==PAGE:1==
Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio
Optimisation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio Optimisation
Master Thesis
June, 2022
Dimosthenis Karafylias
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom-
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen for all of the insightful and
constructive contributions he readily offered during the time of this project.
I am eternally grateful to my parents and family for their unconditional care and love all these
years. Their truly tremendous support made this endeavour possible.
Lastly, I would be remiss in not mentioning my friends for their motivation and for being un-
derstanding.
Thank you all.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Economic applications oftentimes involve decision making under highly uncertain
conditions. As an economic application, portfolio optimisation fits this profile. Re-
cent advancements in Machine Learning, have been of a great benefit to the Finan-
cial Engineering field and have motivated the usage of Reinforcement Learning as
a method to solve decision making in complex environments. This work evaluates
Reinforcement Learning in portfolio optimisation tasks and examines its application
both in the cryptocurrency and the stock market. Reinforcement Learning is lever-
aged as a solution to the problem of optimal redistribution of wealth in a selected
subset of assets, so to maximise a long-term return. A daily reallocation is considered
as a convenient time frame, which also capitalises on frequent changes of prices. Be-
ing highly volatile, the cryptocurrency market can be exploited for gains on those
windows. Out of a possible universe of assets, the choices are limited to a well di-
versified subset by employing the MST (Minimum Spanning Tree) as a method that
searches for minimal dependencies between assets.
Learning through reinforcement is the art of learning how to perform optimal re-
allocations, by trial and error; that is by trying good and bad actions and by exploring
different re-allocations that may potentially lead to larger returns. As an added ad-
vantage of convenience, in a model free approach, there is no need of a financial mar-
ket model. To this end, Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) is
adapted and modified to fit an portfolio optimisation task. Certain alterations in TD3
allow for a more stable performance, overall, than the previous Deterministic Policy
Gradient variants. Being able to discover market dynamics and learn the structure of
a trading environment, model-free reinforcement learning is deemed successful as
a trading agent. Its out-of-sample performance is demonstrated in comparison with
the Standard and Poor’s 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average indexes. The analysis
will characterise the performance by the achieved profit and the Sharpe Ratio.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Glossary of Terms
AI Artificial Intelligence. 2, 24
ANN Artificial Neural Network. 40
API Application Programming Interface. 6
CAPM Capital Asset Pricing Model. 18
CML Capital Market Line. 18
DSR Differential Sharpe ratio. 44
ETF Exchange-Traded Fund. 5, 7, 9, 12, 48, 50
EWP Equally weighted Portfolio. 12
MDP Markov Decision Process. 26–28, 32, 42
MPT Modern Portfolio Theory. 15, 43
MST Minimum Spanning Tree. 20, 21, 51
RRL Recurrent Reinforcement Learning. 41
TD3 Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm. 35, 40, 42, 46, 47, 51–53
USD United States Dollar. 6
iv
==PAGE:6==
Notation
Financial Terms and Statistics
σx
Standard deviation of a variable X
σ2
x
Variance of a variable X
ml
lth statistical moment of a variable X
Ri,t
Gross return of the ith asset at time t
ri,t
Log return of the ith asset at time t
Rp,t
Gross return of a portfolio p at time t
rp,t
Log return of a portfolio p at time t
wi,t
Portfolio weight of the ith asset at time t
Reinforcement Learning
γ
Discount factor, 0 < γ ≤1
µθ(s)
Deterministic policy under network parameters θ
πθ(a|s) Stochastic policy under network parameters θ, given a state s and action a
a ∈A Actions
Gt
Return, Gt = ∑∞
k=0 γkRt+k+1
P(s, r|s′, a) Transition probability of getting to the next state s′ from the current state s with
action a and reward r
Q(s, a), q Action-value function; how good an action is under a given state
r ∈R Rewards
s ∈S
States
St, At, Rt State, action, and reward at time step t of one trajectory
V(s), u State-value function; measures the expected return of a state s
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Part I
Financial Background
3
2
Financial Concepts
4
2.1
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Financial Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Portfolio Optimisation Theory
14
3.1
Markowitz Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Part II
Research, Design & Methods
19
4
Minimum Spanning Tree
20
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Reinforcement Learning
23
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Formalising The Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Double Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Actor-Critic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) . . . . . . . .
35
Part III
Research Summary
39
6
Trading Agents
40
6.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Experiments
47
7.1
Cryptocurrencies, Stocks and ETFs Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
8
Conclusion
54
8.1
Limitations and Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
56
A Policy Gradient
63
A.1 Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
vii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
”A good portfolio is not only a good selection of stocks and bonds, but it also is a balanced whole
that provides the investor with protections and opportunities with respect to a wide range of
contingencies” [Markowitz, 1968]. Modern financial portfolio optimisation emerges as an exten-
sion of Harry M. Markowitz’s work on diversification of investments. While heavily borrowing
principles from his early work, state-of-the-art methods channel this financial knowledge into
more technology exposed domains.
1.1
Research Question
This report investigates the hypothesis that reinforcement learning, as a completely agnostic
solution, that learns by trial and error, is able to model sequential decision making in portfolio
optimisation. The task involves daily reallocation of assets’ weights, in a fixed portfolio compos-
ition, while under a fixed budget, so to maximise financial returns. The portfolio constituents
will be selected in a precedent node reduction step by the graph-inspired Minimum Spanning
Tree method. The performance will be subsequently tested in an out-of-sample forecast per-
formance manner, on a portfolio composition that includes cryptocurrencies, stocks and ETFs.
1.2
Motivation
Reinforcement learning, a main paradigm of Machine Learning was popularised by recently wit-
nessed breakthroughs such as with AlphaGo defeating the European Go champion [Silver, A.
Huang et al., 2016], Deep Q-Networks that surpass human expert performance on Atari games
[Mnih et al., 2015] and DeepStack beating, with statistical significance, professional poker play-
ers in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em [Moravcı́k et al., 2017]. Unlike other Machine Learning
paradigms, reinforcement learning holds the notion of own-learning, from scratch, by trial and
error actions. Reinforcement Learning has recently found potential playgrounds in Robotics
and autonomous driving vehicles, Computer Vision and image recognition, in Healthcare and
personalised medicine, in Financial Engineering and portfolio optimisation among others.
Of all the forms of machine learning, reinforcement learning is the closest to the kind of learn-
ing that humans and other animals do. Many of the core algorithms of reinforcement learning
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction
were originally inspired by biological learning systems. Humans consciously attempt to reflect
on own learning and cognitive processes. The motivation behind this study is further bolstered
from various researches arguing that reinforcement primarily dominates the late phase of learn-
ing and is responsible for long-term retention.
As Artificial intelligence (AI) is gradually permeating the field of Finance and Economics, many
quantitative approaches emerge both in Finance and Machine Learning published literature.
Considering that quantitative financial approaches share optimisation routines with AI and
psychology and neuroscience interconnects behavioural Finance and AI, more applications of
AI in Economics and Finance will be witnessed [Y. Li, 2018]. Reinforcement learning can help
in almost all schemes of sequential decision making tasks [Y. Li, 2018]. Under the examined
context, it discovers optimal actions by trial and error and while it does not model the market, it
is flexible to its episodic trends. By dint of the discounted rewards, it constitutes a non-myopic
approach that optimises for longer-term benefits.
1.3
Structure
This report is organised in 3 parts. Part I introduces term definitions and sets a financial back-
ground necessary to follow the rest of the report. Part II is comprised of a more technical review
of the method employed and delves into complexities necessary to understand the implement-
ation of Reinforcement Learning in portfolio optimisation. Part III reviews part of the literature
on trading agents and summarises the experiments’ main findings and results. Each chapter
was designed to address a separate issue, while maintaining as much as possible a naturally
progressing flow that eventually leads to a more clear understanding of the experiments. The
reader is advised to follow the structure of the report as outlined below. However, if famil-
iar with any of the discussed notions, the corresponding chapter may be skimmed or skipped.
Following, is a concise chapter list with a brief description for each chapter.
Part I - Financial Background
Chapter II: Financial Concepts. This chapter lists necessary financial definitions.
Chapter III: Portfolio optimisation Theory. This chapter explains the main objective of portfolio
optimisation, its conception, the way it is used in the contemporary literature and puts the fol-
lowing chapters in the context of portfolio optimisation.
Part II - Research, Design & Methods
Chapter IV: Minimum Spanning Tree. This chapter analyses the Minimum Spanning Tree method
as a potential approach to form an uncorrelated portfolio.
Chapter V: Reinforcement Learning. This chapter introduces both notation and theory on rein-
forcement learning and the employed TD3 algorithm.
Part III - Research Summary
Chapter VI: Trading Agents. This chapter sets the trading agents’ objectives, reviews seminal
works and outlines the technical details of this implementation.
Chapter VII: Experiments. This chapter evaluates the performance of Reinforcement Learning as
a trading architecture, when using real market-data in a simulated environment.
Chapter VIII: Conclusion. This chapter raises limitations and puts related research directions
forward, for consideration.
2
==PAGE:11==
Part I
Financial Background
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Financial Concepts
This chapter is part of the background series that introduces important theories and concepts
as fundamental building blocks of this work. It initially focuses on defining several financial
terms, which in turn are an integral part of the the chapter’s main design; Financial time series.
In case the reader is already familiar with the most common financial concepts, this chapter
may be skimmed or skipped.
2.1
Definitions
This section includes the most typical, yet important definitions of financial terms that will be
used throughout the report.
2.1.1
Asset
An asset is a resource controlled by an individual or any other economic entity, such as busi-
ness. A liquid asset is an asset that can be easily converted into cash in a short amount of time.
Cash and other marketable securities fall in the category of liquid assets [Investopedia, 2021a].
Consequently, a financial asset is a liquid asset that derives its value from contractual rights or
ownership claim [Investopedia, 2021b]. Cash, bonds, stocks, mutual funds and bank deposits
are often used as typical examples of financial assets and in contrast to land, commodities or
any other tangible asset, they may not have an inherent value in them or even a physical form.
Security
A security is a tradeable financial asset of any kind. There are several types of securities, but their
legal definition may vary according to nation-wide jurisdictions. In the United States, securities
can be loosely categorised into debt securities (e.g. bonds), equity securities (e.g. stocks) and
derivatives (e.g. futures contracts, options, swaps).
2.1.2
Liquidity
Liquidity describes how easily an asset or security can be converted into cash without affecting
the price it can be bought or sold in the market [Investopedia, 2021c]. The most liquid asset
is the cash itself. Conversely, land and real estate can be considered as non-liquid assets as
4
==PAGE:13==
2.1. Definitions
receiving cash from a sale may take a considerable amount of time. The market price is always
governed by the forces of supply and demand. In general terms, the resulting market price,
where supply and demand balance, is referred to as the equilibrium price and represents an
agreement between producers and consumers of the good [GALE, 1955], or buyers and sellers
of the financial asset, for that matter. ”A market is often said to be liquid when the prevailing structure
of transactions provides a prompt and secure link between the demand and supply of assets, thus delivering
low transaction costs” [Gabrielsen, Marzo and Zagaglia, 2011]. Massimb and Phelps, 1994 define
liquidity as the ability to immediately execute small market orders without the occurrence of
large changes in price.
2.1.3
Trading costs
Market Impact
Recall, the Law of Supply and Demand referenced in section 2.1.2. Transactions always determ-
ine the resulting market price. Thus, the market impact of a transaction can be defined as the
difference between the current market price and the speculated market price in the absence of
the transaction [Torre, Ph. and Ferrari, 2000]. Market price is a hidden cost. Since, there cannot
be both occurrence and non-occurrence of a transaction, the market price in the absence of the
transaction, can only be estimated.
Slippage
Slippage refers to the difference between the expected price of a trade, upon placing an order,
and the price at which the trade is actually executed by the system. It can occur at any time, but
is most prevalent during periods of higher volatility [Investopedia, 2021d].
Transaction Costs
Transaction costs are expenses incurring each time upon buying or selling an asset. They typ-
ically include brokers’ commissions for their services to customers. As a rule of thumb, trans-
action costs, for the majority of the exchange platforms, lie in a range between 0.1% and 2% for
every transaction [Investopedia, 2021e]. The cryptocurrencies’ market fees typically fall in the
lower end.
2.1.4
Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) and Mutual Funds
An ETF is, in short, a pooled investment that usually tracks an index1 [Investopedia, 2022a]. A
typical ETF example is the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY) which tracks the S&P 500 Index (contains
500 large-cap and mid-cap stocks from U.S. companies). Usually, ETFs are more appealing to
investors than mutual funds, because the former can be traded as regular stocks at any point
throughout the day; they often carry lower fees and are more liquid than mutual funds. Addi-
tionally, ETFs can be shorted and used to hedge or leverage a position.
2.1.5
Cryptocurrencies
Blockchain is defined as a public ledger or similarly, a distributed database of records of all
transactions or digital events that have been executed and shared among participating parties.
Each transaction in the public ledger is verified by consensus of a majority of the participants in
the system, and once entered, the information can never be erased [Crosby et al., 2016]. Block-
chain technology has uses in other domains except Finance.
1Indexes (or indices) reflect the performance of a basket of securities intended to replicate a certain area of the market.
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Financial Concepts
Bitcoin, the most widely used and accepted decentralised digital currency to date, uses an un-
derlying blockchain implementation to record its transactions. It was conceptualised by Satoshi
Nakamoto in ”Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” as a purely peer-to-peer version
of electronic cash that would allow online payments to be sent directly from one party to an-
other without going through a financial institution [Nakamoto, 2008]. Their proposition in-
troduced a novel proof-of-work consensus mechanism that made changes in the transactions
history computationally impractical and burdensome for attackers. Without delving into much
unnecessary technicalities, this mechanism would prevent double-spending; i.e. signing-over
the same coin to two different users or the ability for an adversary to use some of the coins for
two or more payments [Karame, Androulaki and Capkun, 2012]. The double-spend attack is
still one of the major security issues in most blockchain systems. There is however room for
improvement and ways to mitigate those risks. Zhang and Lee, 2019 argued for extending the
number of block confirmations. Karame, Androulaki and Capkun, 2012 reason that there is an
increasing reliance on Bitcoin among businesses, and its usage in fast payment scenarios (i.e.
exchange time between the currency and goods is short; e.g. ≤30 seconds) is only expected to
increase.
While the best known example of cryptocurrency might be Bitcoin, there exist rouglhy 20,000
registered cryptocurrencies according to CoinMarketCap, excluding the ones too small to be
featured in exchanges. The total cryptocurrency market capitalisation is estimated to be ap-
proximately 932,38 billion USD, of which roughly 42,8 % attributed to Bitcoin2.
To put this
number into perspective, Amazon.com, Inc. and Tesla, Inc. have estimated market valuations
of 1,14 trillion and 730,61 billion USD, respectively3.
Many of them are effectively just tokens, but there are also real, practical infrastructure and
technology benefits. Cryptocurrencies differ from the traditional financial assets because of
their decentralised and open nature [Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017]. There is a variety of smaller
in trading volume currencies, that require smaller investments to observe fluctuations in their
price movements. This direct consequence enables trading software to capture and learn from
the market the impacts of their own trading actions. Due to their openness, markets are more
accessible. The majority of cryptocurrency exchanges are open round-the-clock and they even
provide application programming interfaces (API) for fetching market data and carrying out al-
gorithmic trading actions [Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017]. This is a major advantage and as such,
sparks a motivation for considering cryptocurrencies as an investment option in this report.
It is also worth noting, that there is a growing research activity in cryptocurrency trading and
especially from 2018 onwards. A recent survey [Fang et al., 2022], pointed out that 85 %
of papers have appeared since 2018, demonstrating the emergence of cryptocurrency trading
as a new research area in financial trading. According to the same survey, there was also a
substantial increase of approximately 200 % from 2017 to 2018, followed by a 100 % rise from
2018 to 2019. Published activity kept steadily increasing thereafter.
Cryptocurrencies are gradually receiving acceptance across the trading communities and they
have also begun to be integrated in hedge funds’, institutional investors’ and individuals’ port-
folios and trading strategies [Fang et al., 2022]. Regulation is recently a main topic of discussion
across many circles and there are opposing powers pulling in different directions. Ultimately,
the outcome will likely impact the cryptocurrency market and its trading landscape. The way,
however, remains to be seen.
2CoinMarketCap •coinmarketcap.com, Accessed on 24-June-2022
3Yahoo Finance •finance.yahoo.com, Accessed on 24-June-2022
6
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Financial Time Series
2.2
Financial Time Series
Financial Time Series are central in portfolio optimisation and as such they are vigorously studied.
They provide a broad toolkit to approach portfolio optimisation under a richness of objectives
and complexities. In Finance, a time series tracks the movement of the chosen data points, such
as a security’s price, over a specified period of time with data points recorded at regular intervals.
Financial time series inherit all the features of time series. There is however a key difference
that distinguishes the former from other time series and that is their uncertainty. As a result,
financial time series analysis, employs different statistical methods [Tsay, 2005]. This section
will formalise time series in the context of Finance.
2.2.1
Portfolio
As an extension of the previous definitions in section 2.1, in the context of Finance, the term
portfolio is used more often to describe a collection of liquid financial assets, although it could
also include non-liquid ones. As mentioned in section 2.1.1, bonds, stocks, ETFs and cryptocur-
rencies are examples of liquid financial assets. A portfolio of assets is constructed according to
an objective (e.g. to maximise expected returns or minimise risk), a time-frame and a specified
risk-tolerance. At this point, it would be useful to mathematically formalise the term and keep
a consistent tone in the parts that follow.
A portfolio of m assets and a total monetary value t would satisfy:
m
∑
i=1
wi,t = 1,
(2.1)
where wi,t is the ratio of the ith asset’s value to the total amount t invested; also referred to as
portfolio weight, or proportion of the total portfolio value invested in the ith asset.
2.2.2
Gross Returns
Denoting an asset’s price at a time index t as Pt, the asset’s gross or simple return Rt from time
t −1 to t is formulated as:
1 + Rt =
Pt
Pt−1
⇒Pt = Pt−1(1 + Rt)
⇒Rt =
Pt
Pt−1
−1 = Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1
.
(2.2)
2.2.3
Continuously Compounding Returns
As an extension of gross return Rt in eq. (2.2), continuously compounding or log returns rt
are defined as:
rt = log(1 + Rt) = log
Pt
Pt−1
,
(2.3)
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Financial Concepts
where log here represents the natural logarithm as seen most mathematical textbooks; also seen
as ln in other contexts and applications.
2.2.4
Portfolio Returns
These notions can be extended to include the entirety of assets m that a portfolio contains. Using
the right tools, portfolio returns provide indications on the investment’s performance and risk.
Gross or simple returns of a portfolio p that contains m assets at time t:
Rp,t =
m
∑
i=1
wiRi,t = w1R1,t + w2R2,t + . . .
(2.4)
Recall from section 2.2.1 that wi,t is the weight of the ith asset at time t. While the portfolio
gross returns aggregate across assets, the log returns aggregate across time. For the log returns
it holds:
rp,t = log
"
1 +
m
∑
i=1
wi,tRi,t
#
= log [1 + w1,tR1,t + w2,tR2,t + . . . ]
= log
"
m
∑
i=1
Pi,t
Pi,t−1
#
(2.5)
Unfortunately, due to their nonlinear property, log returns cannot be written as a sum of log
returns of the portfolio’s constituents as in eq. (2.4). They can only be approximated as:
rp,t ≈
m
∑
i=1
wi,tri,t ≈
m
∑
i=1
wi,tRi,t,
(2.6)
by using the log(1 + x) ≈x approximation [Miskolczi, 2017].
2.2.5
Statistical Moments
The lth moment of a continuous random variable X is defined as follows:
m′
l = E(X l) =
Z ∞
−∞xl f(x) dx,
(2.7)
where E symbolises the expected value of the variable X and f(x) is the probability density
function of X . A probability density function, also abbreviated as pdf, describes how likely a
variable is to be sampled from a given distribution.
Mean
The mean or first moment of X is the expected value of X and measures the central location
of the distribution [Tsay, 2005]. It is denoted by µx. Consequently, every following statistical
moment, also referred to as central moment, is defined as:
m′
l = E
h
(X −µx)li
=
Z ∞
−∞(x −µx)l f(x) dx,
(2.8)
8
==PAGE:17==
2.3. Evaluation Criteria
Variance
Variance reflects how disperse a set of numbers is from their average value (mean). The positive
square root of variance, is called standard deviation (SD) of X and is denoted by σx. As a second
central moment, variance is the expectation of the squared deviation of a random variable X
from its mean. Using eq. (2.8) variance is written as:
Var(X ) = E[(X −µx)2] = σ2
x
.
Skewness
The third central moment, also known as skewness is a measure of symmetry of X around its
mean [Tsay, 2005]. For a unimodal distribution negative skew indicates that the left tail is longer
and the mass of the distribution is concentrated to the right of the figure, whereas in a positive
skew case, the right tail is longer and the distribution appears as a left leaning curve. Skewness
is formulated as:
Skew(X ) = E
(X −µx)3
σ3x

.
Kurtosis
The forth central moment, kurtosis, is a measure of the shape of a distribution. A distribution
with a positive excess kurtosis (larger than that of a normal distribution) puts more mass in its
tails (measures outliers) and appears as more peaked. Conversely, in a distribution with a
negative excess kurtosis there is less extremity of deviations; the distribution has ”thinner tails”
and appears as less peaked than a normal distribution. Kurtosis is written as:
Kurt(X ) = E
(X −µx)4
σ4x

.
2.3
Evaluation Criteria
Having introduced some statistical background, it now becomes more intuitive to put some
context around portfolio construction and management. In a brief glimpse of section 2.2.5,
statistical moments may possess the necessary properties to be able to quantify a portfolio’s
performance. A portfolio4 provides an investor with opportunities to grow the returns and
minimise the risk of their collective investment, over individual assets. In light of this, the next
parts to follow, describe such evaluation criteria that equip an investor with advantageous tools
to build and manage a portfolio of investments.
2.3.1
Statistical Moments
Statistical moments are often used as evaluation criteria and may characterise a distribution of
returns, either with respect to single assets to measure individual risk, or to quantify the per-
formance of a particular strategy based on the combined portfolio returns. An example plot of
returns for the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY) ETF and their distribution is seen in fig. 2.1 and
fig. 2.2, respectively. The returns’ distribution has a mean of µ = 0. A slightly negative skew is
4portfolio: a collection of financial assets (section 2.2.1).
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Financial Concepts
an indication of a left longer tail and distributed mass to the right of the figure. A largely pos-
itive excess kurtosis signifies ”heavier tails” and extremity of deviations. Recall that a normal
(Gaussian) distribution (drawn in red colour) has a skewness of 0 and a kurtosis of 3 and often
serves as a basis for comparisons.
Figure 2.1: SPY Returns
Figure 2.2: Distribution of SPY Returns
Remark 1: Due to its property of maintaining the units of measurement, the more frequent
practice is to regard standard deviation σx as a measure of risk (see usage in section 2.3.3). A
large standard deviation means that the returns fluctuate a lot so that the investor might be
lucky and get a large return, but might also be unlucky and lose a lot [Rice, 2006].
Remark 2: For portfolio returns that are positively skewed, the probability of getting positive
returns is higher than that of negative returns. Many studies contend that risk-averse investors
should prefer positively skewed returns [Harvey et al., 2010; Naqvi et al., 2017].
Remark 3: Presence of excess kurtosis indicates a higher probability of extreme events also
known as fat-tail risk [Naqvi et al., 2017; Khan et al., 2020].
2.3.2
Covariance and Correlation
Covariance
While variance measures the variability of a random variable, covariance measures the joint
variability or degree of association of two random variables [Rice, 2006]. For two random vari-
ables X and Y with respective means µx and µy, covariance is defined as:
Cov(X , Y) = E
(X −µx)(Y −µy)

.
(2.9)
This formulation can be interpreted as if X is larger than its mean and Y tends to be larger
than its mean as well, then the association is positive leading to a positive covariance. In the
antithetical paradigm, if X is lower than its mean, yet Y does not follow the same pattern,
then the covariance is negative [Rice, 2006]. The sign of covariance shows the tendency in the
relationship between the two variables. On the flip side, the magnitude of the covariance is
not easy to interpret as it is not a normalised quantity. Covariance is particularly useful when
evaluating financial assets in terms of their returns. The risk is actually lower when the returns
are independent, rather than when they are positively correlated.
10
==PAGE:19==
2.3. Evaluation Criteria
Remark 4: It may be a better decision to invest in uncorrelated, or weakly related for that matter,
securities rather than placing investments in assets that belong in the same sector5 [Rice, 2006].
Correlation
Using eq. (2.9) the correlation coeﬀicient ρX ,Y takes the form:
ρX ,Y =
Cov(X , Y)
p
Var(X )Var(Y)
= E
(X −µx)(Y −µy)

p
Var(X )Var(Y)
= E
(X −µx)(Y −µy)

σxσy
∈[−1, 1].
(2.10)
Correlation arises as a dimensionless quantity and as a normalised version of the covariance
contains values in the range [−1, 1] [Rice, 2006]. A value of +1 would imply a perfectly positive
and linear correlation (X increases as Y increases), while −1 would imply a perfectly negative
and linear correlation (X increases as Y decreases).
A APL
ETH-USD
MSFT
SPY
XOM
A APL
ETH-USD
MSFT
SPY
XOM
0.00042
0.00027
0.0003
0.00021
0.00015
0.00027
0.0039
0.00027
0.00021
0.0002
0.0003
0.00027
0.00036
0.00021
0.00013
0.00021
0.00021
0.00021
0.00017
0.00017
0.00015
0.0002
0.00013
0.00017
0.00044
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
0.0035
Figure 2.3: Covariance matrix of returns
A APL
ETH-USD
MSFT
SPY
XOM
A APL
ETH-USD
MSFT
SPY
XOM
1
0.21
0.76
0.79
0.34
0.21
1
0.23
0.26
0.16
0.76
0.23
1
0.84
0.34
0.79
0.26
0.84
1
0.6
0.34
0.16
0.34
0.6
1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure 2.4: Correlation matrix of returns
By means of the fig. 2.3 and fig. 2.4 above, Ether (ETH), also known as the native cryptocurrency
of Ethereum, appears as rather uncorrelated with Exxon Mobil Corporation (XOM) and Apple
Inc. (AAPL) with respect to their gross returns. To the contrary, as one might postulate, Mi-
crosoft Corporation (MSFT) and Apple Inc., both specialising in the technology and consumer
electronics domain, have a strong positive correlation in their returns.
2.3.3
Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe Ratio is defined as the ratio of the excess expected return of an investment to its
return volatility [Lo, 2002]. Here, standard deviation is employed as a measure of the invest-
ment’s volatility. Thus, Sharpe Ratio (SR) is formulated as:
SR = E

Rp −R f

σp
=
E

Rp −R f

q
Var

Rp −R f
,
(2.11)
where returns Rp refer to the gross returns of a portfolio p. R f is the risk-free return; usually
the return of a U.S. Treasury security (e.g. Treasury Bond).
5assuming this would imply a strong correlation.
11
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Financial Concepts
Remark 5: Sharpe ratio can be very useful for decision-making. A rising return or a falling
standard deviation, lead to a rise in the Sharpe ratio. Hence, a higher Sharpe ratio is good and
between two alternatives, the Sharpe ratio criterion is to choose the one with the higher Sharpe
ratio [Dowd, 2000].
PnL6
µreturns
σreturns
Skew
Kurt
SR
[MSFT, SPY]
1.001
0.0001
0.014
−0.406
0.646
0.118
[MSFT, SPY, XOM]
1.199
0.0008
0.012
−0.603
1.503
1.073
Table 2.1: Statistics for two different portfolio constructions
Table 2.1 re-uses some stocks from section 2.3.2 and employs additional statistics to character-
ise two uniform portfolio constructions7. Recall that Microsoft Corporation (MSFT) has a very
strong positive correlation with the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY) ETF and a weak correla-
tion with Exxon Mobil Corporation (XOM), as also depicted in fig. 2.4. On that grounds, a
different portfolio is constructed with the addition of XOM. The revised portfolio has a larger
”fat-tail” risk and outperforms the first one in terms of the achieved PnL and Sharpe ratio, with
its increased returns and lower risk (standard deviation: σreturns). According to the Sharpe Ratio
criterion, an investor should prefer the revised portfolio.
2.3.4
Maximum Drawdown
Denoting as r(w, t) the function that describes the gross returns (uncompounded) at time t
and as w = (w1, w2, w3, . . . , wm) the weights of the m portfolio constituents, the drawdown
function is defined as the difference between the maximum of the function r(w, t) until time t
and the value of r(w, t) at precisely time t:
D(w, t) = max
0≤τ≤t{r(w, τ)} −r(w, t).
(2.12)
On a given time interval [0, T] the maximum drawdown is formulated as the process of maxim-
ising the drawdown function D(w, t):
MD(w) = max
0≤t≤T{D(w, t)}.
(2.13)
While maximum drawdown remains an attractive measure of risk and is still prevalent as a met-
ric in many studies, it suffers from heavy statistical errors, being based on a single observation
of the maximal loss. As typically seen though, it may be integrated as a supplementary feature
in more comprehensive analyses [Chekhlov, Stanislav Uryasev and Zabarankin, 2005].
6Profit and Loss (PnL): multiplier of the initial portfolio value (value at the time of the investment).
7uniform portfolio; also referred to as equally weighted portfolio (EWP): a portfolio that gives the same importance
(weight) to each and every asset that includes.
7Those portfolios are merely for illustration purposes and were not a product of optimisation.
12
==PAGE:21==
2.3. Evaluation Criteria
2.3.5
Conditional Value at Risk
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), also referred to as excess loss, is defined with respect to a
probability level β such that a β-CVaR portfolio will experience losses above an amount α with
a probability equal to β. A β-VaR (Value at Risk) portfolio will not exceed α in losses with a
probability β. It holds that CVaR ≥VaR. The values of β typically considered are: 0.9, 0.95
and 0.99 [Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev, 2000].
Symbolising gross returns as a random variable X , the cumulative distribution function (cdf)
takes the form: FX (x) = P{X ≤x}, where X = (x1, x2, x3, . . . ). For a probability β, also
referred to as confidence level, with β ∈[0, 1]:
VaRβ(X ) = min{x | FX (x) ≥β}.
(2.14)
For CVaRβ(X ) it holds that X ≥VaRβ(X ) [Sarykalin, Serraino and Stan Uryasev, 2008]:
CVaRβ(X ) =
Z ∞
−∞x dFβ
X (x) , where
(2.15)
Fβ
X (x) =
( 0,
when x < VaRβ(X )
FX (x)−β
1−β
,
when x ≥VaRβ(X )
Although VaR is a very popular measure of risk, it has undesirable mathematical character-
istics such as a lack of subadditivity and convexity [Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev, 2000].
Contrarily, CVaR is a more coherent risk measure exhibiting positively homogeneous and con-
vex properties [Pflug, 2000], albeit more widely used in the insurance rather than the finance
industry. CVaR can be eﬀiciently minimised using linear programming and nonsmooth optim-
isation techniques [Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev, 2000]. VaR and CVaR measure different
parts of the distribution. Depending on what is needed, one may be preferred over the other
[Sarykalin, Serraino and Stan Uryasev, 2008].
13
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Portfolio Optimisation Theory
A financial portfolio is a balanced whole, a master asset with single financial assets as constitu-
ents. It is ultimately constructed to provide an investor with a richness of opportunities and
financial objectives over single assets. A good portfolio formulation enables investors to more
wholly amplify the market’s positive aspects, while at the same time, weakening the negative
impacts of single assets. Objectives are usually decomposed into the maximisation of the expec-
ted returns or the minimisation of the financial risk.
Both economic and non-economic factors, such as political forces can extensively influence the
state of a financial market and induce uncertainty as a salient feature in monetary investments.
So, for an objective to remain consistent over the course of time, a portfolio should be peren-
nially introspected and managed. Portfolio management or portfolio optimisation, as they are
interchangeably used, pertain to the constant reallocation of a monetary fund within a set of
selected investment products.
Portfolio optimisation, thus, resembles a sequential decision making process and can be mod-
elled as such. By definition, the time window of the reallocating activity relates to the investor’s
individual objective. Inherent in portfolio optimisation strategies, are assumptions made for
elements like risk and transaction costs. The methods used under those strategies may borrow
already seen statistical tools, such as statistical moments, covariance and correlation.
This chapter aims to provide intuition behind the portfolio optimisation task and the several
notions that coexist in both the so-called ”traditional methods” and the more recent advents in
the Machine Learning and Deep Learning epochs.
Figure 3.1: Examples of portfolio returns
Figure 3.2: Example distributions of portfolio returns
14
==PAGE:23==
3.1. Markowitz Model
3.1
Markowitz Model
The Markowitz model [Markowitz, 1952] emerges as a foundational part of Modern Portfo-
lio Theory (MPT). Harry M. Markowitz formalised the noteworthy ideas of diversification and
risk reduction. Both notions still remain as governing principles in most portfolio constructions.
Merely comparing portfolio returns, would be a very naive approach to capture the complexity
of investment decisions. Hence, financial risk is integrated as a separate criterion. Markow-
itz also postulated that more eﬀicient portfolios can grow the expected portfolio return, while
concurrently decreasing financial risk [Markowitz, 1952]. Thus, according to the Markowitz
model, there is always an interplay between return and risk that is prominent in any portfolio
construction.
Mathematically, risk is represented by the standard deviation of the portfolio returns. More
formally, denoting with wi = (w1, w2, · · · wm), i = 0, · · · m the portfolio weight each of the m
assets carries in the portfolio, it holds that: ∑m
i=1 wi = 1. Weights can also be negative if short-
selling1is allowed [Luenberger, 1998]. Further, let r = [r1, r2, · · · rm] be the mean (expected)
returns and σi,j the covariance matrix for i, j = 1, 2, · · · m. The Markowitz model assumes a
given target expected return rtarget 2and minimises the risk as follows:
Minimize
w
1
2wT
m
∑
i,j=1
wiwjσi,j
subject to
m
∑
i
wiri = rtarget,
and
m
∑
i=1
wi = 1,
(3.1)
where 1
2 is a scaling and serves convenience purposes [Luenberger, 1998]. The model addresses
this balance between the risk and return factors. When solved, it yields the weights for an
eﬀicient portfolio with the target expected return rtarget.
To solve, a Lagrangian function L must be formed. Using λ and µ as Lagrange multipliers for the
first and the second constraint in eq. (3.1), the Lagrangian is derived as:
L = 1
2
m
∑
i,j=1
wiwjσi,j −λ
 
m
∑
i=1
wiri −rtarget
!
−µ
 
m
∑
i=1
wi −1
!
.
(3.2)
The Lagrangian in eq. (3.2) is differentiated with respect to each wi and then the derivative is
set to 0. Applying the first order condition of optimality3:
1Short selling refers to the case where an investor borrows a security and sells it on the market, planning to buy it back
later for less money, obtaining the difference in price as a profit [Investopedia, 2022b].
2rtarget: the desired expected return.
3Stationary points of a function f (including minima, maxima, and saddle points) satisfy the first order condition
∇f (x) = 0N×1 where x is an N-dimensional point of f.
15
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3. Portfolio Optimisation Theory
∂L
∂wi
= 0,
i = 1, 2, · · · m
∂L
∂λ = 0
and
∂L
∂µ = 0
and using eq. (3.2):
∂L
∂wi
=
m
∑
j=1
wjσi,j −λri −µ = 0,
i = 1, 2, · · · m
∂L
∂λ = −
m
∑
i=1
wiri + rtarget = 0,
∂L
∂µ = −
m
∑
i=1
wi + 1 = 0.
The optimal vector of portfolio weights w∗, can be obtained solving the following vector-matrix
formulation with linear-algebraic methods:
Σw∗= λr + µ1,
wT
∗r = rtarget
and
wT
∗1 = 1,
where Σ is the vector-form covariance matrix σi,j. The optimal weights are now be formed as:
w∗= Σ−1 (λr + µ1) = λσ−1r + µΣ−11.
But, first, the multipliers have to be derived:
rTΣ−1(λr + µ1) = λrTΣ−1r + µrTΣ−11 = rtarget,
1Σ−1(λr + µ1) = λ1TΣ−1r + µ1TΣ−11 = 1.
This leads to:

rTΣ−1r
rTΣ−11
1TΣ−1r
1TΣ−11
 
λ
µ

=

rtarget
1

Setting the constraints α = rTΣ−1r, b = rTΣ−11 and c = 1TΣ−11, the optimal weights are
finally obtained as:
w∗= Σ−1(λr + µ1) =
1
ac −b2 Σ−1
 crtarget −b

r +
 a −brtarget

1

,
where r are the mean (expected) returns of the assets and rtarget is the target expected return.
16
==PAGE:25==
3.1. Markowitz Model
Recall that in this derivation, weights were not constrained to be only positive. That is, short-
selling was allowed. If the antithetical perspective were to be reviewed, then short-selling can
be prohibited by enforcing each and every weight to be positive. Is worth noting that, in short-
selling, all assets are used, either borrowed or as active investments; whereas when prohibiting
short-selling, some assets are not used at all [Luenberger, 1998]. The Markowitz model, under
prohibition of short-selling, is formulated as:
Minimize
w
1
2wT
m
∑
i,j=1
wiwjσi,j
subject to
m
∑
i
wiri = rtarget,
and
m
∑
i=1
wi = 1,
and
wi ≥0,
∀i = 1, 2, · · · m.
(3.3)
This problem, however, involving an extra constraint, is no longer reducible to linear formu-
lations, thereby requiring non-linear methods to be solved. It is usually termed as a quadratic
program and involves increased complexity gradient computations in its solution [Perold, 1984;
Luenberger, 1998]. More recently, there are programming suites solving quadratic and con-
vex optimisation problems, using algorithms such as Sequential Least Squares Programming
(SLSQP) [Kraft, 1988].
Equation (3.1) yields the eﬀicient portfolios, whereby the risk is minimised for a given return
target. An Eﬀicient Frontier is termed as the feasible region where those optimal portfolios lie
with respect to the returns-volatility4two-dimensional plane. This line, seen as the limit of op-
timality, reflects this trade-off decision between expected returns and risk. In the subfigures
below, the Eﬀicient Frontier for a small subset of assets, is drawn in red colour. Figure 3.3 per-
tains to the case where short-selling is allowed, while in fig. 3.4, short-selling is prohibited. Both
consider transaction costs. When short-selling is not allowed, the Eﬀicient Frontier exhibits a
slight downward shift, including portfolios with lower returns.
Figure 3.3: Eﬀicient Frontier with short-selling
Figure 3.4: Eﬀicient Frontier without short-selling
4Volatility here is represented by the standard deviation (σ).
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Portfolio Optimisation Theory
3.2
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
Markowitz’s seminal work [Markowitz, 1952] has motivated a plethora of extension schemes,
where the optimisation objective is modified. The capital asset pricing model (CAPM), mainly at-
tributed to independent contributions from Jack Treynor (1961, 1962), William F. Sharpe (1964),
John Lintner (1965) and Jan Mossin, is a theory that extends on the Markowitz mean-variance
portfolio theory. Central in CAPM is the market portfolio, essentially a bundle, a summation
of all the assets available in the investment universe [Luenberger, 1998]. An asset’s presence
in the market portfolio is determined by the asset’s contribution to the totality of the capital
market value. By nature of its absolute diversification, the market portfolio is not susceptible to
unsystematic risk; only systematic5.
What’s a particularly interesting derivation is the capital market line or pricing line. The capital
market line (CML) effectively reveals the positive correlation between expected returns and
financial risk. In case risk is represented by the standard deviation σ, CML is a straight line
[Luenberger, 1998]:
CML:
r = r f + rM −r f
σM
σ,
(3.4)
where M relates to the market portfolio and r f is the risk-free rate of return. Following is that,
all eﬀicient assets should lie on this line between the risk free rate and the market portfolio. The
area above the CML is infeasible, while portfolios below the CML are deemed as sub-optimal
or ineﬀicient [Luenberger, 1998].
Sharpe Ratio
Note that the factor or slope of the CML line:
rM−r f
σM
, is the Sharpe ratio of the market portfo-
lio. Similarly, the subfigures below illustrate the Eﬀicient Frontier along with the CML, for a
small universe of assets; in both, transaction costs6are subtracted in each optimisation step. The
market portfolio is the one where the CML is tangent to the Eﬀicient Frontier.
Figure 3.5: CML with short-selling
Figure 3.6: CML without short-selling
Sharpe ratio can also be considered as an objective for the mean-variance optimisation task. It
merely requires the expected returns and the standard deviation and is eventually able to yield
an eﬀicient portfolio that falls in the CML.
5systematic risk: risk that affects the market as a whole; unsystematic risk: risk inherent to a particular asset class.
6Transaction costs: expenses incurring each time upon buying or selling an asset, section 2.1.3.
18
==PAGE:27==
Part II
Research, Design & Methods
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Minimum Spanning Tree
This chapter stays in touch with portfolio optimisation, albeit more heavily focusing on the pre-
cursor step of asset (pre-)selection. However, this phase still deserves a distinct mention as
many of the notions used, are derived from other areas of Mathematics; namely the Graph The-
ory. The following section will attempt to introduce the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST). A suc-
cessive literature review, will explicate the MST as a method with observed implementations in
the Finance domain and connect it with some of its possible applications in asset diversification.
4.1
Introduction
This chapter shifts from the portfolio optimisation task to the preceding phase of asset selection.
The Finance industry may still lack a supportive measure for selecting uncorrelated assets that
will later be subject to optimisation. This section describes the MST, as a graph-theory adopted
method that searches for minimally correlated assets, thereby limiting a large universe of assets
to a smaller uncorrelated subset. Another motivating characteristic, is the interpretability a
topological structure would provide in analysing the relation between assets [Mantegna, 1998].
A MST is a weighted graph whose nodes might represent cities, whose edges might represent
communication links and whose edges’ weights might be the cost of transportation between
the cities [Graham and Hell, 1985]. The objective of an algorithm that solves the minimum
spanning tree problem is to search for the transportation links that give the least total amount
of cost; in other words, to find the edges, out of many, that yield the least summation of weights,
while connecting all the nodes. Note that an MST, connects all nodes together without forming
any cycles. MST algorithms are able to handle eﬀiciently thousands of nodes [Graham and Hell,
1985].
All algorithms assume the same vertices1, yet they differ in their criteria of selecting the ap-
propriate edge to append to the graph [Graham and Hell, 1985]. They are usually termed as
greedy or ”myopic” heuristics. Greedy algorithms select the best choice available at each iter-
ation, without regard to possible future consequences. They quickly converge to a solution, al-
though it might be a sub-optimal one [Encyclopedia of Mathematics, 2014]. Using the Kruskal’s
algorithm2 [Kruskal, 1956], a minimum spanning tree is constructed as shown in alg. 1.
1nodes and vertices are used interchangeably; edges is the term used for the links that connect the nodes.
2Kruskal’s alg. runs in O(E log E) polynomial time, where E: number of edges. It shares the same principles with the
Prim’s alg. [Prim, 1957]. Prim’s alg., being faster, runs in O(E + V log V) using Fibonacci Heap, where V: no. of
vertices. Prim’s alg. is more cumbersome to implement, hence often used in graphs with many edges [Rafid, 2019].
20
==PAGE:29==
4.2. Literature Review
Algorithm 1: Kruskal’s algorithm for constructing a MST
Input: A weighted connected graph G = ⟨V, E⟩, V: vertices, E:edges
Output: Et: The set of edges composing the minimum spanning tree G
sort E in ascending order of the edge weights: w(ei1) ≤· · · ≤w(ei|E|)
Et ←∅;
counter ←0
/* Initialise the set of tree edges and its size */
k ←0
/* Initialise the number of processed edges */
while counter <| V | −1 do
k ←k + 1
if Et
S eik is acyclic then
Et ←Et
S eik
/* counter ←counter +1 */
end
end
4.2
Literature Review
Having introduced some useful notation around MST, the objective of its utility can now be
restated; What if those communication links (edges) were weighted with the correlation coeﬀi-
cients of the assets’ returns, instead of an arbitrary cost notion. Then, the MST would form paths
between assets based on their correlation, revealing relationships between their returns. This
exact idea was explored by Mantegna, 1998; Bonanno et al., 2004; Onnela et al., 2002; Millington
and Niranjan, 2021; Birch and Soramaki, 2015 and by others on the cryptocurrency market [J. Y.
Song, Chang and J. W. Song, 2019; Stošić et al., 2018]. As an aforementioned added advantage,
MST algorithms can handle a large amount of nodes; in this case assets.
Mantegna, 1998, as a forerunner implementation, used daily logarithmic price differences’ time
series of stocks from the S&P 500 market index, among other smaller sets, in search for hierarch-
ical structures in the portfolio. To fulfil the axioms of a distance metric3, an edge’s distance d
was not directly set as the correlation coeﬀicient, but rather as a modified function of it:
d(x, y) = 1 −ρ2
x,y,
(4.1)
where ρx,y is the Pearson sample correlation coeﬀicient:
ρx,y =
∑n
i=1(xi −x)(yi −y)
p
∑n
i=1(xi −x)2p
∑n
i=1(yi −y)2 ,
(4.2)
where n is the size of the sample, as in number of days of historical returns, xi, yi are the sampled
returns and x, y the distribution means of the asset’s returns time series x and y.
The author reports that the MST’s hierarchical formation unravelled connections between assets
from a large and complex structure. In the obtained topology, this was manifested in clusters
of companies that belong to the same industry sector.
In a similar fashion, yet introducing slight modifications, later studies justified the spanning
tree as a tool to reveal community clusters out of non-trivial hierarchical market structures.
3axioms considered: (i) d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y, (ii) d(x, y) = d(y, x), (iii) d(x, y) ≤d(x, k) + d(k, y).
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Minimum Spanning Tree
As a key insight derived from the analyses, a market’s diversification potential, can be very
closely resembled by the behaviour of the tree [Onnela et al., 2002].
4.2.1
Variations
• Definition of a new edge distance: d′(x, y) =
q
2(1 −ρx,y), such that d′(x, y) ∈[0, 2], to
penalise negative correlations. Intuitively thinking, lower correlations, or negative ones
for that matter, yield larger distances. So, importantly, as shown in fig. 4.1, uncorrelated
and negatively correlated assets are distant from each other, while correlated ones are
adjacent. Recall that correlation was defined with respect to assets’ returns. Thus, this
distance inclines towards grouping together the positively correlated assets.
Figure 4.1: MST edge distances d′(x, y) =
q
2(1 −ρx,y) shown in orange;
and d(x, y) = 1 −ρ2
x,y shown in dark red.
• Millington and Niranjan, 2021 argued that the Spearman correlation coeﬀicient4 is a better
performing metric and more stable with respect to the outputs of the tree, than the Pearson
correlation coeﬀicient. Being a non-parametric (distribution-free) measure of correlation,
the Spearman correlation coeﬀicient captures a monotonic relationship between the assets’
returns time series, while Pearson’s correlation is a measure of their linear relationship
[Hauke and Kossowski, 2011; Ahlgren, Jarneving and Rousseau, 2003].
In connection with the Mean-Variance Portfolio Theory, Hüttner, Mai and Mineo, 2016 conten-
ded that non-central assets in a graph, form a well diversified portfolio in a Markowitz setting,
albeit this behaviour was merely based on empirical evidence. Further, Onnela et al., 2002 ar-
gued that the assets of the optimal Markowitz portfolio, lie, almost exclusively, on the outskirts
of the tree, thereby being weakly or negatively correlated5.
4Spearman’s correlation coeﬀicient is defined as: rs = ρR(x),R(y) = cov(R(x),R(y))
σR(x)σR(y)
, where ρ is the Pearson’s correlation
but applied on the categorically ranked variables R(x) and R(y).
5Onnela et al., 2002 used d′(x, y) =
q
2(1 −ρx,y) as the edge distance.
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5
Reinforcement Learning
Learning from interacting with the environment is a foundational idea underlying the nature
of learning and enables humans to navigate life and build experiences. From toddlers to older
adults, humans exercise actions and observe immediate or distant consequences from the en-
vironment. From learning motor skills, such as riding a bicycle, or more demanding cognitive
skills, such as decision making and paying attention or hold to a conversation, there is always
an either internal or external awareness that allows humans to adapt new behaviours or refine
their current ones [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. In terms of behavioural psychology, reinforcement
is a consequence which when applied, will strengthen an organism’s future behaviour when
perceiving a stimulus (object or event that elicits a sensory or behavioural response). The mo-
tivation behind this study is further bolstered from various researches arguing that reinforce-
ment primarily dominates the late phase of learning and is responsible for long-term retention
[Abe et al., 2011; Taylor, Krakauer and Ivry, 2014; Shmuelof et al., 2012; V. Huang et al., 2011].
From a computational approach, learning through reinforcement is coined by Sutton and Barto,
2018 as the activity of learning what to do; observing situations/perceiving the environment’s
response and subsequently acting properly to achieve a desired objective. Usually, the object-
ive is to maximise a reward. As discussed above, this exact same pattern, is observed in what
behavioural psychology calls reinforcement; an action’s consequence that strengthens a certain
future behaviour towards a consciously desired goal. In this report, reinforcement learning, is
adopted as a principle for effectively solving problems of a scientific and particularly economic
nature. It will be regarded as a computational approach that attempts to attain a desired object-
ive and learns by perceiving the environment’s response to interactions.
The introductory section discusses certain notions encountered in the course of the learning pro-
cess and defines the key elements of reinforcement learning. Sections that follow, will gradually
delve into the most essential mathematical and formal components and eventually analyse the
approach implemented in this report.
5.1
Introduction
This section is concerned with major principles from the reinforcement learning literature and
brings forth important notions, defined in a theoretical manner and later used to mathematically
formulate the decision process.
23
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
5.1.1
Main Distinction
As presented in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) literature, reinforcement learning, a main paradi-
gm of Machine Learning, differs from the other approaches since it is goal-oriented. A key
distinction is the employment of an agent that interacts with its environment [Sutton and Barto,
2018]. ”An agent is just something that acts (agent comes from the Latin agere: to act). Of
course, all computer programs do something, but computer agents are expected to do more:
operate autonomously, perceive their environment, persist over a prolonged time period, adapt
to change, and create and pursue goals.” [Russell and Norvig, 2021].
Reinforcement learning is different from supervised learning, as it does not require labelled in-
put to generalise to unseen instances. Instead, the agent often interacts with highly uncertain
and dynamic environments. As this may lead to confusions, reinforcement learning is also dis-
tinct from other unsupervised learning approaches. Unsupervised learning, for the most part,
tries to uncover hidden structures in unlabelled inputs and then, through mimicry, is able to per-
form tasks such as video generation, creative writing or speech synthesis. While this would be
a certainly useful inclusion in a reinforcement learning architecture, it does not independently
solve for achieving a desired objective and maximising a reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
5.1.2
The Reinforcement Learning Model
Reinforcement learning settings are concerned with sequential decision making. An agent is
connected to an environment with means of its environment perception (observation of the en-
vironment state) and action. On every interaction step, the agent observes the current environ-
ment’s state and then chooses which action to perform. The action has the ability to change
the environment state and lead to a new one. This state transition is communicated to the
agent through a numerical reward; also referred to as the reward signal in literature [Kaelbling,
Littman and Moore, 1996]. A reward can be either positive or negative.
Interaction is a recurrent process. That is, upon completion of a step, the agent has to observe
the environment state again and potentially refine its behaviour. The exact decision mechanisms
that are responsible, are subject to discussion in the next sections of this chapter.
5.1.3
Key Elements
Policy
A policy can be viewed as the link between the states perceived from the environment, and
the actions that will be taken in response to those states. It could also be described as what
psychology calls a stimulus-response rule. It is the most invaluable and instrumental part of
the reinforcement learning architecture, as policy, alone, is suﬀicient to determine the agent’s
behaviour [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
Reward Signal
A reward signal is associated with the desired objective. In most settings, an agent tries to max-
imise the total reward received over the course of time, when interacting with the environment.
As a consequence, the policy has to be frequently updated, to favour those behaviours that ulti-
mately lead to better long-term rewards. In behavioural psychology terms, a certain behaviour
is strengthened (reinforced), by the actor observing the consequences of its actions. Reward
can also be modelled as a function that takes into account multiple environment variables.
24
==PAGE:33==
5.2. Formalising The Problem
Value
A state value estimates the total reward expected to be accumulated over time, starting from
a specified environment state. It is focused more on a long-term strategy and provides an as-
sessment of the current and expected environment states, whereas reward holds a more of an
instantaneous benefit character. For instance, a particular state in the environment, may yield
a low reward, but the state value can be still high, if succeeding states frequently yield high re-
wards. As a paradigm, a reward could be analogised to either the pain (lower rewards) or the
pleasure (higher rewards) that humans feel, while a value to a pleasing or displeasing feeling
regarding the present situation. A value is always linked to a value function which essentially
estimates the quality of an action in a given state. On a final note, values are far more complex to
compute than rewards, which are essentially an outcome of the environment. Values have to be
constantly re-estimated for as long as the agent observes and remains active on the environment
[Sutton and Barto, 2018].
5.1.4
Exploration - Exploitation Dilemma
Exploration and exploitation are two different cornerstones of problem-solving by state search.
Every algorithm that explores an environment, needs to address the balance between explora-
tion and exploitation [Črepinšek, Liu and Mernik, 2013]. Reinforcement learning encounters
the same dilemma. An agent has to exploit situations already experienced and are likely to
yield a large reward. But, at the same time, to avoid being trapped in local minima through
fast convergence, it also has to explore different, seemingly ”sub-optimal”, actions, but which,
nonetheless, may uncloak improved solutions.
A well known formulation, called the multi-armed bandit problem, exemplifies this quandary.
In Las Vegas, an one-armed bandit is a slot machine. A gambler can insert a coin and has
to decide whether to pull the lever that has paid off best, or one that has not been tried yet,
in pursue of better long-term rewards. In practice, algorithms explore by (1) modifying the
reward (e.g. added bonus for exploration) [Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2001], (2) performing
modelled actions, such as by using statistical tools to come up with confidence bounds that
regulate the uncertainty of the actions [Auer, 2003], (3) injecting noise to actions (e.g. noise
sampled from a Gaussian distribution) [Fortunato et al., 2017].
5.2
Formalising The Problem
This section formalises reinforcement learning as a problem, introduces notation and concret-
ises the so far theoretically explained, key elements of reinforcement learning. Many of these
formalisations are central to pave the way for the methods considered in the course of the report.
5.2.1
Markov Decision Processes
From an antithetical perspective, reinforcement learning is the problem faced by a learning
agent that must learn a behaviour through trial-and-error interactions with a dynamic environ-
ment [Kaelbling, Littman and Moore, 1996; Szepesvari, 2010]. Trial and error is a noteworthy
dynamic as the learner has to discover which actions yield the most reward by trying them.
There exist no prior information on the preferred behaviours and environment states. The en-
vironment is usually adopted as an abstract representation of the agent’s surroundings; things
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
that an agent interacts with. The agent must be able to perceive the state of its environment,
to some extent, and must take actions that consequently affect the state. In addition, it should
also satisfy the core reinforcement learning philosophy to pursue long-term objectives relating
to the state of the environment.
Markov Decision Processes (MDP), an idea adopted from Dynamical Systems Theory, provide
a broad framework to model decision making. MDPs have been extensively used in theoretical
studies because the framework is rich enough to model problems involving sequential choices
made over time and under uncertainty (e.g. economic ones) [Rust, 1994]. The family of sequen-
tial decision problems require that the agent has to perform a sequence of decisions. Under this
basis, the agent has to be able to learn from delayed rewards and potentially trade off immediate
for delayed rewards [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. This special property of reinforcement learning
agents, is very attractive for financial applications, where investment horizons range from few
days and weeks to years or decades. As briefly referenced in section 5.1.3, shortsighted agents
can perform very poorly, while giving weight to ”over the long run” - rewards rather than just
to immediate ones, is hugely important in order to succeed [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
In a MDP, the agent interacts with the environment in steps. Assuming a discrete space for
simplicity, at each time step t, where t = 1, 2, 3, . . . , the agent receives a representation of the
environment’s state, St ∈S, and then selects an action, At ∈A(s). In the next time step and
as a consequence of its action, the agent receives a numerical reward, Rt+1 ∈R ⊂R, and
finds itself in a new state, St+1.
Thus, the agent - environment interaction results in the following sequence:
S0, A0, R1, S1, A1, R2, S2, A2, R3, . . . .
Figure 5.1: Agent - Environment setting in a MDP,
source: Sutton and Barto, 2018
In a finite MDP, states, actions, and rewards (S, A, and R) all have a finite number of elements.
Thus, the variables Rt and St are considered to be random and have discrete probability distri-
butions conditional to the preceding state and action. In other words, particular values s′ ∈S
and r ∈R will have a certain probability to occur at a time step t, which is only dependent to
the previous state and action. The function p describes the MDP dynamics:
p(s′, r | s, a) = Pr{St = s′, Rt = r | St−1 = s, At−1 = a},
(5.1)
for all s′, s ∈S, r ∈R and a ∈A(s). The ’|’ notation denotes conditional probability. As a
probability distribution function, p has to satisfy:
∑
s∈S ∑
r∈R
p(s′, r | s, a) = 1, for all s ∈S and a ∈A(s).
(5.2)
26
==PAGE:35==
5.2. Formalising The Problem
As mentioned, the probability of each possible St and Rt depends only on the preceding state
and action, St−1 and At−1. The state, however, must include information about all aspects of
the past agent - environment interaction that matter for the future. In that case, the state is said
to have the Markov property [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
5.2.2
Policy & Value Functions
Value functions were firstly alluded to in section 5.1.3 as ways to estimate how good is to be in a
given state, or how good is to perform a certain action in a given state. These estimations will be
expressed in relation to the future rewards, or more formally in connection with the expected
return Gt for a given time step t [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Value functions are always formulated
according to a policy that is responsible for selecting actions. Recalling the definition of policy
in section 5.1.3, a policy π is the underlying decision mechanism that determines a probability
to perform a certain action in a given state. A policy can be deterministic or stochastic. Certain
methods to estimate policies will be explained in subsequent sections.
Episodes
In most reinforcement learning settings, the agent-environment interaction is naturally broken
into episodes [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. An episodic task refers to any task that solves a problem
of repeated interaction. That is, every task ends in the so-called terminal state and subsequently
the next episode starts from the exact same initial state, independently of how the previous
episode ended. For example, playing an entire game can be considered as one episode, with
the terminal state being reached when one player loses or wins. By contrast, there are also
continuing tasks that span a longer time frame and solve different types of control problems.
Expected Return
The criterion of discounted rewards is the most widely used as well as easier to deal with math-
ematically [Szepesvari, 2010; Kaelbling, Littman and Moore, 1996]. The notion of discounting
appears as a mathematical trick to bound an infinite sum. Rewards far in the future worth ex-
ponentially less than the reward received at the first state [Szepesvari, 2010]. While following a
discounting behaviour, the agent selects actions that maximise the sum of discounted rewards
received over time. Thus, the expected return Gt, over an infinite horizon, is formulated as:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + · · · =
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1,
(5.3)
while in relation to the next state:
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + γ3Rt+4 + . . .
= Rt+1 + γ
 Rt+2 + γRt+3 + γ2Rt+4 + . . .

= Rt+1 + γGt+1,
(5.4)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is called the discount factor or discount rate and k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . tracks the
time step’s increment. Note that time step t = 1, 2, 3, . . . has a different count. From a different
perspective, a reward received k time steps in the future, will worth γk−1 times the same value
if it were to be received in the immediate next state.
For a value of γ very close to zero, the agent is ”myopic” as in maximising only the immediate
rewards. If γ = 0, eq. (5.3) yields just the reward of the next state. For values of γ close to 1,
the agent is more farsighted, taking into account future rewards. If γ = 1, the MDP is called
undiscounted and the reward of each and every state will carry the same importance.
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
Ultimately, in a more formal fashion, the agent’s goal is to come up with a good way of choosing
the actions, same as learning a suitable policy, so as to maximise the expected total discounted
reward, or expected return Gt [Szepesvari, 2010; Lillicrap et al., 2015].
State-value Function
In an MDP space, a state-value function uπ under a policy π, can be defined by:
uπ(s) = Eπ[Gt | St = s] = Eπ
"
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
 St = s
#
, for all s ∈S,
(5.5)
where Eπ symbolises the expected value of a variable (given a policy π); in this case the expec-
ted return given a state in the environment. A state-value function uπ characterises the quality
of a given state; how good is to be in a given state.
Action-value Function
In a similar manner, under policy π and action a performed in state s, an action-value function
can be defined as:
qπ(s) = Eπ[Gt | St = s, At = a] = Eπ
"
∞
∑
k=0
γkRt+k+1
 St = s, At = a
#
, for all s ∈S.
(5.6)
An action-value function q expresses the value of taking an action a (under state s and policy
π) as the expected return of action a [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
5.2.3
Bellman Equation
Maintaining a similar outlook as seen with expected discounted rewards from future states, a
state-value function can hold the same property. Borrowing some principles from dynamic
programming, a complicated problem can be simplified when broken down into simpler sub-
problems in a recursive manner. That is, computing value functions for each state, hence break-
ing the problem into smaller ones. For a policy π and a state s, a state-value function uπ can be
formulated as:
uπ(s)
=
Eπ [Gt | St = s]
eq. (5.4)
=
Eπ [Rt+1 + γGt+1 | St = s]
=
∑
a
π(a | s)∑
s′ ∑
r
p(s′, r | s, a)

r + γEπ

Gt+1 | St+1 = s′ 
=
∑
a
π(a | s) ∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)

r + γuπ(s′)

, for all s ∈S.
(5.7)
Equation (5.7) is known as the Bellman equation, named after Richard Bellman. It expresses a
relationship between the value of a state s and the values of its successor states s′. It states that
the value of the start state must equal the discounted value of the expected next state, plus the
reward expected along the way [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
28
==PAGE:37==
5.2. Formalising The Problem
5.2.4
Optimal Value Functions
A policy π is better than or equal to a policy π′ if its expected return is greater than or equal
to that of π′ for all states. By way of explanation, π ≥π′ if and only if uπ(s) ≥uπ′(s) for all
s ∈S. A policy satisfying this property is called optimal and is denoted with π∗. There might
be more than one optimal policies.
Optimal state-value function
An optimal state-value function u∗holds true for all optimal policies π∗and is formulated as:
u∗(s) = max
π
uπ(s), for all s ∈S.
(5.8)
Optimal action-value function
The optimal action-value function q∗for all optimal policies π∗is formulated as:
q∗(s, a) = max
π
qπ(s, a), for all s ∈S and α ∈A.
(5.9)
Then, the optimal policy can be derived from: π∗= arg maxa q∗(s, a).
The optimal action-value function yields the expected return for taking action a in state s and
subsequently following the optimal policy π∗. In terms of u∗, the optimal action-value function
q∗can be expressed as:
q∗(s, a) = E [Rt+1 + γu∗(St+1)|St = s, At = a] .
(5.10)
5.2.5
Bellman optimality equations
The Bellman equation can be extended to include optimal policies. The value of a state, consid-
ering an optimal policy π∗, equals the expected return for the best action from that state [Sutton
and Barto, 2018]. An optimal state-value function u∗is given by:
u∗(s)
=
max
a∈A(s) qπ∗(s, a)
=
max
a
Eπ∗[Gt|St = s, At = a]
eq. (5.4)
=
max
a
Eπ∗[Rt+1 + γGt+1|St = s, At = a]
=
max
a
Eπ∗[Rt+1 + γu∗(St+1)|St = s, At = a]
=
max
a ∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)

r + γu∗(s′)

.
(5.11)
Similarly, the Bellman optimality equation for an optimal action-value function q∗is defined as:
q∗(s, a)
=
E

Rt+1 + γ max
a′
q∗(St+1, a′)
St = s, At = a

=
∑
s′,r
p(s′, r | s, a)

r + γ max
a′
q∗(s′, a′)

.
(5.12)
29
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
5.3
Q-Learning
Finding an optimal action-value function is a complex task owing to the optimal policy being
initially unknown. On that account, instead of estimating the action-value function directly, an
action-value function Q is learned through a recursive process of coincident policy and value
function improvement [Watkins, 1989]. Q-learning, an early breakthrough in reinforcement
learning, is an algorithm that approximates the optimal action-value function q∗, independ-
ently of the policy being followed. Coined by Christopher Watkins [Watkins, 1989], Q-learning
updates are given by:
Qnew(St, At)
|
{z
}
updated
←Q(St, At)
|
{z
}
old value
+
α
|{z}
learning rate
·


Rt
|{z}
reward
+
γ
|{z}
discount factor
·
estimate of optimal future value
z
}|
{
max
a
Q(St+1, α)
|
{z
}
new value (temporal difference target)
−Q(St, At)
|
{z
}
old value
|
{z
}
temporal difference


,
(5.13)
where α ∈(0, 1] is a constant step-size parameter, also referenced as learning rate and γ ∈[0, 1]
is the discount factor as seen in eqs. (5.3) and (5.4). The learned action-value function, Q, directly
approximates q∗, the optimal action-value function, and has been shown to converge to q∗with
probability 1 [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
Algorithm 2: Q-Learning for estimating q∗
Input: Algorithm parameters: learning rate α ∈(0, 1]
Output: Optimal action-value function q∗
Initialise Q(s, a) ∀s ∈S+, a ∈A(s)
for 1, . . . , N episodes do
Initialise S
for 1, . . . , t episode time steps do
Choose action A from state S using the policy π derived from Q
Take action A
Observe reward R and next state S′
Update Q:
/* using eq. (5.13) */
Qnew(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α
h
Rt + γ max
a
Q(St+1, a) −Q(St, At)
i
S ←S′
/* state is updated */
end
until S is terminal
end
Before learning, Q is initialised as a table containing arbitrary values (see alg. 2). A tabular1
estimate Q is constructed with actions At as columns and with states St as rows. Then, at each
1tabular: information arranged in rows and columns, in the form of a table.
30
==PAGE:39==
5.3. Q-Learning
time step t, the agent performs a chosen action At, observes a reward Rt and then enters a new
state St+1. Q is subsequently updated according to eq. (5.13) and the tabular estimate Q now
contains updated elements Qnew(St, At).
The core of the algorithm is a Bellman optimality equation for the action-value function (cf.
eq. (5.12)) taking the form of a simple value iteration update. The learning rate α works as
a weighted average of the new information (the temporal difference term) adding to the old
value Q(St, At). A learning rate of 0 would imply that the agent only retains prior information,
whereas in case of α = 1, the agent completely ignores prior knowledge to explore possibilities.
The latter setting, however, would be optimal only in fully deterministic environments, where
the next state in known.
Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning approach. Model-free methods do not need
any kind of environment model at all. ”They cannot think about how their environments will change
in response to a single action” [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Model-free architectures primarily focus
on learning and thus can be regarded as ”trial and error - learners”, as opposed to the model-based
methods that rely on planning. Those settings, have certain advantages over model-based ones,
not requiring suﬀiciently accurate models of complex environments.
5.3.1
Deep Q-Learning
Q was previously defined as a tabular estimate of the optimal action-value function q∗, being
recursively updated at each and every time step t. While the popular Q-learning algorithm is a
foundational idea in model-free reinforcement learning, recent advancements have shown that
state spaces in recent applications, being more complex, are too large to learn all action values
in all states separately [van Hasselt, Guez and Silver, 2015]. So, instead, a differentiable and
parameterised Q-Learning variant Q(s, a; θt) is learned (cf. eq. (5.13)). This is the extension
of Q-Learning to function approximation [Szepesvari, 2010].
θt+1 = θt + α(Rt + γ max
a
Q(St+1, a; θt)
|
{z
}
target yQ
t
−Q(St, At; θt)
|
{z
}
current value
)∇θtQ(St, At; θt),
(5.14)
where yQ
t = Rt + γ maxα Q(St+1, a; θt) is referenced as the target Q value. That is, the current
value Q(St, At; θt) is updated towards the target value yQ
t , as with the temporal difference
target value in eq. (5.13).
Remark 1: Under this deep learning framework, a shift in notation is observed, so that the action-
value function q is sometimes symbolised as Q and the optimal action-value function q∗is also
denoted as Q∗.
Remark 2: Recall, that the objective is to converge to optimal action value functions and then by
extracting optimal policies, achieve greater expected returns. An optimal policy can be retrieved
from: π∗= arg maxa Q∗(St, At).
This is the point where Deep Learning steps in. Function approximation (modelling) involves
training Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) on input–output data so as to approximate the under-
lying rules relating the inputs to the outputs [Basheer and Hajmeer, 2000]. It has been widely ar-
gued and generally accepted that reinforcement learning is benefited from a combination with
powerful function approximators, so to scale to more complex tasks. Environments evolved
to be too complex and large to be searched exhaustively, thereby demanding the generalisation
31
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
properties provided by artificial neural networks [Thrun and Schwartz, 1993]. That is, Q(St, At;
θt), as an approximation, is represented using neural networks, a particularly useful method
of building progressively more abstract representations of the data. In this instance, θt are the
network parameters (weights).
Literature Review
Gerald Tesauro reported a remarkable performance on the game of backgammon with an en-
semble of Q-Learning and an artificial neural network. The network learned from scratch to
play the entire game and was ultimately able to reach human-expert level capabilities, beating
50% of the time other networks trained on large expert data sets [Tesauro, 1991; Tesauro, 1990].
Deep Q-Network (DQN)
A Deep Q-Network (DQN) is a neural network with multiple layers and for a given state s it
outputs a vector of action values in the form Q(s, ·; θt). It takes in information about the
state of the environment and outputs the estimate of the action-value function for each pos-
sible action [Hernandez-Garcia and Sutton, 2019]. This network can be trained by adjusting
the network weights θt, to reduce the mean-squared error in the Bellman equation between
the approximate target values yQ
t
= Rt + γ maxa Q(s, a; θ−
t ) and the optimal target values
yQ
t = Rt + γ maxa Q∗(s, a), where α ∈A(s) and s ∈S. By way of the error minimisation,
Q is accurately estimated so that Q(St, At; θt) ≈Q∗(St, At).
Note that this setting uses two sets of parameters; namely θt, which are learned every time
step, and θ−
t , as parameters of the target network, that are updated periodically. The update
frequency of θ−
t
is a hyper-parameter also referenced as target network’s update frequency
[Hernandez-Garcia and Sutton, 2019]. On a further note, targets yQ
t constitute a separate neural
network which is not trained and remains frozen as an estimated target, yet is used to make
more accurate predictions of Q values. DQN, introduced by Mnih et al. (2015), is a popular
architecture to approximate the action-value function [Mnih et al., 2015].
For large state spaces, reinforcement learning is known to be unstable or even diverge when ap-
proximating the optimal action value function with a nonlinear function approximator such as a
neural network. Mnih et al., 2015 use their DQN - Reinforcement Learning composite with two
important ingredients. Experience replay, as a biologically inspired mechanism, randomises
over the data, thereby removing correlations in the observations and smoothing over changes
in the data distribution. Secondly, Q-function updates towards target values yQ
t , are period-
ically met, so to reduce correlations with the target. Both propositions notably improved the
algorithm’s performance [Mnih et al., 2015].
5.4
Double Q-Learning
Although, traditional Q-Learning can optimally solve MDPs, in a way that Q converges to the
optimal action-value function q∗, there are instances in some stochastic reinforcement learning
environments, where Q-Learning performs poorly [van Hasselt, 2010]. Performance shortage is
mainly exhibited in the form of overestimations of the action value functions [van Hasselt, 2010].
Thrun and Schwartz, 1993 further contend that the max operator in Q-learning (eq. (5.13)),
always picks the largest value, making approximations highly sensitive to overestimations.
Positive biases arise in several contexts such as economics, decision making or bidding, thereby
influencing beliefs, choice of actions and mechanistically cause overestimation of control and
overconfidence [Steen, 2004; Capen, Clapp and Campbell, 1971; Thaler, 1988].
32
==PAGE:41==
5.4. Double Q-Learning
Hado van Hasselt, in mitigation of overestimation, proposed an alternative double estimator to
find a more accurate estimate for the maximum value [van Hasselt, 2010]. Double Q-Learning, as
a double estimator, stores two Q functions: QA and QB. Each of the Q functions is updated with
a value from the other Q function for the next state. Note that in this instance, instead of using
the value QA(S, a∗) = maxa QA(S, a) to update QA, as in Q-learning, QA is updated based
on QB(S, a∗). As QB was updated on the same problem, yet with a different set of experience
samples, it can be considered a less biased estimate. In a similar fashion, QB is updated based
on QA(S, b∗). While, it is vital that both Q functions learn from separate sets of experiences,
an action can be chosen from either QA or QB.
Algorithm 3: Double Q-Learning for estimating Q1 ≈Q2 ≈q∗
Input: Algorithm parameters: learning rate α ∈(0, 1]
Output: Optimal action-value function q∗
Initialise Q(s, a) ∀s ∈S+, a ∈A(s)
for 1, . . . , N episodes do
Initialise S
for 1, . . . , t episode time steps do
Choose action A from state S based on QA or QB
Take action A
Observe reward R and next state S′
Update either QA or QB
/* could be a random selection */
if QA then
α∗= arg max
a
QA(S′, a)
QA(S, A) ←QA(S, A) + α
"
R + γQB

S′,
maximising action a∗
z
}|
{
arg max
a
QA(S′, a)

−QA(S, A)
#
else if QB then
b∗= arg max
a
QB(S′, a)
QB(S, A) ←QB(S, A) + α
"
R + γQA

S′,
maximising action b∗
z
}|
{
arg max
a
QB(S′, a)

−QB(S, A)
#
S ←S′
/* state is updated */
end
until S is terminal
end
The algorithm is shown to be convergent to the optimal action-value function q∗. Double Q-
learning may underestimate the maximum expected action values, but certainly does not suffer
from the overestimation bias to the extent Q-learning does [van Hasselt, 2010].
33
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
5.5
Actor-Critic Methods
So far, the approaches considered in sections 5.3 and 5.4 were value-based or action-value methods
as often referenced. Their actions were selected on the basis of action-value functions. Policies
were subsequently derived from the corresponding action-value estimates. There are added
benefits, however, when parameterising for optimal policies, rather than action-value functions.
Approximating a policy π is often a simpler and more computationally expedient approach to
converge to optimal policies [Simsek, Algorta and Kothiyal, 2016].
Policy Gradient Methods is a family of algorithms that learn a parameterised policy whereby ac-
tions are selected without consulting an action-value function. All methods that follow this
general scheme of policy-learning are termed as policy gradient methods, whether or not they
also learn an approximate value function [Sutton and Barto, 2018].
An Actor-Critic architecture is a paradigm of a method that learns approximations to both policy
and value functions. The actor constituent is a reference to the learned policy, while the critic
component refers to the learned value function, which is usually an action-value function. Actor-
Critic implementations are seeking to combine the strong points of actor-only and critic-only
methods [Konda and Tsitsiklis, 1999].
Actor methods work with parameterising policies and map states to actions in a probabilistic man-
ner. Critic methods rely exclusively on value function approximation and map states to expected
cumulative future rewards. Simply put, the actor is concerned with control, while the critic
addresses the problem of prediction. Those problems are distinct, but are solved concurrently
to find an optimal policy [Bhatnagar et al., 2009]. In practice, actor and critic are implemen-
ted as deep neural networks and they approximate an optimal policy and a state-value func-
tion, respectively. Many works feature actor-critic frameworks to solve real-world robotic tasks
[Haarnoja, A. Zhou, Hartikainen et al., 2018; Haarnoja, A. Zhou, Abbeel et al., 2018].
Figure 5.2: The Actor-Critic framework2,
source: Szepesvari, 2010
2System or Environment
34
==PAGE:43==
5.6. Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3)
5.6
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient
algorithm (TD3)
5.6.1
Introduction
Value-based methods, such as Q-Learning may exhibit consistent overestimation biases, thereby
leading to suboptimal policies and divergent behaviours [Thrun and Schwartz, 1993; Sutton and
Barto, 2018]. Fujimoto, Hoof and Meger, 2018 contend that this behaviour persists in actor-critic
settings. To address this concern, they introduce novel mechanisms to minimise overestimation
biases and further enhance the performance of actor-critic settings. Their proposition, namely
the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3), builds on the Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm (DDPG) [Lillicrap et al., 2015] and naturally, by re-
duction, to its predecessor: Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm (DPG) [Silver, Lever et
al., 2014], as actor-critic methods that still suffer from overestimation biases that lead to policy
breaking and brittle performance with respect to hyper-parameters. Note that under the men-
tioned algorithms the policy is deterministic.
The authors set forth their work as an attempt to solve overestimation bias and variance reduc-
tion in both value and policy updates function approximations, in actor-critic settings. Upon
evaluation against other state of the art algorithms, such as DDPG [Lillicrap et al., 2015], PPO
[Schulman, Wolski et al., 2017], ACKTR [Y. Wu et al., 2017], TRPO [Schulman, Levine et al.,
2015] and SAC [Haarnoja, A. Zhou, Abbeel et al., 2018], authors report that ”TD3 matches or
outperforms all other algorithms in both final performance and learning speed across all tasks”. The al-
gorithms were evaluated on seven continuous control domains from OpenAI gym [Brockman
et al., 2016].
5.6.2
Proposed Methodology
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) is a model-free, actor-critic
algorithm suitable for environments with continuous3 action spaces. Its superiority against
other state of the art methods owes to the addition of three key ingredients: the Clipped Double
Q-Learning, the Delayed Policy Updates and the Target Policy Smoothing.
Clipped Double Q-Learning
The authors introduce a novel clipped variant of Double Q-Learning [van Hasselt, 2010] to
replace the critic. TD3 learns two Q-functions instead of one, hence ”twin”. Here, Q-functions
are action-value functions. Each of the Q estimates is used to update the other as seen in alg. 3
and section 5.4 (Double Q-Learning). The value estimates, being independent, can be used
to make unbiased predictions of the actions selected using the opposite value estimate. Using
Double Q-Learning’s original formulation, for a pair of actors
 πϕ1, πϕ2

, and a pair of critics
(Qθ1, Qθ2), where πϕ1 is optimised with respect to Qθ1 and πϕ2 with respect to Qθ2:
y1 = r + γQθ′
2
 s′, πϕ1(s′)

,
y2 = r + γQθ′
1
 s′, πϕ2(s′)

,
(5.15)
where y = r + γQθ′
 s′, πϕ(s′)

is the learning target, r is the reward, s′ is the next state, γ
is the discount factor, ϕ are the policy network parameters and θ are the value network para-
meters. Recall that in actor-critic settings the actor is effectively the policy πϕ, while the critic
3In a continuous action space actions are infinite, as opposed to a discrete action space whereby the agent chooses a
distinct action from a finite action set [Masson and Konidaris, 2015].
35
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
corresponds to the value function Qθ. Both policy and value function are treated as deep neural
network representations and are not direct calculations.
Remark: For an optimal policy πϕ, the objective function of reinforcement learning is to max-
imise expected return: J (ϕ) = Eπϕ
h
∑T
t=0 γtr(s, a)
i
.
To limit overestimation bias, the less biased value estimate Qθ2 is upper-bounded by the biased
estimate Qθ1. Thus, by taking the minimum between the two estimates, the single target of the
Clipped Double Q-learning algorithm is defined as:
y1 = r + γ min
i=1,2 Qθ′
i
 s′, πϕ1(s′)

.
(5.16)
Clipped Double Q-learning is proven that will converge to the optimal action-value function
Q∗, as defined by the Bellman optimality equation, with a probability of 1 [Fujimoto, Hoof and
Meger, 2018]. The value target does not introduce any additional overestimation. Note that, this
update rule might still build an underestimation bias, but this is far preferable to overestimation
biases, as the value of underestimated actions will not be propagated through the policy update
[Fujimoto, Hoof and Meger, 2018].
Delayed Policy Updates
Target networks are widely leveraged as a tool for stability. By providing a stable objective
in the learning procedure, those networks optimise for a greater coverage of the training data
[Fujimoto, Hoof and Meger, 2018]. On a further note, those targets should remain fixed oth-
erwise residual errors4 will begin to accumulate. That is, to avoid overly divergent values, the
target policy (actor) should remain frozen so that the error over multiple updates is reduced.
Results additionally show that the update rates and the reciprocity between actor and critic
should be appropriately timed to circumvent divergent behaviours. The proposition concludes
that this is best achieved when the policy target network is updated after a fixed number d of
critic updates. In other words, the policy should be updated less frequently than the Q functions
[OpenAI, 2018]. In principle, this should result in higher quality policy updates. Following
the deterministic policy gradient algorithm (Silver, Lever et al., 2014, see appendix A.1 for the
theorem’s proof), the policy is updated with respect to Qθ1 every t mod d time step iterations.
For a deterministic target policy µϕtarget, the policy is learned by maximising Qθ1:
max
ϕ
Es∼B
h
Qθ1

s, µϕtarget(s)
i
,
(5.17)
where s ∼B denotes that states are sampled from an experience replay buffer5 B as the one
used in [Mnih et al., 2015].
Target Policy Smoothing
Learning a deterministic policy6 tends to exploit regions whereby available data are insuﬀicient
to train the model, leading to catastrophic failures. This could be also regarded as overfitting or
model bias [Kurutach et al., 2018]. When updating Q values, a deterministic policy may induce
a high variance in the target Q value.
4residual error: difference between the observed and the estimated value.
5Replay buffers are used to store trajectories of experience when executing a policy in an environment. During training,
replay buffers are queried for a subset of the transition between states (either a sequential subset or a sample) to
”replay” the agent’s experience [Eysenbach, Salakhutdinov and Levine, 2019; TensorFlow, 2018].
6deterministic policy: A policy π : S →A that represents a clear mapping from a given state s to an action a, as
opposed to a stochastic policy whereby there is a probability of performing an action a under a given state s.
36
==PAGE:45==
5.6. Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3)
Regularisation is a strategy that addresses high variance. The proposed approach, target policy
smoothing, intuitively suggests that similar actions should have similar values. A direct modi-
fication is made in the training process, so that the target value is enforced to fit around an
expected target value with a very small deviation ϵ:
y = r + Eϵ
h
Qθ′

s′, πϕ′ (s′) + ϵ
i
,
(5.18)
where effectively a form of bootstrapping7is used to apply a smoothing effect. Adding a small
amount of Gaussian noise ϵ to the policy in order to avoid overfitting, the target is updated as:
y = r + γQθ′

s′, πϕ′ (s′) + ϵ

, ϵ ∼clip (N (0, σ), −c, c) ,
(5.19)
where ϵ is sampled from N (0, σ) and clipped within (−c, c) to ensure that the target is close
to the original action. A target action for a target policy µϕtarget can be defined as:
α′(s′) = clip

µϕtarget(s′) + clip (ϵ, −c, c), αLow, αHigh

, ϵ ∼N (0, σ).
(5.20)
Without any change, if the Q-function approximator develops incorrect sharp peaks for some
actions, the policy will quickly exploit them triggering brittle or faulty behaviours. Target
policy smoothing attenuates those behaviours and keeps the target close to the original action
[OpenAI, 2018]. This favours values for actions that are more robust to interference and noise.
Algorithm 4: Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3)
Initialise critic networks Qθ1, Qθ2 and actor network πϕ with random parameters θ1, θ2, ϕ
Initialise target networks θ
′
1 ←θ1, θ
′
2 ←θ2, ϕ
′ ←ϕ
Initialise replay buffer B
for t = 1, . . . , T time steps in each episode do
Select action with exploration noise α ∼πϕ(s) + ϵ, ϵ ∼N (0, σ) and observe reward
r and new state s′
Store transition tuple (s, a, r, s′) in replay buffer B
Sample mini-batch of N transitions (s, a, r, s′) from B
˜α ←πϕ′ (s′) + ϵ, ϵ ∼clip (N (0, ˜σ), −c, c)
y ←r + γ mini=1,2 Qθ′
i (s′, ˜α)
Update critics θi ←arg minθi N−1 ∑(y −Qθi(s, a))2
if t mod d then
Update ϕ by the deterministic policy gradient:
% Silver, Lever et al., 2014
∇ϕJ(ϕ) = N−1 ∑∇αQθ1(s, a) |α=πϕ(s) ∇ϕπϕ(s)
Update target networks:
θ
′
i ←τθi + (1 −τ)θ
′
i
ϕ
′ ←τϕ + (1 −τ)ϕ
′
end
end
7In bootstrapping, an estimated value is used to update the same kind of estimated value, such as when using a Q value
to update another Q value in Q-Learning.
37
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Reinforcement Learning
5.6.3
Summary
Averting overestimation bias can considerably boost the performance of state-of-the-art imple-
mentations. Provided the stability the delayed target policy updates offer and the better es-
timated actions when explicitly smoothing target policies, TD3 supersedes other trending ap-
proaches in distinct evaluating tasks. By dint of optimising for more simple modifications, this
proposition is rather versatile, generalising its usage to both online and offline reinforcement
learning settings.
38
==PAGE:47==
Part III
Research Summary
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6
Trading Agents
This chapter provides a brief introductory literature review around trading agents and thereupon
delves deeper into the usage of Deep Reinforcement Learning and particularly of the Twin
Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) as a model-free, sequential decision-
maker, that has no financial market knowledge, yet is able to learn through trial and error inter-
actions and effectively navigate a trading landscape. Its performance is reported in chapter 7.
6.1
Literature review
A portfolio is constructed with the objective of maximising the expected returns given a certain
risk level and a time horizon [Neuneier, 1995]. The Markowitz model, seen in chapter 3, was
the first attempt to formalise mean-variance analysis as a constraint optimisation task and to
explicitly propound that eﬀicient portfolios conveniently address the interplay between risk and
expected return. This idea remained as a pillar of Quantitative Finance and effectively shaped
investments into a mathematical and scientific art [R. Zhou and Palomar, 2020].
More recently, the limitations of the vanilla Markowitz and its subsequent more sophisticated
derivations such as the minimum Conditional Value-at-Risk portfolio [Rockafellar and Stan-
islav Uryasev, 2000], the minimum variance portfolio [Chopra and Ziemba, 1993], the risk par-
ity portfolio [Roncalli and Weisang, 2016] and the maximum decorrelation portfolio [Christof-
fersen et al., 2012], have been rigorously studied, motivating the usage of more agnostic optim-
isation routines, that do not assume variance as the sole quantifier of risk.
A reinforcement learning agent learns to trade through trial and error interaction with the en-
vironment and by executing different strategies [Moody and Saffell, 2001]. Note that, this is
distinct from other predictive models that are trained on historical data to forecast the financial
product’s price and subsequently buy or sell the asset. The latter methods, a somewhat contro-
versial discussion, are still popular, yet have been often criticised as sub-optimal and heavily
reliant on historical returns; an ill-based indicator for future performance [Moody and L. Wu,
1997; Sato, 2019]. Atsalakis and Valavanis, 2009 were the first to propose artificial neural net-
works (ANNs) as a medium for predicting the stock market behaviour. However, an ANN is
sensitive to hyperparameter tuning and its network architecture, performance-wise [Soleymani
and Paquet, 2020]. Alternatives, using Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Random Forests
(RF) to improve accuracy [Patel et al., 2015], didn’t report significant improvements.
40
==PAGE:49==
6.1. Literature review
This chapter sees the casting of reinforcement learning in portfolio allocation, being a multi-step
and dynamically evolving optimisation solver that does not imply any inherent risk assump-
tions [Benhamou et al., 2020]. Contrary to other traditional methods, reinforcement learning is
context-agnostic, yet is able to continuously stay in touch with the objective of maximising a re-
ward, throughout the interaction with the environment. Reinforcement learning methods can
be successfully applied to large state spaces without necessitating appropriate models. Neun-
eier, 1995 and Moody and L. Wu, 1997 were the first to successfully implement a critic and actor,
respectively, method according to Fischer, 2018, inspiring further research.
While an umbrella literature review of Deep Reinforcement Learning in portfolio optimisation is
not feasible within few pages, in the interest of conciseness, only seminal works will be briefly
discussed as a medium to provide context for upcoming sections. The first application, of a
critic-only approach was seen by Neuneier, 1995. Daily prices history of the DAX index were
used along with other variables (such as interest rates, stock indices). With the reward function
being modelled as the immediate (log) return, the agent executed discrete buy and hold actions.
Dempster and Romahi, 2002; Cumming, 2015 demonstrated the applicability of reinforcement
learning in high-frequency historical FX datasets. Both employed cumulative returns over the
trading period, as a reward signal. Dempster and Romahi, 2002 traded with buy and sell signals,
while Cumming, 2015 with open long, open short, close and idle state, using a novel method of
transformed candle sticks.
With respect to actor-only approaches, Moody and Saffell, 2001 trained a Recurrent Reinforce-
ment Learning (RRL) agent both to trade half-hourly U.S. Dollar/British Pound foreign ex-
change (FX) rate data and to learn optimal allocation strategies between the S&P 500 and the
three-month Treasury Bills. As a reward function they use the differential Sharpe ratio [Moody
and L. Wu, 1997], an objective function based on exponential moving averages, that is struc-
tured for on-line trading strategies. Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017 applied Deep Recurrent Rein-
forcement Learning (Deep RRL) to manage a portfolio constituted by the eleven most traded
cryptocurrencies by their volume of transactions, and Bitcoin as cash. Using high, low and close
prices and log returns as the reward function, they reported 4-fold returns in 50 days.
Fewer implementations of actor-critic based traders are known. H. Li, Dagli and Enke, 2007
compared an actor-only to an actor-critic approach to predict stocks’ short term movements. The
analysis concluded in two different findings. First, the hybrid actor-critic architecture was found
to be superior to its actor-only alternative. Secondly, the authors contend that an investor’s
psychology is to some extent predictable and thus can be partially imitated by reinforcement
learning. Bekiros, 2010 mapped an agent’s belief to fuzzy inference principles, in a fuzzy actor-
critic reinforcement learning architecture that had a significantly higher predictive ability and
profitability than a Recurrent Neural Network, a Markov-switching model and a Buy-and-Hold
strategy. Performance was consistently superior when tested on the NASDAQ Composite, FTSE
100 and and Japan’s Nikkei 225 indices.
The plethora of financial applications motivate potential playgrounds for reinforcement learn-
ing. For a more comprehensive view of the applications of reinforcement learning in Finance,
such as in options pricing or robo-advising, a reader can consult Hambly, R. Xu and Huining
Yang, 2022.
41
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6. Trading Agents
6.2
Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio Optimisation
The portfolio optimisation problem is reformulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where
the environment is a portfolio of multiple financial products and the control is the fractions of
the capital allocation [Sato, 2019]. In a real trading setting, the future returns and the state
transition probabilities are not known. Thus, uncertainty in financial markets states makes the
portfolio optimisation problem a stochastic optimal control problem in continuous state and
action spaces – a problem which could be solved by model-free reinforcement learning.
In a standard reinforcement learning setting, the current knowledge of the market is formalised
by the state st, where t is the time step. An action at is the decision with respect to the current
allocation (portfolio weights of each asset) [Benhamou et al., 2020]. Execution of the action,
yields a reward signal rt from the environment and provides intuition on whether the actions are
good or bad [Moody and Saffell, 2001]. A reward signal can either be the cumulative portfolio
returns over a given time horizon, or other quantities such as the Sharpe ratio. Recall that an
MDP models sequential choices made over time and under uncertainty [Rust, 1994]. That is,
the agent is required to continuously re-observe the environment and perform a sequence of
decisions thereafter. If the state has the Markov property1, then this interaction is summarised
as ⟨st, at, rt, st+1⟩.
The desired objective is to maximise the reward signal [Sutton and Barto, 2018]; in this case
cumulative returns. Recall from section 5.1.3 that the policy has to be frequently updated, to
favour actions that ultimately lead to better long-term rewards.
The usage of deep learning is to represent the policy and the action-value function. In actor-critic
settings, the actor is effectively the policy πϕ, while the critic corresponds to the value function
Qθ. Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) learns two Q-functions
instead of one. TD3 falls under the umbrella of actor-critic algorithms that use deterministic
policies and has seen very few implementations on portfolio management.
6.2.1
Modelling trading
Having introduced Deep Reinforcement Learning as a potential decision-maker for the portfolio
optimisation problem, this part connects the higher-level intuitions with the formal notions of
the experiment setting. This part summarises technical implementations, so that the experiment
description in chapter 7, will be focused more on results and comparisons.
Prices
The experiments make use of business calendar days’ adjusted closing prices2 for a universe of
handpicked assets. The price vector, for each asset is obtained as: pt = [p1, p2, p3, · · · ]T for a
total of T collected prices. To capture a relative progression of prices between assets, since they
have a significant variation in their absolute price values, the prices are normalised according
to the following principle, such that a normalised price Pt is between 0 and 1:
Pt =
pt −pmin
pmax −pmin
,
Pt ∈[0, 1]
(6.1)
where pmin and pmax are the lowest and highest prices, of the same asset, observed during the
entire period of T days. This is the input that the model is trained on.
1If a state contains information about all aspects of the past agent–environment interaction that matter for the future,
the state is said to have the Markov Property (section 5.2.1).
2Adjusted closing prices account for stock splits and for other factors in corporate actions (e.g. dividends).
42
==PAGE:51==
6.2. Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio Optimisation
Returns
The immediate simple returns are computed as:
rt =
pt
pt−1
−1,
(6.2)
where pt corresponds to the price of an asset at a particular day and pt−1 is the sampled price
from the previous business day. As a vector, for each asset:
rt =

0, pt=2
pt=1
, · · ·
pT
pT−1
T
,
(6.3)
where T symbolises the number of trading days.
Transaction costs
Following Ormos and Urbán, 2013; Betancourt and Chen, 2021; Hongyang Yang et al., 2020,
transaction costs are set to be equal to a typical trading fee rate: ct = 0.1%. The trading fee
remains constant and is applied to every transaction of every asset.
Portfolio wealth
The final portfolio wealth is derived as a product:
W =
T
∏
t=1

(1 −ct)rt · wt−1 + 1

,
(6.4)
where ct is the transaction cost and wt−1 denotes the asset’s weight in the portfolio.
Rewards
A simple reward signal might consider the profits made. At each time step t and for a transaction
cost ct, the reward is given, in relation to profit, as:
ρt =
m
∑
i=1
(1 −ct) ri,t · wi,t−1,
i = 1, · · · m assets.
(6.5)
Differential Sharpe Ratio
Conforming with Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT), a fund manager should seek to maximise
returns while considering risk, instead of exclusively optimising for profits. While Sharpe ratio
[Sharpe, 1994] is the most widely used risk-adjusted metric, it does not facilitate on-line learning.
Following Moody and Saffell, 1998; Moody and L. Wu, 1997, a more suitable reward signal,
called Differential Sharpe ratio, is considered.
The differential Sharpe ratio is based on exponential moving averages of returns and standard
deviations of returns (risk) and is particularly appealing to many trading strategies through
expediting convergence and its ability to be used in live trading3; a very attractive feature in a
reinforcement learning setting.
The first and second moments of returns distributions are defined as:
An = 1
n Rn + n −1
n
An−1 and Bn = 1
n R2
n + n −1
n
Bn−1.
(6.6)
3on-line (real-time) update of the parameters.
43
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6. Trading Agents
Then the running Sharpe ratio for a decay rate4 η:
Sη(t) =
Aη(t)
Kη
 Bη(t) −A2η(t)
 1
2
, with Kη =
1 −η
2
1 −η
2
and Aη(0) = Bη(0) = 0.
(6.7)
Finally, differential Sharpe ratio (DSR) is derived as:
Dη(t) ≡∂St
∂η = Bη(t −1)∆Aη(t) −1
2 Aη(t −1)∆Bη(t)
(Bη(t −1) −Aη(t −1)2)
3
2
,
where
Sη(t) ≈Sη(t −1) + η∂Sη(t)
dη

η=0
+ O(η2).
(6.8)
The exponential moving estimates Aη(t) and Bη(t) are updated as:
Aη(t) = Aη(t −1) + η∆Aη(t) = Aη(t −1) + η
 Rt −Aη(t −1)

,
Bη(t) = Bη(t −1) + η∆Bη(t) = Bη(t −1) + η
 R2
t −Bη(t −1)

(6.9)
In a simpler form, DSR is formulated as [Moody and L. Wu, 1997]:
∂Dη(t)
∂Rt
= Bt−1 −At−1Rt
 Bt−1 −A2
t−1
 3
2
(6.10)
Note that the Differential Sharpe ratio uses first and second order moments of returns. Therefore
it was preferred over profits’ maximisation, as a more complete reward signal able to consider
risk and lead to more consistent strategies.
Discounted rewards
For a discount factor γ (was set equal to γ = 0.99) 5, the discounted rewards Gt in relation to
the next state:
Gt = ρt+1 + γρt+2 + γ2ρt+3 + γ3ρt+4 + . . .
= ρt+1 + γ
 ρt+2 + γρt+3 + γ2ρt+4 + . . .

= ρt+1 + γGt+1
(6.11)
Actions
Following a policy π, the agent executes an action at at each time step t. The time step cor-
responds to the business day that the price was collected. That is, the agent observes the daily
prices of m assets, one day at a time, and decides on an action, knowing previous prices, previ-
ous actions and rewards received from the environment in the form of returns. No knowledge
of future states is available.
Actions are eventually yielded as a column vector wt = [w1, w2, · · · wm], for i = 1, · · · m assets
in the portfolio, whereby the following conditions should hold:
4also referenced as adaptation rate [Moody and Saffell, 2001].
5The discount factor γ is conventionally set to 0.99. Although, François-Lavet, Fonteneau and Ernst, 2015 argue that an
increasing discount factor improves performance and speeds-up the convergence.
44
==PAGE:53==
6.2. Deep Reinforcement Learning For Portfolio Optimisation
m
∑
i=1
wt = 1,
wi ∈[0, 1]
(6.12)
Network architecture
An action is selected from a target actor network πϕ′ 6, where ϕ′ is the updated actor network
parameter ϕ. An action-value function, also referenced as critic, Q(s, a) = Eπ [rt | s, a] is
the expected return of performing action at in state s and following policy π thereafter. Both
actor and critic networks are constructed as two layer feedforward neural networks (FNN) with
256 hidden nodes, rectified linear units (ReLU) [Nair and Hinton, 2010] as activation functions
between the layers and a final output layer. In the actor network, the output layer features as
many dimensions as the number of assets.
A feedforward neural network (FNN) is a non-cyclical network with a distinct set of input units.
A learning algorithm adjusts the weights between units so that the output gives some desired
non-linear function of the input [Sanger, 1989]. For an encyclopedic review of deep neural
networks, a reader is advised to follow the historical survey by Schmidhuber, 2014.
Activation functions
A rectified linear unit is the positive part of its argument; similar to a ramp function:
ReLU:
f(x) =
(
x,
if x > 0
0,
otherwise
The actor network includes a softmax ouptut layer [Fukushima, 2004; Bridle, 1989], which is
responsible for producing actions (at). This activation function is particularly useful in this in-
stance since the output class is very conveniently modelled as a probability distribution, thereby
exponentially scaling the output between 0 and 1:
softmax:
σ(⃗x)i =
exi
∑m
i=1 exi ⇒
m
∑
i=1
ai = 1
where⃗x is the input vector (output tensor of the second hidden layer) and m is the number of
the output dimensions; in this case the number of assets, so each asset has a separate weight
allocation in each time step t. Actions ai and weights wi are used interchangeably here.
Hyperparameters
Deep neural networks exhibit strong performance on many machine learning tasks, but they
are particularly sensitive to the setting of their hyperparameters [Domhan, Springenberg and
Hutter, 2015]. Hence, experimenting with different learning rates, an actor learning rate of
3 · 10−4 and a critic learning rate of 5 · 10−4 for the stochastic gradient descent optimiser Adam
[Kingma and Ba, 2014], were found to be beneficial performance-wise. Greater learning rates
of the span near 10−3 lead to overly unstable, divergent performances and volatility in returns,
whereas lower ones that spread around 10−5 were found to be severely underperforming even
after many training epochs, potentially due to the structure of the objective function7 that made
optimisation very slow. Adam was also preferred in comparison with the Stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) optimisation algorithm.
6The target policy πϕ may also be seen as µϕ. Typically, µϕ is more often used to describe deterministic policies.
7J (ϕ) = Eπϕ

∑T
t=0 γtr(st, at)

.
45
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6. Trading Agents
Introducing noise to the target value estimate y 8, favours actions of higher value, close to the tar-
get estimates and not susceptible to perturbations. In terms of the policy noise and policy noise
clipping, it was noticed that clipping for overall larger policy noises, could induce instability
issues, albeit higher financial returns were also observed in some training experiments. Non-
etheless, a higher randomisation is undesired when it comes to financial profit. Thus, they were
set to a balanced average between overfitting prevention and stability. Table 6.1 summarises the
choices of hyperparameters.
hyperparameters
value
optimiser
Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014]
actor learning rate
3 × 10−4
critic learning rate
5 × 10−4
batch size
64
TD3 hyperparameters
discount factor (γ)
0.99
target network update rate (τ)
5 × 10−3
policy noise9
0.2
policy noise clipping (c)10
(−0.4, 0.4)
policy update frequency11
2
critic hidden dim
256
critic hidden layer(s)
2
Architecture
critic activation function
ReLU [Fukushima, 2004; Nair and Hinton, 2010]
actor hidden dim
256
actor hidden layer(s)
2
actor activation function
softmax [Bridle, 1989]
Table 6.1: Hyperparameters and architecture in TD3
6.2.2
Back-testing
A back-test refers to a setting where the trading agent starts from a selected time point in the
market history, without any knowledge of the future and paper trades (simulation of a trade
without real money) from then onward [Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017]. In the event of back-
testing, two conventional hypotheses are often assumed. In a real trading environment, if a
trading market is suﬀiciently liquid, the following two assumptions are close to realistic:
1. Zero slippage: Recalling the definition of slippage in section 2.1.3, the market liquidity for
each asset is high enough, so that every trade can be executed, immediately, at the price
the order was placed [Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017].
2. Zero market impact: Recalling market impact from section 2.1.3, the capital invested is
insignificant and thus, has no influence on the market [Jiang, D. Xu and Liang, 2017].
8y = r + γQθ′

s′, πϕ′ (s′) + ϵ

, ϵ ∼clip

N (0, σ), −c, c

.
9policy noise: noise added to target policy during critic update.
10noise clip: range to clip target policy noise.
11update frequency: frequency of delayed policy updates with respect to value function updates.
46
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Experiments
The previous chapter already described the aptness of deep reinforcement learning, although
briefly, in a portfolio optimisation task. So far, it is described as a complex system that can
sequentially transform time series into a set of allocation weights, while handling several bi-
ases and overestimations in the process. The deep learning community has provided an ample
toolkit of functionalities and versatile functions that are channelled to the end of portfolio op-
timisation. Reinforcement learning knows no financial ground truth, yet it is able to discover
structure in real financial price time series. This chapter will present empirical results as follows:
• Portfolio construction using the Minimum Spanning Tree, as a notion inspired from graph
theory. It will be discovered how a larger universe of assets is able to be reduced to a
smaller uncorrelated subset.
• Portfolio optimisation using Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient (TD3). This
section provides empirical results, through illustrations and different economic metrics.
The constructed portfolio will be compared against the known Standard & Poor’s 500 and
Dow Jones Industrial Average indexes.
7.1
Cryptocurrencies, Stocks and ETFs Portfolio
A number of assets were initially handpicked to comprise a larger universe of assets. In a real
trading environment, this process is an essential preliminary step and would involve funda-
mental research1 or even technical analysis2. The products are selected in a way that the result-
ing universe would be inclusive of multiple asset classes and potentially of assets with varied
return patterns. The universe of handpicked assets is shown in table 7.1.
1fundamental analysis: measuring the intrinsic value of a security and estimate whether it is overvalued or undervalued
[Investopedia, 2021f]
2technical analysis: evaluate investments by analysing statistics from trading activities, such as price and volume [In-
vestopedia, 2022c]
47
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 7. Experiments
Name
Ticker
Microsoft Corporation
MSFT
Exxon Mobil Corporation
XOM
NVIDIA Corporation
NVDA
Apple Inc.
AAPL
Tesla, Inc.
TSLA
Alphabet Inc.
GOOG
Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Class B
BRK-B
Meta Platforms, Inc.
FB
JPMorgan Chase & Co.
JPM
Stocks
Johnson & Johnson
JNJ
Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN
Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS
Boeing Co.
BA
UnitedHealth Group Inc.
UNH
Lockheed Martin Corporation
LMT
Moderna, Inc.
MRNA
The Coca-Cola Company
KO
The Procter & Gamble Company
PG
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
AMD
Pfizer Inc.
PFE
Polkadot
DOT-USD
Ethereum
ETH-USD
Avalanche
AVAX-USD
Cryptocurrencies
Solana
SOL-USD
Cosmos
ATOM-USD
Bitcoin
BTC-USD
Cardano
ADA-USD
Polygon
MATIC-USD
Invesco QQQ Trust
QQQ
Utilities Select Sector SPDR Fund
XLU
iShares 0-5 Year TIPS Bond ETF
STIP
ETFs
iShares 20+ Year Treasury Bond ETF
TLT
SPDR Portfolio S&P 500 High Dividend ETF
SPYD
Vanguard Developed Markets Index Fund
VEA
SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust
SPY
SPDR Dow Jones Industrial Average ETF Trust
DIA
Commodities
United States Oil Fund, LP
USO
SPDR Gold Shares
GLD
Table 7.1: Universe of assets
The selected universe includes companies that specialise in technology, capital markets, health-
care, aerospace as well as cryptocurrencies, commodities and several ETFs; a few of them with
assets invested in U.S. debt securities. Following Mantegna, 1998; Bonanno et al., 2004 and oth-
ers, the universe is topologically decomposed with an aim of revealing community clusters that
will be later further lessened to obtain a smaller uncorrelated subset. A minimum spanning
tree construction with the assets from the universe is shown in fig. 7.1. There is an observable
clustering of cryptocurrencies (upper-left corner), technology companies (bottom), healthcare
services companies (mid-left), financial services companies (mid-top) and others.
48
==PAGE:57==
7.1. Cryptocurrencies, Stocks and ETFs Portfolio
Figure 7.1: Minimum Spanning Tree representation of the universe
Using Spearman’s correlation, the tree is able to cluster together companies of the same sector, as
they are correlated in their returns’ time series. Recalling section 4.2.1 and fig. 4.1, the distance
d′(x, y) =
q
2(1 −ρx,y) penalises weak and negative correlations, thereby putting together
assets with strong correlations between their returns. An implicit advantage is that the least
correlated an asset is, the larger its distance is from the others. Intuitively, the least correlated
assets will lie on the outskirts of the tree. This graduality in distance provides an attractive fea-
ture, useful to further reduce the number of assets and perhaps the correlation between them.
That is, by removing assets that do not belong to a tree edge, ensures that the remainder ones
have the biggest distance from the centre and by implication, they are weakly correlated. Fig-
ure 7.2 shows a newly formed tree after removing assets from the first construction in fig. 7.1.
Figure 7.3 depicts the outcome of a second reduction, being the third tree in succession and the
one that eventually contains the final subset of assets.
Figure 7.2: Node reduction (Tree no. 2)
Figure 7.3: Final subset (Tree no. 3)
49
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 7. Experiments
7.1.1
Portfolio Inspection
Seeing how the final universe of assets is filtered out of a larger universe, this part provides fur-
ther insight on the obtained portfolio. The selected subset is summarised in table 7.2. Figure 7.4
shows the price time series of each one of the assets in the constructed portfolio.
Name
Ticker
Description
Tesla, Inc.
TSLA
Auto Manufacturer
Meta Platforms, Inc.
FB
Internet Content & Information
Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN
Internet Retail
Stocks
Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS
Capital Markets
Boeing Co.
BA
Aerospace & Defence
Lockheed Martin Corporation
LMT
Aerospace & Defence
Pfizer Inc.
PFE
Drug Manufacturers – General
Cryptocurrencies
Avalanche
AVAX-USD
Blockchain with smart contract functionality
Solana
SOL-USD
Blockchain with smart contract functionality
ETFs
iShares 20+ Year Treasury Bond ETF
TLT
≥95% of assets in U.S. government bonds
Table 7.2: Portfolio constituents
Figure 7.4: Asset prices USD ($)
Figure 7.5 shows the distribution of daily returns, as a percentage, for all assets. The variance of
returns is included in the legend. As someone might postulate, a long-term treasury bond (TLT)
exhibits less variable returns in comparison to other assets. On the other extreme, cryptocur-
rencies have far more variance in their returns’ distribution, which almost appears as uniform.
50
==PAGE:59==
7.1. Cryptocurrencies, Stocks and ETFs Portfolio
Figure 7.5: Distribution of daily returns
In the maps below, both correlation coeﬀicients are tested. The subset, seems to be carefully
filtered by the MST, as indicated by the weak correlations between the returns. There are a few
pairs such as (FB – AMZN) and (BA – GS) that show a moderately positive correlation in both
maps. There are some instances of slightly negative correlations, yet, the majority of pairs have
almost no relationship to each other.
Figure 7.6: Pearson’s correlation of daily returns
Figure 7.7: Spearman’s correlation of daily returns
7.1.2
Evaluation
Upon selecting a diversified and uncorrelated subset as a product of the Minimum Spanning
Tree, this portfolio is optimised and subsequently tested against known benchmarks. In order to
ensure availability of prices for all of the assets, the obtained closing prices were sampled with
business days as the default frequency and excess, previously recorded historical prices, were
discarded, so for all of the price time series to have the same starting date. The Twin Delayed
Deep Deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3) was trained for 400 episodes3 as a suitable
time window that allowed a stable convergence. Results are summarised in fig. 7.8 and table 7.4.
3One episode corresponds to one iteration over the whole training set until the terminal training date is reached.
51
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 7. Experiments
Start date
End date
Training
13-July-2020
15-June-2021
Back-test
16-June-2021
16-June-2022
Table 7.3: Training and back-test sets
Figure 7.8: Return on investment (PnL) against Standard & Poor’s 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the best stock ’PFE’ (w.r.t.
cumulative returns) over a period of one year.
TD3
S&P500
DJIA
Best stock - PFE
Cumulative Returns
4.368
-0.137
-0.128
0.184
Profit and Loss (PnL)
5.368
0.863
0.873
1.184
Mean return
0.008
-0.001
-0.001
0.001
Standard deviation of returns
0.055
0.012
0.010
0.020
Skewness of returns
1.721
-0.510
-0.439
0.893
Kurtosis of returns
13.106
0.876
0.757
3.542
Sharpe ratio
2.352
-0.661
-0.743
0.698
Maximum drawdown
-1.221
-2.353
-2.267
-1.474
Conditional Value at Risk - 99%
-0.151
-0.039
-0.032
-0.044
Table 7.4: Summary of statistics
In the illustrated Profit and Loss (PnL) plot (fig. 7.8), the TD3 reinforcement learning agent
outperforms both indices (Standard & Poor’s 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average) and the best
stock selected based on the highest PnL achieved at the end of the testing period. A positive
excess kurtosis signifies extremity of deviations in returns as a result of the agent investing in
fewer assets than the available ones. A possible explanation might feature transaction costs as
the main resistance in frequent exchanges of wealth between assets. Positively skewed returns
should be preferred according to the skewness criterion in section 2.3.1. The Sharpe ratio verifies
a balanced and risk-adjusted performance of returns.
52
==PAGE:61==
7.1. Cryptocurrencies, Stocks and ETFs Portfolio
Note that due to the nature of discount, rewards far in the future worth exponentially less, yet
this agent is far from a greedy approach that would seek immediate returns. Overall, the design
of the reward function (Differential Sharpe ratio, see section 6.2.1) and the notion of discounted
rewards, pose the TD3 trading agent as a rather suitable approach for a longer-term portfolio
optimisation.
53
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
An ensemble method of Deep Reinforcement Learning and Minimum Spanning Tree was ex-
amined as a complete method of constructing and optimising a diversified portfolio. During
this analysis concepts from Machine Learning, graph theory and portfolio optimisation were
discussed. The effectiveness of the Minimum Spanning Tree as a versatile and visually inter-
pretable aid in portfolio decorrelation and the ability of deep reinforcement learning to tran-
scend known benchmarks under the current market recession without supervised training, pose
themselves as promising outcomes. The present chapter raises limitations alluded to during the
experiment outline and puts potential research questions, forward, for consideration.
8.1
Limitations and Future Work
Deep neural networks are very complex in their interpretation, hence notoriously known as
”black boxes”. Their hidden layers exhibit many complex relationships. Oftentimes more than
necessary. Nonetheless, financial applications favour transparency and interpretability to a
level that a model’s action can be explained by financial theories, as there is significant risk
involved. Much of the state-of-the-art methods find benefits in biologically inspired heuristics
to infer meaningful representations.
Overly complex architectures potentially lead to overfitting and sub-optimal policies. As ob-
served in the experiments, a large number of hyper-parameters, not only makes model-free
reinforcement learning susceptible to overfitting and lowers its degree of generalisation ability,
but also makes tuning an arduous process. This may potentially hinder a wider adoption of
reinforcement learning in portfolio optimisation.
The design of features and rewards could be closely aided by financial domain knowledge.
Much of the literature calls for an integration of machine learning schemes with fundamentals,
sentiment analysis and technical indicators, that would channel accumulated expert financial
knowledge into refined reward signals [Sato, 2019; Hambly, R. Xu and Huining Yang, 2022;
Filos, 2019].
Other possible directions would include, behaviour cloning; a process of acquiring knowledge
through self-supervised observation of an expert performing a particular task. Unlike stand-
ard reinforcement learning regimes, learning through imitation heavily relies on the quality of
the observation. Ultimately, an agent would be able to infer optimal policies when observing
experts execute profitable strategies in speculative markets.
54
==PAGE:63==
8.1. Limitations and Future Work
Last but not least, there is still a wide range of domains inaccessible to reinforcement learn-
ing due to the high cost and danger of interacting with the environment. Offline reinforce-
ment learning breaks the assumption that the agent can interact with the environment. It is a
paradigm that uses previously collected data without requiring additional online data collec-
tion [Fujimoto and Gu, 2021]. This is a particularly handy property as oftentimes data collection,
in real-world financial applications, can be limited or expensive. Others characterise offline re-
inforcement learning as a tremendously promising method for making it possible to turn large
data sets into powerful decision making engines [Levine et al., 2020].
55
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
Markowitz, Harry M. (1968). Portfolio Selection: Eﬀicient Diversification of Investments. Yale uni-
versity press.
Silver, David, Aja Huang et al. (2016). ‘Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks
and tree search’. In: nature 529.7587, pp. 484–489.
Mnih, Volodymyr et al. (Feb. 2015). ‘Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning’.
In: Nature 518, pp. 529–33. DOI: 10.1038/nature14236.
Moravcı́k, Matej et al. (2017). ‘DeepStack: Expert-Level Artificial Intelligence in No-Limit Poker’.
In: CoRR abs/1701.01724. arXiv: 1701.01724. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.01724.
Li, Yuxi (2018). Deep Reinforcement Learning. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1810.06339. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1810.06339.
Investopedia (2021a). Investopedia – Liquid Asset Definition. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/l/liquidasset.asp.
– (2021b). Investopedia – Financial Asset Definition. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/
financialasset.asp.
– (2021c). Investopedia – Liquidity Definition. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/liquidity.
asp.
GALE, DAVID (1955). THE LAW OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND. Vol. 3. 1. Mathematica Scand-
inavica, pp. 155–169. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/24490348.
Gabrielsen, Alexandros, Massimiliano Marzo and Paolo Zagaglia (2011). Measuring market li-
quidity: An introductory survey. arXiv: 1112.6169 [q-fin.TR].
Massimb, Marcel N. and Bruce D. Phelps (1994). ‘Electronic Trading, Market Structure and
Liquidity’. In: Financial Analysts Journal 50.1, pp. 39–50. DOI: 10.2469/faj.v50.n1.39. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.2469/faj.v50.n1.39. URL: https://doi.org/10.2469/faj.v50.n1.39.
Torre, Nicolo G., D. Ph. and Mark J. Ferrari (2000). The Market Impact Model TM.
Investopedia (2021d). Investopedia – Slippage Definition. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/s/slippage.asp.
– (2021e). Investopedia – Transaction Costs. URL: https : / / www . investopedia . com / terms / t /
transactioncosts.asp.
– (2022a). Investopedia – ETF Definition. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/etf.asp.
Crosby, Michael et al. (2016). BlockChain technology: beyond bitcoin. Applied Innovation.
Nakamoto, Satoshi (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
Karame, Ghassan O., Elli Androulaki and Srdjan Capkun (2012). ‘Double-Spending Fast Pay-
ments in Bitcoin’. In: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer and Communica-
tions Security. CCS ’12. Raleigh, North Carolina, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
pp. 906–917. ISBN: 9781450316514. DOI: 10.1145/2382196.2382292. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/2382196.2382292.
Zhang, Shijie and Jong-Hyouk Lee (2019). ‘Double-Spending With a Sybil Attack in the Bitcoin
Decentralized Network’. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15.10, pp. 5715–5722.
DOI: 10.1109/TII.2019.2921566.
Jiang, Zhengyao, Dixing Xu and Jinjun Liang (2017). A Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework
for the Financial Portfolio Management Problem. arXiv: 1706.10059 [q-fin.CP].
56
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Fang, Fan et al. (2022). Cryptocurrency Trading: A Comprehensive Survey. Financial Innovation.
Tsay, Ruey S. (2005). Analysis of Financial Time Series: Second Edition. John Wiley & Sons.
Miskolczi, Panna (June 2017). ‘Note on simple and logarithmic return’. In: Applied Studies in
Agribusiness and Commerce 11.1-2, pp. 127–136. DOI: 10.19041/APSTRACT/2017/1-2/16. URL:
https://ojs.lib.unideb.hu/apstract/article/view/6976.
Rice, John A. (2006). Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis. Third. Belmont, CA: Duxbury
Press.
Harvey, Campbell R. et al. (2010). ‘Portfolio selection with higher moments’. In: Quantitative
Finance 10.5, pp. 469–485. DOI: 10.1080/14697681003756877. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
14697681003756877. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14697681003756877.
Naqvi, Bushra et al. (2017). ‘Portfolio optimisation with higher moments of risk at the Pakistan
Stock Exchange’. In: Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja 30.1, pp. 1594–1610. DOI: 10 .
1080/1331677X.2017.1340182. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/1331677X.2017.1340182.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/1331677X.2017.1340182.
Khan, Kanwal Iqbal et al. (2020). ‘Sustainable Portfolio Optimization with Higher-Order Mo-
ments of Risk’. In: Sustainability 12.5. ISSN: 2071-1050. DOI: 10.3390/su12052006. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/12/5/2006.
Lo, Andrew W (2002). ‘The statistics of Sharpe ratios’. In: Financial analysts journal 58.4, pp. 36–
52.
Dowd, Kevin (2000). ‘Adjusting for risk: An improved Sharpe ratio’. In: International review of
economics & finance 9.3, pp. 209–222.
Chekhlov, Alexei, Stanislav Uryasev and Michael Zabarankin (2005). ‘Drawdown measure in
portfolio optimization’. In: International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 8.01, pp. 13–
58.
Rockafellar, R. Tyrrell and Stanislav Uryasev (2000). ‘Optimization of Conditional Value-at-
Risk’. In: Journal of Risk 2, pp. 21–41.
Sarykalin, Sergey, Gaia Serraino and Stan Uryasev (Sept. 2008). ‘Value- at-Risk vs Conditional
Value-at-Risk in Risk Management and Optimization’. In: ISBN: 978-1-877640-23-0. DOI: 10 .
1287/educ.1080.0052.
Pflug, Georg Ch. (Sept. 2000). ‘Some Remarks On The Value-At-Risk And The Conditional
Value-At-Risk’. In: DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4757-3150-7_15.
Markowitz, Harry M. (1952). ‘Portfolio Selection’. In: The Journal of Finance 7.1, pp. 77–91. ISSN:
00221082, 15406261. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2975974 (visited on 06/06/2022).
Luenberger, David G. (1998). Investment Science. Oxford University Press.
Investopedia (2022b). Investopedia – Short Selling. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/
shortselling.asp.
Perold, Andre F (1984). ‘Large-scale portfolio optimization’. In: Management science 30.10,
pp. 1143–1160.
Kraft, D. (1988). A Software Package for Sequential Quadratic Programming. Deutsche Forschungs-
und Versuchsanstalt für Luft- und Raumfahrt Köln: Forschungsbericht. Wiss. Berichtswesen
d. DFVLR. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=4rKaGwAACAAJ.
Mantegna, Rosario (Feb. 1998). ‘Hierarchical Structure in Financial Markets’. In: arXiv.org,
Quantitative Finance Papers 11. DOI: 10.1007/s100510050929.
Graham, Ronald L and Pavol Hell (1985). ‘On the history of the minimum spanning tree prob-
lem’. In: Annals of the History of Computing 7.1, pp. 43–57.
Encyclopedia of Mathematics (2014). Encyclopedia of Mathematics – Greedy algorithm. URL: http:
//encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=Greedy_algorithm&oldid=34629.
Kruskal, Joseph B. (1956). ‘On the Shortest Spanning Subtree of a Graph and the Traveling
Salesman Problem’. In: Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 7.1, pp. 48–50. ISSN:
00029939, 10886826. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2033241 (visited on 09/06/2022).
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Prim, R. C. (1957). ‘Shortest connection networks and some generalizations’. In: The Bell System
Technical Journal 36.6, pp. 1389–1401. DOI: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1957.tb01515.x.
Rafid, Im (May 2019). Performance evaluation for Kruskal’s and Prim’s Algorithm in Minimum Span-
ning Tree using Networkx Package and Matplotlib to visualizing the MST Result.
Bonanno, G. et al. (Jan. 2004). ‘Networks of equities in financial markets’. In: The European Phys-
ical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 38, pp. 363–371. DOI: 10.1140/epjb/e2004-
00129-6.
Onnela, J-P et al. (2002). ‘Dynamic asset trees and portfolio analysis’. In: The European Physical
Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 30.3, pp. 285–288.
Millington, Tristan and Mahesan Niranjan (2021). ‘Construction of minimum spanning trees
from financial returns using rank correlation’. In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applic-
ations 566, p. 125605. ISSN: 0378-4371. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2020.125605. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437120309031.
Birch, Jenna and Kimmo Soramaki (Jan. 2015). ‘Analysis of Correlation Based Networks Rep-
resenting DAX 30 Stock Price Returns’. In: Computational Economics 47. DOI: 10.1007/s10614-
015-9481-z.
Song, Jung Yoon, Woojin Chang and Jae Wook Song (2019). ‘Cluster analysis on the structure of
the cryptocurrency market via Bitcoin–Ethereum filtering’. In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications 527, p. 121339. ISSN: 0378-4371. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.
121339. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437119304893.
Stošić, Darko et al. (Oct. 2018). ‘Collective behavior of cryptocurrency price changes’. In: Physica
A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 507, pp. 499–509. DOI: 10.1016/j.physa.2018.05.050.
Hauke, Jan and Tomasz Kossowski (2011). ‘Comparison of values of Pearson’s and Spearman’s
correlation coeﬀicient on the same sets of data’. In:
Ahlgren, Per, Bo Jarneving and Ronald Rousseau (2003). ‘Requirements for a cocitation sim-
ilarity measure, with special reference to Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient’. In: Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology 54.6, pp. 550–560.
Hüttner, Amelie, Jan-Frederik Mai and Stefano Mineo (May 2016). ‘Portfolio selection based on
graphs: Does it align with Markowitz-optimal portfolios?’ In: Dependence Modeling 6, pp. 63–
87. DOI: 10.1515/demo-2018-0004.
Sutton, Richard S. and Andrew G. Barto (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Second.
Cambridge, MA : The MIT Press.
Abe, Mitsunari et al. (2011). ‘Reward Improves Long-Term Retention of a Motor Memory
through Induction of Offline Memory Gains’. In: Current Biology 21.7, pp. 557–562. ISSN: 0960-
9822. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.030. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960982211002211.
Taylor, Jordan A., John W. Krakauer and Richard B. Ivry (2014). ‘Explicit and implicit contribu-
tions to learning in a sensorimotor adaptation task.’ In: The Journal of neuroscience : the oﬀicial
journal of the Society for Neuroscience vol. 34,8 (2014): 3023-32. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3619-
13.2014.
Shmuelof, Lior et al. (2012). ‘Overcoming Motor “Forgetting” Through Reinforcement Of
Learned Actions’. In: vol. 32. 42. Society for Neuroscience, 14617–14621a. DOI: 10 . 1523 /
JNEUROSCI.2184-12.2012. eprint: https://www.jneurosci.org/content/32/42/14617.full.pdf.
URL: https://www.jneurosci.org/content/32/42/14617.
Huang, Vincent et al. (May 2011). ‘Rethinking Motor Learning and Savings in Adaptation -
Paradigms: Model-Free Memory for Successful Actions Combines with Internal Models’. In:
vol. 70, pp. 787–801. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.012.
Russell, Stuart J. and Peter Norvig (2021). Fourth. Pearson Education, Inc.
Kaelbling, L. P., M. L. Littman and A. W. Moore (1996). ‘Reinforcement Learning: A Survey’. In:
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.CS/9605103. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/9605103.
58
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Črepinšek, Matej, Shih-Hsi Liu and Marjan Mernik (2013). ‘Exploration and Exploitation in
Evolutionary Algorithms: A Survey’. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 45.3. ISSN: 0360-0300. DOI: 10 .
1145/2480741.2480752. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2480741.2480752.
Brafman, Ronen and Moshe Tennenholtz (Jan. 2001). ‘R-MAX - A General Polynomial Time
Algorithm for Near-Optimal Reinforcement Learning.’ In: vol. 3, pp. 953–958. DOI: 10.1162/
153244303765208377.
Auer, Peter (2003). Using Confidence Bounds for Exploitation-Exploration Trade-Offs. JMLR.org,
pp. 397–422.
Fortunato, Meire et al. (2017). Noisy Networks for Exploration. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1706.10295.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.10295.
Szepesvari, Csaba (2010). Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning. Morgan and Claypool Publish-
ers. ISBN: 1608454924.
Rust, John (1994). ‘Chapter 51 Structural estimation of markov decision processes’. In: vol. 4.
Handbook of Econometrics. Elsevier, pp. 3081–3143. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-
4412(05)80020-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1573441205800200.
Lillicrap, Timothy P. et al. (2015). Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. DOI: 10 .
48550/ARXIV.1509.02971. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971.
Watkins, Christopher (Jan. 1989). ‘Learning From Delayed Rewards’. PhD thesis.
van Hasselt, Hado, Arthur Guez and David Silver (2015). ‘Deep Reinforcement Learning with
Double Q-learning’. In: CoRR abs/1509.06461. arXiv: 1509.06461. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1509.06461.
Basheer, I.A and M Hajmeer (2000). ‘Artificial neural networks: fundamentals, computing,
design, and application’. In: Journal of Microbiological Methods 43.1. Neural Computting in Mi-
crbiology, pp. 3–31. ISSN: 0167-7012. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7012(00)00201-3. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167701200002013.
Thrun, Sebastian and Anton Schwartz (June 1993). ‘Issues in Using Function Approximation for
Reinforcement Learning’. In: Proceedings of 4th Connectionist Models Summer School. Erlbaum
Associates.
Tesauro, Gerald (1991). ‘Practical Issues in Temporal Difference Learning’. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by J. Moody, S. Hanson and R.P. Lippmann.
Vol. 4. Morgan-Kaufmann. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 1991 / file /
68ce199ec2c5517597ce0a4d89620f55-Paper.pdf.
– (1990). ‘Neurogammon: a neural-network backgammon program’. In: 1990 IJCNN Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 33–39 vol.3. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN.1990.137821.
Hernandez-Garcia, J Fernando and Richard S. Sutton (2019). ‘Understanding multi-step
deep reinforcement learning: a systematic study of the DQN target’. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.07510.
van Hasselt, Hado (Jan. 2010). ‘Double Q-learning.’ In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 23: 24th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2010, pp. 2613–2621.
Steen, Eric (Sept. 2004). ‘Rational Overoptimism (and Other Biases)’. In: American Economic
Review 94, pp. 1141–1151. DOI: 10.1257/0002828042002697.
Capen, E. C., R. V. Clapp and W. M. Campbell (1971). ‘Competitive Bidding in High-Risk Situ-
ations’. In: Journal of Petroleum Technology 23, pp. 641–653.
Thaler, Richard H. (Mar. 1988). ‘Anomalies: The Winner’s Curse’. In: Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 2.1, pp. 191–202. DOI: 10.1257/jep.2.1.191. URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=
10.1257/jep.2.1.191.
Simsek, Özgür, Simón Algorta and Amit Kothiyal (2016). ‘Why Most Decisions Are Easy in
Tetris - And Perhaps in Other Sequential Decision Problems, As Well’. In: ICML.
59
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
Konda, Vijay and John Tsitsiklis (1999). ‘Actor-Critic Algorithms’. In: Advances in Neural Inform-
ation Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Solla, T. Leen and K. Müller. Vol. 12. MIT Press. URL: https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1999/file/6449f44a102fde848669bdd9eb6b76fa-Paper.pdf.
Bhatnagar, Shalabh et al. (2009). ‘Natural actor–critic algorithms’. In: Automatica 45.11, pp. 2471–
2482.
Haarnoja, Tuomas, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen et al. (2018). ‘Soft actor-critic algorithms
and applications’. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905.
Haarnoja, Tuomas, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel et al. (2018). ‘Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy
Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor’. In: CoRR
abs/1801.01290. arXiv: 1801.01290. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.01290.
Fujimoto, Scott, Herke van Hoof and David Meger (2018). Addressing Function Approximation
Error in Actor-Critic Methods. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1802.09477. URL: https://github.com/sfujim/
TD3.
Silver, David, Guy Lever et al. (2014). ‘Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms’. In: Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 32.
ICML’14. Beijing, China: JMLR.org, pp. I–387–I–395.
Schulman, John, Filip Wolski et al. (2017). ‘Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms’. In: CoRR
abs/1707.06347. arXiv: 1707.06347. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Wu, Yuhuai et al. (2017). ‘Scalable trust-region method for deep reinforcement learning using
Kronecker-factored approximation’. In: CoRR abs/1708.05144. arXiv: 1708.05144. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1708.05144.
Schulman, John, Sergey Levine et al. (2015). ‘Trust Region Policy Optimization’. In: CoRR
abs/1502.05477. arXiv: 1502.05477. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.05477.
Brockman, Greg et al. (2016). ‘OpenAI Gym’. In: CoRR abs/1606.01540. arXiv: 1606.01540. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01540.
Masson, Warwick and George Dimitri Konidaris (2015). ‘Reinforcement Learning with Para-
meterized Actions’. In: CoRR abs/1509.01644. arXiv: 1509.01644. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1509.01644.
OpenAI (2018). OpenAI – Twin Delayed DDPG. URL: https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/
algorithms/td3.html#documentation.
Eysenbach, Benjamin, Ruslan Salakhutdinov and Sergey Levine (2019). ‘Search on the Replay
Buffer: Bridging Planning and Reinforcement Learning’. In: CoRR abs/1906.05253. arXiv: 1906.
05253. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05253.
TensorFlow (2018). Replay Buffers. URL: https://www.tensorflow.org/agents/tutorials/5_replay_
buffers_tutorial.
Kurutach, Thanard et al. (2018). ‘Model-ensemble trust-region policy optimization’. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.10592.
Neuneier, Ralph (1995). ‘Optimal Asset Allocation using Adaptive Dynamic Programming’.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by D. Touretzky, M.C. Mozer and
M. Hasselmo. Vol. 8. MIT Press. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 1995 / file /
3a15c7d0bbe60300a39f76f8a5ba6896-Paper.pdf.
Zhou, Rui and Daniel P. Palomar (2020). ‘Understanding the Quintile Portfolio’. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing 68, pp. 4030–4040. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2020.3006761.
Chopra, Vijay Kumar and William T. Ziemba (1993). ‘The Effect of Errors in Means, Variances,
and Covariances on Optimal Portfolio Choice’. In:
Roncalli, T. and G. Weisang (2016). ‘Risk parity portfolios with risk factors’. In: Quantitative
Finance 16.3, pp. 377–388. DOI: 10.1080/14697688.2015.1046907. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1080/14697688.2015.1046907. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2015.1046907.
60
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Christoffersen, Peter et al. (May 2012). ‘Is the Potential for International Diversification Disap-
pearing? A Dynamic Copula Approach’. In: Review of Financial Studies 25. DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.
2066076.
Moody, John and Matthew Saffell (July 2001). ‘Learning to trade via direct reinforcement’. In:
IEEE transactions on neural networks / a publication of the IEEE Neural Networks Council 12,
pp. 875–89. DOI: 10.1109/72.935097.
Moody, John and Lizhong Wu (1997). ‘Optimization of trading systems and portfolios’. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE 1997 Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering (CIFEr),
pp. 300–307. DOI: 10.1109/CIFER.1997.618952.
Sato, Yoshiharu (2019). ‘Model-Free Reinforcement Learning for Financial Portfolios: A Brief
Survey’. In: ArXiv abs/1904.04973.
Atsalakis, George S. and Kimon P. Valavanis (2009). ‘Surveying stock market forecasting tech-
niques – Part II: Soft computing methods’. In: Expert Systems with Applications 36.3, Part 2,
pp. 5932–5941. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.07.006. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417408004417.
Soleymani, Farzan and Eric Paquet (2020). ‘Financial portfolio optimization with online deep
reinforcement learning and restricted stacked autoencoder—DeepBreath’. In: Expert Systems
with Applications 156, p. 113456. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.
113456. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417420302803.
Patel, Jigar et al. (2015). ‘Predicting stock and stock price index movement using Trend Determ-
inistic Data Preparation and machine learning techniques’. In: Expert Systems with Applications
42.1, pp. 259–268. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.07.040. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417414004473.
Benhamou, Eric et al. (2020). ‘Bridging the gap between Markowitz planning and deep rein-
forcement learning’. In: CoRR abs/2010.09108. arXiv: 2010.09108. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.09108.
Fischer, Thomas G. (2018). Reinforcement learning in financial markets - a survey. eng. FAU Discus-
sion Papers in Economics 12/2018. Nürnberg. URL: http://hdl.handle.net/10419/183139.
Dempster, Michael and YS Romahi (Nov. 2002). ‘Intraday FX Trading: An Evolutionary Rein-
forcement Learning Approach’. In: pp. 697–708. ISBN: 978-3-540-44025-3. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-
45675-9_52.
Cumming, James (2015). An Investigation into the Use of Reinforcement Learning Techniques within
the Algorithmic Trading Domain.
Li, Hailin, Cihan H. Dagli and David Enke (2007). ‘Short-term Stock Market Timing Prediction
under Reinforcement Learning Schemes’. In: 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Approxim-
ate Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning, pp. 233–240. DOI: 10.1109/ADPRL.2007.
368193.
Bekiros, Stelios (June 2010). ‘Heterogeneous trading strategies with adaptive fuzzy Actor-Critic
reinforcement learning: A behavioral approach’. In: Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
34, pp. 1153–1170. DOI: 10.1016/j.jedc.2010.01.015.
Hambly, Ben M., Renyuan Xu and Huining Yang (Feb. 2022). ‘Recent Advances in Reinforce-
ment Learning in Finance’. In: URL: https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/hambly/PDF/Papers/RL-
finance.pdf.
Ormos, Mihály and András Urbán (2013). ‘Performance analysis of log-optimal portfolio
strategies with transaction costs’. In: Quantitative Finance 13.10, pp. 1587–1597. DOI: 10.1080/
14697688.2011.570368. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2011.570368. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2011.570368.
Betancourt, Carlos and Wen-Hui Chen (2021). ‘Deep reinforcement learning for portfolio man-
agement of markets with a dynamic number of assets’. In: Expert Systems with Applications
61
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
164, p. 114002. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114002. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417420307776.
Yang, Hongyang et al. (Jan. 2020). ‘Deep Reinforcement Learning for Automated Stock Trading:
An Ensemble Strategy’. In: SSRN Electronic Journal. DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.3690996.
Sharpe, William F. (1994). ‘The Sharpe Ratio’. In: The Journal of Portfolio Management 21.1, pp. 49–
58. ISSN: 0095-4918. DOI: 10.3905/jpm.1994.409501. eprint: https://jpm.pm- research.com/
content/21/1/49.full.pdf. URL: https://jpm.pm-research.com/content/21/1/49.
Moody, John and Matthew Saffell (1998). ‘Reinforcement Learning for Trading’. In: Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by M. Kearns, S. Solla and D. Cohn.
Vol. 11. MIT Press. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 1998 / file /
4e6cd95227cb0c280e99a195be5f6615-Paper.pdf.
François-Lavet, Vincent, Raphael Fonteneau and Damien Ernst (2015). ‘How to discount deep
reinforcement learning: Towards new dynamic strategies’. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.02011.
Nair, Vinod and Geoffrey Hinton (June 2010). ‘Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted
Boltzmann Machines’. In: vol. 27, pp. 807–814.
Sanger, Terence D (1989). ‘Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-layer linear feedforward
neural network’. In: Neural networks 2.6, pp. 459–473.
Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2014). ‘Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview’. In: CoRR
abs/1404.7828. arXiv: 1404.7828. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.7828.
Fukushima, Kunihiko (2004). ‘Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a
mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position’. In: Biological Cybernetics
36, pp. 193–202.
Bridle, John S. (1989). ‘Training Stochastic Model Recognition Algorithms as Networks Can
Lead to Maximum Mutual Information Estimation of Parameters’. In: Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’89. Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, pp. 211–217.
Domhan, Tobias, Jost Tobias Springenberg and Frank Hutter (2015). ‘Speeding up automatic
hyperparameter optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves’.
In: Twenty-fourth international joint conference on artificial intelligence.
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Ba (2014). ‘Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization’. In:
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Investopedia (2021f). Investopedia – Fundamental Analysis. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/f/fundamentalanalysis.asp.
– (2022c). Investopedia – Technical Analysis. URL: https : / / www . investopedia . com / terms / t /
technicalanalysis.asp.
Filos, Angelos (2019). Reinforcement Learning for Portfolio Management. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1909.09571. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.09571.
Fujimoto, Scott and Shixiang Shane Gu (2021). ‘A Minimalist Approach to Offline Reinforce-
ment Learning’. In: CoRR abs/2106.06860. arXiv: 2106.06860. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
06860.
Levine, Sergey et al. (2020). ‘Offline Reinforcement Learning: Tutorial, Review, and Perspectives
on Open Problems’. In: CoRR abs/2005.01643. arXiv: 2005.01643. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2005.01643.
62
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Policy Gradient
A.1
Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem
A.1.1
Theorem 1
The following proof from Silver, Lever et al., 2014 is presented here for completeness.
We consider a deterministic policy µθ : S →A with a parameter vector θ ∈Rn.
We
define a performance objective J (µθ) = E

rγ
1 | µ

, and define the probability distribution
p (s →s′, t, µ) and the discounted state distribution ρµ(s). This lets us to write the perform-
ance objective as an expectation,
J (µθ) =
Z
S ρµ(s)r (s, µθ(s)) ds
= Es∼ρµ [r (s, µθ(s))] .
Regularity conditions A.1: p (s′ | s, a) , ∇ap (s′ | s, a) , µθ(s), ∇θµθ(s), r(s, a), ∇ar(s, a), p1(s)
are continuous in all parameters and variables s, a, s′ and x.
Regularity
conditions
A.2:
There
exists
a
b
and
L
such
that
sups p1(s)
<
b, supa,s,s′ p (s′ | s, a)
<
b, supa,s r(s, a)
<
b, supa,s,s′ ∥∇ap (s′ | s, a)∥
<
L, and
supa,s ∥∇ar(s, a)∥< L.
Theorem 1 (Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem). Suppose that the MDP satisfies condi-
tions A.l These imply that ∇θµθ(s) and ∇aQµ(s, a) exist and that the deterministic policy
gradient exists. Then,
∇θJ (µθ) =
Z
S ρµ(s)∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)

a=µθ(s)
ds
= Es∼ρµ
h
∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)
i
.
63
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A. Policy Gradient
A.1.2
Proof of Theorem 1
Note that the regularity conditions A.1 imply that Vµθ(s) and ∇θVµθ(s) are continu-
ous functions of θ and s and the compactness of S
further implies that for any
θ, ∥∇θVµθ(s)∥,
∇aQµθ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)
 and ∥∇θµθ(s)∥are bounded functions of s. These
conditions will be necessary to exchange derivatives and integrals, and the order of integration
whenever necessary in the following proof. We have,
∇θVµθ(s) =∇θQµθ (s, µθ(s))
=∇θ

r (s, µθ(s)) +
Z
S γp
 s′ | s, µθ(s)

Vµθ  s′
ds′

= ∇θµθ(s)∇ar(s, a)|a=µθ(s) + ∇θ
Z
S γp
 s′ | s, µθ(s)

Vµθ  s′
ds′
= ∇θµθ(s)∇ar(s, a)|a=µθ(s)
+
Z
S γ

p
 s′ | s, µθ(s)
 ∇θVµθ  s′ + ∇θµθ(s)∇ap
 s′ | s, a

a=µθ(s) Vµθ  s′
ds′
(1)
=∇θµθ(s)∇a
 
r(s, a) +
Z
S γp
 s′ | s, a)Vµθ  s′
ds′
a=µθ(s)
+
Z
S γp
 s′ | s, µθ(s)
 ∇θVµθ  s′
ds′
= ∇θµθ(s)∇aQµθ(s, a)|a=µθ(s) +
Z
S γp
 s →s′, 1, µθ
 ∇θVµθ  s′
ds′.
Where in (1) we used the Leibniz integral rule to exchange order of derivative and integra-
tion, requiring the regularity conditions, specifically continuity of p (s′ | s, a) , µθ(s), Vµθ(s)
and their derivatives w.r.t. θ. And now iterating this formula we have,
= ∇θµθ(s)∇aQµθ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)
+
Z
S γp
 s →s′, 1, µθ
 ∇θµθ
 s′ ∇aQµθ  s′, a

a=µθ(s′)
ds′
+
Z
S γp
 s →s′, 1, µθ
 Z
S γp
 s′ →s′′, 1, µθ
 ∇θVµθ  s′′
ds′′ds′
= ∇θµθ(s)∇aQµθ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)
+
Z
S γp
 s →s′, 1, µθ
 ∇θµθ
 s′ ∇aQµθ  s′, a

a=µθ(s′)
ds′
+
Z
S γ2p
 s →s′, 2, µθ
 ∇θVµθ  s′
ds′
(2)
...
Z
S
∞
∑
t=0
γtp
 s →s′, t, µθ
 ∇θµθ
 s′ ∇aQµθ  s′, a


a=µθ(s′)
ds′.
Where in (2) we have used Fubini’s theorem to exchange the order of integration, requiring the
regularity conditions so that ∥∇θVµθ(s)∥is bounded.
64
==PAGE:73==
A.1. Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem
Now taking the expectation over S1 we have,
∇θJ (µθ) = ∇θ
Z
S p1(s)Vµθ(s)ds
=
Z
S p1(s)∇θVµθ(s)ds
(3)
=
Z
S
Z
S
∞
∑
t=0
γtp1(s)p
 s →s′, t, µθ
 ∇θµθ
 s′ ∇aQµθ  s′, a


a=µθ(s′)
ds′ds
=
Z
S ρµθ(s)∇θµθ(s)∇aQµθ(s, a)

a=µθ(s)
ds,
where in (3) we used the Leibniz integral rule to exchange derivative and integral, requiring
the regularity conditions, specifically so that p1(s) and Vµθ(s) and derivatives w.r.t. θ are con-
tinuous. In the final line we again used Fubini’s theorem to exchange the order of integration,
requiring the boundedness of the integral as implied by the regularity conditions.
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby,
Denmark
