==PAGE:1==
Numerical Investigation of Contact Properties in
Spline Connections
Master Thesis
Andreas Hansen
DTU Mechanical Engineering
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Andreas Hansen, s165044
Numerical Investigation of
Contact Properties in Spline
Connections
Master Thesis, June 3, 2022
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Numerical Investigation of Contact Properties in Spline Connections
This report has been compiled by
Andreas Hansen, s165044
Supervisors
Niels Leergaard Pedersen (DTU - Mechanical Engineering)
Publication date:
June 3, 2022
Category:
Public
Edition:
1.
Comments:
This report is part of the demands to pass and
achieve the degree of M.Sc - Master in Mechani-
cal Engineering at Denmarks Technical University.
The report accounts for 30 ECTS point.
Ownership:
©Andreas Hansen, 2022
Denmarks Technical University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Niels Koppels Allé
Building 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
Phone
+45 45 25 19 60
E-mail: mek@mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The project deals with straight-sided spline connections and is based on a manufacturing prac-
tice. For some people, this practice is that 25%-50% of teeth in a spline are in engagement when
transmitting torque, while others suggest it is 50%-75%. Prior to the development of a finite
element model to analyze this statement, knowledge was gathered about the geometry, tooth
engagement theory, manufacturing processes and tolerances. This provided an expectation of
what a straight-sided spline should be able to withstand and the limits to the geometry. With
the obtained knowledge, a series of tests were made to analyze how accurate the given state-
ments is, and how accurate this finite elements model is to reality of the statement.
Keywords
Straight-Sided Spline · Master Thesis
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This project has been developed by Andreas Hansen. The report is made as a final project after
2 years of studies in master’s program: Mechanical Engineering. A big thank you to everyone
that has benefited from the preparation of the project. A big thank you to my supervisor, Niels
Leergaard Pedersen, for excellent guidance and assistance in the implementation of the project,
and for enabling this project and have confidence in the implementation of the project. The
project has been prepared for a 5-month period starting on 3. January 2022. The report is
written to give the reader an insight into how the straight-sided spline connection works, and
what advantages/disadvantages there is when using the mechanism.
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Spline Geometry and Deflection
5
2.1
Modes of Deflection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Tooth Engagement and Clearance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Manufacturing and Standards
13
3.1
Broaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Hobbing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Tooth Errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Tolerances and Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Model Construction
17
4.1
Geometry and Standards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Geometry Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Finite Element Model Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
2D Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
2D-3D Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.3
3D Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Analyses
33
5.0.1
Torque Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.0.2
Length Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.0.3
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.0.4
Structural Contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.0.5
Tolerance Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Conclusion
45
6.1
Future Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Appendices
47
A Data For Mesh Analyses
49
B Data for Inner Radius Analysis
53
C Data For Length of Shaft Analyses
55
v
==PAGE:12==
vi
CONTENTS
D Data for the Application of Torque and 2D,2D-3D,3D Comparison
57
E Data for Thickness VS Index Comparison
61
F Data for the Index Analysis on the 2D Model
63
G Data for the Index Analysis on the 3D Model
69
References
75
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
This project deals with spline connections, which is a mechanism shown in Figure 1.1. Spline
connections are being used for transferring a high amount of torque, while also being able to
handle a high rotational speed. It consists of a shaft, which is called the male part, and a hub
called the female part. These two parts are also called the internal spline (hub) and external
spline (shaft) of a spline connection. The torque is usually transferred from shaft to hub. There
are several types of spline connections, where the difference in the types is the geometry of the
teeth e.g., straight-sided splines involute splines, serrated splines and helical splines [1]. Each
type of splines has its own advantages and disadvantages compared to the other types. The
straight-sided spline was the first of its kind [2]. In the recent years, the most common splines
have gone from being straight-sided splines to involute splines. This is because involute splines
can be more easily produced than straight-sided splines, due to a curved tooth profile being
easier to cut than a straight tooth profiles. Involute splines have easier and cheaper factoring
operations, much greater contact area along the profile of the tooth, and a higher tolerance for
misalignment. The advantages of using a straight-sided spline, is that it can tranfer a higher
amount of torque than involute splines [3]. In additional to the type of spline connection, it can
be made using many different materials. The materials being used can be aluminium, brass,
bronze, stainless steel and other steel alloys, but are generally made of carbon steel or stainless
steel, due to the requirement of a high Young’s modulus.
Figure 1.1: The shaft and hub of a spline connection.
Spline connections can deliver more torque than alternative shafts due to an evenly dis-
tributed load across all the tooth pairs. This means that spline connections are usually used
as shaft couplings or brakes in automobiles, aviation, and heavy earth moving machinery. An
example of a spline connection is a multi-disc brake, which can be seen in Figure 1.2a. A multi-
disc brake is a special type of brake, which can handle a large torque. A multi-disc brake consist
of an inner set and outer set. The inner set is the shaft and friction plates, where the outer
set is the separator plates and the hub. The outer set remains stationary while the inner set
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
is in rotation. To transfer the torque, a set of pistons are located around the circumference of
the hub, which applies an axial force. This axial force is applied to the separator plates, which
squeezes them together resulting in a breaking action. A simplified version of a multi-brake disc
can be seen in Figure 1.2b.
(a) Assembled multi-disc brake.
(b) Exploded view of simplified multi-disc brake.
Figure 1.2: Multi-brake disc.
Another reason for using a spline is that the transferring mechanism can be taken apart,
since it is not one continuously part. This gives an additional feature where the connection
between the shaft and hub can change in length. The torque is transferred from shaft to hub
as the flanks from the teeth of the two parts engage. The mating teeth on the shaft and the
hub are spaced uniformly around the circumference. When compared to an ordinary keyway-
type coupling, which only has a single tooth/key connecting the shaft and the hub, a spline
connection will have a much higher load capacity, because of the larger contact surface area the
load is being applied to.
1.1
Problem Statement
In theory, all teeth will engage simultaneously, which means that the load is carried equally
between all the tooth pairs. Yet, because of tolerances from imperfect machining tools, a vari-
ation in teeth clearance will occur. This results in the mating teeth not engaging at same time
causing some of teeth to carry a much larger portion of the total load than some of the other
teeth. This variation in load from tooth pair to tooth pair means that the first tooth pair to
engage and thereby the tooth pair to carry the highest amount of load will eventually fail a lot
sooner than the rest of the teeth.
Because of the variation in clearance, the industry is using a practice of designing splines
assuming that not all teeth in a spline connection is carrying the load. This practice of designing
the splines is not certain, where some industries suggest that 25% - 50% of the tooth pairs are
carrying the load, while others suggest that it is 50% - 75%. This is a significant big difference
in the practice of designing, which can either lead to spline failing much earlier than expected,
or a spline being scrapped long before it has reached its actual life cycle. Either case leads to a
financial inefficiency, where more money is needed than expected to replace broken splines, or
money is being thrown away due to scrapped splines on good condition.
The purpose of this research is to find a more accurate estimate of how many tooth pairs
will be in engagement when using a straight-sided spline, by simulating different cases of imper-
==PAGE:15==
1.1. PROBLEM STATEMENT
3
fections in the geometry of such splines due to tolerances. The simulations of the straight-sided
splines will also be used find an estimate of the probable load on each tooth in engagement, and
analyze the deflection depending on each case. Additionally the accuracy of the simulations will
be analyzed.
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
2 Spline Geometry and Deflection
Straight-sided splines have straight flanks, as the name suggest, which are parallel to each other.
The number of teeth in straight-sided splines can vary from 4 to 12 teeth, depending on the
chosen DIN standard and size. Because of the low amount of teeth compared to other types
of splines, straight-sided splines have much thicker teeth than teeth on other types of splines,
which is the reason for them being able to transmit a higher amount torque. The groove in the
shaft and roundings on the hub is to avoid earlier fatigue due to stress at the root of the flanks.
An example of a straight-sided spline can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The geometry of a straight-sided spline using the stan-
dards DIN 5462 and DIN 5463.
Straight-sided splines are regulated by standards, where the splines fall in three different
categories, light, middle and heavy. The category of a spline is defined by the height of the
teeth. There is an international ISO standard (DIN ISO 14) and German DIN 5463 standard.
Under the international ISO standard, two DIN standards, 5462 and 5463, are given. DIN 5462
is a light version, DIN 5463 is a middle version and DIN 5464 is a heavy version of straight-sided
splines [4]. A table of dimensions for the three different standards can be seen in Table 2.1. The
radius r is the radius of the groove at the root of the tooth in the external spline part. The r
subscript specifies whether the maximum radius is due to the constraint of e, f or d3, which is
specified in an outdated version of DIN 5462 and DIN 5463.
5
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. SPLINE GEOMETRY AND DEFLECTION
Table 2.1: Dimensions for DIN 5462, DIN 5463 and DIN 5464 [4].
By using the minor diameter d1, the major diameter d2, the thickness of the teeth b, the
radius of groove r and the number of teeth N, the last three geometric values can be found,
which are shown in Figure 2.1. The values are calculated using the following three equations:
e = 2
v
u
u
t r2

d2
1 −b2

4r2 + 4rb + d2
1
(2.1)
f = d1 sin

π
N −2 arcsin
 e
d1

−arcsin
 
b
d1
!

(2.2)
d3 = 2



s
r2 + rb + d2
1
4 −r



(2.3)
The fillet radius for the internal spline part shown in Figure 2.1 at the root of the teeth is
0.2[mm]. The two chamfers, g and k, have the same value and are g = k = 0.3[mm].
When referring to a specific standard of spline from Table 2.1, the following is given:
8 × 56 × 62
Here the values are given as the number of teeth times the inner diameter times the outer
diameter. All other dimensions are then given by the chosen standard.
2.1
Modes of Deflection
While a torque is being transmitted from the shaft to the hub, deflection in the teeth will happen,
which is a significant important area when it comes to the amount of teeth pairs in engagement.
As the load increases, the tooth pairs which are in contact will start to deflect relative to each
other. In splines there are three modes of deflection happening: shear, bending and contact. A
representation of these three modes can be seen in Figure 2.2. In a previous study on involute
==PAGE:19==
2.1. MODES OF DEFLECTION
7
splines [5], it was found that deflection due to contact was significantly low, which means it can
be neglected.
Figure 2.2: The three modes of deflection.
As each tooth deflect when tooth pairs engage, the stiffness of those teeth will determine
how much load is needed for a deflection. This stiffness is determined by which material is used
and how high the Young’s modulus is for such material. Furthermore, if a specific amount of
load is required, the more tooth pairs that are in engagement, the less of a stiffness is needed
to carry such load without destroying the spline. The relationship between the stiffness, the
deflection and the applied load to a tooth is calculated using the following:
F = Kδ
(2.4)
Here F is the force applied to the tooth, δ the is deflection of the tooth and K is the stiffness.
Since a tooth in a spline is an elastic body, it can be treated as the relationship in a linear spring.
To give a visual representation of how the stiffness and the load in a spline works, a simplified
version can be seen in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Combination of two linear springs in series configura-
tion.
Each spring represent a tooth in a tooth pair. If the material, and thereby the stiffness of
the external and internal spline is the same, the springs will deflection at the same rate, when a
force is applied. Since the two springs are in series, the first spring in the series apply the force
to the second spring in the series, which in the end apply the force to the frame on the left. This
means that the force can also be described as the following:
F = K1δ1 = K2δ2
(2.5)
The sum of the two spring deflections, δ1 and δ2 is the total deflection of series δtotal. To
find the equivalent stiffness of this series, the following statement can be used:
F = Keqsδtotal = Keq (δ1 + δ2)
(2.6)
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 2. SPLINE GEOMETRY AND DEFLECTION
The equivalent stiffness is isolated, and equation 2.5 is used. This gives the final equivalent
stiffness of the system:
Keqs =
F
δ1 + δ2
=
F
F
K1 + F
K2
=
K1K2
K1 + K2
(2.7)
Because the denominator is the sum of K1 and K2, it results in Keqs being lower than the
sum of K1 and K2. This means that the more springs are added in the series, the less of an
impact they will have in the equivalent stiffness.
Since we do not have just one tooth pair, but several pairs in a spline, the spring have to
come as parallels. An example of a parallel system can be seen in Figure 2.4. Here K1 represent
the equivalent stiffness of a tooth pair, and K2 represent the equivalent stiffness of another tooth
pair.
Figure 2.4: Two linear springs in parallel configuration.
This means that as teeth engage when a load is applied, the equivalent stiffness will be
determined by the number of tooth pairs that are in contact. Here the load is shared by the
two springs instead of passing through one spring to the other. This makes the calculation of
the equivalent stiffness much simpler.
Keqp = K1 + K2
(2.8)
The two systems are now combined to show the final configuration that best represent how
the stiffness of the teeth in a spline works. A combination of Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4 can be
seen in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Combined series and parallel configuration of four lin-
ear springs.
==PAGE:21==
2.2. TOOTH ENGAGEMENT AND CLEARANCE
9
Here the equivalent stiffness of one tooth pair is in parallel with the equivalent stiffness
of another tooth pair, which result in a final equivalent stiffness of the system. K1 and K3
represent the equivalent stiffness of the top series, where K2 and K3 represent the equivalent
stiffness of the lower series. By using equation 2.7 and equation 2.8, the equivalent stiffness can
be determined:
Keq =
K1K3
K1 + K3
+
K2K4
K2 + K4
(2.9)
When using this equation, each spring has its own stiffness, but when it comes to splines,
the two stiffness representing the external spline have the same value, and the two stiffness
representing the internal spline have the same value. This is due to the spline parts being made
of the same material through the whole part. This means the equation can be simplified shown
in equation 2.10, where n is the number if tooth pairs in engagement, Ki is the stiffness of the
teeth in the internal spline and Ke is the stiffness of the tooth in the external spline.
Keq = n ·
KiKe
Ki + Ke
(2.10)
2.2
Tooth Engagement and Clearance
As mentioned in the problem statement, all teeth should theoretically engage at the same time
and carry an equally amount of load. With this ideal tooth engagement, there will be a linear
relationship between torque and the angular deflection. As torque is applied to the shaft and
transmitted to the hub, all teeth will deflect proportional to the applied torque, since all teeth
will engage simultaneously. Since each tooth carries an equally amount of the total load, each
tooth should carry 100%
N
percentage of the total load. An example of the linear relationship
between torque and angular deflection in a spline with 4 teeth can be seen plotted in Figure 2.6.
This plot shows that it is a linear process until the desired torque is reached. In this case, each
stiffness represent a tooth pair, so the equivalent stiffness of two linear springs in a series. It can
be seen that the stiffness of each tooth engage simultaneously, where each tooth carries 25% of
the total load.
Figure 2.6: Theoretical tooth engagement profile of the linear re-
lation between torque and angular deflection.
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. SPLINE GEOMETRY AND DEFLECTION
This theoretically ideal curve does not occur in practice when producing the splines. This is
due to a variation in the spacing, also called clearance, between the teeth. The reason for such
clearance happening will be further discussed in Chapter 3. An example of such spacing can be
seen in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Clearance between two tooth pairs.
Here the clearance in the first tooth pair is smaller than the clearance in the second tooth
pair. This will result in the first tooth pair to engage and start to deflect before the second
tooth pair is engaged. At one point the first tooth pair will be deflected enough so that the
clearance in the second tooth pair is gone and will start to take some of the load. This will
occur throughout all the tooth pairs in the spline, until all tooth pairs are engaged, or until
the required torque is achieved. A plot of the relationship between the torque and the angular
deflection in such configuration can be seen in Figure 2.8. In this plot, it is assumed that there
are still four tooth pairs, but they now have a larger clearance than the previous tooth pair,
going from one to four, where tooth pair four has the larges clearance.
Figure 2.8: Sequential tooth engagement due to clearance.
==PAGE:23==
2.2. TOOTH ENGAGEMENT AND CLEARANCE
11
The plot shows four black lines, which are the engagement lines for the four tooth pairs and
at which part of the angular deflection the pairs engage. The slope of the lines represent the
equivalent stiffness of the tooth pairs. They have the same slope because the material and the
geometry of each tooth pair is close to identical. It can be seen that after some deflection where
only the first tooth pair is taking the load, the second tooth pair engage. From there on, both
tooth pair 1 and tooth pair 2 deflection while increasing the load on both simultaneously, until
the third tooth pair engage followed by the fourth tooth pair. This goes on until the desired
torque is required. This is also called sequential tooth engagement. This can be seen on the
horizontal axis, where the engagement point of each tooth pair starts further out from the pre-
vious pair. The deflection of each tooth pair is also represented by δ1, δ2 and δ3, where it shows
how far each tooth pair have to deflect until all four tooth pairs are in engagement. There might
be some tooth pairs that do not engage at all, due to a large enough clearance compared to
other tooth pairs. It can be seen in the figure that due to this variation in clearance, a larger
total angular deflection is needed to transmit the desired torque compared to the ideal tooth
engagement, which will result in a shorter life-cycle of the spline. This difference in clearance is
due to the variant in the manufacturing of splines.
In addition to a larger required angular deflection, the load carried by each tooth pair will
no longer be evenly divided. An example of how the load can be distributed can be seen in
Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Sequential tooth engagement due to clearance.
It can be seen for this example that the first tooth pair carries 35% of the total load, while
the fourth tooth carries 15%, which is due to the variation in clearance. The amount of load
each tooth pair carries is found by extending the slope of each tooth pair segment, until it
reaches the vertical line. Then each segment of the vertical line is measured and compared to
the total applied force. As the clearance of the second, third and fourth tooth pair increases,
the higher amount of load the first tooth pair have to carry. No two splines are identical, so
the moment of engagement points as well as the distance from engagement point to engagement
point will differ. However this difference can be limited by allowing a certain tolerance to the
chosen dimensions.
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
3 Manufacturing and Standards
To properly understand splines and the variation in tooth engagement, it’s necessary to first
understand the cause of the variation: manufacture. As described in the introduction, a spline
connection consists of an internal and external spline. The internal is the hub with teeth pointing
inward towards the center, and the external is the shaft with teeth point outwards away from the
center. Because one part has a hole and the other part is a shaft, they are manufactured using
two difference methods. The internal spline is manufactured using a method called broaching,
while the shaft is manufactured using a method called hobbing. Before any manufacturing is
done to the workpieces, they are called blanks.
3.1
Broaching
Broaching is a machining operation where a cutter, called a broach, moves entirely through a
workpiece/blank to form contour. An example of such broach can be seen in Figure 3.1 [6].
Figure 3.1: Example of a broach and a workpiece [6].
As seen in the figure, the broach consist of a shaft with a long series of cutting teeth that
gradually increases in height until the desired cut is achieved. While broaching creates very
accurate gear teeth, it might be difficult to maintain the location of the completed gear teeth in
relation to other features of the blank. Furthermore, during setup, the accuracy of a broaching
13
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 3. MANUFACTURING AND STANDARDS
can easily be compromised, which will result in substantial eccentricity error. Additionally, if a
full-topping broach, tool that cuts both tips and roots, is not used to cut the teeth, then error
profiles associated with the roots and error profiles associated with the tips will differ.
3.2
Hobbing
Hobbing is a machining operation where gear teeth are cut into a gear blank [6].
For this
operation, a tool called a hob is used. A hob is a hardened cylindrical cutter, which resembles
a worm gear, which consists of one or more treads that follow a helical path along the length of
a cylinder. in order to create the face that cuts into the workpiece, a series of equally spaced
flutes are cut into the threats along the axial axis of the tool. An example of a hob can be seen
in Figure 3.2.
(a) Plane of rotation view of hob.
(b) Axial plane view of hob.
Figure 3.2: Example of a hob [6].
The hobbing process is done on special machines where the hob is positioned by the spline
blank and fed axially as the machine spins, forming grooves between the splines. the spline
blank shaft and the hob rotates separately in a synchronized manner, where the rotation is done
in a calculated ratio to each other. This is done to generate the desired number of teeth in the
spline blank.
For cutting out the teeth, the hob is slowly fed parallel to the shaft axis, cutting straight
grooves as it rotates across the blank, until all of the spline teeth are created to the desired
length. All the spline teeth are generated in one pass of the cutter by setting the rotation of the
shaft and the thread angle of the hob in a specific way. The cutting pattern is repeated over
and over as the hob rotates. Any errors in the hob tool would cause errors in the spline pattern.
3.3
Tooth Errors
The two previous sections mentioned that errors in the spline parts can be due to the cutting
tools, however errors can also occur due to other factors, where some examples are listed below:
• Eccentricity of the blank or tool
==PAGE:27==
3.4. TOLERANCES AND STANDARDS
15
• Runout in the blank or tool arbor
• Vibrations
• Temperature effects
• Non-homogeneous blank material
• Lead error in the tools
• Deflection due to cutting loads
• Human error such as setup of operation
The listed errors as well as the errors due to the machining operation leads to errors in the
profile of the spline. These errors can be categorized into five difference types. The five types
of errors in a 2D perspective can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Different types of tooth errors.
The index error is when the tooth is spaced at an angle or a certain distance away from the
original position. The thickness error is when the tooth is thicker or thinner than the original
thickness. The radial error is when the tooth is longer or shorter than planned, which is a
result of either the minor or major diameter being too small or too large. The lead error is
when the tooth does not keep its original form in the third dimension along the axial axis. The
profile error is when the profile is off e.g. flank symmetry or profile shift. Usually when a gear
is manufactured, it contained all of these errors to a certain degree, some larger than others.
Due to the complexity of the teeth in a spline and the many different errors they can have, it
is challenging to find the exact clearance between each tooth pair, and when they will engage.
In order to gain a better understand of the impact of each tooth error, a large amount of data
is needed. Furthermore, when testing tooth engagement in splines, very sensitive equipment is
required to gather the data, while the setup of experiments and the equipment must be handled
with great care.
3.4
Tolerances and Standards
The previously described errors needs to be controlled within certain standards. By using certain
standards, it will ensuring greater consistency and proper performance from the spline couplings.
This standard needs to have a margin of error which ensures the greater consistency and proper
performance, but at the same time is cost effective. A tighter margin will result in a higher price
on the spline parts.
Straight-sided splines from the light and medium series follows an international standard
called ISO 14 [7], which determines tolerances of internal and external splines. The tolerances
given determine both the dimensions and the symmetry of the spline parts. A table for the
tolerances of dimensions and a table for the tolerances of symmetry for the light and medium
series can be seen in Table 3.1 and in Table 3.2. The two tables follows the dimensions show
in Figure 3.4. As shown in the tables, the margin of the dimensions depends on if the hole is
treated or not after broaching, and if the desired mounting type is sliding, close sliding or fixed.
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 3. MANUFACTURING AND STANDARDS
Figure 3.4: Dimensions in spline parts following ISO 14 [7].
Tolerances on hole
Tolerances on shaft
Mounting type
Not treated after broaching
Treated after broaching
B
D
d
B
D
d
B
D
d
d10
a11
f7
Sliding
H9
H10
H7
H11
H10
H7
f9
a11
g7
Close sliding
h10
a11
h7
Fixed
Table 3.1: Tolerances for dimensions on holes and shafts.
Spline width, B [mm]
3
3.5 4 5 6
7 8 9 10
12 14 16 18
Tolerance of symmetry, t [mm]
0.010 (IT7)
0.012 (IT7)
0.015 (IT7)
0.018 (IT7)
Table 3.2: Tolerances for symmetry on holes and shafts.
Additionally to the standard for the dimensional and symmetrical tolerances, there is a
standard for the maximum amount of torque a shaft is allowed to transmit [8]. The standard
is given as DIN 748, where the maximum amount of torque is calculated depending on the
diameter of the shaft, and while the equation used is depending on the shafts geometry of the
external spline in the axis direction.
==PAGE:29==
4 Model Construction
The information about a spline connection can now be used to construct a set of different
finite element models, which will be used to analyze the tooth engagement of a spline under
different circumstances, and how the different models will affect the results. For the modelling,
two programs are used. SolidWorks version 2021 will be used for constructing the geometry of
each part, while COMSOL version 5.6 will be used for applying certain factors e.g. material
properties, model constraints and mesh size. COMSOL will also be used to carry out the studies.
4.1
Geometry and Standards
Before any work is done in SolidWorks or COMSOL, a specific spline standard is chosen to be
analyzed. The chosen standard that will be analyzed is DIN 5462 6 × 23 × 26, from the light
series. By using Table 2.1, the following data for the geometry is given:
d1 = 23[mm]
d2 = 26[mm]
b = 6[mm]
N = 6
r = 0.63[mm]
By using the equation 2.1 to 2.3, the rest of the geometry dimensions can be calculated.
These values will later be used to build the geometry of the model in SolidWorks.
e = 2
s
0.632  232 −62
4 · 0.632 + 4 · 6 + 232 = 1.188[mm]
f = 23 sin
 
π
6 −2 arcsin
1.188
23

−arcsin
 6
23
!
= 3.581[mm]
d3 = 2


s
0.632 + 0.63 · 6 + 232
4 −0.63

= 22.100[mm]
Now when all the geometry dimensions are given for the chosen spline, the tolerances can be
calculated, using Table 3.1 and 3.2. Before calculating the tolerances, some assumptions have
to be made.
When the internal spline parts are manufactured for companies, they will most likely be
treated. This means that the dimensional tolerances for the internal spline is B = H11, D = H10
and d = H7.
The desired mounting type depends on what the spline connection will be used for. For
sliding and fixed, the IT grades for all tolerances are the same, which means they have the same
margin. For the close sliding, the width of the teeth have a smaller IT grade, which means the
margin is smaller. Since there are two out of three cases where the IT grade is 10, it is assumed
17
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
that the desired mounting type is sliding. This means that the dimensional tolerances for the
external spline is B = d10, D = a11 and d = f7.
By using the ISO system of limits and fits for tolerances and deviations [9], the maximum
and minimum value of each dimension for both the internal and external spline part can be
found:
Din = 26 H10 = 26 min(0.000) max(+0.084)
din = 23 H7 = 23 min(0.000) max(+0.021)
Bin = 6 H9 = 6 min(0.000) max(+0.030)
Dex = 26 a11 = 26 min(−0.430) max(−0.300)
dex = 23 f7 = 23 min(−0.041) max(−0.020)
Bex = 6 d10 = 6 min(−0.078) max(−0.030)
Furthermore, the tolerances from Table 3.2 follows the IT grade 7, where the maximum
variance must be ±0.012[mm] when B = 6[mm]. This means that the average value of B will
be B = 6[mm], when a lot of samples are taken. It is assumed that for the following models, all
teeth have flanks that are parallel to each other.
4.2
Geometry Modelling
These dimensions can now be used to build a SolidWorks model for the internal and external
spline parts. To simplify the model as much as possible, some further assumptions are made.
These assumptions are made with the intent to limit the change in the models, while still keeping
the models as close to real as possible.
The first assumptions is that the tolerances for the minor and major diameter will have an
insignificant effect on the amount of load each tooth pair will carry. With this assumption, the
2D model is simplified by applying the tolerances for the minor and major diameter, for both
the external and internal spline, on only the internal spline. This means that a fixed minor and
major diameter including the tolerances is set on the internal spline, while a fixed original minor
and major diameter without tolerances is set for the external spline.
The second assumption is that the tolerances from both the internal and external spline for
the width of the teeth, is exclusively used on the external spline. This means that a combination
of the tolerances from the internal and external spline will be used on the external spline for the
tooth width, while no tolerances will be used on the internal spline for the tooth width.
By using these assumptions, a combination of the tolerances have to be made. When combining
the tolerances for the major and minor diameter for both the internal and external spline, it
has to be taken into account that when the diameter is decreased for the external spline, it
would be the same as increasing the diameter for the internal. Furthermore, when combining
the tolerances to find i.e. the maximum allowed diameter, the maximum value from the internal
spline will be combined with the minimum value of the external spline, since it will result in
the maximum diameter. This means that the margin of combined tolerances for the major and
minor diameter can be found:
Dmax = Din,max −Dex,min = 0.084 −(−0.430) = 0.514[mm]
Dmin = Din,min −Dex,max = 0.000 −(−0.300) = 0.300[mm]
dmax = din,max −dex,min = 0.021 −(−0.041) = 0.061[mm]
dmin = din,min −dex,max = 0.000 −(−0.020) = 0.020[mm]
==PAGE:31==
4.2. GEOMETRY MODELLING
19
Since it is assumed that the tolerances on the diameter is insignificant, a fixed added value
due to the tolerances is chosen for both the minor and major diameter in the internal spline,
with the use of the now known combined maximum and minimum values. The chosen added
value for the minor diameter is din,add = 0.040[mm], and the chosen added value for the major
diameter is Din,add = 0.400[mm].
For combining the tolerances for the width of the teeth, the same procedure is done, how-
ever a fixed value is not chosen, but the margin in the tolerance is found for later research. The
maximum and minimum values for the width of the teeth using the combined tolerances is now
found. Since the tolerances will be used on the external spline, it is the maximum value from
the external spline and the minimum value from the internal spline that will give the maximum
value of the added tooth thickness. And the opposite for the minimum value.
Bmax = Bex,max −Bin,min = −0.030 −0.000 = −0.030[mm]
Bmin = Bex,min −Bin,max = −0.078 −0.030 = −0.108[mm]
The range in where the tolerances are acceptable is then calculated to be Brange = |Bmax −
Bmin| = | −0.108 −(−0.030)| = 0.078[mm].
With the use of these assumptions, a 2D model of the geometry with the dimensions is made
for both the internal and external part using SolidWorks. The two models can be seen in Figure
4.1. The model for the external spline show the dimensions of the shaft, where the model for
the internal spline show the dimensions of the cut hole, where the shaft can be fitted in.
(a) External spline.
(b) Internal spline.
Figure 4.1: SolidWorks 2D model of the geometry of external and
internal spline.
Both models are divided into six identical sections, where each section include a tooth and
clear space for the opposite parts tooth for engagement. Since there is 360◦in a full circle, each
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
section is 60◦. For the internal spline, there is removed 2◦from the tooth part, where it is added
in the empty space for the external spline tooth. This is done so there is a 2◦free space for the
tooth from the external spline to rotate. It is assumed that this small change is insignificant for
the final results. For the models to work in COMSOL, the two parts have to be touching each
other. This means that the shaft have to be rotated 1◦to either side from the original position,
so the two parts will be touching when they are imported, hence the 30◦+ 1◦, which is half a
section with the added 1◦.
For both model, it can be seen that each section has been given its own dimension. This is
done so each tooth can be individually modified, without changing the dimensions of the other
teeth. The modifications can either be the width of the tooth or the index from tooth to tooth.
Furthermore, it can be seen that the tolerances for the minor and major diameter are added on
the internal spline part. The outer diameter of the internal spline is assumed to be three times
the size of the major diameter: Din,outer = 3 · 26 = 78[mm]. A final example of the internal and
external shaft in engagement using the two 2D models can be seen in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: 2D model of external spline and the in the internal
spline.
Finally there was the standard of DIN 748, mentioned at the end of the previous chapter,
which states the maximum allowed torque to be applied to a shaft, depending on the geometry
of the shaft. Since a spline has two diameters, the minor and the major diameter, the safest
diameter to use for the calculations is the minor diameter d = 23[mm]. Even though there are
groves which are cut deeper than the minor diameter, it is assumed that the material at the
major diameter will cancel out the missing material in the grooves. Using DIN 748, there are
no changes in diameter along the axial axis, so the maximum torque is calculated using column
a from the standard, which gives the equation:
M = 9.80665π
4
· 10−3 · d3
M = 9.80665π
4
· 10−3 · 233
M = 93.709[Nm]
(4.1)
To simplify the used value in the finite element models, and to add a small safety factor, the
maximum torque is set to be M = 90[Nm].
==PAGE:33==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
21
4.3
Finite Element Model Construction
Now when the geometry of the model is built, it can be imported into COMSOL for analyses.
However for the 3D, both the internal and external 2D model will be extruded in the axial
direction of the external spline to give a third dimension using SolidWorks. There will be made
four different depths of 3D models to compare the difference between the 2D models and 3D
models.
The first three 3D models will have both the external and internal spline gradually increase
in depth, going from 1[mm] thick to 10[mm] thick to finally 26[mm] thick. The fourth 3D model
will have an external spline which is even longer, while the internal spline will remain 26[mm]
thick.
The construction of each type of model will now be explained, starting with the 2D model
followed by the three similar 3D models and finally the last 3D model. A common feature for
every model is the chosen material properties. The material for both the external and internal
spline is chosen to be a standard structural steel with the most common steel properties, which
is a Young’s modulus of E = 200[GPa] and a Poisson’s ratio of ν = 0.3.
Every study made in COMSOL is a stationary solver, where the linearity of the solver is
automatically chosen to be the best suited for the individual study by COMSOL.
4.3.1
2D Model
As mention before, the 2D models for both the internal and external spline are directly imported
from the 2D Solidworks parts as DXF-files. The internal spline is divided into two separate DXF-
files, where the inner hole part is cut out of the outer diameter part, which then leaves the final
internal spline part. The center point of both parts are place at (0, 0) of the model. The first
version of the 2D model have both the internal and external spline divided into sections as shown
in Figure 4.3a. Every tooth pair is in contact with each other, as shown in Figure 4.3b.
(a) External and internal spline part divided into sec-
tions.
(b) Example of one of the six teeth in engagement.
Figure 4.3: The imported 2D model as shown in COMSOL.
The internal spline is divided with a circle of a diameter of D = 40[mm]. The reason for
dividing the internal spline into two sections, is that a fine mesh is not required at the outer
section of the part, because no analyses will be done at that section of the model.
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
The inner part of the external spline is removed with a circle with a variation in radius, which
will be studied later. Until this study, the radius of this inner circle will be set to r = 8[mm].
This is done so that the external spline is fixed at the edge of the inner removed circle, while
a boundary load is placed tangential to the circumference of the outer diameter of the internal
spline. The load is placed such that it will act as a torque on the internal spline, and will make
the spline part rotate clockwise, while the external spline will be fixed in place at the inner
circle. The load applied is defined as F = T
r , where r is the radius of the outer circumference
and T is the desired torque to be applied, resulting in the force needed for this desired torque.
The difference in the placement of where the model is fixed and where the torque is applied will
be studied later on.
For the internal and external spline to be able to get in contact with each other, a contact
pair boundary is made. This is done by defining either of the edges from the internal or external
spline that will be in contact with the other part as a source boundary, and the opposite edge
from the other spline part as a destination boundary. This contact pair is then set as a contact
boundary constraint, where the formulation is set as penalty, the penalty factor is controlled
automatic. The contact is also set to have friction, where the Coulomb model is used with a
friction coefficient set to µ = 0.1. Additionally, both the internal and external spline is set as a
linear elastic material. An illustration of these applied boundaries can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the set constraints.
Finally, a mesh has to be made. The importance for this mesh is that it is fine enough to give
accurate results, while still not being too time consuming. The mesh is done using triangular
formation. The place where a fine mesh is wanted is at the engagement teeth, and especially at
the engagement flanks between the internal and external spline. A fine mesh at the engagement
surfaces is desired, since it gives a better accurate estimate of how high the contact pressure
there will be between the two surfaces.
The mesh for the outer part of the internal spline does not have any effect on the contact
pressure, but is simply there to transfer the torque from the applied load to the inner section
of the internal spline. This section is set to the predefined mesh size from COMSOL as "Extra
coarse". The inner section of the internal spline and the external spline is set to the predefined
mesh size from COMSOL as "Extra fine". The last mesh is the two engagement edges that will
be touching when a torque is applied. This will be the finest part of the mesh, because it will
have a great effect on the contact pressure. An analysis will be made, where the engagement
edges of all six tooth pairs will have an increasing number of distribution. This means that
==PAGE:35==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
23
each engagement edge will be divided into an increasing number of sections, until the contact
pressure will remain the same value after a couple of iterations. For this analysis, all six tooth
pairs are in engagement, and there are no tolerance in the tooth thickness involved. An example
of the described mesh can be seen in Figure 4.5, the two engagement edges are set to have 60
sections each. The analysis is done with a torque of T = 5[Nm].
(a) Overall mesh.
(b) Zoomed in at the engagement between a tooth
pair.
Figure 4.5: Example of mesh used for the 2D model, with an edge
distribution of 60.
A line chart is made with all the data from the analysis, to see when the increasing edge
distribution wont have any effect on the pressure. The data from the analysis can be found in
Appendix A. The chart can be seen in Figure 4.6. The contact pressure is the average pressure
of the six tooth pairs. It can be seen in the chart that at around an edge distribution of 60, the
contact pressure becomes a specific value, and change of this value changes at a low percentages
with an increasing edge distribution. According to the data, the contact pressure will vary at
around a maximum of 1% change. 2D models can have a very fine mesh when compared to 3D
mesh, since there is no third dimension to be taken into account. This means that, as a safety
factor, the chosen edge distribution for 2D models from here on out will be 120, since it wont
increase the computation time much.
Figure 4.6: Contact pressure depending on the edge distribution
for the 2D model.
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
The inner radius of the removed part of the external spline will now be studied. The reason
for this study is that a too small or too large radius of this circle might interfere with the result
of the rest of the studies, by either having all the stress from the transmitted torque going
directly to fixed edge, or directly interfere with the stress pattern formed near the root of the
tooth. For this study, the mesh previously found will be used. For this analysis, the radius of
the inner circle will be increased, until the maximum stress of the inner ring is as low as it can
be. When the radius is too small, the maximum stress will come directly from the pressure,
because is acts as a force times length from the fixed edge to the pressure point. The shorter the
length from the circumference of the inner circle to the engagement edges, the smaller a stress
will be concentrated at the fixed edge. If the radius is too large, it will interfere with the stress
formation around the root of the tooth in the external spline. Just like the mesh analysis, all six
teeth will be in engagement, where no tolerance in tooth thickness is taken into account. The
torque is set to be T = 90[Nm]. Two examples of the change in radius can be seen in Figure
4.7. The blue color shows small stresses and the red color shows large stresses. The color range
is a tool to set how the color should change depending on the values. As an example, if the
color range is set with a minimum of 0[Nm] and a maximum of 0.3[Nm], everything above the
maximum 0.3[Nm] will have the same red color. This is done to better show the pattern of the
stress, when the stress is very concentrated at a specific point. It can be seen in the figures that
as the radius increases, the less stress is at the fixed edge, and the stress pattern is more visible.
(a) 2D Von Mises stress model with a radius of r =
1[mm], with color range: min=0[MPa] max=0.3[Nm].
(b) 2D Von Mises stress model with a radius of r =
1[mm], without color range.
(c) 2D Von Mises stress model with a radius of r =
9[mm], with color range: min=0[MPa] max=0.3[Nm].
(d) 2D Von Mises stress model with a radius of r =
9[mm], without color range.
Figure 4.7: 2D stress model with different radius of the inner fixed
edge.
A line chart is made with all the data from the analysis, to see at what radius the maximum
stress at the fixed edge will have the lowest value. The data from the analysis can be found in
==PAGE:37==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
25
Appendix B. The chart can be seen in Figure 4.8. It can be seen in the chart that the maximum
stress is at its lowest at the radius of r = 9[mm]. This is the optimal radius for when all six
tooth pairs are in engagement. It can be seen as the radius increases above the optimal radius,
the maximum stress increases again, as it interfere with the stress pattern close to the root of
the teeth, which should be avoided.
Figure 4.8: Maximum stress around the fixed edge with all six
tooth pairs in engagement.
For when the tolerance for tooth thickness is implemented, it will most likely not be all six
tooth pairs in engagement. According to the statements that it is either 25%-50% or 50%-75%
tooth pairs that are in engagement, it could be 50% in both cases. The analysis is being done
again, but now with three tooth pairs in engagement, to see if the optimal radius change. The
torque is reduced to T = 10[Nm], due to computer memory issues, however it does not effect the
result, only the value of the stresses generated, which are unimportant a the moment. The three
tooth pairs chosen to be in engagement are shown in Figure 4.9. The three tooth pairs that are
chosen to be en engagement are marked with an "X". The line chart for the new analysis can
be seen in Figure 4.10, and the data for this chat can be found in Appendix B.
Figure 4.9: The chosen tooth pairs in engagement.
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
Figure 4.10: Line chart of the maximum stress around the fixed
edge, with 3 tooth pairs in engagement.
As it can be seen on the line chart, the optimal radius is reduced to around r = 8[mm].
When taking the tolerances into account, it will most likely be around the 50% of tooth pairs
that are engaged, which means that the radius of r = 8[mm] is the most optimal for further
studies involving the tolerances, and will be used from now on.
4.3.2
2D-3D Models
The 2D-3D models are very similar to the 2D model, where the only change is that both the
external and internal spline, as well as the sections each part is split into, is extruded to a certain
thickness. Additionally some extra conditions are added to make the models more similar to
the 2D model, while still being a 3D model. While the 2D model was imported as a DXF-file,
the three 2D-3D geometrical model and the 3D model is imported by STEP-file. These 2D-3D
models should act as a bridge between the 2D and 3D model. An illustration of these models
can be seen in Figure 4.11. Take note of the Cartesian coordiate system. This coordiate system
will be the same throughout the rest of the report. The external and internal spline parts are
extruded in the positive Z-direction.
Figure 4.11: Geometry of the 2D-3D model with a 10[mm] thick-
ness.
==PAGE:39==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
27
The constraints are the same as in the 2D model, however the constraints are now applied on
the generated faces that comes from the previous edges, due to the extrude in the third dimen-
sions. The only new constraint added to these models is a symmetry constraint. The symmetry
constraint is added to all faces that are parallel to the XY-plane, as seen in the previous figure,
where the symmetry constraint assumes there is no displacement in the normal direction to the
chosen faces. This symmetry is created so the models form as a 2D model, while the mesh in
between the symmetry faces can react to each other, acting as a 3D model within the symmetry
faces.
As the thickness of the parts increases, the computation time for generating a mesh and solving
the study increases. Like the 2D model, a mesh analysis is made for each of the three 2D-3D
models. Similarly to the edge distribution was increased in the 2D model, the maximum element
size will be decreased on the faces where the teeth engage with each other on both the internal
and external spline, until the pressure becomes a specific value, and the change of this value is
at a low percentages with an decreasing maximum element size. The minimum element size is
set to 2E −6[mm] to give the models a larger margin in element size. The models will always
try to make the element sizes as large as possible, hence the very small minimum element size.
The mesh size for the outer most section of the internal spline remains the same as the 2D
model, but the inner most section of the internal spline and the rest of the external spline has
the predefined mesh size changed from "Extra fine" to "Finer" for the model with 1[mm] thick-
ness and "Fine" for the two other models. This is due to large computation time and memory
limitation on the used computer.
The analyses are done with a torque of T = 5[Nm], and
the pressure is taken as the average pressure of the six tooth pairs in engagement. The mesh
analyses can be seen in Figure 4.12, and the data for these charts can be found in Appendix A.
(a) For model with 1[mm] thickness.
(b) For model with 10[mm] thickness.
(c) For model with 26[mm] thickness.
Figure 4.12: Contact pressure depending on the maximum element
size for all three 2D-3D models.
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
For the models with a thickness of 10[mm] and 26[mm], an issue appeared where the computer
used did not have enough memory to run the studies. This can be seen in Figure 4.12b and
Figure 4.12c, where a final stable value is not found. Even though it may seem like it differs
a lot on the figures, the maximum it will differ at the finer mesh is around 9% in change of
value. The maximum mesh size for the three models is chosen so it will remain as fine a mesh
as it can be, without running into memory failure or large computation time for future studies.
The maximum element size for the 1[mm] thickness model is 0.1[mm], for the 10[mm] thickness
model is 0.3[mm] and for the 26[mm] thickness model is 0.5[mm]. An example of the mesh at
the engagement faces can be seen in Figure 4.13.
(a) Mesh seen on the XY-plane.
(b) Mesh at the tooth engagement faces.
Figure 4.13: Mesh of the 2D-3D model with 10[mm] thickness.
Since the 2D-3D models are so similar to the 2D model, it is assumed that the radius of the
inner fixed faces have the same optimal radius of r = 8[mm]. If the analysis is run again using
the 3D models, the same outcome from the study on the 2D model will most likely happen again
on the 2D-3D models.
4.3.3
3D Model
The final model is the 3D model. This model differs a lot from the other models, because of
some changes that makes it closer to reality.
Like the 2D-3D models, This model is also extruded to have a thickness of 26[mm], however
the shaft is extruded an additionally 10[mm] in the negative Z-direction. This extra length will
be studied later on. The section for the internal spline stay the same. The inner circle that
was subtracted from the external spline is removed, and is instead divided into a different set of
sections. The first division is where the external shaft continues to extrude out of the internal
spline, and the second division is 1[mm] after the first division along the extra extruded shaft.
This model can be seen in Figure 4.14.
==PAGE:41==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
29
(a) Full overview.
(b) Zoomed in view of the division in the ex-
ternal spline.
Figure 4.14: Geometry of the 3D model.
The reason for this change in geometry and division is due to the constraints and mesh. The
torque is applied in the same way as previous models. The fixed face is now set to be the face
of the extra extruded external spline, which is parallel to the XY-plane. This now creates a way
for the torque to travel from internal spline, to the external spline and along the axis of the
external spline until it reaches the fixed face.
The symmetry from the 2D-3D models is removed from the faces where the external spline
has the extra length, but remains on the faces on the opposite side. This results in the model
acting as half of a spline connection, split where the symmetry face are. The reason for half
a spline model is the reduction of size and computation time, while it will still give accurate
results.
The contact boundary remains the same, as it was in the 2D-3D model, but is extended the
extra 1[mm] thick section on the external spline. The reason for this is, if the internal spline
deforms in the negative Z-direction in Figure 4.14a, there is a chance for contact between the
internal spline and the extra extruded external spline. It is assumed that the 1[mm] is enough,
and that the internal spline will not deform further than that.
The mesh for the 3D model is also different from the 2D-3D models.
The other section of
the internal spline remains as the predefined mesh "Extra coarse". The grooves at the tooth
roots of the external spline has a defined minimum element size of 1.1[mm] and a maximum
element size of 1.2[mm].
This is defined for the grooves on all three sections of the eternal
spline. The reason for this is due the coarse mesh on the rest of the external shaft. The section
of the external spline which is in engagement with the internal spline, as well as the extra 1[mm]
thick shaft section and the inner section of the internal spline has a predefined COMSOL mesh
as "Fine". The last section of the external spline has a minimum element size of 5[mm] and
a maximum element size of 10[mm]. The reason for a finer mesh for the eternal spline at the
engagement, is to inspect how the torque is transmitted to the part from the internal spline.
Once the torque is transmitted to the external shaft is and going to the fixed face, a fine mesh
is not needed, hence the coarse part of the external spline.
Like the previous 2D-3D models, the mesh of the engagement faces are made finer until a
stable value is found. The corresponding faces on the 1[mm] thick external spline section is
added as a part of the mesh size reduction. This is due to there being a chance the internal
spline will deform such that it will touch and apply a pressure on the face of the 1[mm] thick
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
external spline section. The analysis is done with a torque of T = 5[Nm], and the pressure
is taken as the average pressure of the six tooth pairs in engagement. The mesh can be seen
in Figure 4.15. The mesh analysis can be seen in Figure 4.16 and the data can be found in
Appendix A.
(a) Mesh overview.
(b) Zoomed in view of mesh of the external spline.
Figure 4.15: Mesh of the 3D model.
Figure 4.16: Contact pressure depending on the maximum element
size for the 3D model.
Like the 10[mm] thick and 26[mm] thick 2D-3D models, the computer had the same problem
with the memory. The maximum element size for the 3D model is chosen to be 0.5[mm], while
the minimum element size is 2E −6[mm], since the program makes the largest element size
possible. From the data, it can be assumed that the value in pressure will vary with a margin
of maximum ±12%. The maximum mesh size is chosen so it will remain as fine a mesh as it can
be, without running into memory failure or large computation time for future studies.
==PAGE:43==
4.3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL CONSTRUCTION
31
Like the radius of the inner circle from the 2D and 2D-3D models, the length of the 3D model
can have an effect on the results. As mention before, the torque is transmitted from internal
spline to external spline and along the axial direction of the external spline, until it reaches
the fixed surface. If the length is too short, the torque will not be fully transmitted into the
external spline before it is transferred as stress at the fixed surface, while a long length requires
a larger mesh and longer computation time. It is therefor desired to find an optimal length of
the extruded external spline. This is done by decreasing the extra length of the shaft, until
there is a change in contact pressure between the external and internal spline. It is done using
the mesh found in the previous section. The analysis is done with a torque of T = 5[Nm], and
the pressure is taken as the average pressure of the six tooth pairs in engagement. A chart of
the contact pressure in relationship to the extra external spline length from the analysis can
be seen in Figure 4.17 and the data can be found in Appendix C. An illustration of how the
torque is transmitted from internal spline to external spline can be seen in Figure 4.18. To be
able to see the Von Mises stress pattern trough the external spline, the current sections of the
spline is divided in the XY-plane. This is only done, so half of the spline can be hidden in the
results. This division does not affect the results and is only for visual purpose. It can be seen
that in Figure 4.18a the torque has enough distance to be transmitted fully into the shaft, while
in Figure 4.18b, the torque goes almost directly from internal spline to the fixed face of the
external spline.
Figure 4.17: Contact pressure in relationship to the extra external
spline length.
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 4. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
(a) Example of external spline with an extra
length of 16[mm].
(b) Example of external spline with an extra length of 1[mm].
Figure 4.18: Von Mises stress pattern of external spline.
Color
range is set to a minimum of 0.01[MPa] and a maxi-
mum of 0.01[MPa].
As seen in the chart, the pressure starts to become a specific value at the additional length
of 6[mm]. Anything below a length of 6[mm] would effect further studies. As a safety for the
further studies, it is wise to chose a little longer length. The chosen length to be used from now
on is 10[Nm].
==PAGE:45==
5 Analyses
Now when the geometry, constraint and mesh is built for the three types of models, some
additional studies can be made to compare the models. These studies will include how a change
in the placement of the applied torque changes the results, and finally how many teeth are in
engagement when applying tooth width tolerance and how much of a load those engaged teeth
take of the total load.
5.0.1
Torque Application
For the model construction, the torque was applied to the internal spline along the circumfer-
ence of the outer diameter, however the torque is normally applied on the external spline and
transmitted to the internal spline. A new 3D model similar to the previous 3D model is made,
but a few changes are made. The previously fixed face from the previous 3D model is divided
into two separate faces, which is shown in Figure 5.1. The radius of the circle is r = 8[mm]. The
fixed constraint and the boundary load is changed compared to the previous 3D model. The
fixed constraint is now set to be where the previous boundary load was, which was the face of
the outer of the internal spline as shown in Figure 4.4. The boundary load is set to be on the
newly formed circular section on the face shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: 3D model with the new shown constraints.
33
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
The previous way of determining the transmitted torque can not be used on this surface, so a
new way for transferring the torque using this surface is used. The previous load was tangential
to the surface, but in this case it needs to be a force per unit arena load which will create a
rotational effect around the axis of the external spline. First the torsional equation can be used,
where the maximum shear stress τmax at circumference of the circle can be isolated. Here T is
the torque and J is the polar moment of inertia. The part T
J is written as a variable α. The
maximum shear stress that will act on the circular face can be seen in Figure 5.2.
τmax
R
= T
J = α
τmax = αR
Figure 5.2: Maximum shear stress on the face of the external
spline.
The maximum shear stress at circumference of the circle can also be expressed as seen below.
Here D is the diameter.
τmax = 16T
πD3
The two expressions can be put together, and α can be isolated:
τmax = 16T
πD3 = αR
α =
16T
πD3R
(5.1)
α will have the units
N
m3 . This expression can be used in the force per unit area for the x-
and y-direction shown below. There is no force in the z-direction.
x-direction : x = −Y α
p
X2 + Y 2 < R

y-direction : y = Xα
p
X2 + Y 2 < R

==PAGE:47==
35
With the use of equation 5.1, a desired torque can be set, which will then convert the torque
as a force per unit area as α.
The idea of applying the torque on the external spline and fixing the circumference of the
outer diameter of the internal spline is done to the 2D model and the three 2D-3D models as
well. This is illustrated in Figure 5.3, which shows the 2D model version.
For the 2D-3D models, the torque is applied in two separate ways. The first way of applying
the torque is to apply it to the volume which is generated of the surface, when the two spline
parts are extruded. The surface mentioned is the surface where the torque is applied in the 2D
model. The second way of applying the torque is to keep it on the same surface, like in the 2D
model, while the extruded volume is without applied load.
When the torque is applied to the volume, it should be more similar to the 2D model, since
it is the same constraints all the way through the thickness of the model. When the torque is
applied to the area, it should be more similar to the 3D model, since the torque is applied to a
surface and will have to be transmitted through the volume (the rest of the external spline).
Figure 5.3: 2D model of how the load and fixed constraint is ap-
plied.
5.0.2
Length Analysis
The torque is now applied on the external spline, which alters the Von Mises stress pattern in
the shaft. Due to this change in stress pattern, the shaft might not be long enough to fully
transmit the torque through the shaft, before it is transmitted to the internal spline and to the
fixed surface. An analysis will be made for an optimal length, just like the analysis done in
Figure 4.17. The torque is set to be T = 5[Nm] and the mesh is the same as the previously
determined mesh from the 3D model. This new analysis can be seen in Figure 5.4, and the
data can be seen in Appendix C. The value of pressure starts to be come stable at around an
additional length of 8[mm]. Like the previous 3D model, the additional length is set to 10[mm].
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
Figure 5.4: Contact pressure in relationship to the extra external
spline length.
An illustration of the stress pattern in the external spline can be seen in Figure 5.5. This
model of the external spline is split into two separate sections to be able to see the stress
pattern, just like the previous 3D model, however it does not effect the results. It is only for
visual purpose. It can be seen that the pattern is much different from the previous analysis
in length. The stress is very high at the circumference of the circle where the applied torque
is, which is expected. It can be seen in Figure 5.5b that the torque barely transmits through
the external spline, where in Figure 5.5a it travels a short length before it is transferred to the
internal spline.
(a) Example of external spline with an extra
length of 16[mm].
(b) Example of external spline with an extra length of 1[mm].
Figure 5.5: Von Mises stress pattern of external spline.
Color
range is set to a minimum of 0.1[MPa] and a maxi-
mum of 0.25[MPa].
==PAGE:49==
37
5.0.3
Model Comparison
A lot of models have now been made, and they can now be compared with each other. Each
model will be applied with an increasing torque going from 10[Nm] to 90[MPa], with a step of
10[MPa] each. The models will be compared by the average pressure on the engagement faces
of the six tooth pairs, and will be using the same mesh as described previously for each model.
The data for the comparison can be seen in Appendix D.
From the data, it can be seen that there is a big difference in if the torque is applied on
the external or internal spline. For the 2D model and the three 2D-3D models, the contact
pressure is reduced to around 27% of the previous contact pressure when the torque application
is changed from internal to external spline. For the 3D model, the pressure is increased by a
factor of 10 when the torque is applied to the external spline in relation to when it is applied
to the internal spline. As mention before, it can be seen that the 2D-3D models have a very
similar pressure to the 2D model when the torque is applied on the volume, while having a vert
similar pressure to the 3D model when the torque is applied on the face. As the thickness of
the 2D-3D model increases, the pressure for the torque on the volume stays almost the same,
while the pressure for the torque on the face area decreases with 90% and 61%. This is due to
the torque having to rotate and transmit the torque through a longer external spline, while the
value of the torque stays the same.
This shows that it is hard to compare the 2D model to the 3D model, because the the 2D
model assumed that the constraints would be the same when extruded in the 3rd dimension,
while the 3D model both have a different geometry in the third dimensions and different con-
straints. Since the geometry of a real spline is closer to the 3D model than the 2D model and
the 2D-3D models, it is assumed that this the pressure from that model is closer to reality.
It is hard to know which of the two 3D models is more accurate to a real life scenario. Some
experiments with real spline connections could be done to determine which is closer to reality,
but the accuracy in tolerances with a real life experiment would also play a big part in the
results. As mention before, the torque is usually transmitted from the external spline to the
internal spline in a real life scenario. Due to this, it is assumed that the 3D model where the
torque is applied on the external spline is the most accurate, and will be used in further studies.
The similar 2D model with the torque applied on the shaft will be used as well, for comparison
to the 3D model.
5.0.4
Structural Contact
With all the models compared, and a chosen model which represent reality the most, the tol-
erances for the tooth thickness can be analyzed. However when applying the tolerances to the
teeth, a problem with contact happens. When the tolerance is applied, only one tooth pair
will start in engagement. This means that the rest of the external spline is unconstrained and
freely to move. In this highly non-linear problem, it will result in load paths and stress states
changing abruptly, which gives problems for COMSOL Multiphysics, which expect some degree
of smoothness to the solution. This problem can be fixed by adding a spring foundation [10].
A spring foundation is a constraint that applies an elastic and damping boundary. This
spring foundation is put on both the internal and external spline. The spring constant is chosen
to be at a very high value, high enough such that the deformations are negligible due to the
initially applied loads. The spring constant is then reduced gradually to zero for every iteration
of the analysis. This decrease from a high spring constant to a spring constant of zero gives
the program a chance of slowly analyzing the deformation state. The spring constant can be
described as:
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
ktot = k0 (1 −ramp) · 2−ramp·10
Here ramp is the factor that goes from 1 to 0, resulting the the spring constant going from a
very high value to zero. k0 is the starting high spring constant. It is set to be k0 = 1E9[N/m].
An illustration of how the spring constant ramps down is shown in Figure 5.6. The ramp factor
is added as an exponent to the load. This means that the load will go from 0 at ramp = 0 to
the maximum load at ramp = 1. When running the models, the ramp will start from 0 and will
be increased by 0.1 after each analysis, until it has reached 1.
Figure 5.6: Spring stiffness in relation to the ramp factor [10].
This spring foundation is now tested on a 2D model, shown in Figure 5.7. For this analysis,
tooth pair number 1 has no tolerances, however the thickness of the external spline tooth is
reduced by 0.01[mm] for every next tooth pair. E.g. for tooth pair number 3, the thickness of
the external spline tooth is reduced by 0.03[mm], while for tooth pair number 5 it is 0.05[mm].
It can be seen in the figures that when tooth pair number 1 starts in engagement, the external
spline will rotate around the engaged surface, meaning that the teeth furthest away from the
center of this rotation will get in contact first. This results in tooth pair number 4 engaging as
the second pair, even though the thickness of the tooth is smaller than some of the others. The
displacement can also be seen in Figure 5.7b, where the dark blue color is less displacement,
and the yellow color is more displacement.
==PAGE:51==
39
(a) Stress pattern.
(b) Displacement.
Figure 5.7: Stress pattern and displacement with a decreasing
tooth thickness using the 2D model.
5.0.5
Tolerance Implementation
Now the tolerances for the width of the teeth will be taken into account. The maximum and
minimum tolerance the tooth width was found in section 4.2 to be Bmax = −0.030[mm] and
Bmin = −0.108[mm], where the range was calculated to be Brange = 0.078[mm]. The mean
tolerance is calculated to be Bmean = −0.108−0.030
2
= 0.069[mm]. This can be used to make
many cases, where each case have a different tooth thickness for each tooth. However there is
a problem with using the tolerances for tooth thickness. If all six teeth have a different tooth
thickness than 6[mm], it will result in either the top of the external spline tooth or the root of
the external spline tooth to be the first engagement point. This is due to the fact that when the
external spline rotates, the outer tip of the teeth will move faster than the root of the teeth. If
the thickness of the tooth at both tip and root is reduced at the same rate, it will result in the
tip to engage first, as shown in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Example of tooth engagement, when a tolerance for
tooth thickness is used [2].
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
Due to this being a point contact for the 2D model and line contact for the 3D model,
COMSOL can not solve this problem.
However, if the tolerance for the tooth thickness is
converted to a tolerance for the index, it means that it will always be a face to face contact for
the first tooth to engage. This is because the index tolerance will affect the 60◦between each
segment, and not the thickness of the teeth. The relationship between the tooth thickness and
the index is found by applying a tooth thickness tolerance, and see how much of a degree the
shaft rotates until the tip of the tooth engaged. This is done using values from the maximum
tolerance Bmax to the mean tolerance Bmean. The data for this relationship can be found in
Appendix E, and the data is plotted in Figure 5.9. It can be seen that the relationship is linear,
which means by following the same path, the relationship for the minimum tolerance Bmin can
be found.
Figure 5.9: Tooth thickness tolerance in relationship to index er-
ror.
The index corresponding to the maximum tolerance is Bi,max = −0.138◦and the index cor-
responding to the minimum tolerance is Bi,min = −0.318◦, which gives a range of Bi,range =
−0.180◦. At this point an error was made with the minimum, mean and maximum value. The
mean was set to be Bi,mean = 0◦, where it actually should have been Bi,mean = −0.318−0.138
2
=
−0.228◦. The maximum index was set to be Bi,max = 0.180◦, where it should have remained
the Bi,max = −0.138◦, and the minimum index was set to be Bi,max = −0.180◦, where it
should have remained Bi,min = −0.318◦. This means that the range was accidentally doubled.
The faulty data will be used from here on out, but bare in mind that this might alter the results.
Now when the relationship is found, a number of cases with, where each tooth in each case
has an index tolerance. It is assumed that the index tolerance values for the cases is based of
a normal distribution with a standard deviation of σ3. By having a standard deviation of σ3,
it ensures that 99.72% of all generated values are within the tolerance margin. The standard
deviation to generate the different cases is calculated using the equation below. the value for z
is set to be z = 3, due to the chosen standard deviation of σ3.
z = Bmean −Bmin
σ3
3 = 0 −0.180
σ3
σ3 = 0.06
==PAGE:53==
41
Using this standard deviation, a number of cases can be generated. A total of 20 cases are
generated. The 20 cases can be seen in Appendix F for the 2D model, and in Appendix G
for the 3D model. The teeth of the external spline is numbered using the same method shown
in Figure 5.7. The index tolerances are listed, such that tooth number 1 always will start in
engagement and is fixed at surface of the internal spline. This means that the index tolerance
with the lowers degree will always be used on tooth 1, but the rest of the index tolerances is
in a random order. The tolerance for the first tooth is marked as grey in the appendix. The
tolerances are implemented in the SolidWorks files, and imported afterwards. As seen in Figure
4.1, the index for the rest of the teeth are related to the tooth number 1. Tooth number 2 have
to take the generated index tolerance for both tooth number 1 and 2 into account. E.g. for case
1, tooth number 1 is rotated with a degree of −0.039◦counter clockwise, while tooth number
2 is rotated with a degree of 0.054◦clockwise. Since the tooth number 1 is fixed to the face
of the first engagement to the internal spline, tooth number 2 has to be rotated with a degree
of 0.054 −(−0.039) = 0.093◦clockwise. This is done for all 5 teeth, where each tooth is in a
relation to the previous number tooth. This is then done for all 20 cases.
There is a last thing to consider for these cases. The external spline is most likely mounted
on a some sort of bearing. However this bearing can easily be simulated. If the circumference of
the inner section of the external shown in Figure 5.7 got a symmetry constraint, where there will
be no displacement normal to the circumference, this will act as a bearing. The external spline
will still be able to rotate around the axial direction, but the center will not be able to move in
the plane. This can also be done for the 3D model, where the symmetry will be placed on the
circumference of inner circle section where the torque is applied, shown in Figure 5.1. However
it needs to be a surface for the 3D model, so the section of the surface is extruded 1[mm] into
the external spline to create a surface, as shown in Figure 5.10. In the figure, the section is only
hidden to see the surface, and is not removed. The circumference of the circle in both the 2D
model and the 3D model has a radius of 8[mm].
Figure 5.10: The surface with applied symmetry in the 3D model.
The 20 cases are now analyzed where a torque of T = 90[Nm] is applied. The 20 cases will
be analyzed both with and without the symmetry around the circumference of the circles for
both the 2D and 3D model. The contact pressure is taken from each tooth pair separately for
all 20 cases and are put into a sheet. The data for this analysis can be found in Appendix F
and Appendix G.
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
The determination of which teeth that are in engagement is done by analyzing the profile
of the model. The data for the teeth in engagement are then put into a separate sheet, to
determine the average number of teeth in engagement, according to the 20 generated cases. For
the 2D model, the average number of engaged tooth pairs when the model is without symmetry
is 2.65, which is 44.167% of the teeth. However for the 2D model with symmetry, the average
number of engaged tooth pairs is 1, which is 16.667% of the teeth. For the 3D model, the average
number of engaged tooth pairs when the model is without symmetry is 2.7, which is 45% of the
teeth. However for the 3D model with symmetry, the average number of engaged tooth pairs is
1.3, which is 21.667% of the teeth. It was previously assumed that the 3D model was the most
accurate of all the models, and the external spline is mostly likely mounted on a bearing. This
means that according to the data, 21.667% of the total amount of tooth pairs are in engagement.
However an error was made when determining the normal distribution, resulting in a too large
margin in tolerance, which means that the percentage of teeth in engagement is probably higher
than the 21.667%. Tooth number 1 is in engagement and takes some of the load in most the the
cases, because it is the tooth that starts in engagement in every single case. It can also be seen
in the data that for both the 2D and 3D model without symmetry, that it is primarily tooth
number 3, 4 and 5 that are in engagement, because they are the teeth furthest away from point
of rotation, meaning the travel the longest distance.
The data for how much of a percentage a tooth takes of the load in each case can also be
found in Appendix F and Appendix G. It can be seen in some cases, such as case 4, case 6 and
case 10 for both the 2D and 3D model without symmetry, that one tooth takes a huge amount
of load compared to the other teeth in engagement, at around 60% −90% of the load. When
looking at the 3D model with symmetry, it can be seen that in most cases, the first tooth take
all the load, which should be expected, since the cases are set so tooth number 1 is the one that
started in engagement.
An illustration of the stress and displacement in both the 2D model and 3D model can be
seen in Figure 5.11 and in Figure 5.12. The illustration for the 2D model shows both a ver-
sion with symmetry and a version without symmetry. The illustration for the 3D model shows
the version with symmetry, but from two different angles. It can be seen for the 2D models
that when a symmetry is applied, only 1 tooth will be in engagement, where when there is no
symmetry, 3 of the teeth are in engagement. For the 3D model, it shows that the end with the
applied symmetry is similar in displacement to the 2D model with symmetry. However along the
external spline part toward the engagement with the internal spline part, it start to look more
similar to the 2D model without symmetry. Like the 2D model, the displacement is significant
smaller at the point of engagement, the further away from the symmetry. The displacement for
the 3D model without symmetry is near identical to the 2D version. Comparing the 3D and the
2D model without symmetry, it can be seen that they both engage with the same teeth in all
20 cases.
==PAGE:55==
43
(a) Stress pattern, with symmetry and a color of minimum
0.0001[MPa] and maximum 0.2[MPa].
(b) Displacement, with symmetry.
(c) Stress pattern, without symmetry and a color of
minimum 0.0001[MPa] and maximum 0.3[MPa].
(d) Displacement, without symmetry.
Figure 5.11: Stress and displacement of the 2D model using case
5.
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 5. ANALYSES
(a) Stress pattern.
(b) Displacement.
(c) Stress pattern.
(d) Displacement.
Figure 5.12: Stress and displacement of the 3D model with sym-
metry applied using case 5.
==PAGE:57==
6 Conclusion
It was assumed that the 3D model with symmetry was the model closest to a real spline connec-
tion. The final study shows, according to the 3D model with symmetry, that around 21.667% of
the teeth in a spline connection are in engagement. However these results were based of faulty
data, due to a calculation error of the standard deviation. The margin for tolerance was dou-
bled, which means that with the real tolerance margin, a higher percentage would most likely
have been found. Furthermore, with more teeth in engagement, the load would have been more
evenly distributed between the tooth pairs.
Additionally, the length from the symmetry to the engagement with the internal spline does
also have an effect on the results. If the extra length on the external spline would have been
longer, it would have resulted in the symmetry being further away from the engagement, and
make the 3D model more like the 2D model without symmetry. The closer the symmetry bearing
is the the engagement with the internal spline, the similar the 3D model will act to the the 2D
model with symmetry.
The number of cases would have an impact on the results. If there were more cases, the
results would have been more accurate.
When the mesh analysis was made, the analysis ran into problems with the memory on the
computer. If a better computer in use, a finer mesh could have been used for the model, which
would thereby make the result more accurate. The final mesh of the engagement faces for the
3D model was assumed to have a margin error of maximum ±12%. With the use of a better
computer, this number could have been reduced significantly, and made the final results more
accurate.
Even though there were some errors, the final results can still be used as a guideline for how
to find a more accurate estimate to tooth engagement in a straight-sided spline.
6.1
Future Studies
Some additional studies can be made to give a better idea of how tooth engagement in splines
work.
All the analyses was based of the chosen spline standard DIN 5462 6 × 23 × 26. This is one of
the smaller spline sizes in the light series. By doing the same analyses on larger sizes or other
standards, it would give a better overview over how the different standards and sizes differ from
each other.
The chosen tolerance margin for the index was based of the tolerance for the thickness of the
teeth, however an index error happens when the blank is being rotated too far or too short for
when cutting the teeth out. This means that an index will happen every time a new tooth is
produced, meaning that the index errors adds up for each tooth that is cut. This scenario would
be good to analyze, since it is closely related to reality.
When the torque is transmitted from the external spline to the internal spline, it will in most
45
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
cases not be transmitted to the whole circumference of the outer diameter, as depicted in Figure
5.3. Instead it will be transferred to a fraction of the circumference, which will change the stress
pattern in the internal spline. As shown in Figure 1.2, spline couplings have two sets of tooth
pairs, which means that not all tooth pairs are in engagement in either of the cases, and will
thereby not have a fully fixed circumference, but fractions of it.
When the tolerance was chosen for the internal and external spline, it was chosen to be one
with a larger margin. If the mounting type was chosen to be close sliding instead of sliding ac-
cording to Table 3.1, the tolerance margin would have been smaller, and more teeth would have
been in engagement. Furthermore, the tolerance for symmetry in the tooth faces was not taken
into account, which would have changed the final results, but have made them more accurate
to reality.
==PAGE:59==
Appendices
47
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
A Data For Mesh Analyses
49
==PAGE:62==
2D
edge dis:
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
%-Change
[Pressure]
%-Change
[Von Mises]
2
3,20E+04
3,53E+04
3
2,76E+04
3,24E+04
-13,63
-8,32
4
2,97E+04
3,27E+04
7,45
1,08
5
3,10E+04
3,40E+04
4,50
3,96
10
3,15E+04
3,33E+04
1,57
-1,94
20
3,18E+04
3,38E+04
0,80
1,22
40
3,25E+04
3,41E+04
2,43
1,05
60
3,21E+04
3,37E+04
-1,27
-1,32
80
3,21E+04
3,38E+04
-0,07
0,54
100
3,24E+04
3,40E+04
1,07
0,34
120
3,21E+04
3,38E+04
-0,94
-0,56
140
3,24E+04
3,39E+04
0,92
0,35
160
3,23E+04
3,39E+04
-0,44
0,15
180
3,22E+04
3,38E+04
-0,16
-0,30
2D3D
1
Face max size [mm]:
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
%-Change
[Pressure]
%-Change
[Von Mises]
1
3,36E+07
4,41E+07
0,9
3,69E+07
3,98E+07
9,97
-9,67
0,8
3,53E+07
3,98E+07
-4,27
0,02
0,7
3,25E+07
3,81E+07
-8,14
-4,25
0,6
3,07E+07
3,80E+07
-5,31
-0,31
0,5
3,22E+07
3,93E+07
4,89
3,47
0,45
3,26E+07
3,93E+07
1,18
-0,10
0,4
3,42E+07
4,04E+07
4,75
2,80
0,35
3,47E+07
4,10E+07
1,58
1,56
0,3
3,35E+07
4,00E+07
-3,40
-2,41
0,25
3,34E+07
3,98E+07
-0,48
-0,51
0,2
3,27E+07
3,87E+07
-1,94
-2,82
0,18
3,36E+07
3,94E+07
2,70
1,85
0,16
3,34E+07
3,89E+07
-0,65
-1,22
0,14
3,32E+07
3,88E+07
-0,51
-0,25
0,12
3,37E+07
3,85E+07
1,41
-0,84
0,1
3,39E+07
3,91E+07
0,55
1,61
0,08
3,38E+07
3,85E+07
-0,18
-1,58
0,06
3,40E+07
3,86E+07
0,49
0,30
0,05
3,36E+07
3,80E+07
-1,17
-1,54
0,04
3,39E+07
3,84E+07
1,10
0,94
10
Face max size [mm]:
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
%-Change
[Pressure]
%-Change
[Von Mises]
5
3,26E+06
4,93E+06
Average on all teeth
Average on all teeth
Average on all teeth
==PAGE:63==
4,5
3,26E+06
4,93E+06
0,00
0,00
4
3,34E+06
4,94E+06
2,48
0,39
3,5
3,23E+06
4,89E+06
-3,19
-1,19
3
3,34E+06
4,97E+06
3,36
1,69
2,5
3,23E+06
4,89E+06
-3,25
-1,66
2
3,42E+06
4,94E+06
5,77
1,02
1,8
3,23E+06
4,86E+06
-5,47
-1,54
1,6
3,09E+06
4,76E+06
-4,49
-2,08
1,4
3,17E+06
4,80E+06
2,71
0,83
1,2
3,33E+06
4,71E+06
5,02
-1,85
1
3,37E+06
4,58E+06
1,13
-2,81
0,9
3,53E+06
4,59E+06
4,89
0,26
0,8
3,50E+06
4,40E+06
-0,90
-4,03
0,7
3,58E+06
4,32E+06
2,21
-2,00
0,6
3,06E+06
4,00E+06
-14,59
-7,25
0,5
3,22E+06
4,06E+06
5,43
1,32
0,4
3,38E+06
4,10E+06
5,01
1,18
0,3
3,27E+06
3,91E+06
-3,23
-4,60
0,2
3,16E+06
3,84E+06
-3,35
-1,96
0,15
3,44E+06
3,97E+06
8,66
3,41
26
Face max size [mm]:
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
%-Change
[Pressure]
%-Change
[Von Mises]
5
1,19E+06
1,89E+06
4,5
1,24E+06
1,92E+06
3,89
1,74
4
1,18E+06
1,90E+06
-4,36
-1,05
3,5
1,18E+06
1,90E+06
0,01
0,05
3
1,19E+06
1,90E+06
0,61
-0,03
2,5
1,19E+06
1,90E+06
0,25
0,00
2
1,22E+06
1,91E+06
2,48
0,67
1,8
1,23E+06
1,94E+06
0,64
1,61
1,6
1,24E+06
1,90E+06
1,04
-2,31
1,4
1,19E+06
1,91E+06
-4,38
0,61
1,2
1,19E+06
1,87E+06
-0,03
-2,28
1
1,33E+06
1,81E+06
11,87
-3,23
0,9
1,36E+06
1,76E+06
2,23
-2,82
0,8
1,36E+06
1,71E+06
-0,05
-2,71
0,7
1,38E+06
1,67E+06
1,83
-2,49
0,6
1,21E+06
1,58E+06
-12,64
-5,01
0,5
1,28E+06
1,59E+06
5,42
0,48
0,4
1,30E+06
1,58E+06
1,82
-0,61
0,3
1,28E+06
1,52E+06
-1,46
-3,58
3D
Face max size [mm]:
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
%-Change
[Pressure]
%-Change
[Von Mises]
5
1,34E+06
1,85E+06
Average on all teeth
Average on all teeth
==PAGE:64==
4,5
1,33E+06
1,85E+06
-0,48
-0,51
4
1,28E+06
1,85E+06
-3,92
0,04
3,5
1,31E+06
1,82E+06
2,42
-1,54
3
1,29E+06
1,85E+06
-1,08
1,94
2,5
1,35E+06
1,84E+06
3,99
-0,65
2
1,37E+06
1,84E+06
1,92
-0,04
1,8
1,39E+06
1,83E+06
1,18
-0,71
1,6
1,36E+06
1,82E+06
-2,41
-0,60
1,4
1,32E+06
1,82E+06
-2,39
0,20
1,2
1,35E+06
1,81E+06
2,24
-0,32
1
1,46E+06
1,74E+06
7,69
-4,08
0,9
1,48E+06
1,75E+06
1,45
0,38
0,8
1,49E+06
1,69E+06
1,18
-3,44
0,7
1,52E+06
1,68E+06
1,46
-0,46
0,6
1,34E+06
1,56E+06
-11,95
-7,08
0,5
1,40E+06
1,55E+06
5,20
-0,39
0,4
1,45E+06
1,54E+06
3,50
-1,18
==PAGE:65==
B Data for Inner Radius Analysis
53
==PAGE:66==
6 tooth pairs in engagement
T
[Nm]
radius
[mm]
Max stress
[MPa]
90
7
0,158
7,2
0,15
7,4
0,143
7,6
0,136
7,8
0,129
8
0,121
8,2
0,115
8,4
0,109
8,6
0,104
8,8
0,1
9
0,098
9,2
0,099
9,4
0,103
9,6
0,107
9,8
0,113
10
0,122
3 tooth pairs in engagement
T
[Nm]
radius
[mm]
Max stress
[MPa]
10
7
0,0167
7,2
0,0162
7,4
0,0158
7,6
0,0156
7,8
0,0155
8
0,0154
8,2
0,0154
8,4
0,0155
8,6
0,0158
8,8
0,0166
9
0,0174
==PAGE:67==
C Data For Length of Shaft Analyses
55
==PAGE:68==
Torque applied from internal to external
T = 5 [Nm]
Extra Length
[mm]
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
20
9,014E+03
9,829E+03
18
9,026E+03
9,844E+03
16
9,027E+03
9,856E+03
14
9,050E+03
9,856E+03
12
9,049E+03
9,845E+03
10
9,046E+03
9,821E+03
8
9,049E+03
9,827E+03
6
9,064E+03
9,847E+03
4
8,984E+03
9,827E+03
2
8,842E+03
9,823E+03
1
8,728E+03
9,874E+03
0,5
8,67E+03
1,00E+04
Torque applied from external to internal
T = 5 [Nm]
Extra Length
[mm]
Pressure
[N/m^2]
Von Mises
[N/m^2]
20
9,069E+04
9,911E+04
18
9,040E+04
9,877E+04
16
9,051E+04
9,885E+04
14
9,050E+04
9,870E+04
12
9,045E+04
9,894E+04
10
9,031E+04
9,912E+04
8
9,012E+04
9,879E+04
6
8,909E+04
9,894E+04
4
8,805E+04
9,889E+04
2
8,668E+04
9,990E+04
1
8,492E+04
1,008E+05
0,5
8,43E+04
1,02E+05
Average on all teeth
Average on all teeth
==PAGE:69==
D Data for the Application of Torque
and 2D,2D-3D,3D Comparison
57
==PAGE:70==
2D
T
[N/m]
Shaft
Hub
Difference (%)
Hub = Torque applied on hub
10 4,13E+03 1,57E+04
26,25
Shaft = Torque applied on shaft
20 8,35E+03 3,08E+04
27,08
Shaft (A) = area
30 1,26E+04 4,59E+04
27,37
Shaft (V) = volume
40 1,68E+04 6,10E+04
27,51
50 2,10E+04 7,61E+04
27,60
60 2,52E+04 9,12E+04
27,66
70 2,94E+04 1,06E+05
27,70
80 3,36E+04 1,21E+05
27,73
90 3,79E+04 1,36E+05
27,76
2D3D (01)
T
[N/m]
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
Difference (%)
Hub-Shaft(V)
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
10 4,35E+03 4,35E+06
1,66E+04
26,22
5,26
27524,98
5,37
20 8,65E+03 8,65E+06
3,19E+04
27,09
3,62
27960,08
3,58
30 1,30E+04 1,30E+07
4,73E+04
27,40
3,07
28107,98
2,97
40 1,73E+04 1,73E+07
6,26E+04
27,55
2,81
28186,14
2,67
50 2,16E+04 2,16E+07
7,80E+04
27,65
2,65
28234,25
2,48
60 2,59E+04 2,59E+07
9,33E+04
27,71
2,54
28267,85
2,36
70 3,02E+04 3,02E+07
1,09E+05
27,76
2,46
28291,38
2,27
80 3,45E+04 3,45E+07
1,24E+05
27,79
2,41
28309,99
2,20
90 3,88E+04 3,88E+07
1,39E+05
27,82
2,36
28323,75
2,15
2D3D (10)
T
[N/m]
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
Difference (%)
Hub-Shaft(V)
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
10 4,22E+03 4,21E+05
1,60E+04
26,28
-3,07
-90,33
-3,29
20 8,31E+03 8,30E+05
3,07E+04
27,11
-3,93
-90,41
-4,00
30 1,24E+04 1,24E+06
4,53E+04
27,41
-4,21
-90,44
-4,25
40 1,65E+04 1,65E+06
5,99E+04
27,56
-4,36
-90,45
-4,37
50 2,06E+04 2,06E+06
7,45E+04
27,65
-4,44
-90,46
-4,45
60 2,47E+04 2,46E+06
8,91E+04
27,71
-4,50
-90,47
-4,50
70 2,88E+04 2,87E+06
1,04E+05
27,76
-4,54
-90,47
-4,55
80 3,29E+04 3,28E+06
1,18E+05
27,79
-4,57
-90,48
-4,56
90 3,70E+04 3,69E+06
1,33E+05
27,81
-4,60
-90,48
-4,59
2D3D (26)
Pressure [N/m^2]
Pressure [N/m^2]
Change from previous model (%)
Pressure [N/m^2]
Change from previous model (%)
==PAGE:71==
T
[N/m]
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
Difference (%)
Hub-Shaft(V)
Shaft (V)
Shaft (A)
Hub
10 4,26E+03 1,63E+05
1,62E+04
26,24
1,15
-61,24
1,28
20 8,38E+03 3,21E+05
3,10E+04
27,03
0,86
-61,35
1,15
30 1,25E+04 4,78E+05
4,58E+04
27,31
0,76
-61,38
1,10
40 1,66E+04 6,36E+05
6,05E+04
27,46
0,71
-61,40
1,08
50 2,07E+04 7,93E+05
7,53E+04
27,54
0,68
-61,41
1,07
60 2,49E+04 9,51E+05
9,00E+04
27,60
0,66
-61,40
1,06
70 2,90E+04 1,11E+06
1,05E+05
27,65
0,65
-61,40
1,05
80 3,31E+04 1,27E+06
1,20E+05
27,68
0,64
-61,40
1,04
90 3,72E+04 1,43E+06
1,34E+05
27,70
0,63
-61,39
1,04
3D
T
[N/m]
Shaft
Hub
Difference (%)
Hub-Shaft
Shaft (A)
Hub
10 1,79E+05 1,79E+04
1003,19
9,99
10,04
20 3,39E+05 3,35E+04
1010,40
5,72
8,19
30 5,01E+05 4,95E+04
1010,74
4,69
8,22
40 6,63E+05 6,58E+04
1008,18
4,27
8,64
50 8,26E+05 8,22E+04
1004,68
4,06
9,16
60 9,89E+05 9,86E+04
1002,46
3,93
9,53
70 1,15E+06 1,15E+05
1000,96
3,84
9,80
80 1,32E+06 1,32E+05
999,85
3,78
10,00
90 1,48E+06 1,48E+05
999,12
3,75
10,16
Pressure [N/m^2]
Change from previous model (%)
Pressure [N/m^2]
Change from previous model (%)
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
E Data for Thickness VS Index
Comparison
61
==PAGE:74==
thickness [mm]
Index [˚]
-0,030
-0,138
-0,031
-0,143
-0,032
-0,148
-0,033
-0,152
-0,034
-0,157
-0,035
-0,161
-0,036
-0,166
-0,037
-0,171
-0,038
-0,175
-0,039
-0,180
-0,040
-0,185
-0,041
-0,189
-0,042
-0,194
-0,043
-0,980
-0,044
-0,203
-0,045
-0,208
-0,046
-0,212
-0,047
-0,217
-0,048
-0,221
-0,049
-0,226
-0,050
-0,231
-0,051
-0,235
-0,052
-0,240
-0,053
-0,244
-0,054
-0,249
-0,055
-0,254
-0,056
-0,258
-0,057
-0,263
-0,058
-0,267
-0,059
-0,272
-0,060
-0,277
-0,061
-0,281
-0,062
-0,286
-0,063
-0,291
-0,064
-0,295
-0,065
-0,300
-0,066
-0,304
-0,067
-0,309
-0,068
-0,314
-0,069
-0,318
==PAGE:75==
F Data for the Index Analysis on the
2D Model
63
==PAGE:76==
https://goodcalculators,com/normal-distribution-generator/
Generated values cases:
Tooth N:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
-0,039
-0,099
-0,041
-0,128
-0,093
-0,116
0,004
-0,117
-0,102 -0,121
2
0,054
0,102
0,147
-0,074
0,065
-0,021
0,094
-0,004
-0,055
0,016
3
0,049
-0,045
0,014
0,071
-0,023
0,098
0,076
-0,038
0,043
0,070
4
0,129
0,050
0,043
-0,019
0,056
-0,073
0,031
0,104
-0,062
0,018
5
0,006
-0,046
0,038
0,023
0,042
-0,020
0,007
-0,025
0,002
0,051
6
0,075
0,139
-0,004
0,005
0,052
0,033
0,059
-0,022
0,036
-0,071
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
-0,070
-0,108
-0,022
-0,040
-0,044
-0,031
-0,063
-0,010
-0,027 -0,071
2
-0,053
-0,016
0,094
-0,005
-0,030
0,084
-0,032
0,063
-0,010
0,048
3
-0,060
0,022
0,053
0,050
0,103
-0,010
0,019
0,028
0,013
-0,033
4
-0,025
-0,067
0,035
0,060
-0,021
0,024
-0,023
0,119
0,031
0,123
5
-0,045
0,040
-0,014
-0,033
0,050
0,012
-0,007
0,068
0,039
0,026
6
-0,018
0,082
0,058
-0,035
0,081
-0,022
-0,004
0,163
-0,024 -0,018
Calculated index cases:
Tooth N:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
60,093
60,201 60,188 60,054 60,158 60,095 60,090
60,113
60,047 60,137
3
59,995
59,853 59,867 60,145 59,912 60,119 59,982
59,966
60,098 60,054
4
60,080
60,095 60,029 59,910 60,079 59,829 59,955
60,142
59,895 59,948
5
59,877
59,904 59,995 60,042 59,986 60,053 59,976
59,871
60,064 60,033
6
60,069
60,185 59,958 59,982 60,010 60,053 60,052
60,003
60,034 59,878
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
60,017
60,092 60,116 60,035 60,014 60,115 60,031
60,073
60,017 60,119
3
59,993
60,038 59,959 60,055 60,133 59,906 60,051
59,965
60,023 59,919
4
60,035
59,911 59,982 60,010 59,876 60,034 59,958
60,091
60,018 60,156
5
59,980
60,107 59,951 59,907 60,071 59,988 60,016
59,949
60,008 59,903
6
60,027
60,042 60,072 59,998 60,031 59,966 60,003
60,095
59,937 59,956
Pressure on the engagement faces that are in engagement
Case\Tooth
1
2
3
4
5
6
Engaged
w/o sym
1 22683
69092
95275
3
2 63864
107160
91995
3
3 74912
26725 140150
3
4 46978
169310
2
5 85721
99891
101320
3
6
8927
154640
2
7 66207
104870 101320
3
8 84507
108500
74313
3
9 19903
135030
2
10 94629
169880
2
11 35272
64014
87119
3
12 21176
134230
2
13 32505
97311
45466
3
14
2985
103880
43538
3
15
7173
150320
2
Pressure [N/m^2]
==PAGE:77==
16 24051
14042
19067
3
17 23709
134950
2
18 68228
95939
68811
3
19
14020 102630
50157
3
20 72212
51554
97354
3
Repetitions
19
2
11
9
10
2
2,650
44,167 %
w sym
1 222580
1
2 222510
1
3 222370
1
4 222400
1
5 222590
1
6 222520
1
7 222510
1
8 222490
1
9 222530
1
10 222440
1
11 222560
1
12 222520
1
13 222620
1
14 222470
1
15 222570
1
16 222480
1
17 222560
1
18 222460
1
19 222630
1
20 222500
1
Repetitions
20
0
0
0
0
0
1,000
16,667 %
Pressure on all engagement faces
w/o sym
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
22683
-371
69092
-181
95275
-208
2
63864
-344
107160
-227
91995
-118
3
74912
-454
26725 140150
-333
66
4
46978
-486
-26
169310
-372
45
5
85721
-347
99891
-227
101320
-123
6
8927
-487
-29
154640
-376
42
7
66207
-472
-19
104870 101320
-92
8
84507
-350
108500
-223
74313
-126
9
19903
-499
-46
135030
-383
29
10
94629
-470
-8
169880
-360
58
11
35272
-309
64014
-296
87119
-128
12
21176
-482
-26
134230
-369
51
13
32505
-323
97311
-136
45466
-290
14
2985
103880
-334
68
43538
-449
15
7173
-489
-30
150320
-375
43
16
24051
-158
14042
-372
43
19067
17
23709
-482
-25
134950
-370
48
18
68228
-349
95939
-232
68811
-121
19
-449
14020 102630
-335
66
50157
20
72212
-302
51554
-289
97354
-128
Pressure [N/m^2]
==PAGE:78==
w sym
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
222580
-358
-183
-125
-111
-174
2
222510
-369
-181
-125
-110
-149
3
222370
-368
-181
-127
-108
-191
4
222400
-354
-187
-126
-101
-171
5
222590
-365
-182
-125
-103
-168
6
222520
-359
-188
-128
-106
-167
7
222510
-358
-182
-128
-115
-187
8
222490
-360
-183
-123
-107
-179
9
222530
-354
-185
-128
-105
-169
10
222440
-363
-187
-125
-99
-188
11
222560
-351
-180
-128
-113
-187
12
222520
-358
-185
-128
-101
-159
13
222620
-361
-182
-127
-115
-181
14
222470
-352
-183
-126
-115
-198
15
222570
-350
-186
-128
-106
-172
16
222480
-361
-180
-127
-111
-197
17
222560
-352
-183
-128
-110
-186
18
222460
-356
-181
-126
-108
-162
19
222630
-350
-181
-127
-109
-198
20
222500
-361
-181
-124
-106
-188
Percentage of load carried by each tooth
Case\Tooth
1
2
3
4
5
6
w/o sym
1
12
37
51
2
24
41
35
3
31
11
58
4
22
78
5
30
35
35
6
5
95
7
24
38
37
8
32
41
28
9
13
87
10
36
64
11
19
34
47
12
14
86
13
19
56
26
14
2
69
29
15
5
95
16
42
25
33
17
15
85
18
29
41
30
19
8
62
30
20
33
23
44
w sym
1
100
2
100
3
100
4
100
% of total load
==PAGE:79==
5
100
6
100
7
100
8
100
9
100
10
100
11
100
12
100
13
100
14
100
15
100
16
100
17
100
18
100
19
100
20
100
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
G Data for the Index Analysis on
the 3D Model
69
==PAGE:82==
https://goodcalculators,com/normal-distribution-generator/
Generated values cases:
Tooth N:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
-0,039
-0,099
-0,041
-0,128
-0,093
-0,116
0,004
-0,117
-0,102
-0,121
2
0,054
0,102
0,147
-0,074
0,065
-0,021
0,094
-0,004
-0,055
0,016
3
0,049
-0,045
0,014
0,071
-0,023
0,098
0,076
-0,038
0,043
0,070
4
0,129
0,050
0,043
-0,019
0,056
-0,073
0,031
0,104
-0,062
0,018
5
0,006
-0,046
0,038
0,023
0,042
-0,020
0,007
-0,025
0,002
0,051
6
0,075
0,139
-0,004
0,005
0,052
0,033
0,059
-0,022
0,036
-0,071
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
-0,070
-0,108
-0,022
-0,040
-0,044
-0,031
-0,063
-0,010
-0,027
-0,071
2
-0,053
-0,016
0,094
-0,005
-0,030
0,084
-0,032
0,063
-0,010
0,048
3
-0,060
0,022
0,053
0,050
0,103
-0,010
0,019
0,028
0,013
-0,033
4
-0,025
-0,067
0,035
0,060
-0,021
0,024
-0,023
0,119
0,031
0,123
5
-0,045
0,040
-0,014
-0,033
0,050
0,012
-0,007
0,068
0,039
0,026
6
-0,018
0,082
0,058
-0,035
0,081
-0,022
-0,004
0,163
-0,024
-0,018
Calculated index cases:
Tooth N:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
60,093
60,201
60,188
60,054
60,158
60,095
60,090
60,113
60,047 60,137
3
59,995
59,853
59,867
60,145
59,912
60,119
59,982
59,966
60,098 60,054
4
60,080
60,095
60,029
59,910
60,079
59,829
59,955
60,142
59,895 59,948
5
59,877
59,904
59,995
60,042
59,986
60,053
59,976
59,871
60,064 60,033
6
60,069
60,185
59,958
59,982
60,010
60,053
60,052
60,003
60,034 59,878
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
60,017
60,092
60,116
60,035
60,014
60,115
60,031
60,073
60,017 60,119
3
59,993
60,038
59,959
60,055
60,133
59,906
60,051
59,965
60,023 59,919
4
60,035
59,911
59,982
60,010
59,876
60,034
59,958
60,091
60,018 60,156
5
59,980
60,107
59,951
59,907
60,071
59,988
60,016
59,949
60,008 59,903
6
60,027
60,042
60,072
59,998
60,031
59,966
60,003
60,095
59,937 59,956
Pressure on the engagement faces that are in engagement
Case\Tooth
1
2
3
4
5
6
Engaged
w/o sym
1 1,6E+06
3,1E+06
2,6E+06
3
2 5,6E+04
3,6E+05
3,0E+05
3
3 1,0E+04
1,3E+06
4,5E+06
3
4 1,0E+05
4,8E+06
2
5 9,7E+05
1,2E+05
8,2E+04
3
6 9,7E+05
5,0E+06
2
7 3,4E+06
4,0E+06 2,4E+05
3
8 3,8E+05
3,6E+06
3,2E+06
3
9 1,2E+06
5,0E+06
2
10 3,2E+05
4,5E+06
2
11 1,1E+06
3,1E+06
2,9E+06
3
12 1,3E+06
5,0E+06
2
13 1,8E+06
2,8E+06
5,0E+05
3
14 6,0E+04
4,7E+05
1,5E+05
3
15 2,4E+06
5,0E+06
2
Pressure [N/m^2]
==PAGE:83==
16 1,4E+05
5,1E+06
2,0E+06
3
17 1,1E+06
4,9E+06
2
18 1,5E+09
3,2E+10
3,0E+10
3
19 4,8E+04
9,0E+05
4,6E+06
1,1E+06
4
20 3,8E+05
2,8E+06
3,0E+06
3
Repetitions
20
2
11
9
10
2
2,700
45,000 %
w sym
1 7,0E+06
1
2 7,0E+06
1
3 7,0E+06
1
4 6,7E+06
1
5 6,6E+06
1
6 6,9E+06
1
7 5,2E+06
3,6E+06
2
8 6,9E+06
1
9 7,0E+06
1
10 6,8E+06
1
11 5,8E+06
1,7E+05
2
12 6,7E+06
1
13 7,1E+06
2,7E+06
2
14 6,6E+06
2,9E+06 1,1E+06
3
15 6,9E+06
1
16 7,0E+06
1
17 6,9E+06
1
18 7,0E+06
1
19 6,0E+06
3,2E+06
2
20 6,9E+06
1
Repetitions
20
0
1
0
3
2
1,300
21,667 %
Pressure on all engagement faces
w/o sym
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2E+06
8E+04
3E+06
1E+05
3E+06
1E+05
2
6E+04
8E+04
4E+05
9E+04
3E+05
1E+04
3
1E+04
5E+04
1E+06
4E+06
1E+05
2E+05
4
1E+05
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
5
6E+05
6E+04
3E+06
1E+05
3E+06
1E+05
6
1E+06
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
7
3E+06
8E+04
1E+05
4E+06
2E+05
1E+05
8
4E+05
8E+04
4E+06
1E+05
3E+06
1E+05
9
1E+06
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
10
3E+05
9E+04
1E+05
4E+06
9E+04
1E+05
11
1E+06
9E+04
3E+06
9E+04
3E+06
1E+05
12
1E+06
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
13
2E+06
8E+04
3E+06
1E+05
5E+05
1E+05
14
6E+04
5E+05
1E+04
2E+04
1E+05
6E+04
15
2E+06
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
16
1E+05
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
2E+06
17
1E+06
9E+04
1E+05
5E+06
8E+04
1E+05
18
2E+09
7E+04
3E+10
1E+09
3E+10
1E+09
19
5E+04
9E+05
5E+06
1E+05
2E+05
1E+06
20
4E+05
7E+04
3E+06
1E+05
3E+06
1E+05
Pressure [N/m^2]
==PAGE:84==
w sym
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
2 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
3 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
4 6,7E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
5 6,6E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
6 6,9E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
7 5,2E+06 -7,6E+05 -4,3E+05
4,3E+05
3,6E+06 6,5E+05
8 6,9E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
9 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
10 6,8E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
11 5,8E+06 -8,4E+05
1,7E+05
-3,5E+05 1,0E+06 1,5E+06
12 6,7E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
13 7,1E+06 -9,3E+05 -9,9E+05
2,4E+04
2,7E+06 1,2E+06
14 6,6E+06 -9,0E+05 -8,8E+05
1,1E+05
2,9E+06 1,1E+06
15 6,9E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
16 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
17 6,9E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
18 7,0E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
19 6,0E+06 -1,2E+06 -1,2E+06
2,9E+04
1,4E+06 3,2E+06
20 6,9E+06 -1,3E+06 -1,6E+06 -2,5E+05 1,4E+06 1,8E+06
Percentage of load carried by each tooth
Case\Tooth
1
2
3
4
5
6
w/o sym
1
22
42
35
2
8
50
42
3
0
22
78
4
2
98
5
83
10
7
6
16
84
7
44
53
3
8
5
50
44
9
19
81
10
7
93
11
15
44
41
12
21
79
13
36
54
10
14
9
69
22
15
33
67
16
2
70
28
17
19
81
18
2
51
47
19
1
13
69
17
20
6
45
49
w sym
1
100
2
100
3
100
4
100
% of total load
==PAGE:85==
5
100
6
100
7
59
41
8
100
9
100
10
100
11
97
3
12
100
13
72
28
14
62
27
11
15
100
16
100
17
100
18
100
19
65
35
20
100
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
References
[1]
grobdev. Spline applications in manufacturing, 2020. URL https://www.grobinc.com/
types-of-splines-used-in-shaft-manufacturing/.
[2]
MI Tiko Spline, Inc. Wixom. Advantages of involute splines as compared to straight sided
splines. URL https://www.geartechnology.com/ext/resources/issues/0585x/Tifco.
pdf.
[3]
Engineering
Product
Design.
Shaft
splines
serrations.
URL
https://
engineeringproductdesign.com/knowledge-base/splines-serrations/.
[4]
Niels Leergaard Pedersen. Optimization of straight-sided spline design, 2010. URL https:
//findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/537f0c937401dbcc12001df5.
[5]
Brian J. De Caires. Variation analysis of involute spline tooth contact, 2006. URL https:
//scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1374&context=etd.
[6]
Mr. TUMPALA UMA SANTHOSH. Analysis of spline profile and its manufacturing, 2016.
URL http://www.ijlera.com/papers/v1-i9/3.201612176.pdf.
[7]
ISO. Straight-sided splines for cylindrical shafts with internal centering - dimensions, toler-
ances and verification, 1982. URL https://www.saiglobal.com/pdftemp/previews/osh/
iso/iso_12345_07-01/t003596e.pdf.
[8]
DIN 748. Zylindrische wellenenden, 1970.
[9]
ISO.
The iso system of limits and fits - tolerances and deviations.
URL https:
//kiralytool.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/hole-shaft-tolerance-chart.pdf.
[10] COMSOL.
Structural contact modeling guidelines.
URL https://www.comsol.com/
support/knowledgebase/1102.
75
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Niels Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
