==PAGE:1==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
Implementation of an agile decision-
making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc 
organisations 
 
Daniel Rye Sørensen - s145455 
Master Thesis 
Department of entrepreneurship, Technology and entrepreneurship 
Supervisor: 
Lars Alkærsig 
Associate Professor 
Lyngby, Denmark 
June 2022 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
Abstract 
“How might one implement an agile decision-making process in ad-hoc voluntary 
organisations” is the prime question in this thesis. Three areas of research are 
investigated – Organisational structures, Decision making processes and strategies, 
and change management. Semi-structured open-ended interviews was conducted in 
the effort of collecting data. It was found structurally they resemble but are more fluid 
than the classical adhocracy. In these associations decision making processes diverge 
into two paths – a linear, and a disordered model. It is proposed that if these 
associations were to professionalise their volunteers, they will be able to move over 
the decision making to them rather than having very formalised decision making at the 
strategic apex. Which alleviate the burdens of the managerial levels and creating 
ownership of the tasks within their volunteers. It is proposed that moving much of the 
decision making closer to the “ground level” would give an agile decision-making 
process.  
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisor Lars Alkærsig for his guidance and help during this 
project. Without this would not have happened.  
I would also like to thank all who took the time to be interviewed who are too 
numerous to be individually named. 
 
Learning objectives 
• Interpret information about organisational structures relevant businesses and 
other organisations with an extensive theoretical understanding 
• Interpret information about decision making processes relevant to businesses 
and other organisations with an extensive theoretical understanding 
• Identify the strengths and weaknesses of different decision-making methods 
and their best applications. 
• Identify the strengths and weaknesses within organisations and teams thereby 
assigning the best tool for them 
• Asses current decision-making practices within teams and organisations 
• Designing agile decision-making processes depending on the situation 
==PAGE:3==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
• Evaluate an organisations environment on implementing change and what 
necessary steps need to be undertaken 
• Being able make an implementation plan on how teams and organisations best 
can adopt new decision-making processes.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Contents 
Abstract .................................................................................................................. 2 
Acknowledgements .............................................................................................. 2 
Learning objectives .............................................................................................. 2 
1. 
Chapter, Introduction .................................................................................. 5 
1.1 
Background and motivation ............................................................................................................... 5 
1.2 
Research questions ............................................................................................................................ 5 
2. 
Chapter, Literature review ......................................................................... 5 
2.1 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 6 
2.1 
Organisational design ......................................................................................................................... 6 
2.2 
Decision making strategy ................................................................................................................. 11 
2.3 
Change management ....................................................................................................................... 13 
3. 
Chapter – Methodology ............................................................................ 17 
4. 
Chapter – Cases ....................................................................................... 17 
4.1 
Koncertkirken, Blågårdsplads .......................................................................................................... 17 
4.2 
Karlslunde Esport .............................................................................................................................. 22 
4.3 
Eventyrriddernes rollespils forening ............................................................................................... 27 
5. 
Chapter – Discussion ............................................................................... 33 
6. 
Chapter - Conclusion ................................................................................ 36 
References .......................................................................................................... 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
5 
1. Chapter, Introduction 
1.1 
Background and motivation 
My motivation for this thesis is twofold. First, I have both been volunteering for 16 
years in nine different associations. Later in life I began taking more responsibilities 
and have been part of four association boards in all the distinct roles ranging from 
chairperson to acting member. The latest being part of ERF, where we are having 
trouble in how to both manage big personalities and the sudden growth that needs to 
the association undergoes yearly. This is my primary reason for the thesis, 
understanding this type of organisation and figuring out ways to improve upon that 
system. Secondarily, I am COO in a start-up, while not directly comparable organisation 
types, the learnings from this thesis should be directly applicable in the organisational 
development of my start-up. Both in terms of the overall structure and how to manage 
individual teams. My hope is that I will get both the theoretical insight and practical 
knowledge in the research fields associated with this thesis. 
 
1.2 
Research questions 
Associations is a breeding ground for interest-based events and volunteering is a 
crucial part of Danish society, taking place in everything from sports to elections. 
Despite this significant role volunteering is in decline. So, with declining workforce 
limited economy how can you structurally optimise such organisations. This led to the 
following research question: 
 
How might one implement an agile decision-making process in ad-hoc voluntary 
organisations? 
 
This main research question is divided into the following sub-questions: 
• For whom is it most critical to have agility in their decision making? 
• What value, if any, would such a change supply these types of organisations? 
• What restrictions exists in these types of organisations? 
 
1.3 
Purpose of research 
The overall aim of this thesis is to investigate associations and finding a way to 
optimise the decision making in these associations. This is based on my own 
experience within these organisations, where often the decision-making power lies at 
the top which can stop function further down the chain of command. Leading to not 
only the wrong decision since the decision makers are indirectly affected, but also a 
long discussion leading to delayed decision making.  
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
2. Chapter, Literature review 
2.1 
Introduction 
This literature review aims to investigate and research the current studies in the field 
of organisational structures, decision making strategies, and change management. The 
purpose of which is to uncover existing knowledge and understand the theory within 
each field. The findings will be used to create an overall implementable structure and 
there decision-making strategy that apply to voluntary ad-hoc organisations.  
 
This literature review begins a high-level description of two frameworks for 
organisational design that are well proven in the organisational design literature. 
Followed by a select chronological overview of research using each framework. After 
which these frameworks will be compared in their application. 
 
In continuance, this literature review shows a suitable model to strategically make 
decision in ad-hoc organisations. To select such a model a definition of decision is 
explored. Furthermore, theory and frameworks within the literature are explored. 
After which a framework/model is selected based on the theory described and its’ 
application.  
 
For the last part of this literature review a framework for change will be selected. 
Furthermore, the factors important to change management will be highlighted. The 
choice of a framework will be based on the consensus found within the literature. 
 
2.1 
Organisational design 
2.1.1 Galbraith’s star model 
Starting off with the newest of the two frameworks – Galbraith’s star model (Galbraith, 
2011) it is a framework that outlays five categories for where policies fall into which 
makes up the organisation - Strategy, structure, processes, rewards, and people. These 
are defined in the following way. 
==PAGE:7==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
7 
 
Figure 1: Illustration of Galbraith’s star model 
Strategy is defined as the organisation’s goals and aims, as well as values and missions 
that the organisation pursues and set its’ direction.  
Structure refers to where power and authority is distributed within an organisation.  
Processes decides information flow and decisions made within an organisation. This is 
subdivided into vertical and lateral processes.  
Rewards is methods used to align the goals of the employees with those of the 
organisation. 
People covers the human resource aspects of an organisation. 
What the star model implies is that different policies should be put into distinct 
categories but are interconnected thus needing to be aligned to be interacting 
harmoniously with each other. This model stems from what (Galbraith 2011) believes 
to be an overemphasis on structure in the literature since structure affects status and 
power. He puts emphasis on structure being less important in fast-changing business 
environments, especially matrix organisations, where structure is less important, and 
the other aspects of this model are increasingly becoming more important.  
 
Aubry & Lavoie-Tremblay (2017) approaches organisational design as to bridge 
research from management and organisational theory to the project management 
field. From this they conclude an overall understanding of the organisations context to 
be of prime importance. Additionally, organisational design should be seen as a time-
consuming ongoing process. This leads them to coin the term “slow organisational 
design.” This term can aptly be put in conjunction with the star model (Galbraith 2011) 
which lends itself to a slower organisational development (Turner & Maxim, 2019). 
 
Turner & Maxim (2019) explores organizational design in the context of project-based 
organisations. They found three types of project-based organisations – Contractors, 
Backoffice and project-led front office. Within these they found them to differentiate 
between routine (running and change) and temporary tasks (projects) - At least in the 
context of organisations having taken a strategic choice to be project oriented. They 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
suggest that for such organisations the star model (Galbraith 2011) supplies a useful 
framework regarding the design of project-based organisation. But emphasises other 
“simpler “models might be used as a foundation as “you should be able to walk before 
you can run” (Tuner & Maxim, 2019 p. 8).  
 
Holbeche (2019) goes into detail as to how one might redesign organisations into 
being agile and resilient in an everchanging business environment. Holbeche (2019) 
advocates for scrubbing overly complicated policies and bureaucracy out, promoting a 
culture and environment that understands the organisations newly found agile 
purpose, and using “the costumer as the glue that hold the organisation together”. In 
opposition to Aubry & Lavoie-Temblay (2017) and Turner & Maxim (2019), she sees 
the star model (Galbraith 2011) as a much more dynamic tool, but is reliant on the 
individual organisation simplifying processes, using rewards to promote and agile 
culture in the people, and streamlining structure in an overall strategy of agility. Which 
might not be possible larger organisations. 
 
2.1.2 Mintzberg’s 5 organisation types 
Mintzberg names five archetypes for organisations to fall into within the framework 
(Mintzberg 1989) he proposes. In his framework Mintzberg names 6 basic element – 
Strategic Apex, Middle Line, Technostructure, Support Staff and Operating Core. These 
are defined in the following way.  
 
Figure 2: Mintzberg’s 6 basic elements of organisation 
Strategic Apex is the governing body of an organisation. This might be a CEO or a board 
of directors, among others. Its main goal is to ensure the organisation is completing its’ 
task in an efficient manner. Additionally, they keep the interest of the organisation 
owners, members, etc. 
==PAGE:9==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
9 
Technostructure consists of the analytical capabilities of an organisation. Whose main 
goal is to standardise the organisations tasks and processes in an efficient manner. 
Middle Line is the link between the strategic apex and the operating core. It is the 
second line management in an organisation, who coordinate between elements. 
Support Staff are all the structures in an organisation that does not directly support the 
organisations’ core operations. This can be anything from research departments to 
cantinas. Often these are in smaller organisations outsourced but are internalised in 
larger organisations.  
Operating Core is the people who perform the basic tasks that are related to the 
organisations production of products or services.  
 
Through this framework Mintzberg names five archetypes’ organisations fall into. 
These are differentiated upon 3 factors – The primary coordination mechanism, the 
key part of the organisation, and the decentralisation form.  
 
Simple Structure is characterised by the things it is not developed, and complex. 
Machine bureaucracy is defined by its highly specialised tasks and formalised 
processes. 
Professional organisation has a predictable and standardised behaviour though with a 
high degree of complexity in its’ work functions.  
Diversified organisation is marked separated making forming market specific groups 
within the organisation. 
Adhocracy is defined by blurring the lines between sections of the organisation, 
creating ad-hoc teams derived from various parts of the organisation.  
 
Burton & Obel (2018) investigates the organisation design field in relation to structure 
and coordination. They show areas where the field is lacking highlighting start-ups and 
entrepreneurial ventures. Their focus, however, is solely on firms leaving out 
community lead projects, associations, and non-profit organisations. They conclude in 
this research field one cannot generalise and thereby design effective and efficient 
organisations. 
 
Martela (2019) investigates how three of the types in Mintzberg’s 5 types (Mintzberg 
1989) solves what he defines as the six fundamental problems of organising. Martela 
highlights that a move toward self-management in sectors both private and public 
could be a solution for many such organisations to become more agile and adaptable. 
Explaining that this is possible through a professionalised workforce and sophisticated 
it systems allowing managers to coordinate thousands of people. However, Martela 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
prefaces this with a need to have key enabling structures in place before such a shift 
can occur.  
 
Mushli (2021) is a case study of how one might increase the Indonesian government’s 
governance and smooth out unnecessary bureaucracy through organisational design. 
Mushli suggest decreasing the technostructure and making the vertical structure 
shorter as to decrease the steps communication needs to travel through. Thus, 
suggesting a move towards more function driven structure. 
 
2.1.3 Comparison  
For this comparison of frameworks, their complexity of use and when they are suitable 
to use will be discussed to select one.  
 
In terms of complexity the star model is seen by Turner and Maxim (2019) as a 
complex model to use. Whereas Holbeche (2017) suggest it is a tool for simplifying 
complex structures and processes. In essence the model is simplistic to look at, using 
terms that most in management should be able to decipher. The complexity comes in 
the interconnectedness of the elements. The larger the organisation the more policies 
are inherent to it making it more complex and vice versa for smaller organisations. 
However, in terms of gaining an in-depth view of an organisation this model falls short, 
since it focuses solely on the interaction between policies and the results thereof.  
 
Regarding the most suitable application of the star model. The literature suggests the 
best fit to be project-based organisations or larger organisations who either wishes to 
either set up project-based departments or moving completely to it. Furthermore, 
organisations who wishes to internal look at how to complete their core business 
operations taking more effectively and efficiently more than structure into account. In 
essence it is a model for already established organisations.  
 
When it comes to complexity on Mintzberg’s framework, for me it was not at once 
decipherable as with the star model. It holds more - a model to understand structure 
and the archetypes to categorise organisations. Despite being a bit more micro in its 
outlook, it does not become incomprehensible since the framework it uses does an 
excellent job in guiding the process of mapping out the organisation. Thereby making it 
easy to understand the overall structure thereof and making changing to it. 
 
From the literature everything from start-ups to governments use this model. Though 
there is a lack of examples in terms of community lead organisations and associations 
==PAGE:11==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
11 
(Burton & Obel, 2018). Since structure is such a fundamental function in organising this 
model applies in more situations. 
 
In conclusion Mintzberg’s 5 types are applicable in a more diverse cast of 
organisations. It supplies are more in-depth view into an organisation structure. 
Additionally, it does not depend on an already existing structure and allows for a 
completely new organisation to plot out how the ideal organising would take place. 
Therefore, Mintzberg’s 5 types will be used in this thesis’ case examples.  
 
2.2 
Decision making strategy 
Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret (1976) defines a decision as a commitment to action, 
usually requiring a process and/or resources. Which is further subdivided into 
unstructured and structured decisions, which differ in whether they have been met 
before and whether systems to manage them has been put into place. They set out a 
model for unstructured decision-making processes consisting of three umbrella 
categories – Identification, development, and selection. Which do not necessarily need 
to happen sequentially as it does with the rational model (Eisenhardt & Zbarack, 1992). 
They conclude that the diagnosis, which fall into the identification category, is the 
single most important routine. Followed by design and bargaining, which are in 
development and identification, respectively. Their model, however, is limited in its’ 
scope since it does not look at the interrelationship between decisions but only the 
process of a single unstructured strategic decision.  
 
Eisenhardt & Zbarack, (1992) add to the definition from (Mintzberg, Raisinghani & 
Theoret, (1976) by labelling it important. They look to confirm the hypothesis that 
organisations portray as political systems with partially conflicting goals. They find that 
decision making in its nature is rational and political. Leading to the most “powerful” 
decision makers decide the decisions. The rationality Eisenhardt & Zbarack (1992) refer 
to is what Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret (1976) document as part of the 
development and selection, specifically design and analysis/judgement, respectively. 
Whereas the political would be put under identification and choice, specifically in the 
recognition and bargaining, respectively.  
 
Liberman-yaconi, Hooper & Hutchings (2010) explores the strategic decision-making in 
micro firms, which they consider underrepresented in the literature. They define 
decision as a decision that aim the supply a competitive advantage, which look to 
change the scope and direction of a firm. They highlight those decisions made in small 
firms are not comparable to large firm decision making. They point to a disparity in 
resources on information gathering and processing as the main differentiator. Adding 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
to that a higher degree of scrutiny. Leading an individual managers’ heuristics and 
personal traits being diminished in larger firms. In contrast micro-firm decisions are 
made by a few or a singular person. They highlight a model that documents the 
current unaltered process that consists of – Informing, option generating and 
deliberation which leads to a strategic decision. This meant as a recursive process, 
where managers might go through each step-in loops. It in contrast to (Mintzberg, 
Raisinghani & Theoret, 1976) model which are linear in nature.  
 
Kownatzkim, Walter, Floyd & Leghner (2013) explores the relation between control 
and decision-making speed. They highlight that a late decision, despite its’ correctness 
is a useless decision and could pose severe consequences for the organisation. They 
find that the dichotomy between behavioural and outcome control systems, where 
one could have great behavioural but not outcome control and vice versa. They imply 
that the three usual control types (Behaviour, outcome, and content control) involve a 
great deal of participation and trust across the levels of an organisation. Which in turn 
increase the communication and information flow across the organisation.  
 
Velu & Stiles (2013) highlights a framework consisting of three parts -Intelligence, 
design, and choice. In this model they address how to manage common pitfalls, how to 
manage tension, the politics, and the rationality of each. They highlight that manager 
need to be aware of tension when change is implemented. Furthermore, an 
identification of mechanisms from politics and rationality are shown to function as 
levers for stability and change. Meaning they found methods where they can affect 
stability and change in reference to resource cannibalization.  
 
Ahmed, Bwisa, Otieno & Karanja (2014) traces the origin of strategic decision-making 
by going through numerous models backed by theory. They assess the discipline has 
reached maturity. In this they also define the difference between rational and non-
rational methods. Rational are based around ideal optimization, that decisions are 
made under certain assumptions, and that it assumes omniscience in relevant 
information. Non-rational in contrast dispense with ideal scenarios, are concerned 
with how people make decisions and have a search for information included. In 
opposition to (Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret, 1976) and in agreement with 
(Liberman-yaconi, Hooper & Hutchings, 2010) they conclude decision making in 
general is a recursive process. Consequently, this disallows for true rationality in such a 
process and calls for the use of hybrid methods to solve decision-making problems in 
both rational and non-rational.  
 
==PAGE:13==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
13 
Hauser, Eggers & Güldenberg (2020) analyses the decision-making approaches of small 
to medium sized enterprises. They investigate three themes - causation, effectuation, 
and absence of strategy and have made broader categories within. They paint a more 
rational picture of small to medium sized enterprise leaders, since they find that 
despite not planning strategy does not mean it is uncoordinated absent strategy, but 
rather the use of heuristic in effectuation. Furthermore, they find that small 
organisations tend to use causal heuristics in their decision making. Whereas medium-
sized use a more effectual approach. They conclude that the rationales in absence 
strategy and effectuation principles differ, adding that effectuation dominated most of 
the data. They also point out effectuation is not the opposite of causation. 
 
2.2.1 Framework 
From early on in this field of research a decision has been defined as commitment to 
action, where resources or processes are needed with the added label of it being 
important (Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret, 1976) (Eisenhardt & Zbarack, 1992). The 
later literature has continued this definition with slight change. A few adding minor 
adjustments to it to fit the research they are performing i.e., something which adds to 
the competitive advantage of a firm or similar related to this (Liberman-yaconi, Hooper 
& Hutchings, 2010). For this thesis, the definition from the primogenitor will be used.  
 
The first factor to investigate is the unstructured and structured decision as mentioned 
in (Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret, 1976). Structured decisions by their definition 
already met. It might not be the ideal decision made but as (Kownatzkim Walter, Floyd 
& Leghner, 2013) argue for the speed of which are decision is made is just as important 
as its’ correctness. Therefore, the structured decision will primarily be investigated as a 
baseline for how an organisation manages both the expected and unexpected in 
general. As for the framework to analyse the case examples the framework found in 
(Liberman-yaconi, Hooper & Hutchings, 2010) will be used, since they investigated 
micro-firms, and the focus of this thesis will be organisations that similarly have fewer 
resources (appendix A.1). Though they do have more workforce due to the voluntary 
nature of them, but the overall decision-making will be left to a handful of people or 
even at times a singular person. Furthermore, the causal, effectual and absence 
strategy patterns highlighted in (Hauser, Eggers & Güldenberg, 2020) will be put on top 
of the before mentioned framework, as to categorise and understand the decisions 
made in the case examples (appendix A.2).  
 
2.3 
Change management 
Levasseur (2001) explains Kurt Lewin’s three step change model. He highlights that 
despite the model’s simplicity it is “a truly elegant and infinitely practical guide to the 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
host of complex and sometimes baffling issues inherent to the change process”. After 
which detailing of the unfreezing, change and freezing part of the model is introduced. 
It is a tool which does not detail out specific change agents but brings clarity to the 
major steps which must be undertaken to make change successful. Leading it to be an 
agile tool fit for most situations. Lavasseur even states “Lewin’s three step change 
model is the most powerful and fundamental of the tools in my box”. 
 
Todnem (2005) shows a consensus in the field that change is of ever present and if 
increasing importance. Adding that the pace of change has never been higher in than 
in the current business environment. He says that most organisational change tends to 
be reactive, essentially putting out fire or absence of strategy. Adding a reported 
failure rate of around 70 percent of change programmes started. He finds 
contemporary frameworks to be contradictory and confusing. Stating that many of 
these contemporary frameworks are based on unchallenged hypotheses and lack 
empirical evidence.  
 
Swanson & Creed (2014) explores the complexity of Kurt Lewin’s body of work. They 
highlight that time has distorted Lewin’s legacy, pointing to a disparity between what 
Lewin intended and what has happened posthumously. Adding that the change 
management field draws upon the set of tools he left behind. They point out that 
modern interpretation of Lewin’s work is simplified to a three-step process without a 
full analysis of the forces in the field of change. Regarding the force field model, they 
explain it as an analysis of the enabling and constraining forces of change. Adding that 
there is an inverse principle between the two forces. Meaning that a constraint can 
both be perceived as a barrier but also seen as a motivator for change. The same goes 
for enabler either being seen as a supplement to change or a replacement for 
performance. The conclude that an oversimplification of Lewin’s force field model risks 
ineffective decisions being made. They show that understanding the inverse principle 
and the force in different contexts makes a more meaningful analysis possible. This 
points to a discrepancy between theory and reality, where reality is far more 
disordered than what the field has moved onto after Lewin’s death by simplifying his 
body of work to unfreeze, change, and freeze.  
 
Chad (2015) investigates the rebranding of a non-profit SME in relation to its’ 
rebranding. Evidence is provided that internal support and stakeholder buy-in is of 
principle importance. This is backed by the investigated organisation having “no 
problems” in implementing this by having employees involved in all aspects of the 
process. Additionally, a catalyst for change is needed, in this he mentioned leadership 
is often that catalyst, especially in rebranding. It is highlighted that non-profit 
==PAGE:15==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
15 
organisations often are reluctant to hire outside help when a major change is to 
happen. Due to often having few resources, but conversely not having the 
competencies in-house. Making it clear there is a need for tools to help these 
organisations.  
 
Hussain, Lei, Akram, Haider, Hussain & Ali (2016) examines the three stages of Lewin’s 
model and sets up factors of importance in each stage. For the unfreezing stage they 
point to two types of change, reactive where external or internal pressures forces an 
organisation to change, and initiative-taking where an organisation itself finds change 
to be desirable. For the change process they find employee involvement and 
leadership which are to things which go hand in hand. For employees to be involved in 
the change leadership must be transparent, reaffirming and enhance employee trust. 
For refreezing they point to three activities to be considered when implementing 
change – activity planning, commitment planning, and change management structures. 
In conclusion they see knowledge sharing as a catalyst for unfreezing an organisation, 
and likewise important when moving stages. While employee involvement is the main 
factor in change it is interrelated with leadership.  
 
Rosenbaum, More & Steane (2017) explores how the organizational change 
management field has built upon Lewin’s three step model. They show 13 models with 
clear linkage to Lewin’s model. They categorize these into three areas, change a(n) – 
Project, response to resistance, and interpretive process. They consider Lewin’s work 
in two levels. The first represented as a framework for change, saying that to change 
there was a need to unfreeze what currently exists, undertake the identified change, 
and then institutionalizing said change or refreezing. The second level are processes 
which informs this framework such as Lewin’s force field analysis which is 
characterised by elements of iteration. They conclude with “Lewin’s approach, when 
considered in its’ entirety, is as relevant now as it was during the time of his original 
writings”.  
 
Galli (2018) reviews and compares several models to understand the aspects of change 
management – A general change management model, Lewin’s change model, John 
Kotter’s model, the ADKAR change model, the McKinsey 7-S model, and GE’s change 
acceleration process. In his comparison it becomes abundantly clear that no matter 
which model is used, change can only be successful when communicated to and 
accepted by those affected by the change i.e., employees or team members. 
Additionally, he puts emphasis on understanding all the resistant forces against change 
since it could have far-reaching consequences. The main factor in change is people. 
Leadership should make them see and feel the need for change. Adding that resistance 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
is normal, but it comes to play when people feel they are left out. He concludes the 
model have different perspectives but it ultimately it will be the environment and 
organisation that will be the deciding factor in which model fits.  
 
2.3.1 Framework 
Organisational change has been defined as “continually renewing an organisation’s 
direction, structure and capabilities to serve the ever-changing needs of external and 
internal customers” (Todnem, 2005) (Hussain, Lei, Akram, Haider, Hussain & Ali, 2016).  
A simpler description which I prefer for this thesis is “the movement from the known 
(current state) state to the unknown (desired future state) state.” (Hussain, Lei, Akram, 
Haider, Hussain & Ali, 2016) The latter definition will be the lens which organisational 
change will be seen.  
 
A consensus that has arisen during this part of the literature review that needs to be 
taken into consideration, is that people are the change. Which includes both 
management, employees, and volunteers. Management or the leadership (Strategic 
apex or middle line) is seen as the catalyst from which the change occurs (Chad, 2015). 
The communication between the strategic apex or the middle line and employees (the 
operating core) is crucial (Galli, 2018). This leads to the understanding that 
involvement in all effected personal is crucial to the success of the change (Chad, 
2015) (Hussain, Lei, Akram, Haider, Hussain & Ali, 2016) (Galli, 2018). Therefore, 
mismanagement and lack of participation and onboarding is what these other authors 
mention as the prime reason for the almost 70 percent failure rate in change initiatives 
mentioned in (Todnem, 2005).  
 
As for a framework a back to “basics” approach seems to be in order. Firstly, (Swanson 
& Creed, 2014) point out a simplification of Lewin’s change model detailed by 
(Levasseur, 2001). (Swanson & Creed, 2014) Adds that to gain the full effect of the 
three-step model, one should use the force field analysis Lewin also provided during 
his lifetime. This is meant as to be aware of the forces that pull and push the change in 
certain direction, which then informs what action to take to navigate the separate 
phases in the three-step model. The biggest reason to go back to “basics” (going back 
to Lewin’s body of work) is the clear dispute existing within the field. (Todnem, 2005) 
finds that contemporary models are based on hypothesises and a fundamental lack of 
empirical evidence. (Rosenbaum, More & Steane, 2017) points out many of these 
contemporary models are based on Lewin’s work and (Swanson & Creed,2014) point 
out that the derivatives made from Lewin’s work has undergone an oversimplification, 
thereby not reflecting reality. In the end (Levasseur, 2001) (Rosenbaum, More & 
Steane, 2017) and (Galli, 2018) endorse the use of this framework though when used 
==PAGE:17==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
17 
in its entirety. This has led to Lewin’s three step model and force field analysis to be 
used in this thesis.  
 
3. Chapter – Methodology 
Qualitative data was collected in the form semi-structured open-ended interviews. The 
reason for this method to be chosen over having a larger sample size by collecting 
quantitative data through i.e., surveys or email-interviews, is due to the nature of what 
is being investigated. That being the organisational structure, decision making 
processes, and the implementation of them. In here the how and why was most 
important to understand which surveys are not compatible with (Yin, 2014 p. 3-11). 
Twelve interviewee candidates were sought in the local environment of the greater 
Copenhagen area, simply due to access. Nine interviews were conducted six of which 
were deselected. The reason being that these organisations lacked either having 
grown over the past years or lacking any upcoming change to counter this “stagnancy”. 
Thereby not being relevant for this thesis. These interviews were analysed using the 
different models/frameworks proposed in the literature review.  
 
4. Chapter – Cases 
In this chapter cases will be present where each case will be analysed following the 
frameworks chosen. This will be done in the same order as with the literature review 
previewed with a description of the organisation. The method used for data collection 
is a qualitative interview made with a person who are in a management position within 
the case organisation.  
 
4.1 
Koncertkirken, Blågårdsplads 
The following is based on the interview made with the director/daily manager Björn 
Ross (Appendix A.5) and the website connected to Koncertkirken. 
 
4.1.1 Description 
Koncertkirken was set up back in 2009 and acts as both a music house and a cultural 
community centre based in a church owned by the organisation. The organisation’s 
main purpose is to present good, different, and challenging music of high quality in all 
manner of genres. They fund and arrange 100+ concerts a year and they rent out the 
church for a diverse array of events. It is an organisation that is deeply anchored in its’ 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
local environment having many partnerships with the local music scene, breweries, 
and people.  
 
4.1.2 Organisational structure 
Starting at the strategic apex the Koncertkirken has two units within that parameter – 
Their board and their daily manager. Where the relation between the two units can be 
described as sparring partners in most instances. Except when larger projects need 
approval. The coordination mechanism used is largely mutual adjustment due to the 
voluntary nature of the organisation and the fact daily manager to a large degree do 
job functions usually associated with other parts of the organisation due to the 
organisation relatively small size, 3 staff members (2 part time) and approximately 20 
volunteers.  
 
Moving on to the technostructure much of what is usually associated with the 
technostructure is partly being conducted by the daily leader – Strategic planning, 
economy and, “production” planning. While others are partly conducted by volunteer, 
employees, and daily manager – Training of staff and logistics. Due to the mutual 
adjustable nature of the organisation the control and standardisation inherent within 
the technostructures function is done both vertically and horizontally through said 
mutual adjustment.  
 
The middle line at the time of writing for this organisation is non-existent due the size 
of the organisation.  
 
The support staff’s function is maintained partly by the daily manager – Public 
relations, payroll, reception. The parttime employees – Reception, cleaning. And the 
board – Public relations, legal counsel.  
 
Finally, the operating core here the volunteers make up most of the function 
associated with the operating core. Which consists of sound technical ability, stocking 
and selling food items, and setting up for the different events held by the organisation, 
but in the end, everyone pitches in into these activities where necessary and with the 
first example where competencies allow. 
==PAGE:19==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
19 
 
Figure 3: Visual representation of Koncertkirkens organisational structure – Arrows show the high integration of the 
technostructure, and support staffs function held by personal in the strategic apex. 
 
From the visualisation of the structure seen in figure 3, the strategic apex is very much 
integrated with the support staff and technostructure. Additionally, the 
technostructure bleeds into the operating core as due to the mutual adjustment 
happening within the organisation. This shows a prominent level of decentralisation 
across the organisation. Additionally, due to the organisations core business being 
situated within the operating core makes this the key function within the organisation 
however, this does not diminish the work done in other parts of the organisation. This 
shows the structure of this organisation to fall into the adhocracy category.  
 
4.1.3 Decision making strategy 
Two decisions will be investigated to shed light on decision-making processes this 
organisation. 
 
Koncertkirken has for most of its’ existence been confined to a single employee – the 
daily manager, but has employed two part-time employees, the first in 2021 and the 
second 2022. The trigger for the decision to increase the workforce was and is largely 
bounded the internal need for more manpower. This has previously and to some 
extent is still constrained by internal resources – In this case the time needed for 
training and payment. As for informing this has been left to the managers personal 
characteristic and sparring with the board as to start generating options. Having earlier 
success in utilising temporary internships from previous interns, on the background to 
minimise training and indoctrination. This decision has been long brewing but has just 
recently been brought to action. This means in the planning of this decision it was goal-
driven in nature leaving it to be causal decision.  
 
The second decision is the make a long-term strategy on the longevity of the 
organisation, at the time of writing this is not finished yet. This is internally triggered 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
by the fact the manager is not far away from retirement age and having been the key 
motor of the organisation this strategic planning is of crucial importance. There are 
several parts within this strategic planning – economy, the organisations direction, and 
successor the manager. Informing and option generation coinciding at the same time 
in this case, a strategic meeting with the manager and board is held. Here they are 
combining themes in classical planning they use in the causation theme when setting 
goals for their economy and seeking funding from cultural funds and the municipality. 
In another sense they work within the effectuation theme, trying to imagine 
opportunities to phase out the current manager. Deliberation on this strategy is likely 
to take place over many board meetings and have running evaluations.  
 
4.1.4 Change management 
Koncertkirken has run much the same it has since its’ early years with the biggest 
change happening within the volunteer group, but they are now looking to the future 
where a lot of potential change is coming. Therefore, a look at the pressures 
surrounding the change from current state will be looked at, based on a possible 
scenario described by the manager. 
 
” I see a slow deliberate delegation of my tasks to others… I see a team where 
members have distinct functions but are working closely together, who have the same 
energy as we have now… One should keep cultivating the organisation from within and 
strengthen its’ character.” 
- 
Björn Ross, daily manager, KoncertKirken 
 
This will be followed by a looking at a potential process. 
 
As seen in figure 4, internal pressures for Koncertkirken are high, its’ long-term survival 
hinges on the successful implementation and results of this strategy. Leading to an 
extraordinarily potent force for change. Another force for change is the optimisation of 
workflows and load. Now a large body of work is concentrated in one person, leading 
to a prioritisation of work tasks. Which with the proposed change will lead to a more 
efficient organisation giving it more of an impetus for change. The coordination 
mechanism as said is mutual adjustment which ensures the change is communicated 
more easily, feedback and onboarding is made easier since it is already an established 
method of communication within the organisation. Lastly, workforce specialisation 
goes hand in hand with the optimisation of workflow and load, having a team to take 
care of specific areas of work potentially allows them to professionalise in that specific 
area which should lead to that increased efficiency.  
==PAGE:21==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
21 
 
Figure 4: Pressures of change regarding Koncertkirkens long term strategy 
 
The biggest hindrance to this change now is the available resources within the 
organisation. They have previously sought municipal operational aid as a cultural 
institution but have been declined. Overcoming this is part of their strategy with 
contingencies but is now a major resistant force. Koncertkirken unfortunately has a 
weak system, having much of the organisation tied to a single person, this has 
somewhat been mitigated by the hiring of two part-time assistants leaving it a weaker 
resistant force. There is a risk of the communication of change being misinterpreted 
within the organisation, especially because of the ad-hoc nature of an organisation 
with volunteers there is a potentiality in resistance from them, but it is minor 
compared the alternative. Now the clarity of this change is muddled, the first steps are 
being taken but the rails have not been completely laid yet.  
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
Figure 5: Change process based on interview with Björn Ross 
 
In figure 5 the proposed process of implementing this change is shown. First the 
involvement of stakeholders. Done to onboard stakeholder to the change. Secondly, 
starting the change by doing the activities implementing the change. Lastly, initialising 
by in this case giving the team autonomy. 
 
4.2 
Karlslunde Esport 
The following is based on the interview made with the board member and treasurer 
Nicolai Wachmann (Appendix A.4) and the website connected to Karlslunde Esports 
 
4.2.1 Description 
Karlslunde Esport started as an idea in 2019 after which it was set up as an association 
in 2020. They function as a sports and training enter for Esports centred around 
Karlslunde. The organisation’s purpose is to expand the focus and interest in esports 
and create a community with opportunities for practicing esports. They do weekly 
training sessions for up to 8 teams and facilitate esports events. 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
23 
4.2.2 Organisational structure 
Karlslunde Esport’s strategic apex consists solely of their board. The coordination 
mechanism is largely done through their committees by mutual adjustment. Due to 
the way they take tasks down into these committees who activate and align their 
volunteers. The organisation consists of 4 committees each with their own work 
function and 8 trainers and around 50 volunteers. These committees are each headed 
by a board member and filled by volunteers this kind of compresses the structure 
leading it to be flat with few links from the bottom to the top.  
 
Within their technostructure the work is done is mostly training and indoctrination of 
their trainers, scheduling events and coordinating trainers, and ethical standardisation. 
This work is kept mainly by several of the committees.  
 
The middle line here consists of the committees receiving tasks above from the board 
and then coordinating within themselves and each other if necessary to bring these 
tasks into fruition.  
 
The support staff is kept by both the committees and the volunteers in it – Public 
relations, cleaning. And the board – Payroll, membership pricing, reception. 
Throughout this an interconnectedness can be seen between the support staff, the 
middle line and strategic apex. Due to the intermingling of the board, committees and 
thereby the activation of the volunteer force. 
 
The operating core of this system consists of the trainers and the volunteers who does 
the preparation for the weekly training sessions and the events to organisation make, 
respectively.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
Figure 6: Visual representation of Karlslunde Esport’s organisational structure – Arrows shows the interconnectedness of the top 
layers. 
From the visualisation of the organisational structure seen in figure 6, there can be 
seen an integration of the first 2 layers – Strategic apex <-> Middle line, support staff, 
and technostructure. The committees set up in the organisation makes them very 
integrated into each other due to the structure built into the organisation. This leads 
to a coordination mechanism of mutual adjustment. Despite authority being firmly 
placed with the board there is a large degree of selective decentralisation in the way 
they are running their committees. Despite the key part of the organisation lying in the 
board all other parts resemble that of an adhocracy.  
 
4.2.3 Decision making strategy 
One decision will be investigated to shed light on the decision-making process in this 
organisation. 
 
At one-point Karlslunde Esports’ number of active members outgrew their facilities 
and equipment. This was an internal trigger that led to the overall decision to expand 
the organisations service output. This decision consisted of two parts to be 
investigated – Room expansion and obtaining more equipment. The first part came 
about due to a partnership with the local sports association owning a sports-centre, 
which already allowed them to use their facilities and thereby move to larger rooms. 
The second part needed more investigation. The informing and option generation was 
done by their technical committee who generated two options by effectuating on 
available means and possibilities of seeking more funding. The first a larger investment 
which consisted of ultramodern equipment but would require additional funding. The 
==PAGE:25==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
25 
other would-be older equipment but would be within that year’s budget. These were 
deliberated on at the board level. They decided to go with the latter possibility for the 
reasons of the funding cycle first starting next year and the immediate need to expand 
now. Their basis for acting was essentially causal due to the goal and the limited 
resources available.  
 
4.2.4 Change management 
As written earlier Karlslunde Esport needed to expand. The pressures and 
implementation about this decision in section 4.2.3 will be described. 
 
As for the forces as seen in figure 8, starting with for change. The largest being their 
own mission and vision of propagating this sport out into their local community. 
Secondly, they as any association look to satisfy their members, in this case in terms of 
having the necessary facilities to have them participate in their activities. Thirdly, they 
have with their committees the necessary competencies to seek out information on 
the technical aspects of the equipment and building it internally.  
As for the resisting forces, firstly, the trainers were not initially involved in the decision 
and were of a different opinion to the board’s decision this will be explored further 
later in this section. Secondly, moving within the sports-centre were out of their hands 
and up to the administration of that centre, which in turn would depend on what other 
associations were using at that time. It could be that they had to wait a week or a year. 
Lastly, funding was restricting their choices about this change. 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
.
 
Figure 8: Pressures of change regarding Karlslunde Esport expansion 
 
 
Karlslunde Esport had an elongated unfreezing. The first part of which consisted of 
involving a committee and informing the sport-centre of their desire to move into 
larger rooms. The resulting direction about their plans for expansion were 
communicated through the minutes of meeting from the board meeting where the 
decision was made. The reason for the elongation of the unfreezing was the trainers 
who were of a different opinion than the board due to the limited information 
contained in the minutes of meeting. The board decided to address this by onboarding 
the trainers by meeting them before going ahead. They discovered that the trainers 
were misinterpreting the reasons for the chosen decision, they felt this affected them, 
and they felt not heard. They defused the situation by going into a dialogue with them 
explaining their decision. Both due to the time it took for the committee to go through 
the informing and option generation process, and their quick communication with the 
sports association. Luckily coincided with larger rooms becoming available. They simply 
bought the new equipment, moved rooms, and assembled the equipment. After which 
they announced their new setup and reaffirmed with active members and trainers.  
==PAGE:27==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
27 
 
Figure 9: Change process based on expanding capabilities of service in Karlslunde Esport 
4.3 
Eventyrriddernes rollespils forening 
The following is based on personal knowledge as the chairperson of the board and the 
interview with board member Mikkel Bargholz (Appendix A.3) 
 
4.3.1 Description 
Eventyrriddernes rollespils forening (ERF) was founded in 2021 with the purpose of 
spreading the interest in fantasy related hobbies and create a community around that. 
This was to do through a yearly festival and monthly events. Currently, they plan and 
execute one event each month, have held the festival once, and are working on the 
next. They have 1 employed event-coordinator, are ad-hoc paying 10-20 volunteers for 
larger commitments who will be referred to as coordinators, and 200-300 volunteers 
they can draw upon.  
 
4.3.2 Organisational structure 
The way ERF organises themselves up to and during the festival will be investigated, 
because of the increased complexity during that time as compared to the rest of the 
year. 
 
ERF’s strategic Apex consists of their board, and their event coordinator. The board is, 
however, is not directly interjected into the daily operations and have more of a 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
sparring and certifying role. Due to the personality of the event coordinator the 
coordination mechanism from the strategic apex to the other layers are direct 
monitoring. However, the interaction between the board and event-coordinator aligns 
more with mutual adjustment.  
 
Within their technostructure they have training of volunteers, scheduling, security 
planning, and strategic planning. Many of these are directly supervised by the event 
coordinator but are being conducted by the coordinators who have the necessary 
competencies. 
 
The support staff support many of the necessities – Restrooms for both the public and 
staff/volunteers, food for staff/volunteers, electricity, water, and finally garbage. 
Within this layer we have a few coordinators, and many volunteers who complete the 
tasks related within.  
 
The middle line consists of the coordinators each of which oversee their own function 
area such as marketing, entertainment, PHS, transportation, electricity and light, 
economy, etc. Most of which are directly supervised by the event coordinator, but a 
few mutually adjust with each other since they lie outside the event coordinators 
competency area such the coordination between PHS, electricity, and security.  
 
The operating core consists of the many volunteers who are performing the work at 
the festival. Though the operating core in this in this system is not activated for a long 
time, while a lot of planning is happening in the upper levels going ahead the festival.  
The operating core. Additionally, the volunteers within this are also moving up to the 
support staff performing functions there since they switch between contrasting 
functions form day to day depending on what the individual volunteer desires to work 
with.  
 
==PAGE:29==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
29 
 
Figure 10: Visual representation of ERF’s organisational structure up to and during the festival. 
 
As can be seen in the visualisation in figure 10, represented by the loop there is a high 
degree of monitoring of tasks done in the middle line as the event-coordinator holds 
the coordinators in a short leash. The non-existent lines between the technostructure, 
support staff, and middle line stands for the informal communication done within the 
coordinator group via mutual adjustments and shows a great degree of horizontal 
decentralisation amongst that group. There is no upward vertical decentralisation 
between the middle line and strategic apex due to the event-coordinators personal 
leadership style – Direct supervision. However, there is a selective degree of 
downward vertical decentralisation. Coordinators oftentimes relying upon key people 
within the operating core. For this organisation, their key is the middle line. 
Coordinating and bringing everything together and matching the right volunteers to 
the right posts. Most parts of the organisation coordinate informally through mutual 
adjustment, and it is now selectively decentralised due to the coordinator’s personal 
leadership styles and decision to award key volunteers with responsibilities, despite 
the top being more “old school”. This could mean the organisation either could fall 
into the diversified organisation or adhocracy. Though there are rigidly structured units 
within the organisation which lends it to be more of an adhocracy.  
 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
4.3.3 Decision making strategy 
In this section two decision will be described, the first happening in the strategic apex 
about location scouting. The other is the first and only unstructured decision to be 
discussed which were happening in the middle line on closing off an entrance to the 
festival due to a range of factors. 
 
Three stakeholders took part in the original festival – ERF, Lyngby-Taarbæk 
municipality, and Frilandsmuseet. Going from the previous year they started 
deliberating on how to go forward. The result ended with the Frilandsmuseum parting 
ways leaving the festival with no place to be held. This reverted the process back to 
the informing phase. Each remaining stakeholder went out searching for a location 
that, had enough space, capable electrical grid, access to running water, was not 
appointed to other use in the city plan, and finally was a place where Lyngby-taarbæk 
did not have a dispute with the owner (In case it was on private property). Two options 
were generated from the informing phase, which were deliberated internally in ERF’s 
board and a location was chosen. In the way ERF have partners engaged with co-
creation in their informing phase and the aftermath of the decision they effectuate.  
 
As the Prussian field marshal Helmuth von Moltke wrote in 1871: “No plan of 
operations extends with any certainty beyond the first encounter with the main enemy 
forces1” so was the case for ERF when they held their first festival. One of the largest 
problems that arose was the availability of volunteers. 15 separate functions had to be 
filled with manpower one of which were gatekeeping. 4 gates were put up which 
ideally had to be shift staffed by 30+ volunteers á day. However, as the first day of the 
festival went underway it became clear the recruitment of volunteers as not followed 
the projection. This led the gatekeeping coordinator to realise he did not have the 
capacity to keep all four gates open. This was the internal decision trigger. This 
coordinator started by generating three options based around his own knowledge and 
take-action oriented personality, which he afterwards went about gathering the 
information. The first of which were asking other function areas if they had spare 
volunteers, none of them had. The second was to ask his own volunteers to fill out 
more shifts individually, they were too few to make that happen. Lastly, put a call out 
for other coordinators to come up with ideas. Those assembled agreed that the best 
possibility would be to close off the least used gate. This meant an onboarding some of 
the other burdened function areas - security and the stage crew to enclose the gate 
area. This was ad-hoc problem solving within a constrained setting due to the lack of 
 
1 Kein Operationsplan reicht mit einiger Sicherheit über das erste Zusammentreffen mit der feindlichen Hauptmacht hinaus 
==PAGE:31==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
31 
workforce. Essentially, it is absence of strategy due to the lack of control over the 
event. 
 
4.3.4 Change management 
The unstructured decision about the closing of a gate will be described using Lewin’s 
pressure and change model. 
 
The first and largest force for change, was the situation. It was not workable in terms 
of the scheduling and availability of volunteers which compromised the way the 
function area could perform its’ activities. Leading to a strong impetus for change. 
Having involved most of the other coordinators in the middle line led to an alignment 
between them making reducing the burden of communication in a disordered 
environment. Another force bounded to the first is the change or lack thereof that 
would affect the current volunteers within the affected function area. Reducing the 
area which they had to guard meant they could keep the original schedule meaning no 
change to the duration of their duties. The only change that needed to be 
communicated was the shift in where they had to meet up. Lastly, the informal 
coordination between the coordinators in the middle line allowed for this change to 
happen agilely with minimal resistance within their themselves and their volunteers.  
As for the resistant forces onboarding and limited resources are intermingled into each 
other. Since not every coordinator was present in the cocreation and choice, here 
specifically those who needed to be activated, the security team and stage crew. Since 
they were the ones who would be able to fence up and verify the work done at the 
gate in question. The largest obstacle was within the strategic apex due to the personal 
characteristics of the event-coordinator who felt he needed control of every aspect 
and needed to be informed at once at the trigger phase.  
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
 
Figure 11: Pressures of change about the closing of a gate at ERF’s festival 
 
The implementation started with onboard the security team and stage crew as to start 
the work that needed to be done. This was a simple matter, since the security team 
only would be busy in case of accidents, which luckily at that time had not happened. It 
was equally easy to onboard and start the stage crew, due to their work tasks being 
mainly before and after the festival, with minor troubleshooting and maintenance in 
the interim. The trouble came with the onboarding of the leadership (The event-
coordinator) who were strongly opposed to redirect any guest flow to and from the 
event. A clear conflict arose leading the gate coordinator to disregard the conflict and 
go ahead with the change. 
 
“The gate coordinator came into HQ to inform of what he had planned to mitigate the 
volunteer shortage on his end. That seemed to blow the lid of our event-coordinator. We knew 
from the start that this event was his “baby”, and due to some prior conflicts, our event-
coordinator was vulnerable and triggered by the feeling of losing control… to his credit the gate 
coordinator just left stating that this is the solution that will be made into effect.” 
- 
Mikkel Bargholz, board member, ERF 
- 
 
Despite the disapproval the coordinator had set a path and was determined to see it to 
its’ end. Having already onboarded the relevant workforce they went ahead and made 
the change and redirect incoming guests to other gates. Meanwhile some of the board 
==PAGE:33==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
33 
members who serendipitously were at the headquarter had overheard the 
conversation and decided to mitigate a heavy conflict by first talking the event 
coordinator down.  
 
“I looked to the other board members, and we knew we had to talk him down. In the end we 
succeeded and got him to apologize for his rash reaction to the gate coordinator… I think this 
experience was good for the future of our organization”  
- 
Mikkel Bargholz, board member, ERF 
 
In the end everyone became aligned with the change, and it was reaffirmed both to 
the leadership and other relevant personal. To secure the change they put up signs to 
redirect the traffic further up as to not needing a person manually redirecting it.  
 
Figure 12: Change process of closing the gate at ERF’s festival 
5. Chapter – Discussion 
When looking at the interviewed organisations a pattern can be seen about their 
organisational structure. The first commonality the organisations are small for the 
most part, some of them sprawling larger in the preparation and execution of larger 
events. These organisations driven by driven people, even in the cases where there are 
hired a workforce. People who derive value from the work they do intrinsically. Where 
the monetary compensation is secondary. This leads to those involved feeling to a 
large degree ownership of what they do. This is best highlighted in section 4.3.4 with 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
the conflict that arose in that example. Which created conflict due to the overlap in 
each of their respective responsibilities. Another example of taking ownership can be 
seen in 4.1.2 with a lot of responsibilities lying with the volunteers. This was not 
originally the case but as time moved on and some of the volunteers becoming 
“veterans” they started to take over some of the responsibilities of the manager. In the 
case of organisations where they are not purely driven by a board and volunteering a 
tendency of intermingling of work responsibilities seem to be occurring leading 
decentralisation of the organisation.  
There is a dichotomy between control and trust (Möllering,2015), when something has 
high intrinsic value to an individual, they seek control over it. For any organisation to 
grow and develop itself larger than its’s beginning it need more people. Trust is 
necessary to give out to people and allow them to take ownership in the organisation.  
Continuing with another pattern in their organisational structure, there is a lot of 
informal communication through mutual adjustment, which makes sense due to the 
ad-hoc nature of volunteering. In the case of new volunteers coming in they 
individually need to figure out what they want to do, at the same time the organisation 
need to find a spot where they are needed. It is a continuous process that occurs both 
as the organisation develops but also as the individual volunteer develops inside the 
organisation. By having these very informal it helps quickly developing and using the 
current skillsets of their volunteers.  
Mintzberg described 5 types of organisations that organisations fall into. All these 
organisations resemble mostly what Mintzberg described as the adhocracy despite 
being in what one might refer to as different industries. Though unique for these 
organisations is the fusion between the middle layer (Technostructure, Middle line, 
and Support Staff) and the operating core or semi horizontal and vertical 
decentralisation between them. Where the classical adhocracy Mintzberg describes 
one would find vertical decentralisation between the middle layers.  
 
The decision strategies in these types of organisations depends highly on how the 
board is integrated into the organisation in relation to any potential hired 
management. Two approaches shine through from the interviews.  
The first is more linear resembling what (Mintzberg, Raisinghani & Theoret, 1976) 
described in their work. The best example of this can be found in section 4.2.3. Here 
the decision phases are very neatly and organised moved through the organisation 
having clear boundaries for when the distinct phases are happening. Additionally, little 
heuristics or gut feeling are used in the process due to the way the held meetings 
around the distinct phases. Karlslunde Esport is also the only of the three case 
examples that did not have a hired manager who had taken over much of the 
administrative responsibilities. 
==PAGE:35==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
35 
The other approach resembles the chosen model. It is much more disordered and 
based around the managers personal characteristics and heuristics in general. It is 
much more difficult to investigate since so much is bound within a single person, and 
they do not always understand the how and why of what they are doing. It is far from 
a linear process as can be seen in both section 4.1.3 and 4.3.3 where the distinct 
phases are taking simultaneously or in a different order to what is ascribed in the 
linear model.  
These two different approaches are differentiated in the structure of the 
organisations. The more integrated the board is in the daily decision-making of the 
organisation the more structured the decision making. Conversely, if having hired a 
manager and due to the smaller size heuristics and personal characteristics takes over 
making for a more disordered approach.  
 
Implementation of change is difficult to generalise so factors to be aware of is more 
proper. For all three cases resources has been a limiting factor. Whether that being 
workforce or money. These types of organisations are not economic powerhouses and 
need to have been very conscious of where they put and the utilisation of their 
resources.  
Another crucial factor is stakeholder mapping. Knowing who a change affect and 
onboarding these people are likely to be the most important factor when having to 
implement a change, at times things can be forced through by sheer personality like in 
section 4.2.4 and 4.3.4 but to refreeze the change all stakeholders must be aligned to 
the change otherwise the organisation will lose volunteers or workers at some point 
since they are here for the intrinsic value they gain from the work and not being heard 
is likely to affect their value gain negatively. Generally, these types of organisations can 
have trouble refreezing due to the transitory nature of volunteers, if sweeping 
structural changes are made reaffirming this to these volunteers are a necessary step 
to refreeze. 
One factor in their structure that helps both the onboarding and reaffirmation process 
is the informal way communication is being managed, as seen it is much easier to 
spread these changes agilely in organisations with a high degree informal 
communication once a consensus has been reached.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
6. Chapter – Conclusion 
The organisations who have sprawling growth followed by a recession in size, have the 
greatest impetus to implement agility in their decision-making processes. Since having 
a very bureaucratic and strict hierarchical processes will hinder the output of whatever 
event or function the organisation is providing, and unnecessarily bring stress on the 
managerial layers of the organisation. By implementing agility in the decision-making 
process, the organisation stands to gain more than what is put in, even if the decision 
is not “perfect”. In these organisations the greatest restriction to change management 
is the usual lack of managerial skills. Due to the way associations are formed through 
passion projects, those who are running the day to day usually do not have classical 
managerial training. This leads to mistakes, mismanagement, and miscommunicated 
processes within these organisations. Like with other smaller firms these organisations 
are limited in the resources they have, but unlike the private sector can attract a 
diverse pool of talent through volunteering. 
 
Finally, how might one go about implementing an agile decision-making strategy? 
First, what is an agile decision-making strategy in these organisations? This would be a 
specific decentralisation of the “on the ground” decision responsibilities moving it 
from the strategic apex to the relevant team or part of the organisation who have their 
hands in the “cake batter”. To do this a professionalisation of the function areas need 
to happen, like what ERF had done with their coordinator system. They do, however, 
lack the second part of the equation – Giving trust to the appointed coordinators. This 
could consist of economic freedom within a budget, recruiting volunteers themselves, 
scheduling these volunteers. It will be dependent on the organisation, event, and in 
the end what the leadership is comfortable with. To institute such a change in an 
organisation, the leadership would have to be aware of change means in the context 
of organisational structure. Being aware of the affected elements, not excluding 
themselves as well. Here Lewin’s forcefield model and three step model brings in value 
in starting a beneficial thought process about change. In addition, they are not overly 
specific to any environment making them largely applicable in these types of 
organisations whose environment vary.  
 
 
==PAGE:37==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
37 
References 
Galbraith, Jay (2011): The star model, jaygalbraith.com 
 
Aubry, Monique, and Lavoie-Tremblay, Mélanie (2018): Rethinking organizational 
design for managing multiple projects, international journal of project management 
Turner, Rodney and Miterev, Maxim (2019): The organizational design of the project-
based organisation, Project Management Institute Inc. 
 
Holbeche, Linda (2019): Designing sustainably agile and resilient organizations, Wiley 
 
Shafiee Kristensen, S., & Shafiee, S. (2019). Rethinking organization design to enforce 
organizational agility. Paper presented at 11th Symposium on Competence-Based 
Strategic Management (SKM 2019), Stuttgart, Germany. 
 
Mintzberg, Henry (1989): Inside our strange world of organizations, The free press 
 
Aubry, Monique and Lavoie-Tremblay, Mélanie (2018): Rethinking organizational 
design for managing multiple projects, international journal of project management 
 
Burton, Richard and Obel, Børge (2018): The science of organizational design: fit 
between structure and coordination, Journal of organization design 
 
Martela, Frank (2019): What makes self-managing organizations novel? Comparing 
how weberian bureaucracy, Mintzberg's adhocracy, and self-organizing solve six 
fundamental problems of organizing, Journal of organization design 
 
Muslih, Mochamed (2021): Towards a Better Organizational Structure, Journal of 
business and economics 
 
Mintzberg, Henry and Raisinghani, Duru and Theoret, Andre (1976): The structure of 
"unstructured" decision processes, Sage publications 
 
Eisenhardt, Kathleen and Zbaracki, Mark (1992): Strategic decision making, Strategic 
management journal 
 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
Liberman-yaconi, Leanardi and Hooper, Terrena and Hutchings, Kate (2010): Toward a 
model of understanding strategic decision-making in micro-firms: Exploring the 
Australian information technology sector, journal of small business management 
 
Kownatzki, Maximilian and Walter, Jorge and Floyd, Steven and Leghner, Christoph 
(2013): Corporate control and the speed of strategic business unit decision making, 
Academy of management journal 
 
Velu, Chander and Stiles, Philip (2013): Managing decision-making and cannibalization 
for parallel business models, Elsevier 
 
Ahmed, Anwar and Bwisa, Henry and Otieno, Romanus and Karanja, Kabare (2014): 
Strategic decision making: Process, models, and Theories, Macrothink Institute 
 
van den Oever, Koen and Martin, Xavier (2015): Business model change: Managerial 
roles and tactics in decision-making, Advances in strategic management 
 
Hauser, Adrian and Eggers, Fabian and Güldenberg, Stegan (2020): Strategic decision-
making in SMEs: effectuation, causation, and absence of strategy, Small Business 
economics 
Levasseur, Robert E. (2001) People Skills: Change Management Tools—Lewin's Change 
Model. Interfaces 31(4):71-73 
 
Todnem, Rune (2005) Organisational change management: A critical review, Journal of 
Change Management 
 
Swanson, Donald and Creed, Andrew (2014): Sharpening the focus of force field 
analysis, Journal of change management 
 
Chad, Paul A. (2015): Utilising a change management perspective to examine the 
implementation of corporate rebranding in a non-profit SME, Faculty of business 
 
Hussain, Syed and Lei, Shen and Akram, Tayyaba and Haider, Muhammad and Hussain, 
Syed and Ali, Muhammed (2016): Kurt Lewin's change model: A critical review of the 
role of leadership and employee involvement in organisational change, Journal of 
innovation & knowledge 
 
==PAGE:39==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
39 
Rosenbaum, David and More, Elizabeth and Steane, Peter (2017): Planned 
organisational change management Forward to the past? An exploratory literature 
review, Journal of organisational change 
 
Galli, Brain (2018): Change management model: A comparative analysis and concerns, 
Engineering management review 
 
Koncertkirken.dk. 2022. Koncertkirken | Blågårds Kirke i hjertet af Nørrebro. [online] 
Available at: <https://www.koncertkirken.dk/>  
 
Karlslunde-esport.dk. 2022. Karlsunde Esport. [online] 
Available at: < https://karlslunde-esport.dk/> 
 
Frivillighed.dk. 2021. Frivillighed |Fakta og tal om frivillige organisationer i Danmark. 
[online] 
Available at: <https://frivillighed.dk/guides/fakta-og-tal-om-frivillige-organisationer-i-
danmark> 
 
Yin, R., 2014. Case study research. London: Sage Publication, pp.3-11. 
 
Guido Möllering (2015) The practical wisdom of trust: An interview with Bart 
Nooteboom, Journal of Trust Research 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
Appendix A 
A.1. Liberman-yaconi, Hooper & Hutchings’ model of decision making in micro firms 
 
A.2. Hauser, Eggers & Güldenberg’s decision themes 
 
==PAGE:41==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
41 
A.3. Interview – Eventyrriddernes rollespilsforening0 
Interview guide – ERF 
Contact person: Mikkel Bargholz 
Time used in interview: 2 hours 12 minutes 
Establishing the contact person 
• Is it okay if I record this meeting? 
• Is it okay if I quote you? 
• What is your name? 
• What is your title? 
• What is your background? 
• What organisation are you employed or belong to? 
The organisation 
• When were the organisation established and to what purpose? 
• Could you tell me a bit about the history of the organisation? 
• What does the organisation do? 
• What is the organisations’ product(s) / service(s)? 
• What do you see as the organisation’s core business? 
• How many are employed? 
• How many volunteers? 
Organisational structure 
• How would you describe the way your organisation is structured? 
• Potential follow up 
▪ How many links are there between management and 
employees? 
▪ How many links are there between management and 
volunteers? 
o Is the interaction there more formal or casual? 
• Do you have a board that is the upper authority? 
▪ If yes how involved is the board? 
• Are there any standardisation in your organisation? 
▪ Example: Workflows, processes etc. 
• Do you outsource any workflows or processes to third parties? 
• Do you have teams within the organisation? 
▪ If any what are the function of these teams? 
Decision making strategy(ies) 
• When your organisation must make a strategic decision, who has the 
responsibility for this? 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
o How would that happen? Do you have an example?  
▪ Is that the usual flow of things?  
• Example of flow: Intelligence (Discovery and analysis), 
Design (Making solutions-/strategies), Choice (Choosing a 
direction) 
o Any examples that do not follow that? 
o On what basis do your organisation act regarding strategic decisions? 
▪ Examples: Goal driven (Causation), Imagine new opportunities 
from available resources (Effectuation), Putting out fires 
(Absence of strategy) 
o Which is preferred? 
• Change management 
• Referring a bit back to your strategic decision making. How do you plan out to 
implement it?  
▪ Refer to what was said during what they would describe in 
Intelligence, Design and, Choice. 
▪ Refer to unfreezing, change, and freezing if necessary 
o How do you decide that a change is needed? 
o How would you go about creating the need for 
change? 
o How do you manage doubts and concern to the 
change? 
o How would you involve people in the change? 
o Do you have any plans to sustain the change post 
official implementation? 
o How do you onboard others to the change? 
 
A.4. Interview – Karlslunde Esport 
Interview guide – Karlslunde ESport  
Contact person: Nicolai Wachmann  
Time used in interview: 1 hour and 23 minutes 
Establishing the contact person 
• Is it okay if I record this meeting? 
Ja 
• Is it okay if I quote you? 
Ja 
• What is your name? 
==PAGE:43==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
43 
Nicolai Wachman 
• What is your title? 
Bestyrelse medlem 
• What is your background? 
Risikovurdering af virksomheder i forsikring øjemed. 
• What organisation are you employed or belong to? 
Tidligere bestyrelsesmedlem 2019-2021 
The organisation 
• When were the organisation established and to what purpose? 
Der var ikke esport på konkurrence plan i greve kommune, og få det accepteret som en 
sport 
• Could you tell me a bit about the history of the organisation? 
Afholdt 1 event om året pga. corona.  
• What does the organisation do? 
Events, løbende træning 2 gange om uge 
• What is the organisations’ product(s) / service(s)? 
Træning,  
• What do you see as the organisation’s core business? 
Medlemskab og events og salg a merchandise 
• How many are employed? 
8 trænere 
• How many volunteers? 
25-50 
Organisational structure 
• How would you describe the way your organisation is structured? 
Bestyrelse med ansvar med 4 udvalg styret af et bestyrelsesmedlem og fyldt ud af 
frivillige 
Bestyrelse, som eneste arbejdsenhed med frivillig under udvalg. trænere 
• Potential follow up 
▪ How many links are there between management and 
employees? 
 
 Udvalg var ansigtet og tog ting med til bestyrelsen. 
▪ How many links are there between management and 
volunteers? 
 
Udvalg var ansigtet og tog ting med til bestyrelsen. 
o Is the interaction there more formal or casual?  
• Do you have a board that is the upper authority?  
Ja 
▪ If yes how involved is the board?  
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
Meget 
• Are there any standardisation in your organisation?  
Personlig onboard 
▪ Example: Workflows, processes etc. 
 
Skete gennem sociale medier, hvorefter man standardiserede særligt 
træningen, etikken og værdier 
• Do you outsource any workflows or processes to third parties? 
 
Karlslunde idrætsforening 
• Do you have teams within the organisation?  
 
Ja 
▪ If any what are the function of these teams?  
 
Udvalg indenfor div. områder 
Decision making strategy(ies) 
• When your organisation must make a strategic decision, who has the 
responsibility for this?  
 
Bestyrelsen. 
o How would that happen? Do you have an example? 
 
Bestyrelse -> udvalg -> bestyrelse 
▪ Is that the usual flow of things?  
Økonomisk trigger, udvalgene lavede arbejdet og bestyrelsen tog den 
endelige beslutning 
• Example of flow: Intelligence (Discovery and analysis), 
Design (Making solutions-/strategies), Choice (Choosing a 
direction) 
o Any examples that do not follow that? 
Udvidelse af deres setup, indkøb af nyt udstyr. Kortlagt krav til udstyr tekniske 
specifikationer, lav praksis stole, borde. Hvad var muligt inden for de økonomiske 
rammer. Man måtte gå på kompromis, blev drøftet på et bestyrelsesmøde. Valgte at 
holde sig indenfor en ramme for at undgå underskud. Der var modstand særligt fra 
trænerne ift. kompromiset.  
o On what basis do your organisation act regarding strategic decisions? 
 
Man ønskede at gro en niche sportsgren, dette informede resten af deres 
strategier.  
▪ Examples: Goal driven (Causation), Imagine new opportunities 
from available resources (Effectuation), Putting out fires 
(Absence of strategy) 
o Which is preferred?  
==PAGE:45==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
45 
• Change management 
• Referring a bit back to your strategic decision making. How do you plan out to 
implement it?  
Teknisk udvalg informerede, nogen konflikt ift. kompromis.  
▪ Refer to what was said during what they would describe in 
Intelligence, Design and, Choice. 
▪ Refer to unfreezing, change, and freezing if necessary 
o How do you determine that a change is needed? 
 
 
De manglede faciliteter ift. den vækst de havde været i 
gennem 
  
o How would you go about creating the need for 
change? 
 
 
Vi følte det, der var ikke plads til alle og vi havde ikke nok 
udstyr til alle  
• How do you manage doubts and concern to the 
change? 
 
 
Ift. konfilkten måtte de gå i dialog med trænerne. Det var af 
økonomiske grunde, det var enten at have underskud og potentielt ikke kunne få 
driften til at fungere, eller have ældre udstyr. 
 
• How would you involve people in the change? 
 
 
Møde med alle involverede  
• Do you have any plans to sustain the change post 
official implementation? 
 
 
Da det var indkøbs process så når først var købt er der ikke 
meget at gøre efterfølgende.  
• How do you onboard others to the change? 
 
 
De åbnede en dialog og forklarede situationens natur. 
Økonomien skulle være i orden. 
 
A.5. Interview – Koncertkirken 
 
Interview guide – Koncert Kirken  
Contact person: Björn Ross 
Time used in interview: 1 hour 7 minutes 
Establishing the contact person 
• Is it okay if I record this meeting? 
Ja 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
• Is it okay if I quote you? 
Ja – Note Bjorn ønsker at se og godkende. 
• What is your name? 
Björn Ross 
• What is your title? 
Director / Daily leader 
• What is your background? 
Svensker, kunstakademisk uddannelse, billedkunster baggrund, arbejdet med music, 
startede med concert kirken I 2009. Fuldtid I 2014. Købte stedet April 2015.  
• What organisation are you employed or belong to? 
Koncerkirken 
The organisation 
• When were the organisation established and to what purpose? 
2009, købte kirken I 2015. Non-profit andelsselskab, kan købe andele I den og blive 
medlem og få stemmeret. Formål at drive kirken som et lokalt kulturhus, vedtægterne. 
Primært et musik- og kulturhus. Har tilknytning med lokalmiljøet laver, bisættelser, 
fester, bryllupper. Være tilgængelig for alle. Dyrker alle musikgenre og særligt de mere 
niche genre.  
• Could you tell me a bit about the history of the organisation? 
Se ovenover. 
• What does the organisation do? 
Koncerter, fester, bisættelser, udlejning. 100-120 konceter.  
• What is the organisations’ product(s) / service(s)? 
Udlejning, koncerter, forsamlinghus, drikkevarer, københavns største udvalg af 
økologiske øl, snacks. 
• What do you see as the organisation’s core business? 
Koncerter/musik og dertilhørende drift.  
• How many are employed? 
3 ansatte, 2 på deltid. + 1 time baseret rengøring. 
• How many volunteers? 
20+ faste frivillige. Primært unge kvinder. 20-30 år. Internationale. 2 vagter om 
måneden 
Mange aktiviteter som interesserer forskellige dertil får de deres interesse 
tilfredsstillet gennem en vagt. Det sociale er bygget op til at skabe en ”familie”. 
Udflugter fra partnerskaber. Hyggeaften. 
• Organisational structure 
• How would you describe the way your organisation is structured? 
==PAGE:47==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
47 
Bestyrelse (7 medlemmer + op til 5 suppleanter) de inkluderer folk og kører meget 
demokratisk. Bestyrelsen er en sparrings partner, men kan trække i håndbremsen.  
• Potential follow up 
▪ How many links are there between management and 
employees? 
 
0, Flad struktur 
• How many links are there between management and volunteers? 
 
---,,--- 
• Is the interaction there more formal or casual?  
Langt fra formel, meget venskabelig, søger at skabe et social miljø. 
• Do you have a board that is the upper authority?  
Ja, dog større projekter og generel politik er bestyrelsen inde over.  
• If yes how involved is the board?  
I praksis går de fleste beslutninger på den daglige leder 
• Are there any standardisation in your organisation?  
▪ Example: Workflows, processes etc. 
 
Ja, oplæring gennem andre, (frivillig <-> frivillig) 
• Do you outsourcer any workflows or processes to third parties? 
 
Holder så vidt alt internt. 
• Do you have teams within the organisation?  
Ikke som sådan. 
• If any what are the function of these teams?  
• Decision making strategy(ies) 
• When your organisation must make a strategic decision, who has the 
responsibility for this?  
For det meste ligger ansvaret hos Bjorn, større projekter og tiltag bestyrelsen 
• How would that happen? Do you have an example?  
Det eneste større har været renovation af kirken. Det er ikke i tale 
endnu, men de står til at skulle lave en længere sigtet strategi, da Bjorn 
snart går på pension. 
▪ Is that the usual flow of things?  
• Example of flow: Trigger (internal - external), Informing, 
Option generation, Deliberating -> strategic decision. 
Paired with Internal resources and managers personal 
characteristics 
o Any examples that do not follow that? 
 
 
Nej 
o On what basis do your organisation act regarding strategic decisions? 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
▪ Examples: Goal driven (Causation), Imagine new opportunities 
from available resources (Effectuation), Putting out fires 
(Absence of strategy) 
Målbevidst ift. deres bestyrelsen og på baggrund af at finde 
kompetencer der tilføjer…. kigger på langtidsstrategi.  
 
 
Which is preferred? 
Change management 
• Referring a bit back to your strategic decision making. How do you plan out to 
implement it?  
Større ting, møde i og med bestyrelsen til sparring og godkendelse. Derefter 
involvering af relevant personel 
▪ Refer to what was said during what they would describe in 
Intelligence, Design and, Choice. 
▪ Refer to unfreezing, change, and freezing if necessary 
o How do you determine that a change is needed? 
 
 
 
Ser på om noget kan optimeres  
• How would you go about creating the need for 
change? 
Logisk, handler om optimering af funktioner, optimerering, 
skifter til team frem for 1 ”blæksprutte” 
• How do you manage doubts and concern to the 
change? 
 
 
 
Bruge personer indefra, have dem med i 
processen. 
• How would you involve people in the change? 
De skal være en del af det, og kan være det gennem bestyrelsen 
og generalforsamling 
• Do you have any plans to sustain the change post 
official implementation? 
 
 
 
Involvering fra start af. 
• How do you onboard others to the change? 
 
 
 
Logisk baseret, ift. den optimering der skal 
 
A.6. Thesis plan  
==PAGE:49==
Implementation of an agile decision-making strategy in voluntary ad-hoc organisations 
49 
 
 
