==PAGE:1==
High frequency optomechanics in
dielectric nano-cavities
by
Benjamin Falkenberg Gøtzsche (s163996)
Physics & Nanotechnology
Master thesis
DTU Fotonik
Supervisors: Nicolas Stenger & Philip Kristensen
Handed in: July 1st, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy is a widely used tool for analysis of vibrational states of
molecules, in which plasmonic structures serve as the nanophotonic environment enabling the en-
hancement of the Raman signal. By the use of plasmonics, the exceptional enhancements come at the
cost of a broad spectral profile. With the development of dielectric nano-cavities, this thesis investi-
gates the use of such nano-cavities as a new platform for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, where
a narrow spectral profile is expected. We set up simulations based on data inferred from experimental
results for the plasmonic structure, and compare these with parameters for nano-cavities. Further-
more, we investigate the possibility of using the dynamical backaction between the molecule and the
intra-cavity field as an extra enhancement mechanism. It is found that the comparison between the
plasmonic structure and the nano-cavity exhibits a trade-off, where the dimer features high output
power but low spectral resolution of the vibrational mode. The nano-cavity exhibits lower output
power than the dimer, but yields a clear distinction for the vibrational modes.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation
3
2.1
Optomechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Temporal coupled mode theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Modelling of the cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Quasi-normal mode theory
9
3.1
Defining the quasi-normal modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Modelling the permittivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Ag dimer simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Convergence analysis and breakdown of the single QNM picture . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Breakdown of the single QNM picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Cavity optomechanics
20
4.1
Equations of motion and defining the optomechanical coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Driving term for vibrational mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Perturbation theory in Gν . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Optomechanical simulations using CMT equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Comparison of dielectric nano-cavity and plasmonics
31
5.1
N-oscillator model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Number of molecules available . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Optomechanical simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Simulations of multiple Stokes modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Discussion and future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
38
7
Appendix
39
7.1
Derivations of QNM theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Convergence and error analysis of QNM frequency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Derivation of equation of motion using a Hamiltonian approach . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Perturbation theory of the intra-cavity field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.5
Derivation of the in-phase and quadrature component of the driving term . . . . . . .
45
7.6
Area assessment for assessing number of molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.7
Quadrature and in-phase driving terms for 5 nm gap size Ag dimer and nano cavity
.
46
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Page 1 of 49
1
Introduction
In the modern world, the demand for spectroscopic tools seems to be ever-increasing. Whether this
is the scanning of a briefcase when going through the airport, the quality assurance of food [1] before
being put on shelves, or something third, the use of spectroscopy in all its forms provides valuable
information in many regards. Spectroscopy is not limited to any specific physical process, but always
relies on some intrinsic value provided by what one wants to analyze. This could be infrared ab-
sorption spectroscopy, relying on the characteristic absorption of the molecules. Within spectroscopy,
people generally talk about destructive and non-destructive methods, meaning whether one sacrifices
the analyzed sample upon examining it (destructive) or the sample is un-altered after examination
(non-destructive). In an ideal world, one would always want a non-destructive technique if possible,
however, this might not always be readily available.
For this thesis we will investigate the non-
destructive spectroscopic technique based surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). The use of
Raman spectroscopy has many applications, and in particular one could envision a scenario where
quality control of drugs is done with Raman spectroscopy. For instance, the quality control done in
pharmaceutical companies often rely on using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The
HPLC analysis takes up valuable time, and might even require the drug manufacturer to ship the
samples for analysis. Raman spectroscopy on the other hand, has the possibility of analyzing the drug
in-line of the production, and can thereby save time and money.
Raman spectroscopy is a technique used for studying vibrational footprints inherent in the materials of
consideration, known as Stokes frequencies. Although this thesis will be limited to studying molecular
vibrations, Raman spectroscopy could just aswell be used for studying 2D materials. Raman spec-
troscopy is based on the principles of Raman scattering, an inelastic scattering process, of which an
input laser with frequency ωL interacts with a Raman-active material in a non-linear fashion, resulting
in frequency-shifted output light [2], shown in Figure 1. By measuring the spectrum of the transmitted
light, and observing the shifted frequencies, one can correlate the shift of the input frequency with
what specific molecule the light was interacting with. Although the scenario as explained here sounds
simple in nature, two key problems arise when trying to do this in a lab:
1. The Raman interaction is a weak process, hence if no further measures are in place, concerning
what is explained above, it is hard measuring the Raman shifted frequencies due to low signal
power
2. Molecules feature more than one vibrational modes, each with their individual vibrational fre-
quency.
Addressing the first point, one might naively think that turning up the power of the input laser might
resolve this problem. While nothing is wrong with this method, it is an inefficient way of increasing
the Raman scattered power. What is done instead, is placing the molecules in a nanophotonic envi-
ronment, and using the local enhancement mechanisms of such an environment. This is the general
principle of SERS, and in particular, this enhancement mechanism is known as the electromagnetic en-
hancement. A nanophotonic environment could be something as simple as two metallic nanoparticles
situated close to one another, known as a dimer, which will be investigated in this thesis. When the
dimer is irradiated with light, the light induces coherent charge oscillations in the metallic nanopar-
ticles, commonly referred to as localized surface plasmons (LSP). Within the vicinity of the metallic
nanoparticles, the field is greatly enhanced. By placing the molecule within the vicinity of the metallic
nanoparticles therefore causes a great enhancement of the Raman signal, due to the enhanced local
field. The generated Raman signal that is now shifted in frequency is then further amplified by the
same mechanism. The SERS platform allows for great enhancement of the Raman signal, and de-
tecting single molecules is even possible [3]. Furthermore, one can also have a chemical enhancement
mechanism by virtue of charge transfer from the molecule and the nanophotonic environment. This
will however not be discussed in the work presented here.
While the enhancement mechanism provided by the dimer just discussed is necessary for the detection
of the Raman signal, it does however come at the cost of having a broad resonance of the LSP, leading
to the second point on the list. Molecules feature a large number of vibrational modes, and with the
use of a dimer, one amplifies many vibrational frequencies at once. For complex molecules, it would
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
Page 2 of 49
initially seem favourable to excite a single vibrational frequency. Exactly this is studied in this thesis,
by investigating how the dimer performs compared to a dielectric nanocavity, which also exhibits a
local field enhancement mechanism, and offers a narrower response than the LSP.
While all the vibrational modes of the investigated molecule oscillate at their respective Stokes fre-
quency, not all vibrational modes are detectable by Raman spectroscopy, meaning that not all vibra-
tional modes are Raman active. For a molecule to be Raman active, the vibration of the molecule
must result in a change of the polarizability of the molecule, commonly referred to as a differential
polarizability. This means that, depending on the molecule under investigation, analysis from Raman
spectroscopy might not yield all necessary information, and complementary techniques should be em-
ployed. Within the scope of the project, we will only consider Raman active modes.
The thesis is constructed in the following way. A more detailed motivation is given in Section 2,
wherein a brief presentation of the theory that will be used throughout the thesis is presented. Sec-
tion 3 will present a more elaborate description on the definition of quasi-normal modes, and how the
modeling of these can be fruitful. Using the quasi-normal modes, simulations of a silver dimer are
presented. As it will turn out, the description of SERS can also be understood in the sense of cavity
optomechanics, which is presented in Section 4. Of particular importance is the understanding of a
dynamical backaction in optomechanical systems, which can provide further enhancement factors for
the SERS setup. Simulations of the optomechanical system are shown. Section 5 presents a com-
parison of the Ag dimer with a dielectric nano-cavity in a realistic scenario, where-in characteristic
differences in the SERS performances is seen. The results are reflected upon and further work is
considered. Lastly, in Section 6 we round up the results presented.
ω
ωS
ω
ωAS
Stokes process
Anti-Stokes process
Figure 1: Depiction of the Stokes and anti-Stokes process occurring for Raman scattering. For the
Stokes process, scattering with a photon with frequency ωL results in a red-shifted photon,
leaving the molecule in a higher energy state, by having added a quanta of vibration (a
phonon) with frequency Ων.
For anti-Stokes, the process involves using a phonon, and
results in a blue-shifted photon.
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
Page 3 of 49
2
Motivation
In this section we will present some of the motivating factors for the work to be presented in the
thesis. Two primary sources of motivation for the project are as follows,
1. The fabrication of dielectric nano-cavities with effective mode volumes below the diffraction
limit.
2. The mapping of cavity optomechanics onto the theory of plasmon-enhanced Raman scattering
for molecules.
It was generally accepted up until recently that the mode volume Veff of a nano-cavity was bounded
by the the diffraction limit Veff = (λ/(2n))3 where λ is the wavelength of the intracavity field and n is
the refractive index [4]. With theoretical efforts predicting that mode volumes below the diffraction
limit are indeed possible [5], the experimental realization of such nano-cavities have only been realized
very recently [6]. By use of topology optimization, and taking fabrication constraints into account, the
nano-cavities were fabricated with the intention to maximize the Q/Veff ratio, where Q is the cavity
quality factor, in order to maximize the Purcell factor, thus maximizing the light-matter interaction.
With the fabrication of such dielectric cavities, one might ask how such a strong light-matter interac-
tion could be utilized?
The description of plasmon-enhanced Raman scattering by use of molecular cavity optomechanics was
presented recently by Roelli et al, in which the intra-cavity field couples to the molecular dynamics
of some molecule via the radiation pressure. In the investigation presented, a plasmonic system in
the form of two metallic nanoparticles separated by a gap size on the order of a few angstroms was
the cavity of interest. Given a strong coupling of the vibrational degrees of freedom in the molecular
system, the molecular system can act back on the intra-field via the differential polarizability, in a
manner that modulates the phase of the intra-cavity field. What was shown by Roelli, was that the
parametric coupling of the molecules differential polarizability is analogous to the parametric coupling
of a mirror displacement, investigated in cavity optomechanics, meaning that the theory of cavity op-
tomechanics can be used to describe the problem.
This reformulation of the problem in terms of cavity optomechanics, paves the way for many inter-
esting physical phenomena [7]. Of particular interest in the work to be done in this thesis, is the
investigation of amplification of the molecular degrees of freedom using the dynamical backaction.
By means of a large optomechanical coupling rate, the backaction between the molecular vibrations
and the intra-cavity field can lead to a modification of the molecular dynamics that is dependent on
the detuning of the incident laser with respect to the cavity. This serves as a novel enhancement
mechanics for Raman scattering.
With the fabrication of nano-cavities featuring effective mode volumes below the diffraction limit, an
expected strong light-matter coupling, and a possible enhancement mechanism for Raman scattering
in form of dynamical backaction, the work presented in this thesis is simply a curiosity project; can
the dielectric nano-cavities serve as a platform for SERS and utilize the dynamical backaction? To
further extend this question, we also wish to outline the pros and cons of using a dielectric nanocavity
as opposed to plasmonics, in this case the dimer, and show a comparison of the two in the context of
cavity optomechanics.
In the next subsections, brief presentations of the some of the theoretical tools needed to investigate
the posed problem are presented.
The working principles of optomechanics will be outlined, also
giving an overview of the key parameters. The principles of temporal coupled mode theory will be
presented, as they, which will be shown later, serve the basis for simulating optomechanical coupling.
Finally, the cavity of consideration needs appropriate modeling to extract realistic parameters, which
is shown in the brief presentation of quasi-normal mode theory.
2.1
Optomechanics
With the possibility to describe the plasmon-enhanced Raman scattering using optomechanics, the
working principles of optomechanics are presented, largely based on [7].
How this relates to the
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
Page 4 of 49
differential polarizability will be presented in Section 4.1.
Of primary concern in optomechanics is the displacement of a mirror inside a cavity, as illustrated by
Figure 2. The displacement x of the mirror is generally small with respect to the cavity length L, and
a first-order correction to the change of cavity length is usually sufficient. For a single longitudinal
mode in a cavity, this causes a change of the resonance frequency,
ω(x) = mπv
L + x =
mπc
L(1 + x/L) ≈mπc
L

1 −x
L

= ω0 −ω0
L x,
(1)
where m is the order of the longitudinal mode, v = c/n is the speed of light with c being the speed
of light in vacuum, and the n the refractive index. Here ω0 is the angular frequency mode in the
cavity with no optomechanical coupling. The dispersive shift of the resonance frequency caused by a
displacement of the mirror is characterized by the optomechanical coupling rate G = ω0/L.
Although the primary interest in this thesis is presented in the classical regime, it is important to
highlight an important intrinsic value of any optomechanical system, namely the vacuum optomechan-
ical coupling strength g0. This is best illustrated by inserting the frequency ω(x) in Hamiltonian for
a harmonic oscillator with bosonic creation (annihilation) operators ˆa† (ˆa), and inserting the position
operator ˆx as the displacement, yielding
ˆH = ¯hω(x)ˆa†ˆa ≈¯h(ω0 −Gˆx)ˆa†ˆa = ¯hω0ˆa†ˆa −¯hg0ˆa†ˆa(ˆb† + ˆb)
(2)
where the position operator is expressed in terms of the phonon creation (annihilation) operator ˆb†
(ˆb) by ˆx = xzpf(ˆb† + ˆb).
xzpf =
p
¯h/(2meffΩm) is the zero-point fluctuation amplitude with meff
being the effective mass of the movable mirror and Ωm being the mechanical modes frequency. The
introduced intrinsic quantity g0 = Gxzpf is the vacuum optomechanical coupling strength, and should
be interpreted as the optomechanical coupling strength by the presence of a single photon. If one had
the desire to investigate cavity optomechanics in the quantum mechanical formulation, the interaction
Hamiltonian defined by the last term in Eq. (2) serves as the starting point.
An important aspect of cavity optomechanics is the ability of light inside the cavity to affect the
dynamics of the mechanical oscillator. The optomechanical coupling causes a shift of the frequency
shift due to a displacement of a cavity mirror. Due to the finite lifetime of the cavity, the intra-cavity
field is not able to respond instantaneously, causing a delayed response for the cavity. As will be seen
later, we can use this delayed response to amplify the motion of the mechanical oscillator, which seen
in the context of Raman spectroscopy, yields an increased light-matter interaction.
2.2
Temporal coupled mode theory
The temporal coupled-mode theory (CMT) models a scenario as seen in Figure 3 where a cavity with
an intra-cavity field A is coupled to two waveguides [8]. A field in the waveguide propagating towards
the cavity is denoted with a positive sign sl+, and with a negative sign when propagating away from
Figure 2: Setup of a simple optomechanical setup. With a coherent field coupling from the left into
the cavity, whose cavity escape rate is κ and the angular resonance frequency is ω, an
intra-cavity field interacts with the right-most mirror, suspended from a fixated wall via an
effective spring with spring constant k. The right-most mirror has an effective mass meff
and a displacement coordinate x. Figure idea from [7].
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
Page 5 of 49
A
Figure 3: Visual interpretation of the temporal CMT. From left to right, waveguide 1 coupling (with
lifetime τ1) to the cavity of consideration with a field A, which can then couple to waveguide
2 with the lifetime τ2. Figure inspired by [8].
the cavity sl−, where l denotes the waveguide of consideration. Normalization of these fields is chosen
such that |sl±|2 is a measure of the power in the waveguide, and the intra-cavity field A is normalized
such that |A|2 is a measure of the energy stored in the cavity.
The waveguide-cavity coupling is
determined by the lifetime τl, once again owing l to the waveguide of consideration. Although the
theory can be extended to any number of coupled waveguides, we limit ourselves to two waveguides,
thus having a simple input- and output waveguide. The temporal coupled-mode equations in their
simplest form are given as,
dA
dt = −iω0A −τ −1
1 A −τ −1
2 A +
p
2/τ1s1+ +
p
2/τ2s2+, ,
(3a)
s1−= −s1+ +
r
2
τ1
A,
(3b)
s2−= −s2+ +
r
2
τ2
A,
(3c)
where ω0 denotes the cavity resonance frequency and τ1 and τ2 denotes the lifetime from the cavity
to waveguide 1 and waveguide 2. For simplicity we will consider a symmetric cavity where τ1 = τ2.
Although no optomechanical coupling is added yet, the CMT equations in their current form already
yield useful information, since they provide immediate access to the transmission and reflection spec-
trum, T(ω) = |s2−|2/|s1+|2 and R(ω) = |s1−|2/|s1+|2 respectively. Concerned primarily with the
transmission spectrum, the analytical transmission is found by sending in a field s1+ oscillating at
the frequency ω. For simplicity we only send in a field from the left, hence s2+ = 0. It is useful
to transform the reference frame to the driving laser frequency ω, by letting A(t) = a(t)exp(−iωt),
such that a(t) is the slowly varying component of A with respect to the reference frame frequency ω.
Solving (3a) in Fourier domain, thus letting d/dt →−iω, and by using (3b), we find the transmission,
T(ω) = |s2−|2
|s1+|2 =
 1
τ1τ2

4
∆2 +
  1
τ
2
(4)
where 1/τ = 1/τ1 +1/τ2 is the total decay rate, and ∆= ω−ω0 is the detuning. Immediately one sees
that the transmission spectrum is a Lorentzian shape. Furthermore a transmission of unity requires
not only a resonant condition ω = ω0, but also a symmetric cavity in form of τ1 = τ2.
Simulating the ODE in (3a) is straight forward. One, however, needs to be careful when inserting
realistic values for a cavity, due to numerical artefacts when values become comparable to machine
precision (for MatLab, around 10−16). Arguably, the necessity of such rescaling highly depends on the
input parameters Q and ω0. Nevertheless, it is introduced for generality, since is will be of use when
introducing the optomechanical coupling. We rescale the variables by letting a = ka˜a and t = kt˜t.
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
Page 6 of 49
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
0.5
1
1.5
10-15
Figure 4: Simulation of the CMT equations for a symmetric cavity (τ1 = τ2) with intra-cavity energy
|a|2 depicted as the red curve, subject to an input power pulse |s1+|2, the blue curve.
Here, the input pulse is on resonance with the cavity, i.e.
∆= 0.
For the simulation,
Q = ω0τ/2 = 400, ω0/2π = 194 THz, P0 = 100 mW, t0 = 2.5τ and T0 = 0.1τ.
Inserting in the CMT equation, one has,
d˜a
d˜t = ikt∆˜a −ktτ −1˜a + kt
ka
p
2/τ1s1+(t)
(5a)
s1−= −s1+ + ka
r
2
τ1
˜a,
(5b)
s2−= −s2+ + ka
r
2
τ2
˜a,
(5c)
By recognising a characteristic timescale for the system, we let kt = τ. To reduce the constants in the
last term of eq. (5a), we set ka = kt
p
2/τ1 = τ
p
2/τ1.
We model the input envelope function s1+ to be a Gaussian function, featuring a temporal width T0
and peaks at the time t0, such that s1+(t) = √P0exp(−(t −t0)2/(2T 2
0 )). Using the envelope function,
and scaling time with kt, it is straight forward to simulate the ODE. A general simulation is shown in
Figure 4, showing the temporal evolution of the input envelope |s1+|2 and the intra-cavity envelope
|a|2. The delayed response of the cavity with respect to the input pulse is observed, due to finite
cavity life time.
By means of Fourier transforming, we gain access to the transmitted power as function of input
frequency. Sweeping the detuning, and computing the ratio |s2−(ω)|2/|s1+(ω)|2, we can compare the
results with the analytical transmission spectrum found in Eq. (4), which is shown Figure 5.
Good
agreement with the simulated transmission and the analytical transmission is seen, highlighting the
CMT equations as a good platform for analyzing ’waveguide-cavity-waveguide’-problems, where an
input field is coupled to a cavity, and coupled out into an output waveguide, which will be further
studied later. The problem as stated in Eq. (3) naturally has analytical solutions, hence the interest
in simulations is minimal. Once we however concern ourselves with optomechanical coupling, the
intra-cavity field is subject to interaction with vibrational modes in a non-linear fashion, meaning
analytical solutions are not readily available. Hence simulating the CMT equations is very useful. As
will be shown later, the optomechanical interaction leads to a phase modulation of the intra-cavity
field, leading to the formation of frequency sidebands, which can be analyzed by the output waveguide,
naturally yielding a spectroscopic feature of the setup. Characterizing the optomechanical coupling,
thus gaining more insight in the spectroscopic aspect that this interaction provides, is one of the
primary interests in this thesis.
2.3
Modelling of the cavity
As presented by the introductory example of the CMT equations, we can model the temporal evolution
of the intra-cavity field subject to an input field coupling to the cavity, given that we have two
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
Page 7 of 49
0
50
100
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
0
0.05
0.1
Figure 5: Transmission spectrum as function of input frequency, comparing simulation of CMT equa-
tion and analytical CMT transmission result, with the relative error shown in the bottom
plot. Simulation parameters are identical to parameters shown in Figure 4.
parameters; the resonance frequency ω0 and the lifetime τ, each being intrinsic values of the cavity.
Naively, one could be tempted to start with Maxwells equation and derive the Helmholtz equation,
and solve the Helmholtz equation subject to the boundary conditions of a perfect electric conductor
(PEC), meaning that the electric field should vanish at the boundary of the cavity. This Hermitian
eigenvalue problem would yield the frequency of the normal modes of the cavity. One would then
employ a separate strategy to assess the cavity escape rate, in order to obtain the lifetime of the
cavity. With this approach, one has decoupled the resonance frequency ω0 and the lifetime τ. This
approach appears nonphysical given that one required the field to vanish at the boundary in the first
place, which is especially highlighted with the choice of low Q-factor cavities, where the field lives
outside.
The solution to this ambiguity is resolved by applying an appropriate boundary condition to the wave
equation. By applying the curl operator to ∇× E in the source-less Maxwells equations in frequency
space, one finds the wave equation for the electrical field as
∇× ∇× E(r, ω) −ϵR(r, ω)k2E(r, ω) = 0
(6)
where k = ω/c is the wave number and ϵR(r, ω) is the relative permittivity. With only the wave
equation, the problem is not well defined until one applies some boundary conditions for which the
differential equation is solved for. Here we apply the Silver-M¨uller radiation condition, allowing for
the decay of the field towards the far-field. The radiation condition can be written for the electric-
and magnetic field as [9]
ˆr × E(r, ω) →
r µ0
ϵ0ϵB
H(r, ω)
as |r| →∞,
(7a)
ˆr × H(r, ω) →−
rϵ0ϵB
µ0
E(r, ω)
as |r| →∞,
(7b)
where ϵ0 and µ0 is the vacuum permittivity and the vacuum permeability respectively and ϵB = n2
B
is the constant relative permittivity far away. For the calculations, it is assumed that the relative
permeability is unity. By use of Maxwells equations, we can rewrite the radiation condition for the
electrical field as
ˆr × ∇× E(r, ω) →−
rϵ0ϵB
µ0
E(r, ω)
as |r| →∞,
(8)
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
Page 8 of 49
The choice of this radiation condition turns the wave equation into a non-Hermitian eigenvalue prob-
lem, of whom the eigenmodes ˜fµ(r) are found, commonly called quasi-normal modes (QNM), with
complex frequencies ˜ωµ = ωµ −iγµ, where the real part corresponds to the resonance frequency of the
mode and the imaginary part corresponding to the field decay of the mode [10]. The QNM theory
will be further explained in the next section, where the general theory of QNMs is shown. It will be
found that the quasi-normal modes yield a robust definition of the mode volume, and can be used to
approximate the Green tensor, of which both are key definitions we will use later. For now, as slightly
motivated earlier, one of the main advantages provided by the QNM formalism is compatibility with
the CMT equations [11]. In principle, given any geometry, one can compute the quasi-normal modes,
and use those results directly in the CMT equations. We will show this by means of simulations of
two silver nanoparticles constituting a dimer in the next section.
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
Page 9 of 49
3
Quasi-normal mode theory
The quasi-normal modes (QNM) are solutions to the wave equation subject to a radiation condition,
allowing for decay of the cavity. In this section, we begin by introducing the theory of the QNM. When
introducing the theory, we will restrict ourselves to the key aspects of QNMs useful for this project,
whereas a more detailed treatment can be found by Kristensen et al [10]. In order to obtain realistic
results for simulations of a silver dimer, we construct a permittivity model based on experimental data.
With this, QNM simulations of the Ag dimer are performed using the MatLab toolbox MNPBEM
(metallic nanoparticles boundary element method), of which convergence studies are conducted. By
decreasing the gap size between the metallic nanospheres making up the dimer, the description using
a single QNM breaks down, which is elaborated. As will be seen in the next section when discussing
cavity optomechanics, the QNM theory will be used to formally derive an optomechanical coupling
to a vibrational mode ν in a molecule. To calculate such a value, one needs to calculate the QNM
frequency and the (generalized) mode volume, which is done for a silver dimer and is one of the main
results to be taken from this section.
3.1
Defining the quasi-normal modes
For presenting the QNM theory, it is useful to define Maxwells equations in Fourier domain on matrix
form. Considering no free charges, we have ∇· (ϵ0ϵR(r)E(r, ω)) = ∇· (µ0µR(r)H(r, ω)) = 0. The curl
equations take on the form

0
(ϵ0ϵR(r))−1∇×
−(µ0µR(r))−1∇×
0
 
E(r, ω)
H(r, ω)

= −iω

E(r, ω)
H(r, ω)

+ W−1

Js(r, ω)
Ms(r, ω)

,
(9)
In the absence of source terms, Eq. (9) yields no solutions for a real eigenvalues ω except for the trivial
case of ω = 0. It is however possible to find complex eigenvalues, denoted ˜ω, whose eigenmodes obey
the radiation condition shown in Eq. (7). With the complex eigenfrequency, one has the associated
eigenvectors, denoted ˜Fn(r) = [˜fn(r), ˜gn(r)]T, where ˜fn and ˜gn denote the electric and magnetic
QNM respectively. The QNMs are therefore solutions to the source-less Maxwell equation written in
compact form as
D˜Fn(r) = −i˜ωn ˜Fn(r)
(10)
where the matrix D is the left-most matrix shown in Eq. (9). Due to the choice of time-dependency
of the form exp(−iωt), the complex QNM frequency must have, under the assumption of no gain, a
negative imaginary part. We can therefore write ˜ωn = ωn −iγn where γn > 0 denotes the field decay
constant. Solving the non-Hermitian eigenvalue problem of Eq. (10) therefore gives direct access to
the quality factor of the system, by Qn = ωn/(2γn).
An important result that we want to show, is the format expansion of the Green tensor using the
QNMs. To do this, we need to establish two things: the adjoint QNM and a method for normalization
of the QNMs. For the results shown here, more detailed derivations are shown in the Appendix 7.1.
Before defining the adjoint QNM, it is helpful to establish the inner product of two ’usual’ electromag-
netic fields. For two electromagnetic field FA(r, ω) and FB(r, ω), the inner product is defined with
the weight function W we have
⟨FA(r)| FB(r)⟩=
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
FT
A(r)WFB(r) dV
(11)
where the weight function is defined as W = diag(ϵ0ϵR(r), µ0µR(r)), yielding
⟨FA(r)| FB(r)⟩=
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
(EA(r)ϵ0ϵR(r)EB(r) + HA(r)µ0µRHB(r)) dV
(12)
The inner product shown in Eq. (12), in the case of projecting a field F(r) onto itself, yields the total
electromagnetic field energy of the considered volume V .
With this, we now seek to define the adjoint QNM. Suppose that we have an adjoint QNM ˜F‡(r), and
seek to calculate the inner product ⟨˜F‡
n(r)|DF(r, ω)⟩. By the definition of the matrix D, we have
⟨˜F‡
n(r)|D F(r)⟩=
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
h
˜f ‡
n(r) · (∇× H(r)) −˜g‡
n(r) · (∇× E(r))
i
dV
(13)
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
Page 10 of 49
which after use of some vector identities can be written as
⟨˜F‡
n(r)|DF(r)⟩= −⟨D˜F‡
n(r)|F(r)⟩+ I∂V (˜F‡
n(r), F(r))
(14)
Where the last term denotes a surface integral on the boundary ∂V of the investigated volume V .
This naturally arises since the QNM is a leaky mode. From Eq. (14) it is clear that D is not self
adjoint, and one should define the adjoint operator as D‡ = −D.
Considering the surface integral in the limit of going to the far field, where no sources are present, the
electric field and the magnetic field obey the radiation condition. For the surface integral to vanish
in this limit, we can define a radiation condition for the adjoint electric and magnetic QNM as
ˆr × ˜g‡
n(r) →
r ϵ0
µ0
˜f ‡
n(r),
for r →∞
(15a)
ˆr × ˜f ‡
n(r) →−
rµ0
ϵ0
˜g‡
n(r)
for r →∞
(15b)
where the sign is flipped as opposed to Eq. (7b) and (7a). This means that if ˜Fn solves (10) and
obeys the radiation condition, then we can define the adjoint to the non-Hermitian problem,
D‡ ˜F‡
n(r) = −i˜ωn ˜F‡
n(r)
(16)
with ˜F‡
n = [˜fn(r), −˜gn(r)]T satisfying the adjoint QNM radiation condition. Having found the adjoint
QNM, one can introduce a normalization of two QNMs by means of
⟨⟨˜F‡
n(r)|˜Fn(r⟩⟩=
1
2ϵ0
Z
V

ϵ0ϵR(r)˜fn(r) · ˜fn(r) −µ0˜gn(r) · ˜gn(r)

dV
+
i
2ϵ0˜ωn
Z
∂V

[r∂r˜fn(r)] × ˜gn(r) −˜fn(r) × [r∂r˜gn(r)]

· ˆn dA
(17)
where r = |r| and ∂r mean the partial derivative with respect to r. The normalization as stated
in Eq. (17) generally yields complex values, which will then be used for scaling the QNMs. Other
methods for normalization of the QNMs are also available, one of which we will make use of in the
numerical simulation, where integration in the complex frequency plane around the QNM frequency
can be computed. Although not formally explained here, numerically this method can be computed
efficiently with trapezoidal integration.
Having defined the basics of the QNM theory, we wish to highlight some of the important parameters
one can extract. Detailed explanations of this can be found in [10].
As indicated from the normalization of the ’usual’ electromagnetic fields, the normalization is ex-
actly the total electromagnetic field energy of the considered volume. Similarly one can from the
normalization of the QNMs define a similar quantity, known as the generalized mode volume vn,
vn(r0) = ⟨⟨˜F‡
n(r)|˜Fn(r)⟩⟩
ϵR(r0)˜f 2n(r0)
(18)
where r0 is the point of interest.
From the definition of the generalized mode volume, the value
will not only vary with respect to the coordinate r0 one decides upon, but can also, as seen from the
normalization, be complex-valued. The effective mode volume can be found from the generalized mode
volume as 1/Veff = Re(1/vn). This provides a formal definition of mode volume for any structure one
could be interested in.
As a final result to be highlighted for the QNMs is the expansion of the matrix Green tensor, where
the QNM frequencies define poles for the Green tensor. By assuming that the matrix Green tensor
can be expanded in terms of the QNM alongside sufficient scaling, the matrix Green tensor can be
shown to take the form
G(r, r′, ω) = c2
2ω
X
n
˜Fn(r)[˜F‡
n(r′)]T
˜ωn −ω
(19)
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
Page 11 of 49
This is an important result, since this allows for a single QNM to approximate the Green tensor
with high accuracy in a frequency region of interest, as will be seen when showing simulations, as
long as the gap size of the dimer is not too low. From having a good approximation of the Green
tensor, it naturally follows from the imaginary part of the Green tensor that one can describe the
Purcell factor, which defines the enhanced spontaneous emission rate due to the interaction with a
nanophotonic environment. [12]
To show the single QNM approximation, we highlight it in form of the Purcell factor FP. The Purcell
factor is a dimensionless factor, characterizing the enhanced spontaneous emission rate due to the
presence of a nanophotonic environment, relative to the emission rate in a homogeneous background
medium. It is related to the matrix Green tensor as
FP = 6πc
nRω Im (ˆep · G(r0, r0, ω) · ˆep)
(20)
where ˆep is the orientation of the dipole. For the single QNM approximation, we consider a single
term denoted with c from the sum in Eq. (19), yielding
FP ≈3πc3
nRω2 Im
 ˜f 2
c (r0)
˜ωc −ω
!
(21)
Assuming the electric QNM to be real, and consider frequencies close to resonance, we find that the
Purcell curve is Lorentzian shaped
FP = 3πc3
nRω2
γc˜f 2
c (r0)
[ωc −ω]2 + γ2c
(22)
and reduces further to the well-known Purcell factor when on resonance, introducing the cavity
Q = ωc/2γc and rewriting ˜f 2
c (r0) as the inverse effective mode volume [13]. The motivation of the
form shown in Eq. (22) is to show that the Purcell factor is a Lorentzian shape around resonance.
This is important when simulating, as it will be shown that this approximation is crucial to determine
an initial guess of the QNM frequency.
3.2
Modelling the permittivity
In order to assess realistic parameters for the Ag dimer, one needs to define a realistic material response
for the metal, done by defining a realistic permittivity model. In order to describe the permittivity
one can use the Drude model [14],
ϵD(ω) = 1 −
ω2
p
ω2 −iγDω
(23)
where ωp is the characteristic plasma frequency and γD is the damping factor, of which τcol = γ−1
D
is the relaxation time of the conduction electron. The simplicity of the Drude model comes at the
price of not accounting for interband transitions. In order to take interband transitions into account,
one introduces poles in the complex frequency plane, known as Lorentz poles. Such a permittivity
model is known as the Drude-Lorentz model.
By fitting of the permittivity model [15] using the
experimental data shown by Johnson and Christy [16], one can obtain the characteristic parameters
for the permittivity model [17], and thus have an analytical expression for the permittivity obeying
causality [2].
For reasons that will become clear in the next subsection, we will not use the Drude-Lorentz permit-
tivity, since the Lorentz poles in the complex frequency plane cause issues when integrating in the
complex plane, necessary for the normalization of the QNMs. The problem is caused by the intro-
duced branch cuts from the Lorentz pole, hence using the Drude model is necessary for evaluating the
generalized mode volume.
Extracting the plasma frequency and the damping factor from data involves defining some spectral
region of interest (ROI) of which the permittivity model is fitted. As will be seen in the next section,
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
Page 12 of 49
and in particular indicated in Figure 8, we are interested in describing the permittivity in the energy
range of [2.2; 3.1] eV, since this is where the Purcell curve for the fundamental mode we seek to
investigate peaks. With this spectral ROI, and inspired by [15], we can define an objective function
Φ as,
Φ =
X
ωj
 Re

ϵdata(ωj) −ϵt
D(ωj)
2 +
 Im

ϵdata(ωj) −ϵt
D(ωj)
2
(24)
where ϵdata(ωj) is the experimental data evaluated at the desired frequency ωj and ϵt
D(ωj) is the
Drude permittivity where ωp and γD are kept as free parameters. Interpolation between points for
the experimental data is used. By choosing the spectral ROI, and minimizing the objective function
by varying ωp and γD, one finds the best fit for the Drude model. Figure 6 shows the relative error
of the Drude model fitted in the energy range of [2.2; 3.1] eV with respect to the experimental data.
Generally, good agreement with the fit and the experimental permittivity is seen in the ROI, where
as the agreement fails outside the fitted windows.
Generally in plasmonics, gold or silver are the preferred metals of choice for SERS [18]. It was found
that the frequency of the fundamental mode of the Au dimer was situated around an interband
transition of gold, which is not accounted for in the simple Drude model. Naturally, this leads to a
large deviation from the experimental data when fitting to a Drude model in the energy ROI. This
is not the case for the Ag dimer. It is reported that an Ag dimer leads to a slightly higher SERS
enhancement factor relative to Au, but comes at the price of faster oxidization of the dimer, at which
the SERS enhancement factor becomes lower than gold 1.
-40
-20
0
0
2
4
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
50
100
Figure 6: The real and imaginary part of the fitted permittivity ϵR,f, plotted together with the spline
interpolated experimental data from Johnson and Christy ϵR,d. The associated relative error
for the Drude model fit of the permittivity is shown for the real and the imaginary part of
the permittivity. The fitting window, being the range of frequencies used for the objective
function, is indicated by dashed lines. Fitted Drude parameters are ωp = 8.107 eV and
γD = 71.6 meV.
For the silver dimer simulations to be shown in the next subsection, we will restrict ourselves to gap
sizes ≥5 nm. Going to smaller gap sizes, one can argue that the permittivity model should include
non-local effects in order to yield realistic results.
The simulations also become computationally
intensive.
1Information provided by Silmeco, manufacturer of SERS substrates
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
Page 13 of 49
3.3
Ag dimer simulations
When simulating the quasi-normal modes, we use the MatLab toolbox called MNPBEM [19]. Although
a detailed description of the toolbox is way out of the scope for this project, meaning that we will
partially treat the toolbox as a ’black box’, a short description of how it works is suitable.
Any
perturbation of the permittivity in an otherwise free space gives rise to a scattered field. Say that
some incident field Ein(r) interacts with the permittivity perturbation, the total electric field away
from the permittivity perturbation at the point r′ would be described as Etot(r′) = Ein(r′)+Escat(r′).
The permittivity landscape solely determines the scattered field. It is possible to calculate scattered
field by means of fictitious surface charges and currents enclosing the surface. With the scattered field
at hand, one can set up a generalized eigenvalue problem
Σ(˜ω)˜x = 0,
(25)
satisfied when the eigenvalues of Σ(˜ω) vanishes, yielding the QNM frequencies. With the generalized
eigenvector ˜x it is possible to calculate the QNM field distribution from the surface charges and cur-
rents [20]. Numerical errors are introduced in the discretization of the surface charges and currents,
which will be studied later.
The discretization of the resonator for this work is done with triangles. The resonator investigated
using the MNPBEM toolbox is the two metallic (Ag) nanoparticles making up a dimer, featuring
two characteristic dimensions, namely the radius of the metallic nanosphere R and the gap size dgap
separating the two identical nanospheres. Using MNPBEM one has the freedom to choose any dimen-
sions for the dimer, we however restrict ourselves to R = 50 nm, whereas the gap size will be varied.
For discretizing the dimer with triangles, one chooses a number in a set of numbers available in the
MNPBEM toolbox, determining how many vertex points NV the discretized representation of the
dimer has. We will generally talk about the average triangle side length h, which for a large number
of vertex points will result in a lower average triangle side length, meaning better resolution. When
setting up the fictitious surface charges and currents, one needs an excitation object centered in the
center of the dimer, where a dipole oriented along some axis is chosen. Unless otherwise noted, the
dipole will be oriented along the dimer axis, since this is the fundamental mode with the strongest
interaction.
In order to set up the matrix Σ(˜ω) in Eq. (25), required to find the QNM frequencies, one needs to
define a material response form of a permittivity model, hence we modeled the permittivity of silver
in the previous subsection. Lastly, one needs to supply a guess for the QNM frequency. While the
QNM frequency can be calculated by means of other methods, like the volume integral equation (VIE)
method [21], it can also be approximated prior to simulating a QNM. Within the MNPBEM toolbox
one has access to the full scattered Green tensor, and can thereby calculate the Purcell curve. When
defining the QNMs, it was shown that they can be used to approximate the Green tensor, and in
particular how the single QNM could yield an approximate solution to the Purcell curve. Evidently,
the form of Eq. (22), assessing the FWHM around the Purcell curve peak yields a good estimation
of the imaginary part of the complex frequency, and the frequency at which the Purcell curve peaks
yields an estimate of the real part of the complex frequency.
Equipped with an appropriate guess for the complex quasi-normal mode frequency, the MNPBEM
simulation can be initiated. An output from the simulation is the simulated QNM frequency, and
the (not yet normalized) QNM field distribution, which is shown in Figure 7. The normalization of
the QNMs is crucial since this yields information about the generalized mode volume. For numerical
studies, another variant of the normalization presented earlier is used, based on integration around
the QNM frequency. This is easily implemented by means of a trapezoidal integration function in a
discretized circle with Ni sampling points around the QNM frequency.
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
Page 14 of 49
Figure 7: QNM field distribution shown for the Ag dimer with a gap size of dgap = 50 nm. The chosen
mesh has an average triangle length of h = 11.2 nm. The dimer axis is along the y-axis.
Purposely the derived values of the simulation shown in Figure 7 are not shown here, since they don’t
yield much information without assessing the error associated with them, which is the topic for the
next subsection.
We now want to show the Purcell curve found by using the fitted Drude model, and compare it to
the Purcell curve for experimental data. For the calculation of the full scattered Green tensor in
MNPBEM, one need not an analytical model for the permittivity like for the QNM simulations. We
can therefore compare the Purcell curve for the experimental data from Johnson & Christy with the
Purcell curve for the Drude model, shown in Figure 8. Within the region of interest slight deviations
are found, owed to the non-zero relative error shown in Figure 7. The deviance is the price one pays
for using the simple Drude model, necessary for the QNM simulations. Outside the fitting window,
the Drude model has no correspondence to the experimental data. This is not of big concern, since
we have no interest in investigating these modes.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 8: Purcell curves using experiemental data and the fitted Drude model, calculated from the
full scattered Green tensor. Simulation parameters: h = 11.2 nm, dgap = 50 nm.
To highlight the QNM expansion of the Green tensor, Figure 9 shows the single QNM approximating
the Purcell curve, both calculated using the Drude model. Two approximations are shown, one that
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
Page 15 of 49
uses a single QNM from the sum in Eq. 19, and one where a single QNM and its complex conjugate
is used to calculate the sum. The contribution from the conjugate frequency is generally small, but
the contribution is generally larger for QNMs with low resonance frequencies.
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 9: Single QNM approximating the Purcell curve from the full scattered Green tensor, both
calculated using the fitted Drude model.
One has to be careful with the interpretation of the simulated QNM frequency and he calculated
generalized mode volume from a single simulation, since the discretization of the resonator geometry
poses numerical errors on the results. A study of the numerical errors is essential to assess the validity
of the results of the MNPBEM simulation.
3.4
Convergence analysis and breakdown of the single QNM picture
Convergence of the MMPBEM simulations is crucial to gaining insight into the behaviour of the nu-
merical errors introduced by discretization of the grid. Understanding this error will allow us to make
the best educated guess of the derived parameters from the simulation. The simulations results we
wish to extract is the generalized mode volume and the complex QNM frequency, and the analysis
here will primarily be focused on the QNM frequency.
Generally one can perform two studies of associated with simulations, namely convergence and consis-
tency. Consistency is the analysis of whether or not a sequence of numbers {si}N
i=1 converges towards
a limit S. Here the sequence would be the QNM frequency extracted from simulations with identical
dimer dimensions, but with varying mesh resolution, meaning lowering of the average triangle side
length h, and S would be the true QNM frequency. Formally it can be written that the sequence
{si}N
i=1 is convergent with the limit S, if for any ϵ > 0, there exists a number N such that |S −sn| < ϵ
for all n > N. Within the framework of MNPBEM, we can however strictly not assess the limit S,
and can therefore not analyze the consistency. We can however analyze the convergence by use of
Cauchy’s criterion, which states that:
{si}N
i=1 is convergent if for any ϵ > 0 there exists a number
N such that |sn −sm| < ϵ for n, m > N.
With the expectation of the error associated with the QNM frequency to vanish in the limiting case
of h, we expect that
˜ω(h) = ˜ωtrue + E(h)
(26)
where it is expected that E(h) →0 when h →0. The functional form of E(h) is unknown as of yet,
but can be investigated without knowing ˜ωtrue, by investigating an expected trend. Here we highlight
polynomial convergence, since the functional form of the error turns out to be of polynomial form,
but the method applies to exponential convergence as well.
For polynomial convergence we expect the error to be of the form E(h) = E0hα where E0 and α are
unknown variables. By choosing some x < 1, defining a fixed scaling from one mesh size to the next,
we have
˜ω(h) −˜ω(xh) = E(h) −E(xh) = E0hα(1 −xα),
(27)
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
Page 16 of 49
which by applying the logarithm on both sides yields,
log(˜ω(h) −˜ω(xh)) = α log(h) + log(E0(1 −xα)),
(28)
meaning that the parameters α, E0 can be determined as a linear fit, given that the problem features
polynomial convergence.
It should be mentioned that for this analysis, it is not only sufficient to analyze a single simulation for
some mesh size, but several simulations with the same mesh size need to be considered. The situation
is illustrated in Figure 13. Initiating some simulation with an average triangle side h, the discretization
could look like what is shown in Figure 13. Due to the jagged edges of the discretization, the gap size
of the simulated dimer might effectively be different from the gap size that was desired. While this
effect is less prominent for finer mesh, it will present no matter what. The solution to this is doing
repeated rotation simulations, meaning that after one defines a mesh for the simulation, the metallic
nanospheres are simulated Nrot-times, where each subsequent simulation is rotated by some amount
of degrees (4◦rotation is usually used here) with respect to the previous mesh representation. With
such an approach, the jagged edges caused by the mesh are expected to cancel out when averaging
the simulation results, and furthermore, one gets an idea of the variance for the QNM frequency.
5
10
15
20
25
3800
3820
3840
3860
3880
3900
3920
3940
Figure 10: Example of a simulation sequence for dgap, with Nrot = 11 rotated mesh representations,
where each subsequent simulation is rotated 4◦.
Second order fit is used describe the
results from a poor mesh resolution. The fit is f(h) = −12.6 · 10−3h2 + 6.14h + 3775 with
R2 = 0.9985.
Figure 10 shows a typical simulation, where a polynomial fit indicates the trend of the simulation,
here shown for dgap = 15 nm. Similar results are shown in Appendix 7.2 for dgap = 22 nm, dgap = 10
nm and dgap = 5 nm. As expected, towards finer resolution of the mesh, little deviance from a rotated
mesh is seen, due to a better representation of the dimer. Using the fit to investigate the convergence 2,
Figure 11 shows the results by setting x = 3/4, quite clearly indicating that α ≈1, yielding E0 = 8.56.
Having analyzed the functional form of the error, one can argue that the best estimate for the QNM
frequency is found by letting h →0 in the fit, which for the dimer with dgap = 15 nm would yield a
Re(˜ω) = 3775 THz.
We will not present a convergence analysis on the assessment of a mode volume, since this involves
an extra discretization variable in terms of the complex integration, where one performs numerical
integration on a discretized circle with M-many corners in the complex frequency space around the
found QNM frequency. From the error analysis shown, the QNM frequency is dependent on the mesh
used and its orientation, meaning the center at which the numerical integration is performed will be
susceptible to the mesh aswell. The proper way to take the jagged edges into account is by performing
L-many integrations, each with a different M for the integration, for a given geometry mesh triangle
2Mathematically this is not super convincing, since one then does convergence analysis of a fit.
However, since
we only have certain values of h available from the MNPBEM software, one would only end up with 3 points for a
convergence analysis plot, of which the validity is equally questionable.
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
Page 17 of 49
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
0.9539 log10(h) + 0.2152
Figure 11: Cauchy convergence check for dgap = 15 nm with varying mesh size. For the analysis,
x = 3/4.
5
10
15
20
25
4
6
8
10
12
14
10-5
Figure 12: Mode volume for dgap = 15 nm with Nrot = 11 rotations for a given mesh. Integration
modulus is 94 THz and 35 points discretize the circle when integrating.
side h, that should be rotated Nrot. While this analysis is straightforward to do, it is cumbersome,
since the analysis presented for the QNM frequency for the rotated mesh takes 1-2 days to finish. We
therefore resort to picking a number M that we think is sufficiently high, and use this for any simu-
lation. Having fixed M = 35 with a modulus of 94.2 THz in the frequency plane, the effective mode
volume for dgap = 15 nm simulation with repeated rotated mesh is presented in Figure 12. Although
no error analysis reveals the functional form of the error for the effective mode volume, having a finer
mesh significantly reduces the variance.
3.5
Breakdown of the single QNM picture
As shown in Figure 9, it is possible to approximate the Green tensor, and therefore approximate the
Purcell curve, by use of a single QNM with great precision. This turns out to be invalid when reducing
the gap size of the dimer. This is best illustrated by once again comparing the scattered Green tensor
calculation with the single QNM approximation when calculating the Purcell curve. Figure 14 illus-
trates this for a dgap = 10 nm dimer simulation, where the single QNM approximation never attains
the same Purcell factor as the full scattered Green tensor calculation for the investigated mode. This
is further illustrated in Figure 15, where we conduct the investigation of the repeated mesh rotation
again, and report the Purcell factor found from the full scattered Green tensor and the single QNM
approximation. Although changing the mesh resolution and rotating the metallic nanoparticles, the
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
Page 18 of 49
discrepancy is still observed, meaning this seems to be a result of the model. For lower gap sizes the
discrepancy between the two methods is more pronounced, seen in Appendix 7.2, the Figure 32 .
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Figure 14: Comparison of Purcell curve using the scattered Green tensor and a single QNM to ap-
proximate the the Green tensor, using the Drude permittivity.
Figure 13: Schematic representation of the problem arising from the discretized dimer setup. The solid
black line represents the ideal dimer (not taking real-life surface roughness into account),
whereas the dark grey showcases the discretization. Light grey is the surrounding air. For
a chosen discretization, the discretized dimer will effective feature a different gap size ˜dgap
than the ideal dimer gap dgap.
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
Page 19 of 49
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
Figure 15: The Purcell factor calculated using the full scattered Green tensor, and using a single QNM
to approximate the Green tensor, as a function of mesh resolution having repeated 5 times.
The difference between the two Purcell factors is owed to higher-order modes being present, and one
can’t expect the single QNM to be the only mode contributing to the Purcell factor, explaining why
the single QNM approximation under-estimates the Purcell factor relative to the full scattered Green
tensor, which would account for all the modes.
This dimension-dependent effect is also observed experimentally [22], where the position of an electron
beam has an impact on the spectral response of the nanoparticle, and in particular, when close to the
nanoparticle, is able to excite higher order-modes.
This explanation is further investigated by calculating a quasi-normal mode map.
Sweeping the
complex frequency space, and computing the eigenvalue of the Σ-matrix shown in Eq. (25), the QNM
frequencies show up at places where the eigenvalue vanishes.
This is done in Figure 16, where a
mode featuring higher a decay rate is observed close to the same resonance frequency. Whether it is
primarily this mode, or QNMs lower in the frequency plane can’t be concluded from this plot.
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
-1.5
-1
-0.5
Figure 16: QNM map where dark blue spots indicates the vanishing eigenvalues of the Σ-matrix,
indicating a QNM.
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
Page 20 of 49
4
Cavity optomechanics
With the basics of the quasi-normal theory elaborated, this section serves the purpose of showing how
the optomechanical coupling of an intra-cavity field via a molecules differential polarizability arises,
by use of the Placzek model. We first show how the optomechanical coupling of a single vibrational
mode ν is coupled to the CMT equations by a Lagrangian approach. By use of the derived parameters
from the QNM simulations of the dimer, this allows us to derive the optomechanical coupling strength
of the system. Having the CMT equations with optomechanical coupling, we show analytical results
by means of perturbation theory, highlighting the dynamical change of the intra-cavity field and the
vibrational mode, known as dynamical backaction. The results are highlighted visually for the two
systems, one in a resolved-sideband regime, and the other in the Doppler regime. With the results
from perturbation theory, and scaling of the equations of motion for computational improvements
when simulating the system, simulations are shown, wherein the simulated dynamics are compared
with the derived analytical results.
A
Q
A(t)
Δω(t)
~
Figure 17: The depiction of the optomechanical coupling of the CMT equations with the cavity A and
the mass-weighted molecular displacement Qν. The cavity A would be the same cavity
shown in Figure 3.
4.1
Equations of motion and defining the optomechanical coupling
To address the equations of motion, one can derive them by means of two methods. One method, that
is presented in [23], is the formal Hamiltonian approach where the total Hamiltonian of the system
is established. With the Hamiltonian, one can form the quantum Langevin equations for the cavity
field operator and the molecular creation (and annihilation) operator. The expectation value of such
equations yields equations of motion for the intra-cavity photon number and the displacement of the
molecule. This approach is shown in Appendix 7.3.
The second approach to obtaining the equations of motion is a more classical approach, where we
start with the CMT equations shown in Eq 3. Recasting the CMT equations in the QNM formalism
[11], once again concerned with the symmetric cavity with only one input waveguide, one has
d
dtA(t) = −i˜ωcA(t) + √γcs1+(t)
(29)
where ˜ωc = ωc −iγc is the QNM frequency of A, and γc = τ −1 can be recognized from the preliminary
CMT showcase. The output waveguides are still defined as
s1−= −s1+ + √γcA(t),
(30a)
s2−= √γcA(t),
(30b)
We now consider the case of putting a molecule in the cavity at the position rm. Under the influence
of an electric field, the molecule induces a dipole moment p via the polarizability α. Expanding the
polarizability to first order in the displacement, one has
p(rm) = α(xν)E(rm) ≈
 
α0 + ∂α
∂xν

xν=0
xν
!
E(rm)
(31)
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
Page 21 of 49
where we, from the first order correction in xν of α(xν) gain access to the differential polarizability.
This is known as the Placzek model, in which the spontaneous Raman scattering is described as an
amplitude modulation of the electric field [24] 3. The induced dipole moment associated with the
differential polarizability is denoted dp. From here on, we adopt the notation from Roelli et al. by
using subscript ν to denote what is associated with the molecular vibrational mode of choice.
A small change of the permittivity ∆ϵ(r) causes a perturbation of the resonance frequency ∆˜ω, such
that the perturbed frequency becomes ˜ω′
c = ˜ωc + ∆˜ω, which within the QNM formalism is described
as,
∆˜ω = −˜ωc
2
Z
V
∆ϵ(r)˜fc(r) · ˜fc(r) dV,
(32)
where V is the volume of the considered perturbation, and it is assumed that the introduced change
of the permeability is assumed to be negligible.
By describing the change of the induced polarization dP, one can relate the induced dipole moment
caused by the differential polarizability to the permittivity perturbation,
dP(rm) = ϵ0∆ϵ(rm)E(rm) = dp(rm)
vp
⇒∆ϵ(rm) =
1
ϵ0vp
∂α
∂xν

xν=0
xν
(33)
where vp is the volume of the perturbation, containing the molecule. Inserting this change of permit-
tivity in the perturbation of the resonance frequency Eq (32), and assuming the electric QNM to be
constant over the integrated space, one finds
∆˜ω = −˜ωc
2ϵ0
∂α
∂xν
xν˜fc(rm) · ˜fc(rm) = −
˜ωc
2ϵ0ϵR(rm)
∂α
∂xν
xν
1
vc
(34)
where the normalization of the electric QNM is used in the last equality, invoking the generalized
mode volume vc (evaluated at rm).
Assuming the molecule to have no electronic transition resonant with the cavity, the coupling of the
molecular displacement is purely parametric, causing a dispersive shift of the resonance frequency,
completely analogous to the optomechanical coupling showcased in optomechanics Eq (1), meaning
that we have
Gν = −∂(∆˜ω)
∂xν
=
˜ωc
2ϵ0ϵR(rm)
∂α
∂xν
1
vc
(35)
Where the negative sign is introduced to account for the two different sign conventions of ω′
c and ω(x)
in Eq. (1). To connect the cavity optomechanics explored here with what was discussed in Section 2.1,
the moving mirror is in this case the vibrational coordinate of the molecule, and the dispersive shift
is characterized by the differential polarizability. Following traditional cavity optomechanics, using
the definition of the vacuum optomechanical coupling rate, we can express g0 for a given vibrational
mode ν as
g0,ν =
˜ωc
2ϵ0ϵR(rm)
∂α
∂Qν
1
vc
r
¯h
2Ων
(36)
where the mass-weighted cartesian coordinate Qν = √meff,νxν is introduced, as is conventional for
Raman spectroscopy [25]. The harmonic frequency is chosen to be a single Stokes frequency. The
differential polarizability is an intrinsic value of the considered vibrational mode, and is usually ex-
pressed in terms of the Raman activity Rν = (∂α/∂Qν)2 available either from DFT simulations or
inferred from experimental data. Each vibrational Stokes mode would have their own g0,ν.
It is worth mentioning that the vacuum optomechanical coupling as is presented in Eq.
(36) is
complex-valued, since the QNM frequency and the generalized mode volume is of complex value.
In the literature of optomechanics, the vacuum optomechanical coupling is a real-valued parameter.
Hence, whether the imaginary part of g0,ν features any physical insight is not investigated, and the
real part of Eq. (36) is simply used.
3A shortcoming of the Placzek model is the fact that it does not take the inherent quantum nature of Raman
scattering into account, hence Stokes and anti-Stokes processes has equal amplitude.
As discussed in Roelli et al.,
one can replace xν with the transition matrix element for either the Stokes or anti-Stokes process, and obtain the
temperature dependence of the processes, thus providing the well-known Stokes/anti-Stokes amplitude asymmetry
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
Page 22 of 49
Inserting the frequency perturbation in the CMT equation, again emphasizing it’s only the real part
we consider, we get the coupling to the vibrational mode xν by means of
d
dtA(t) = −i˜ωcA(t) + iGνxνA(t) + √γcs1+(t)
(37)
The question then arises; how do we model the molecular displacement? Naturally, the molecular dis-
placement should be a harmonic oscillator, but what is the driving term of such a harmonic oscillator?
Following ideas from [26], one can define the equations of motion from Lagrangian mechanics, where
it is found that once again, the differential polarizability is the coupling from the intra-cavity field to
the molecular displacement.
The total Lagrangian density of the system comprising of an electromagnetic field La, vibrational
degrees of freedom Lν and an interaction La−ν is written as
L = 1
2

ϵ0|E|2 −1
µ0
|B|2

|
{z
}
La
+ N
2

˙Q2
ν + Ω2
νQ2
ν

|
{z
}
Lν
+La−ν
(38)
where B is the magnetic induction field, and Lν resembles a collection of harmonic oscillators, where
N is the number density of harmonic oscillators. For the coupling La−ν, the time-averaged potential
for the dipole is U = −(1/2)p · E [7], hence the energy density becomes
La−ν = −N

−1
2p(r, t) · E(r, t)

= N
2 α|E(r, t)|2
(39)
where the average energy should be interpreted as the average energy over one period of the electrical
field oscillation. With the Lagrangian we can form the equations of motion for Qν using the Euler-
Lagrange equation
∂
∂t
 ∂L
∂˙Qν

−∂L
∂Qν
= 0
⇒
¨Qν + Γν ˙Qν + Ω2
νQν = 1
2
∂α
∂Qν
|E(r, t)|2
(40)
where we have phenomenologically added a damping rate Γν to the system, highlighted with the
blue color. To obtain the coupling of the intra-cavity field A(t) described by the CMT equations, we
approximate the electrical field E(r, t) by a single QNM,
E(r, t) ≈Ec(t)˜fc(r)
(41)
The time-averaged energy density of the cavity is defined by the electrical field by means of
⟨u(r, t)⟩= 1
2ϵ0ϵR(r)|E(r, t)|2
(42)
Resulting in an average energy,
⟨Uc(t)⟩= 1
2ϵ0|Ec(t)|2
Z
V
ϵR(r)˜fc(r) · ˜f ∗
c (r) dV = |A(t)|2
(43)
which in the limit of large Q, results in the integral being approximately unity due to the normalization,
meaning that one should set A(t) =
p
ϵ0/2 Ec(t). This means that we can now use Eq. (41), at the
position of the molecule, to find
|E(r, t)|2 ≈2
ϵ0
|A(t)|2˜f 2
c (rm) =
2
ϵ0ϵR(rm)vc(rm)|A(t)|2
(44)
Yielding now the equations of motion of the mass-weighted molecular displacement, with the cavity
field acting on the displacement as a driving force via the differential polarizability. Rewriting now
the differential polarizability as the optomechanical coupling rate Gν using Eq. (35), we thus end up
with the two coupled differential equations
d
dtA(t) = −i˜ωcA(t) + iG′
νQνA(t) + √γcs1+(t)
(45a)
¨Qν + Γν ˙Qν + Ω2
νQν = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|A(t)|2
(45b)
Where G′
ν = Gν/√mν = g0,ν
p
2Ων/¯h. For now, the interaction involves only a single molecule, as
depicted in Figure (17).
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
Page 23 of 49
4.2
Driving term for vibrational mode
A crucial point for the model shown in Eq. (45), especially becoming clear when simulating as is, is
the lack of driving term in the absence of an applied field. No matter the initial conditions of the
harmonic oscillator, the displacement will undergo an underdamped oscillation, tending to zero unless
a field is applied. The settling of the non-linear processes, and in particular the G′
νQνA(t)-term, will
never manifest. Naturally, this is a shortcoming of the model, due to having neglected any fluctuations
that might occur, which for the harmonic oscillator is the Brownian motion, sustaining a non-zero
value of the displacement. This is especially clear when deriving the quantum Langevin equations
first, and then defining the coupled CMT and harmonic oscillator evolution as expectation values of
the quantum Langevin equations (see Appendix 7.3).
To account for this, we add a harmonic driving term to the harmonic oscillator equation, Fd(t) =
F0 cos(Ωνt), which should be interpreted as the force acting upon the mechanical oscillator due to the
presence of a thermal bath. From basic theory of classical harmonic oscillators, driving on resonance,
the steady-state amplitude Qν,ini is determined by Qν,ini = F0/ΓνΩν. Determining Qν,ini using the
equipartition theorem, and assuming that the harmonic oscillator is in thermal equilibrium with this
bath, F0 becomes
1
2Q2
ν,iniΩ2
ν = kBT
⇒
F0 = Γν
p
2kBT
(46)
From which a higher temperature will result in a greater displacement of the mechanical oscillator.
4.3
Perturbation theory in Gν
Before highlighting the simulation results, analytical results yield a quantitative idea of the expected
behaviour of the simulations.
The two coupled equations shown in Eq (45) are inherently non-
linearly coupled, hence we resort to perturbation theory, expanding the solution of a in orders of
the optomechanical coupling, and to each order document the change in the mechanical oscillator. It
is useful for the calculations to transform the reference frame of a to the input frequency, identical
to what was done in Section 2.2. In doing so, the CMT equations coupled to the vibrational mode is
written as,
˙a = i (∆+ G′
νQν) a −γca + √γcs1+(t)
(47a)
¨Qν + Γν ˙Qν + Ω2
νQν = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a(t)|2 + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(47b)
For the sake of simplicity, and also since this is what will be done in the simulations, we consider an
infinitely broad temporal width of the envelope, and thus have s1+(t) = √P0 where P0 is the input
launch power.
For no optomechanical coupling of the intra-cavity field, i.e. no perturbation of the complex resonance
frequency ˜ω, the two equations decouple, and Eq. 47a forms a linear ODE
˙a0 = i∆a0 −γca0 +
p
γcP0
(48)
where we deliberately denote the field with no optomechanical coupling a0. The solution takes the
form,
a0 = e−(γc−i∆)t
Z
e(γc−i∆)tp
γcP0dt + C

(49)
=
√γcP0
γc −i∆+ Ce−(γc−i∆)t
(50)
where C is determined by initial conditions for the cavity field. In the same manner, the influence of
the field a0 provides a solution for Qν(t) denoted Qν,0. Since a0 is constant in time, the contribution
from a0 provides a constant offset for the harmonic oscillator.
Under the influence of a0, the harmonic oscillator takes the form of
¨Qν,0 + Γν ˙Qν,0 + Ω2
νQν,0 = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a0|2 + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(51)
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
Page 24 of 49
We define the initial conditions Qν(0) = ˙Qν(t) = 0, i.e. the displacement is at rest initially. For the
steady state (particular) solution, the solution takes on the form of Qν,0(t) = a cos(Ωνt)+b sin(Ωνt)+c.
Inserting this form, we find
−sin(Ωνt)aΩνΓν + cos(Ωνt)bΩνΓν + Ω2
νc = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a0|2 + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(52)
from which it is identified that a = 0, b = F0/(ΩνΓν) and c = 2G′
ν|a0|2/(ω0Ω2
ν), meaning that Qν,0(t)
takes the form
Qν,0(t) =
F0
ΩνΓν
sin(Ωνt) + 2G′
ν|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
(53)
Now concerning the optomechanical coupling, with molecular vibrations of the form Qν,0(t), the phase
of the cavity is altered harmonically. Thus, to first order, the cavity field is altered by δa, and we can
let the entire field be a ≈a0 + δa. Inserting this in the CMT equations, we have
˙a = −i(˜ω −G′
νQν,0(t))(a + δa) + iωL(a + δa) +
p
γcP0
(54)
which after subtraction of Eq. (48) yields an ODE for δa
δ ˙a = −i˜ωδa + iG′
νQν,0(t)a0 + iG′
νQν,0(t)δa + iωLδa
(55)
By setting p(t) = γc −i(∆+ G′
νQν,0(t)) and q(t) = iG′
νQν,0(t)a0, the solution of δa takes the form
δa = e−P (t)
Z
eP (t)q(t) dt + C

with P(t) =
Z
p(t) dt
(56)
where P(t) is found as
P(t) =
Z
γc −i
 
∆+ 2G′
ν
2|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
+ G′
νF0
ΩνΓν
sin(Ωνt)
!
dt
= (γc −i∆1)t + iG′
νF0
Ω2νΓν
cos(Ωνt)
As evident from the form of P(t), the phase of the field δa is varying harmonically in time. The
solution of δa is found by recasting the field in a series of Bessel functions, of which the mathematical
details are shown in the Appendix 7.4. The input argument for the Bessel functions turns out to take
the form of
β = 2g0,ν
Ων
r
kBT
¯hΩν
<< 1,
(57)
satisfied for Ων >> g0,ν and kBT << ¯hΩν since kBT ≈25 meV at room temperature. Using this,
one can approximate the particular solution of the field δa, denoted as δap(t), with good accuracy as
δap(t) ≈2G′
ν
2|a0|2a0
˜ωcΩ2ν
i
γc −i∆1
+ G′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν

eiΩνt
γc −i(∆1 −Ων) −
e−iΩνt
γc −i(∆1 + Ων)

,
(58)
Where evidently two field components arise, one at ∆1 = Ων and another at ∆1 = −Ων, respectively
called the anti-Stokes (AS) and the Stokes (S) field. The modified detuning is found as ∆1 = ∆+
(2G′
ν
2|a0|2)/(˜ωcΩ2
ν), and effectively caused due to the intra-cavity field a0 acting on the mechanical
oscillator. Generally one can set ∆1 ≈∆, except for cases where the intra-cavity field is strong.
With this field, we wish to highlight its impact on the molecular dynamics.
Denoting the cavity
field-dependent driving term for the harmonic oscillator Fm(t), we can expand this to first order in
δa
Fm(t) = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a(t)|2 ≈2G′
ν
˜ωc

|a0|2 + 2Re (a∗
0δa(t))

= ¯Fm + δFm(t)
(59)
Seeking to express δFm(t) in terms of an in-phase and quadrature components with respect the the
motion of the molecular displacement (known as the mechanical picture of the dynamical backaction),
we find
δFm(t) = δFQ cos(Ωνt) + δFI sin(Ωνt)
(60)
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
Page 25 of 49
where
δFQ = 2G′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

γc
γ2c + (∆1 −Ων)2 −
γc
γ2c + (∆1 + Ων)2

(61a)
δFI = 2G′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

(Ων −∆1)
γ2c + (∆1 −Ων)2 −
(Ων + ∆1)
γ2c + (∆1 + Ων)2

(61b)
where we have neglected the first term of Eq. (58), since this only gives rise to further constant
displacement of Qν, which is small compared to
¯
Fm. This can be seen, alongside the derivation of
δFQ and δFI, in Appendix 7.5. It is worth mentioning that for any calculation of the optomechanical
system, we will only use the real part of the cavity frequency in equations like Eq. (59) and Eq. (61).
The modification of the molecular dynamics is seen by insertion of (59) in (47b), and letting Qν ≈
Qν,0 + δQν
¨Qν,0 + δ ¨Qν + Γν

˙Qν,0 + δ ˙Qν

+Ω2
ν (Qν,0 + δQν) ≈...
(62a)
2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a0|2 + δFQ cos(Ωνt) + δFI sin(Ωνt) + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(62b)
which after subtraction of Eq. (51) yields a differential equation for δQν
δ ¨Qν + Γνδ ˙Qν + Ω2
νδQν = δFI sin(Ωνt) + δFQ cos(Ων))
(63)
whoms particular solution is
δQν(t) = −δFI
ΩνΓν
cos(Ωνt) + δFQ
ΩνΓν
sin(Ωνt)
(64)
Finally yielding an expression of the displacement of the vibrational mode ν as
Qν(t) ≈
 F0
ΩνΓν
+ δFQ
ΩνΓν

sin(Ωνt) −δFI
ΩνΓν
cos(Ωνt) + 2G′
ν|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
,
(65)
valid for β << 1, where the contributing driving terms of Qν are not too large. Evidently, one finds
that for a blue-detuned laser with ∆1 ≈∆= Ων while being in the sideband resolved regime, we
have δFQ > 0 and δFI = 0, meaning amplification of the vibrational mode. The amplification of
the vibrational mode couples back to the cavity field, producing a stronger phase modulation. The
dynamical backaction therefore further amplifies the Raman signal. If the requirement of β << 1
was not met, a parametric instability occurs and the system enters a chaotic regime, where for a
blue-detuned input laser ∆≈Ων one enters a regime where the vibrational mode effectively has gain,
going into a mode of ”mechanical lasing”.
If one considers the opposite case of a red-detuned laser ∆≈−Ων, still being in the sideband resolved
regime, one finds that δFQ < 0 and δFI = 0, meaning a reduction of the amplitude of the vibrational
modes. This is known as resolved-sideband cooling, and is used to cool vibrational modes towards the
ground state [27].
The quadrature and in-phase driving terms heavily determine the dynamical change of the vibrational
mode. The Doppler-regime and the resolved-sideband regime are therefore visualized in Figure 18,
where the parameters of the two systems are shown in Table 1. System 1 is clearly in the resolved-
sideband regime and feature two distinct maxima (minima) for ∆= Ων (∆= −Ων). Evidently, due
to the strong intra-cavity field at zero detuning compared to detuning at the Stokes frequency, one
also obtains contributions around zero detuning. For the Doppler regime that is system 2, which for
visualisation purposes is relatively close to being in the resolved-sideband regime, the quadrature and
in-phase driving components feature broad profiles, and shifts the maxima and minima towards greater
values of the detuning, since the broad cavity profile experiences contributions from both sidebands at
∆= ±Ων. For the calculation, the contribution from the zeroth-order field component of the cavity
field is taken into account of the detuning, meaning that ∆1 > ∆. For larger optomechanical coupling
strengths, this would lead to a clear asymmetry of system 1 around ∆= 0.
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
Page 26 of 49
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
10-3
Figure 18: Visualization of δFI and δFQ for system 1 and system 2 as a function of the detuning,
normalized to the driving force F0 calculated at T = 300 K. Parameters for system 1 and
system 2 are shown in Table 1, and a launch power of P0 = 100 mW is chosen.
g0,ν [GHz]
2Ων/κ
ωc [THz]
Q
β
System 1:
5.0
20.0
1.2 · 103
63.9
2.4 · 10−5
System 2:
18.0
0.7
1.2 · 103
2.2
8.8 · 10−5
Table 1: Parameters for the two systems. The vibrational mode chosen for both the systems is the
Stokes mode for thiophenol with a Stokes frequency Ων = 187.8 THz and a damping rate
Γν = 376.9 GHz yielding a mechanical quality factor of Qm = 500. g0,ν is chosen only for
visualization purposes, and does not resemble any specific realistic values.
The dynamical change of the vibrational mode is usually in literature characterized as an effective
change of the vibrational mode’s damping rate. Say that we add the in-phase and quadrature com-
ponent to the harmonic oscillator only under the influence of a0, then we have
¨Qν,0(t) = −Γν ˙Qν,0(t) −Ω2
νQν,0(t) + δFQ cos(Ωνt) + δFI sin(Ωνt)
(66a)
= −cos(Ωνt) [F0 −δFQ] −sin(Ωνt)
F0Ων
Γν
−δFI

+ 2Gν|a0|2
˜ωc
(66b)
= −˙Qν,0

Γν −δFQΓν
F0

|
{z
}
Γeff
−Qν,0

Ω2
ν −ΩνΓνδFI
F0

|
{z
}
Ω2s
−2G′
ν|a0|2ΓνδFI
˜ωF0Ων
(66c)
where we have defined the effective damping rate Γeff = Γν −δFQΓν/F0, the shifted natural frequency
Ωs =
p
Ω2ν −ΩνΓνδFI/F0 and the last term can be neglected, since it is a constant offset for the
harmonic oscillator and does not contribute to the dynamics. While the shift of the natural frequency
is interesting in its own regard, we are primarily interested in the change of the damping rate. An
important figure of merit for the backaction damping rate is the cooperativity, here defined as
C = |δFQΓν/F0|
Γν
(67)
and is a measure of how strong the quadrature component is relative to the intrinsic damping rate of
the vibrational. In the case of C > 1 for a blue-detuned input laser, one effectively has gain of the
vibrational mode, leading to parametric instability. We will primarily consider the case of 0 < C < 1,
since this happens to be the regime of the available optomechanical rates for the nanocavity and the
dimer.
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
Page 27 of 49
4.4
Optomechanical simulations using CMT equations
Due to the various orders of magnitude of the parameters entering the CMT equations with optome-
chanical coupling shown in Eq. (47), simulations becomes computationally intensive. For the purpose
of minimizing numerical errors associated with machine precision, alongside improving simulation
times, we rescale the parameters of the coupled equations.
Rewriting the second order differen-
tial equation for the harmonic oscillator as two coupled first order differential equations by defining
yν = (d/dt)Qν, and introducing the following scalings t = kt˜t, Qν = kQ ˜Qν, yν = ky˜yν, a = ka˜a,
s = ks˜s and F0 = kd ˜F0, we have
d˜a
d˜t = kt (i∆−γc) ˜a + kt
ka
√γcks˜s1+(t) + iktkQG′
ν ˜Qν˜a
(68a)
d ˜Qν
d˜t
= ktky
kQ
˜yν
(68b)
d˜yν
d˜t = −ktΓν ˜yν −kQkt
ky
Ω2
ν ˜Qν + k2
akt
ky
2G′
ν
˜ωc
|˜a|2 + kdkt
ky
˜F0 cos
 Ωνkt˜t

(68c)
Characterizing a typical timescale of the system, we let kt = Ω−1
ν , since we from the previous section
expect dynamical backaction effects around ∆/Ων ≈±1 for the sideband-resolved regime. Casting Eq.
(68b) in its simplest form is done by letting kQ = ktky = Ω−1
ν ky. To reduce the expression of the last
term in Eq. (68a), we let kQ = (ktG′
ν)−1 =
1
g0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2 which naturally makes ky =
Ων
g0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2.
We set ka =
Ων
g0,ν
p
¯h˜ωc/2 to scale the prefactors for the cavity field driving force, which then results
in ks =
Ω2
ν
g0,ν
p
¯h˜ωc/(2γc). Lastly, we set kd =
Ω2
ν
g0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2. With such prefactors, the equations of
motion for the scaled variables becomes
d˜a
d˜t = ˜a
Ων
h
i(∆+ Ων ˜Qν) −γc
i
+ ˜s1+
(69a)
d ˜Qν
d˜t
= ˜yν
(69b)
d˜yν
d˜t = −Γν
Ων
˜y −˜Qν + |˜a|2 + ˜F0 cos
 ˜t

(69c)
Which, seen from a simulation point of view compared to Eq. (47), is less computationally extensive
to simulate, and more robust in regards of machine precision.
An important limitation of the equations shown in Eq. (69) is caused by the non-linear coupling of
frequencies. If one were to initiate an input envelope function as a Gaussian envelope with a finite
temporal width, as was done for the initial showcase of the CMT equations in Section 2.2, the envelope
has a finite width in Fourier domain. If such a pulse is initiated with the optomechanical coupling,
frequency mixing within the envelope occurs, and results gain little to no insight. We therefore only
consider the limit of an infinitely broad envelope function, meaning no broadening in Fourier domain,
and s1+(t) (within the reference frame of ωL) is simply √P0.
Initiating the vibrational modes displacement from rest, we let the harmonic oscillators’ steady-state
manifest, before applying the input driving field. The driving laser is applied slowly in time as a linear
function in s1+(t), meaning quadratic in power, such that the vibrational mode can adiabatically follow
the constant displacement caused by the intra-cavity photons. Using an envelope with an infinitely
broad temporal width comes at the cost of the numerical Fourier transform not being well defined,
since the signal does not tend to zero when t →∞. All results for the optomechanical simulations
therefore stay in time domain.
For visualization purposes of the optomechanical simulations, we use the parameters for system 1
shown in Table 1, where we le to indicate the behaviour of the simulation,. The only input parameters
for the simulation is the detuning, input launch power P0 (and at what time this is applied), and the
driving term amplitude F0 related to the temperature, where the residual parameters entering are
solely determined by the system parameters of consideration. For all simulations shown, F0 will be
determined for T = 300 K.
A typical optomechanical simulation is shown in Figure 20, where the output waveguide power and
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
Page 28 of 49
10-3
10-2
10-1
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
10-25
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Figure 19: Comparison of amplitude for the vibrational mode found by perturbation theory and the
simulation. The red curve corresponding to the right axis shows the cooperativity. Param-
eters chosen correspond to system 1, with g0,ν = 20 GHz.
the mass-weighted displacement Qν is shown in the same time series. For the output power |s2−(t)|2
shown in Figure 20a the constant upwards shift corresponds to the field cavity field component a0 due
to being in the reference frame of ωL, and is naturally zero before applying the input power. The inset
shows the effect of the optomechanical coupling, where the small oscillations in the power output is
caused by δap(t). For the mass-weighted displacement Qν(t) the displacement is initially started at
rest, where a driving force drives it towards a steady state. With the input field applied, a constant
displacement due to the intra-cavity field is seen. As evident from the values of the quadrature driving
component for system 1, shown in Figure 18, the dynamical change of the vibrational mode is small,
in agreement with the shown simulation.
To investigate how the first order perturbation results compare to the simulation which solve the
entire problem, one can vary the input power and assess the amplitude of the molecular displacement,
and compare that with the first order perturbation results. This is done in Figure 19. Not only
does this serve as an important validity check for low powers, it serves as a good estimate of the
molecular displacement. Furthermore, it always underestimates the molecular displacement, which is
to be expected since the analytical results is based on a single term of an infinite sum in Eq. (98).
The quadrature and in-phase driving components are not only important for the molecular dynamics,
but naturally also yields information of the expected changes in the power of the output waveguide.
Since we have that |s2−(t)|2 = γc|a(t)|2, we can to first order in G′
ν express the field as |a(t)|2 ≈
|a0|2 + 2Re(δa∗
pa0), where the second term is already found in terms of the δFm(t), meaning that the
power of the output waveguide will take the form of
|s2−(t)|2 ≈γc

|a0|2 + ˜ωc
2G′ν
[δFQ cos(Ωνt) + δFI sin(Ωνt)]

,
(70)
where evidently at ∆≈Ων the in-phase driving term goes to zero, and the output power oscillates as
a cosine with the frequency Ων, which is also observed in Figure 20.
Although we primarily concern ourselves with the case of a blue-detuned input laser since this further
amplifies the Stokes signal, the reverse case can now easily be investigated, by means of for a red-
detuning the input laser. In Figure 21 this case is shown, where clearly the amplitude of the molecular
displacement is suppressed after applying the input laser, indicating optomechanical cooling.
In Figure 22 the parametric instability is highlighted for the blue-detuned input laser in the case of
a strong optomechanical coupling. It should be noted that we are not concerned about entering this
regime, since the parameters required to be in this regime can be deemed ’out of reach’ with the
current mode volumes.
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
Page 29 of 49
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10-3
63
63.5
64
64.5
9.87
9.88
9.89
9.9
9.91
9.92
10-4
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
10-25
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
(b)
Figure 20: Figure a) the power output |s2−(t)|2 in the reference frame of ωL under the influence of
optomechanical coupling to Qν in Figure b). The inset of Figure a) shows oscillations at
the Stokes frequency Ων. For Figure b), dynamics is shown before and after an applied
input power, shown as the red curve belonging to the right y-axis. Parameters chosen is
system 1 in Table 1. Dashed black lines of Figure b) show the first order perturbation
results.
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
Page 30 of 49
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
10-25
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Figure 21: Example of optomechanical cooling, by negative detuning of the input laser, where the
molecular vibration is suppressed in comparison to the molecular vibration prior to the
applied field. Parameters taken from system 1 Table 1, but with g0,ν = 40 GHz.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
10-21
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Figure 22: Example of parametric instability. Parameters taken from system 1 Table 1, but with
g0,ν = 90 GHz. Notice the change of the number for Qν compared to the other simulations
shown.
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
Page 31 of 49
5
Comparison of dielectric nano-cavity and plasmonics
Having presented the QNM simulations for the dimer, with a documented error analysis, one is
now able to assess a QNM frequency and effective mode volume for the dgap = 5 silver dimer that
can be used for comparison of a dielectric nano-cavity. Albeit we have not calculated the effective
mode volume nor the complex QNM frequency for a dielectric nano-cavity ourselves, the framework
is established, and principally one could import the desired nano-cavity geometry and calculate the
quasi-normal modes.
For the desired nano-cavity, the initial idea was to use the dielectric nano-cavity featuring a mode
volume below the diffraction limit fabricated at DTU Fotonik [6]. However, this nano-cavity is a
dielectric-mode cavity, meaning that the hotspot of the cavity mode is situated inside a dielectric,
and molecules would have to couple to the evanescent field of the cavity, drastically reducing the
optomechanical coupling. Instead, we base the dielectric nano-cavity on ideas presented by Choi et
al. [5], which feature an air-mode cavity with two disconnected tips embedded in a photonic crystal
(PhC) structure. For the case of having the tips separated by a gap of 1 nm, an effective mode volume
of Veff = 2.61 · 10−4 µm3 is reported. While the reported quality factor is in the order of 106, being
largely based on the PhC of which the cavity is embedded, such quality factors are not favorable when
detuning the input laser by the Stokes frequency of the investigated molecule, due to the vanishing
intra-cavity field available for such detunings. By designing the surrounding PhC differently, more
appropriate quality factors of Q = 400 can be considered, indeed more favorable for an optomechanical
application we seek to describe, while maintaining the low effective mode volume.
With these considerations, Table 2 highlights the parameters for the two systems we seek to compare.
g0,ν [MHz]
2Ων/κ
ωc [THz]
Q
Ag dimer
2.09 · 103
0.29
3.51 · 103
2.69
Nano-cavity
35.50
560.24
2.01 · 102
400
Table 2: Parameters for investigated realistic systems. The vibrational mode chosen for both systems
is the Stokes mode for thiophenol with Ων = 187.8 THz, Γν = 376.9 GHz, yielding a me-
chanical quality factor of Qm = 500 and a Raman activity of Rν = 31.6 ˚A4 amu−1. For
simplicity we have set ϵR = 1 for the calculation of g0,ν.
As indicative from the optomechanical coupling strengths, the values shown in Table 2 are, espe-
cially for the system in the resolved-sideband regime, different from the parameters shown in Table
1, meaning that simulations done in a similar manner as shown in Section 4 will have very small op-
tomechanical effects. We, therefore, shift the focus from coupling to a single molecule, to an ensemble
of N identical molecules.
5.1
N-oscillator model
The extension from coupling to a single molecule to now N identical molecules is straightforward.
Given an optomechanical coupling of the intra-cavity field to N-many vibrational modes, we must
have that iG′
νQνa →ia PN
j=1 G′
ν,jQν,j in the CMT equation for the cavity field, which for identical
coupling rates yields iaNG′
νQν. We assume the intra-cavity field to be constant over the region at
which we consider the molecules, which will be reflected in the choice of N.
The equations of motion for coupling to N molecules thus takes on the form,
˙a = i (∆+ NG′
νQν) a −γca + √γcs1+(t)
(71a)
¨Qν,1 + Γν ˙Qν,1 + Ω2
νQν,1 = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a(t)|2 + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(71b)
...
(71c)
¨Qν,N + Γν ˙Qν,N + Ω2
νQν,N = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
|a(t)|2 + F0 cos(Ωνt)
(71d)
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
Page 32 of 49
Where it is assumed that the interaction between the molecules (i.e. Coulomb forces) are negligible.
A visual interpretation of the equation of motion is shown in Figure 23.
Comparing the above model to the model shown in Eq. (47), it is evident that the analytical results
derived using perturbation analysis for a single molecule will differ from what was derived in Section
4.3. The method for deriving the analytical results is however identical, and will for brevity not be
shown again. Doing the calculation for the model with N molecules and approximating the field
as a(t) ≈a0 + δa(N)(t), the field a0 is unaltered. For the calculation of δap(t), one can derive a
similar factor to β shown in (57), here denoted as β′, where it turns out that β′ = Nβ. For the
considered optomechanical coupling strength, we still have β′ << 1, meaning that we can use similar
approximations as done for the derivation of Eq. (58). Using this, one finds the expression for δa(N)
to be
δa(N)(t) = 2NG′
ν
2|a0|2a0
Ω2ν ˜ωc
i
γc −i∆N
+ NG′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν

eiΩνt
γc −i(∆N −Ων) +
e−iΩνt
γc −i(∆N + Ων)

(72)
Expressing the the quadrature and in-phase driving component acting on the individual molecule as
δF (N)
m
= δF (N)
Q
cos(Ωνt) + δF (N)
I
sin(Ωνt), we have
δF (N)
Q
= 2NG′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

γc
γ2c + (∆N −Ων)2 −
γc
γ2c + (∆N + Ων)2

(73a)
δF (N)
I
= 2NG′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

(Ων −∆N)
γ2c + (∆N −Ων)2 −
(Ων + ∆N)
γ2c + (∆N + Ων)2

(73b)
meaning that due to the presence of N-molecule, each molecule will effectively experience an effective
optomechanical rate of
√
NG′
ν relative to the singl- molecule investigation. The modified detuning,
the N-molecule equivalent of ∆1, takes the form of ∆N = 2NG′
ν
2|a0|2/(Ω2
ν ˜ωc).
A
Q
Q
Q
A(t)
A(t)
~
A(t)
~
~
Figure 23: Cavity field coupling to multiple vibrational modes. The vibrational modes only couple to
the cavity field, and hence does not couple to each other.
5.2
Number of molecules available
An essential concept of the simulation results to be shown, is the number of molecules available in
the cavity. A more rigorous treatment of the model proposed in Eq. (71) would take each molecules
position into account, and each molecule would experience a different value of the intra-cavity field.
For simplicity we propose an assessment of a region where the intra-cavity field is constant relative to
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
Page 33 of 49
the hotspot of the cavity, which is done using the QNM field distribution calculated for the Ag dimer
simulations.
From the QNM field distribution, we assess an area of the field profile transverse to the dimer axis,
of which the radius rM of that circle is found at the point at which the field has decayed to 1/
√
2
of the center-field value, shown in Appendix, Figure 33. The radius turns out to be rM ≈14 nm.
One could then imagine a monolayer of molecules situated in the hot spot of the dimer, realized
by self assembled monolayers covering the nanoparticles, or the nanoparticles being situated close to
molecules functionalized on a dielectric, all contributing to the Raman interaction. Having assessed
the area Afield = πr2
M, one needs to know how many molecules can be packed onto this area. We
assess the radius of thiophenol by approximating the volume taken up by the N-molecules as
Vm = N 4
3πr3
ν =
NAρVm
M
 4
3πr3
ν ⇒rν =

3M
4πNAρ
1/3
(74)
where NA is Avogadro’s number, and M and ρ is the molar mass and the density of Thiophe-
nol.
Assuming a sheet of Thiophenol, one molecule thick, we find the number of molecules as
N = πr2
M/(πr2
ν) = 1025 by inserting that for Thiophenol that ρ = 1.08 g/cm3 and M = 110.19
g/mol. The validity of this number is enforced by the fact that Roelli et al. estimates 750 molecules
contributing to the plasmon-enhanced Raman signal when considering dimers with smaller dimen-
sions.
For comparison purposes, we will use the same number of molecules for the simulations of the Ag
dimer and the dielectric nanocavity.
With a number of molecules available, we can calculate the in-phase and quadrature driving term, in
order to highlight the expected dynamics. These are shown in Appendix, Figure 34 and Figure 35.
5.3
Optomechanical simulation results
For the optomechanical simulations with N molecules, re-scaling of the equations of motions by
introducing scaled variables is once again favourable. The process of re-scaling is once again similar to
what was shown in Section 4, and the naming of the variables will follow what was done for the single
vibrational mode previously. By choosing the following constant: kt = Ω−1
ν , kQ =
1
Ng0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2, ky =
Ων
Ng0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2, ka =
Ων
g0,ν
p
¯h˜ωc/2N, ks =
Ω2
ν
g0,ν
p
¯h˜ωc/(2Nγc) and kd =
Ω2
ν
Ng0,ν
p
¯hΩν/2 the equations of
motion reduce to
d˜a
d˜t = ˜a
Ων
h
i(∆+ Ων ˜Qν) −γc
i
+ ˜s1+
(75a)
d ˜Qν,1
d˜t
= ˜yν,1
(75b)
d˜yν,1
d˜t
= −Γν
Ων
˜yν,1 −˜Qν,1 + |˜a|2 + ˜F0 cos
 ˜t

(75c)
...
(75d)
d ˜Qν,N
d˜t
= ˜yν,N
(75e)
d˜yν,N
d˜t
= −Γν
Ων
˜yν,N −˜Qν,N + |˜a|2 + ˜F0 cos
 ˜t

(75f)
where we naturally only simulate one of the harmonic oscillators, since they exhibit identical dynamics.
To highlight the dynamics of the system parameters shown in Table 2, we sweep both the detuning
and the input launch power P0, and assess the amplitude of the oscillatory power as indicated by
Eq. (70), since this yields the Raman signal. This is shown in Figure 24 for the nano-cavity and in
Figure 25 for the Ag dimer. It is very easy to conclude from the two figures, since the nano-cavity
features a clear signature when the detuning coincides with the Stokes frequency, whereas the dimer
appears to feature a maximum (for a given launch power) around ∆≈4Ων. This is in agreement with
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
Page 34 of 49
the quadrature driving component for the dimer, shown in Appendix Figure 34. For a given launch
power, the dimer yields higher Raman signal power compared to the nano-cavity. Comparing the
dimer and the nano-cavity therefore yields a trade-off between selectivity, i.e the ability to tell where
the Stokes frequency is situated, and the signal power. This trade-off can be attributed to two key
points. As indicated by Table 2, the optomechanical coupling for the silver dimer is simply higher,
hence a stronger coupling from the molecule to the intra-cavity field is expected. The second reason
is owed to the off-resonance driving of the system. For the dimer, the low quality factor means that
one has a stronger intra-cavity field available at the Stokes frequency, whereas the nanocavity with a
larger Q, features a weaker intra-cavity field when driven off-resonance.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
101
102
103
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
Figure 24: Sweep of input power and detuning for the dielectric nanocavity, with the colorbar showing
the amplitude of the oscillatory part of |s2−(t)|2 in mW.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
101
102
10-3
10-2
10-1
Figure 25: Sweep of input power and detuning for 5 nm gap size dimer with the colorbar showing the
amplitude of the oscillatory part of |s2−(t)|2 in mW.
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
Page 35 of 49
5.4
Simulations of multiple Stokes modes
From the setup of the simulation shown in the previous sub-section, one might argue that in the
context of detecting single molecules the dimer would be the best platform for SERS, since this
yields the highest output power. This is in agreement with literature [28] [29]. Where the nano-cavity
seems to provide interesting application is in the context of differentiating multiple Stokes frequencies.
An application could be the one showcased in Figure 26, where the nano-cavity is implemented in
some pipe in which a gaseous composition is flowing from left to right. This could correspond to
a similar scenario as highlighted in [30], where the monitoring of gaseous composition around fresh
fruit is investigated, only when using the nano-cavity here, the size of this system could be drastically
reduced and therefore open new possibilities.
The operation of the setup would be sweeping of the input laser frequency around the cavity resonance,
such that one sweeps the detuning of the cavity. This could in principle be done entirely on a single
structure, where the input laser is transmitted using a photonic crystal waveguide coupling to the
nano-cavity, which then couples the output signal onto another photonic crystal waveguide.
A
Figure 26: Thought experiment showcasing an application of a nanocavity as a SERS platform for
monitoring a gaseous composition.
To test such a scenario, we choose the Stokes frequencies presented in Table 3. Although a 2D sweep
as was presented for thiophenol in the previous subsection is possible, here we choose P0 = 100 mW
as the input waveguide launch power, and sweep only the detuning. Although it is possible to assess
a Raman activity for all the molecules constituting the gaseous composition, we let all the vibrational
modes feature the same Raman activity Rν as the one we used for thiophenol in Table 2.
Vibrational mode frequency
Ων,1 (CO2)
Ων,2 (CO2)
Ων,3 (O2)
Ων,4 (CO)
Ων,5 (N2)
Stokes frequency [THz]
242.2
261.6
293.1
403.4
439.4
Table 3: Stokes frequencies investigated. The same dissipation rate of Γν = 376.9 GHz is used for all
the molecules.
For simplicity, the simulations are run in parallel, such that any mixing of the vibrational frequencies
is inhibited. The sequential simulations are shown in Figure 27 where the red curve is the sum of all
the frequencies. As also seen earlier, the output power is weak, here about 1 µW, but clear distinction
of the peaks is seen. Had the same analysis been done using the dimer, following results shown in
Figure 25, no differentiation of the individual Stokes modes would be possible.
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
Page 36 of 49
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
1
2
10-4
CO
N2
CO2
CO2
O2
Figure 27: Amplitude of oscillatory output power for multiple Stokes frequencies as a function of
detuning (normalized to the largest Stokes frequency). Input launch power P0 = 100 mW.
An important question is then if this is possible to detect in a real life scenario. While the output
signal is low compared to the dimer, detection of signals around ≈µW is definitely possible since the
slope of the output power is highly sensitive to the detuning. If one needs can deal with such optical
powers, visualizing clear distinct vibrational modes should be possible.
An interesting prospect of the simulation shown in Figure 27 is the future possibilities, enabled by
larger optomechanical coupling rates. Purposely the two Stokes frequencies of CO2 are chosen for the
analysis, due to being relatively close to each other in frequency. Even with the distinction of the
two CO2 peaks being possible by the use of the dielectric nano-cavity, one might however envision
a scenario where two peaks, even when increasing the Q of the cavity, can’t be distinguished. Here,
one can argue that a high cavity Q with a strong optomechanical coupling would be able to resolve
this, since a strong optomechanical coupling would narrow the mechanical linewidth as shown earlier,
allowing for clear distinction. While this in principle is true, and the analysis presented here certainly
indicates an amplification of the molecular displacement, to what extent one can realistically amplify
the vibrational mode is not clear, since the anharmonicity the molecule would experience would
counteract the amplification. Even with this, if there is a case where the spectral overlap is an issue
for differentiating two desired Stokes frequencies is not addressed here, only that a nano-cavity with
strong optomechanical coupling could be a great candidate for solving such a problem.
5.5
Discussion and future work
For the use of the Raman activity for the multiple molecular resonances, the Raman activity for
Thiophenol is used for vibrational modes different from Thiophenol. This is naturally a simplification
of the problem, and the assessment of a Raman activity for each of the vibrational modes should be
considered before calling the results realistic. Work has been done in assessing the Raman activity
[31] by means of DFT- and ’second-order polarization propagator’ calculations. By further under-
standing the results found from such calculations, one can estimate intrinsic Raman activity for the
vibrational mode of consideration, and therefore assess a proper optomechanical coupling strength for
the investigated mode.
The QNM simulations of the silver dimer were conducted by having air between the two silver nanopar-
ticles. The problem one actually considers from the optomechanical simulations is placing a molecule
in the hot spot of the cavity. The refractive index change introduced by considering a molecule (or
N molecules) in the cavity will likely alter the effective mode volume, further lowering the effective
mode volume due to field localization in the higher index material. From the calculation of g0,ν for
parameters shown in Table 2 it was assumed that ϵR = 1, which is also a simplification of the problem.
These two effect however are not expected to change the physics per se, apart from yielding a slightly
different value for the optomechanical coupling strength entering the simulations.
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
Page 37 of 49
For future work on the optomechanical simulation, the natural next step would be to include a second
moment to the simulated variables, thereby including noise. This would mean that one should include
a term for Brownian motion acting upon the harmonic oscillator, and therefore a precise definition of
temperature could be assessed by means of the variance, instead of using the harmonic driving term
presented here. Adding intensity noise to the intra-cavity field would also be interesting, primarily to
see the effect it would have on the mechanical oscillator.
As for the nano-cavity, simulating the quantum mechanical aspects would also be fruitful. For what
is investigated here, we do not obtain the Stokes/anti-Stokes asymmetry that one observes in the
laboratory, due to having neglected the inherent quantum nature of the Raman interaction where
either a phonon is taken or added from the mechanical oscillator. This however only makes sense to
investigate, once one has access to temperature using Brownian motion. Seeing this asymmetry would
yield more realistic numbers for the amplification of the vibrational mode.
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
Page 38 of 49
6
Conclusion
In this thesis we have investigated the use of dielectric nano-cavities as a platform for SERS, and
compared the performance with plasmonics in the form of a silver dimer, driven by curiosity of how
such a nano-cavity would perform.
We have discussed how the quasi-normal modes can be used to model a general cavity, and demon-
strated the results of such a modeling for the case of the silver dimer.
For the silver dimer, the
permittivity was modeled by the use of experimental data, yielding a realistic permittivity model. By
numerical simulations using the MNPBEM MatLab toolbox, numerical errors are introduced due to
discretization of the resonator geometry, which has been documented, allowing us to gain insight in
the functional error form. By understanding the error as a function of the used mesh, we can estimate
what the best guess for a QNM frequency is, given the gap size of the dimer. Furthermore, it was
shown that by decreasing gap size, the description of the dimer using a single QNM breaks down,
owed to the presence of higher-order modes.
It was shown how the theory of SERS could be modeled by means of cavity optomechanics, where
the vibrational mode of a molecule via its differential polarizability causes a dispersive shift of the
cavity resonance frequency, analogous to the displacement of a cavity mirror in cavity optomechanics.
To assess an associated optomechanical coupling strength, we derived this within the quasi-normal
mode framework by relating the optomechanical coupling strength to a perturbation of the QNM
frequency caused by the presence of a Raman active molecule. This frequency perturbation could be
incorporated into the coupled-mode theory, enabling us to simulate the influence of the Raman active
molecule on the intra-cavity field. With the optomechanical coupling to the molecular vibrational
mode, perturbation theory allowed us to compare analytical results with results from simulations,
resulting in an in-phase and quadrature driving component acting on the molecular displacement,
of which good agreement is seen as long as the optomechanical coupling strength is relatively weak.
With the simulations of the optomechanical coupling using the CMT equations, we investigated two
test systems where one system is in the resolved-sideband regime and the other in the Doppler regime,
where the dynamical backaction between the intra-cavity field and the vibrational mode was investi-
gated, which for a blue-detuned input laser causes an amplification of the molecular vibrational mode,
constituting to a larger Stokes field amplitude.
We compared the silver dimer with the nano-cavity in optomechanical simulations. For the Ag dimer,
the vacuum optomechanical coupling strength to the vibrational mode ν of thiophenol was estimated
to be g0,ν = 2.09 GHz, whereas the nano-cavity featured g0,ν = 35.50 MHz. The comparison was akin
to the simulations for the two test systems, where the silver dimer was in the Doppler-regime with
2Ων/κ = 0.29 and the nano-cavity was deep in the resolved-sideband regime with 2Ων/κ = 560 From
simulations, considering N = 1025 identical thiophenol molecules interacting with the intra-cavity
field, it was generally shown that one has a trade-off between having high power output, in favor of
the silver dimer, and clear distinction of the vibrational modes, in favor of the nano-cavity. While
further work still needs to be done to assess more realistic optomechanical coupling, the results shown
in this thesis indicate that the dielectric nano-cavities can provide a useful platform for SERS, since
individual vibrational modes can be addressed compared to the plasmonic, opening new possibilities
for investigating complex molecules.
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
Page 39 of 49
7
Appendix
7.1
Derivations of QNM theory
First we seek to find the adjoint QNM. Suppose that we have an adjoint QNM ˜F‡(r), and seek to
calculate the inner product ⟨˜F‡
n(r)|DF(r, ω)⟩. By the definition of the matrix D shown in Eq. (9),
we have
⟨˜F‡
n(r)|D F(r)⟩=
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
h
˜f ‡
n(r) · (∇× H(r)) −˜g‡
n(r) · (∇× E(r))
i
dV
(76)
which by use of the identity B · (∇× A) = ∇· (A × B) + A · (∇× B) can be recast as,
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
˜f ‡
n(r) · (∇× H(r)) −˜g‡
n(r) · (∇× E(r)) dV =
1
2ϵ0
Z
V
H(r) · (∇× ˜f ‡
n(r)) −E(r) · (∇× ˜g‡
n(r)) dV
+ 1
2ϵ0
Z
V
∇· (H(r) × ˜f ‡
n(r)) −∇· (E(r) × ˜g‡
n(r)) dV
(77)
Where the last integral can be converted to a surface integral using Gauss’ theorem. Identfying the
first integral on the right hand side of the equality as −⟨D˜F‡
n(r)|F(r)⟩, we have
⟨˜F‡
n(r)|DF(r)⟩= −⟨D˜F‡
n(r)|F(r)⟩+ I∂V (˜F‡
n(r), F(r))
(78)
where I∂V denotes the surface integral over the surface ∂V associated with the volume V . From Eq
(78) it is clear that D is not self adjoint, and one should define the adjoint operator as D‡ = −D.
By use of cyclic nature of the scalar triple product, we can write the surface integral as
1
2ϵ0
Z
∂V
h
H(r) × ˜f ‡
n(r) −E(r) × ˜g‡
n(r)
i
·ˆn dA =
1
2ϵ0
Z
∂V
˜f ‡
n(r)·[ˆn × H(r)]+E(r)·
ˆn × ˜g‡
n(r)

dA (79)
In the limit of large volumes the eletric- and magnetic field E(r) and H(r) fulfills the radiation
condition. By use of Eq. (7b), we have
I∂V (˜F‡
n(r), F(r)) =
1
2ϵ0
Z
∂V
E(r) ·

−
r ϵ0
µ0
˜f ‡
n(r) + ˆn × ˜g‡
n(r)

dA
(80)
from which the surface integral vanish if one defines the radiation condition for adjoint magnetic QNM
as
ˆr × ˜g‡
n(r) →
r ϵ0
µ0
˜f ‡
n(r),
for r →∞
(81)
where the sign is flipped as opposed to Eq. (7b). Finding the radiation condition for the adjoint
electric QNM, one considers the problem of calculating ⟨F(r)|D˜F‡(r)⟩, and repeats the calculating in
a similar manner. In the end, one again finds the flipped sign with respect to Eq. (7a), meaning that
ˆr × ˜f ‡
n(r) →−
rµ0
ϵ0
˜g‡
n(r)
for |r|→∞
(82)
This means that we can define the adjoint non-Hermitian problem to Eq. (10),
D‡ ˜F‡
n(r) = −i˜ωn ˜F‡
n(r)
(83)
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
Page 40 of 49
7.2
Convergence and error analysis of QNM frequency
5
10
15
20
25
3920
3940
3960
3980
4000
4020
4040
Figure 28: Repeated mesh rotation simulations for dgap = 22 nm with Nrot = 10. Error bars represent
one standard deviation. The fit is f(h) = 0.114h2 + 1.936h + 3916.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
3680
3690
3700
3710
3720
3730
3740
Figure 29: Repeated mesh rotation simulations for dgap = 10 nm with Nrot = 10. The fit is f(h) =
−0.3279h2 + 12.77h + 3631, with R2 = 0.9947.
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
Page 41 of 49
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
3500
3510
3520
3530
3540
3550
3560
Figure 30: Example of a simulations sequence for dgap = 5 nm, with Nrot = 11 rotated mesh represen-
tations, where each subsequent simulation is rotated 4◦. Second order fit is used describe
the results from a poor mesh resolution. The fit is f(h) = −0.393h2 + 12.52h + 3458 with
R2 = 0.9822.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
1
2
3
4
10-5
Figure 31: Assessed effective mode volume for Ag dimer with dgap = 5 nm, simulated for 9 subsequent
rotations.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Figure 32: Peak Purcell factor for the fundamental mode, with a gap size of 5 nm, indicating the
breakdown of the single QNM approximation.
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
Page 42 of 49
7.3
Derivation of equation of motion using a Hamiltonian approach
In order to acquire knowledge of the dynamics of the molecular displacements, we first define the
formal Hamiltonian. From the Hamiltonian of the total system, we construct the quantum Langevin
equations, from which classical equations of motion are found as expectation values of the quantum
Langevin equations. The derivation will largely be based [23].
The system of consideration is here limited to the following
1. An intracavity field of a plasmonic cavity, oscillating at the frequency ωp.
2. A normal vibrational mode of a molecule, oscillating with a frequency Ων.
3. A parametric coupling of the intracavity field and the vibrational mode.
4. An external driving laser, oscillating a the frequency ωL.
Hence the formal Hamiltonian of the system is the following (in the same order as the list above)
ˆH′ = ˆHa + ˆHν + ˆHa−ν + ˆHL
(84)
The intracavity Hamiltonian ˆHa for no coupling naturally takes the form ˆHa = ¯hωpˆa†ˆa, with ˆa being
the field annihilation operator. For the normal vibrational mode, we will primarily consider Stokes
frequencies, featuring a low occupation at room temperatures. For the lowest lying vibrational modes,
the vibrational modes are sufficiently described by a harmonic oscillator, hence we let ˆHν = ¯hΩνˆb†
νˆbν
with ˆbν being the annihilation operator for the vibrational mode ν. For clarity, any parameter or
variable that is unique to the vibrational mode considered, is denoted with the subscript ν.
For the field-phonon coupling term ˆHa−ν, we consider only a regime with no electronic transition,
hence the coupling to the molecular displacement is purely parametric. To quantify this, we expand
the cavity frequency to first order in the position operator ˆxν by means of
ωp(ˆxν) =
nπc
L + ˆxν
=
nπc
L(1 + ˆxν/L) ≈nπc
L

1 −ˆx
L

= ωp −ωp
L ˆxν = ωp −Gν ˆxν,
(85)
where L is the cavity length, n quantifies the nodes of the standing normal mode of the cavity and c
is the speed of light. The introduced quantity Gν is the optomechanical coupling rate. The expansion
is justified if the position displacement is small compared to the cavity length. The first term term of
(85) corresponds to the frequency of the cavity field with no optomechanical coupling, where as the
second term is a dispersive shift caused by the optomechanical coupling. Using ˆxν = xzpm,ν(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν)
where xzpm,ν =
p
¯h/(2mνΩν) with mν being the effective mass of the vibration mode, the field-phonon
Hamiltonian takes the form
ˆHν−p = −¯hGνxzpm,νˆa†ˆa(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν) = −¯hg0,νˆa†ˆa(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν)
(86)
where g0,ν = Gνxzpm,ν is the vacuum optomechanical coupling rate.
The Hamiltonian for the driving laser takes the form [7]
ˆHL = i¯hs√κex
 e−iωLtˆa† −eiωLtˆa

,
(87)
where s is the flux of the pump field, such that |s|2 is the photon flux and κex is the in-coupling rate
for the cavity. The total Hamiltonian of the system (84) thus takes the form
ˆH′ = ¯hωpˆa†ˆa + ¯hΩνˆb†
νˆbν −¯hg0,νˆa†ˆa(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν) + i¯hs√κex
 e−iωLtˆa† −eiωLtˆa

(88)
It is useful to remove the explicit time dependency of the total Hamiltonian by transforming to the
external input lasers frame of reference.
This is done by using the unitary transformation ˆU =
exp(iωLˆa†ˆat) such that
ˆH = ˆU ˆH′ ˆU † −i¯h ˆU ∂ˆU †
∂t
(89)
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
Page 43 of 49
Where ˆH will be in the new reference frame. Doing so for (88) yields
ˆH = −¯h∆ˆa†ˆa + ¯hΩνˆb†
νˆbν −¯hg0,νˆa†ˆa(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν) + i¯hs√κex
 ˆa† −ˆa

(90)
where the detuning ∆= ωL −ωp has been introduced. Formulating equation of motion for the two
operators ˆa and ˆbν, done by using Heisenbergs equation of motion (here for an arbitrary operator ˆO),
d ˆO
dt = −i
¯h[ ˆO, ˆH] + ∂ˆO
∂t
(91)
we can formulate the quantum Langevin equations for ˆa and ˆbν
dˆa
dt = i∆ˆa + ig0,νˆa(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν) + √κexs
|
{z
}
Bare time evolution
−κ
2 ˆa + √κ0δˆs0,in + √κexˆsex,in
(92a)
dˆbν
dt = −iΩνˆbν + ig0,νˆa†ˆa
|
{z
}
Bare time evolution
−Γν
2
ˆbν +
p
Γνδˆbin,
(92b)
where κ = κ0 + κex is the total decay rate of the cavity with κ0 being the intrinsic loss of the cavity
and κex being the coupling rate of fields coupling into the cavity or vice versa. The indication of bare
time evolution arises directly by use of (91). The extra terms are added phenomenologically, which
for (92a) correspond to cavity field decay, vacuum noise and input laser noise respectively. For (92b)
the added terms correspond to a decay of the molecular field operator and thermal noise respectively.
Equations of the Hermitian conjugate of ˆa can be found by
d
dt
 ˆa†
=
 d
dtˆa
†
,
(93)
and similarly for ˆb†
ν. Forming equations of motion for the position ˆxν and momentum ˆpν operator by
using
ˆxν = xzpm,ν(ˆb†
ν + ˆbν)
(94a)
ˆpν = ixxpm,νmνΩν

ˆb†
ν −ˆbν

(94b)
We obtain the equations of motion by differentiation of (94) and inserting (92b)
dˆxν
dt = ˆpν
mν
−Γν
2 ˆxν +
p
Γνδˆxin
(95a)
dˆpν
dt = ¯hGνˆa†ˆa −mνΩ2
ν ˆxν −Γν
2 ˆpν +
p
Γνδˆpin
(95b)
where the immediate coupling of the vibrational mode and the cavity field ˆa can be appreciated in
the first term of (95b), namely the radiation pressure. The quantum noise operators are δˆxin and δˆpin
are related to the thermal noise δˆbin.
Interested in the equations of motion for the expectation value of the molecular vibration and the
cavity field, we obtain the following two coupled equations
da
dt = i

∆+ Gνxν + iκ
2

a + √κexs
(96a)
d2xν
dt2
= −Γν
dxν
dt −Ω2
νxν + Fp(t)
mν
(96b)
Where the expectation values ⟨ˆa⟩= a, ⟨ˆxν⟩= xν are used, the noise terms have averaged to zero, and
the radiation pressure becomes Fp(t) = ¯hGν|a(t)|2.
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
Page 44 of 49
7.4
Perturbation theory of the intra-cavity field
The starting point for the derivation here is the differential equation for δa shown in Eq. 55 by using
the form of the solution shown in Eq. 56.
By using P(t) shown in the main text, the homogeneous solution of δa, denoted δah, takes the form
δah(t) = Ce
−(γc−i∆1)t−i
G′
ν F0
Ω2ν Γν cos(Ωνt)
(97)
with ∆1 = ∆+ 2G′
ν
2|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
and C takes initial conditions into account. It should be noted that the
contribution to the detuning is generally small, and generally one can set ∆1 ≈∆, unless one uses a
high cavity Q with ∆= 0, due to the strong intra-cavity field.
For the particular solution denoted δap(t), we can separate this into two integrals, one denoted as I1
where q(t) is constant due to the offset in Qν,0, and one denoted as I2, with q(t) oscillating at Ων
caused by the applied driving force Fd(t). We further let β = G′
νF0/(Ω2
νΓν), where I1 becomes
I1 = iG′
νa0
2G′
ν|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
e−(γc−i∆1)t−iβ cos(Ωνt)
Z
e(γc−i∆1)t+iβ cos(Ωνt) dt
= iG′
νa0
2G′
ν|a0|2
˜ωcΩ2ν
e−(γc−i∆1)t−iβ cos(Ωνt)
Z
e(γc−i∆1)t
∞
X
n=−∞
inJn(β)einΩνt dt
= 2G′
ν
2|a0|2a0
˜ωcΩ2ν
∞
X
n=−∞
in+1Jn(β)
γc −i(∆1 −nΩν)ei(nΩνt−β cos(Ωνt))
where it is used that exp(iz cos(ϕ)) = P∞
n=−∞inJn(z)exp(inϕ), with Jn being the Bessel functions of
first kind. With a similar approach the integral I2 becomes
I2 = iG′
νF0a0
ΩνΓν
e−(γc−i∆1)t−iβ cos(Ωνt)
Z
e(γc−i∆1)t+iβ cos(Ωνt) sin(Ωνt) dt
= G′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν
e−(γc−i∆1)t−iβ cos(Ωνt)
Z
e(γc−i∆1)t(eiΩνt −e−iΩνt)
∞
X
n=−∞
inJn(β)einΩνt dt
= G′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν
∞
X
n=−∞
inJn(β)
 ei(n+1)Ωνt−iβ cos(Ωνt)
γc −i∆1 + i(n + 1)Ων
−ei(n−1)Ωνt−iβ cos(Ωνt)
γc −iv + i(n −1)Ων

And hence the particular solution takes the form
δap(t) = 2G′
ν
2|a0|2a0
˜ωcΩ2ν
∞
X
n=−∞
in+1Jn(β)
γc −i(∆1 −nΩν)ei(nΩνt−iβ cos(Ωνt))
(98a)
+ G′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν
∞
X
n=−∞
inJn(β)
 ei(n+1)Ωνt−iβ cos(Ωνt)
γc −i∆1 + i(n + 1)Ων
−ei(n−1)Ωνt−iβ cos(Ωνt)
γc −i∆1 + i(n −1)Ων

(98b)
And hence the total solution takes the form δa(t) = δah(t)+δap(t). We will primarily be interested in
the particular solution, due to interest of describing the steady state dynamics. Evidently from δap(t),
the applied driving force Fd(t), causing a harmonic oscillation of the displacement in form of Qν,0(t)
couples to the intra-cavity field as a harmonic phase modulation, and creates frequency sidebands
weighted with a Bessel function and a Lorentzian. From the definition of F0 in Eq. (46), β takes the
form
β = 2g0,ν
Ων
r
kBT
¯hΩν
<< 1
(99)
since we generally have Ων >> g0,ν and kBT << ¯hΩν since kBT ≈25 meV at room temperature.
Since β ≈0, n = 0 is the primary contribution to the infinite sum of Eq. (98), one can justify that
the particular solution takes the form of
δap(t) ≈2G′
ν
2|a0|2a0
˜ωcΩ2ν
i
γc −i∆1
+ G′
νF0a0
2ΩνΓν

eiΩνt
γc −i(∆1 −Ων) −
e−iΩνt
γc −i(∆1 + Ων)

.
(100)
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
Page 45 of 49
7.5
Derivation of the in-phase and quadrature component of the driving
term
The starting point for the derivation is the cavity field dependent driving term in Eq (59), featuring
the particular solution of the fields response to a harmonic displacement δa(t). Using the argument
given in Section 4.3 where β ≈0, the sum in (98) collapses on n = 0. For now we disregard the DC
term in δap(t), and look only at the frequencies ±Ων. The corresponding driving term is denoted
δFm,1.
δFm,1(t) = 2G′
ν
˜ωc
 a0δa∗
p(t) + a∗
0δap(t)

= |a0|2Θ

e−iΩνt
γc + i(∆1 −Ων) −
eiΩνt
γc + i(∆1 + Ων) +
eiΩνt
γc −i(∆1 −Ων) −
e−iΩνt
γc −i(∆1 + Ων)

(101)
where Θ = G′
ν
2F0/(˜ωcΩνΓν). we introduce the following factors and identify their conjugates
c1 = γc + i(∆1 −Ων)
c2 = γc + i(∆1 + Ων),
c3 = γc −i(∆1 −Ων) = c∗
1
c4 = γc −i(∆1 + Ων) = c∗
2,
and write the complex exponential explicitly as cos(Ωνt) and sin(Ωνt) to obtain
δFm,1(t) = |a0|2Θ

cos(Ωνt)
 1
c1
−1
c2
+ 1
c∗
1
−1
c∗
2

+ i sin(Ωνt)
 1
c∗
2
+ 1
c∗
1
−1
c2
−1
c1

(102)
= |a0|2Θ
"
cos(Ωνt)
 
2Re(c1)
|c1|2
−2Re(c2)
|c2|2
!
+ i sin(Ωνt)
 
2iIm(c2)
|c2|2
+ 2iIm(c1)
|c1|2
!#
(103)
which be insertion of the introduced constants yields
δFm,1(t) = δFQ cos(Ωνt) + δFI sin(Ωνt)
(104)
= 2G′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

γc
γ2c + (∆1 −Ων)2 −
γc
γ2c + (∆1 + Ων)2

cos(Ωνt)
(105)
+ 2G′
ν
2F0|a0|2
˜ωcΩνΓν

(Ων −∆1)
γ2c + (∆1 −Ων)2 −
(Ων + ∆1)
γ2c + (∆1 + Ων)2

sin(Ωνt)
(106)
Turning the attention to the DC term of δap(t) we find the corresponding constant radiation pressure
term denoted δFm,2(t)
δFm,2(t) = G′
ν
˜ωc
G′
ν
2|a0|4
˜ωcΩ2ν

i
γc −i∆1
−
i
γc + i∆1

(107)
= −G′
ν
3|a0|4
˜ω2cΩ2ν

2∆1
γ2c + ∆2
1

(108)
which turns out to be smaller than the constant offset provided by a0, denoted ¯Fm
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
Page 46 of 49
7.6
Area assessment for assessing number of molecules
r = 14 nm
Figure 33: QNM field distribution for dgap = 15 nm, with insets showing where the field decays to
1/
√
2 of the center field value, appearing ≈14 nm from the center
7.7
Quadrature and in-phase driving terms for 5 nm gap size Ag dimer
and nano cavity
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
10-3
Figure 34: The in-phase and quadrature driving component for the realistic dimer launched with
P0 = 100 mW.
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
Page 47 of 49
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
10-4
Figure 35: The in-phase and quadrature driving component for the nano-cavity launched with P0 =
100 mW.
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
Page 48 of 49
References
[1] Raymond Gillibert, Jiao Qi Huang, Yang Zhang, Wei Ling Fu, and Marc Lamy de la Chapelle.
Food quality control by surface enhanced raman scattering. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry,
105:185–190, 2018.
[2] Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear optics: principles and applications,
volume 3. CRC Press, 2014.
[3] Katrin Kneipp, Martin Moskovits, and Harald Kneipp.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering:
physics and applications, volume 103. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[4] R Coccioli, M Boroditsky, KW Kim, Y Rahmat-Samii, and E Yablonovitch. Smallest possible
electromagnetic mode volume in a dielectric cavity. IEE Proceedings-Optoelectronics, 145(6):391–
397, 1998.
[5] Hyeongrak Choi, Mikkel Heuck, and Dirk Englund. Self-similar nanocavity design with ultrasmall
mode volume for single-photon nonlinearities. Physical review letters, 118(22):223605, 2017.
[6] Marcus Albrechtsen, Babak Vosoughi Lahijani, Rasmus Ellebæk Christiansen, Vy Thi Hoang
Nguyen, Laura Nevenka Casses, Søren Engelberth Hansen, Nicolas Stenger, Ole Sigmund, Henri
Jansen, Jesper Moerk, et al.
Nanometer-scale photon confinement inside dielectrics.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.01681, 2021.
[7] Markus Aspelmeyer, Tobias J Kippenberg, and Florian Marquardt.
Cavity optomechanics.
Reviews of Modern Physics, 86(4):1391, 2014.
[8] John D Joannopoulos, Steven G Johnson, Joshua N Winn, and Robert D Meade. Molding the
flow of light. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ [ua], 2008.
[9] Samuel Silver. Microwave antenna theory and design. Number 19. Iet, 1984.
[10] Philip Trøst Kristensen, Kathrin Herrmann, Francesco Intravaia, and Kurt Busch. Modeling elec-
tromagnetic resonators using quasinormal modes. Advances in Optics and Photonics, 12(3):612–
708, 2020.
[11] Philip Trøst Kristensen, Jakob Rosenkrantz de Lasson, Mikkel Heuck, Niels Gregersen, and Jes-
per Mørk. On the theory of coupled modes in optical cavity-waveguide structures. Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(19):4247–4259, 2017.
[12] Lukas Novotny and Bert Hecht. Principles of nano-optics. Cambridge university press, 2012.
[13] Edward Mills Purcell.
Spontaneous emission probabilities at radio frequencies.
In Confined
Electrons and Photons, pages 839–839. Springer, 1995.
[14] Mark Fox. Optical properties of solids, 2002.
[15] Alexandre Vial, Anne-Sophie Grimault, Demetrio Mac´ıas, Dominique Barchiesi, and Marc Lamy
De La Chapelle.
Improved analytical fit of gold dispersion: Application to the modeling of
extinction spectra with a finite-difference time-domain method. Physical Review B, 71(8):085416,
2005.
[16] Peter B Johnson and R-WJPrB Christy. Optical constants of the noble metals. Physical review
B, 6(12):4370, 1972.
[17] Aleksandar D Raki´c, Aleksandra B Djuriˇsi´c, Jovan M Elazar, and Marian L Majewski. Optical
properties of metallic films for vertical-cavity optoelectronic devices. Applied optics, 37(22):5271–
5283, 1998.
[18] Nikiwe Mhlanga, Thabang A Ntho, Hleko Chauke, and Lucky Sikhwivhilu. Surface-enhanced
raman spectroscopy substrates: Plasmonic metals to graphene. Frontiers in Chemistry, 10, 2022.
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
Page 49 of 49
[19] Ulrich Hohenester and Andreas Tr¨ugler. Mnpbem–a matlab toolbox for the simulation of plas-
monic nanoparticles. Computer Physics Communications, 183(2):370–381, 2012.
[20] Filippo Alpeggiani, Stefania D’Agostino, Daniele Sanvitto, and Dario Gerace. Visible quantum
plasmonics from metallic nanodimers. Scientific reports, 6(1):1–9, 2016.
[21] Jakob Rosenkrantz de Lasson, Jesper Mørk, and Philip Trøst Kristensen. Three-dimensional
integral equation approach to light scattering, extinction cross sections, local density of states,
and quasi-normal modes. JOSA B, 30(7):1996–2007, 2013.
[22] Søren Raza, Shima Kadkhodazadeh, Thomas Christensen, Marcel Di Vece, Martijn Wubs,
N Asger Mortensen, and Nicolas Stenger. Multipole plasmons and their disappearance in few-
nanometre silver nanoparticles. Nature communications, 6(1):1–9, 2015.
[23] Philippe Roelli, Christophe Galland, Nicolas Piro, and Tobias J Kippenberg. Molecular cav-
ity optomechanics as a theory of plasmon-enhanced raman scattering. Nature nanotechnology,
11(2):164–169, 2016.
[24] Mohammed N Islam. Overview of raman amplification in telecommunications. Raman Amplifiers
for Telecommunications 1, pages 1–34, 2004.
[25] Edgar Bright Wilson, John Courtney Decius, and Paul C Cross. Molecular vibrations: the theory
of infrared and Raman vibrational spectra. Courier Corporation, 1980.
[26] Soo-Y Lee, Donghui Zhang, David W McCamant, Philipp Kukura, and Richard A Mathies. The-
ory of femtosecond stimulated raman spectroscopy. The Journal of chemical physics, 121(8):3632–
3642, 2004.
[27] Albert Schliesser, R´emi Rivi`ere, Georg Anetsberger, Olivier Arcizet, and Tobias J Kippenberg.
Resolved-sideband cooling of a micromechanical oscillator. Nature Physics, 4(5):415–419, 2008.
[28] Han-Kyu Choi, Kang Sup Lee, Hyun-Hang Shin, Ja-Jung Koo, Gyu Jin Yeon, and Zee Hwan
Kim. Single-molecule surface-enhanced raman scattering as a probe of single-molecule surface
reactions: promises and current challenges. Accounts of Chemical Research, 52(11):3008–3017,
2019.
[29] Yuling Wang and Joseph Irudayaraj. Surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy at single-molecule
scale and its implications in biology. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 368(1611):20120026, 2013.
[30] Vincenz Sandfort, Jens Goldschmidt, J¨urgen W¨ollenstein, and Stefan Palzer. Cavity-enhanced
raman spectroscopy for food chain management. Sensors, 18(3):709, 2018.
[31] Jens Oddershede and E Nørby Svendsen. Dynamic polarizabilities and raman intensities of co,
n2, hcl and cl2. Chemical Physics, 64(3):359–369, 1982.
