==PAGE:1==
Study restoration strategy and procedures for
islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable
resources
Master Thesis
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100%
variable resources
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Yifan Zhang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind Energy, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Wind Energy, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Yifan Zhang ­ s202355
Signature
Date
ii
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nowadays, with the rapid increment of economics and human activities, the emission of
CO2 has come to a new historic high. As the European Union (EU) declares that Europe
will be climate neutral by 2050, an economy with net­zero greenhouse gas emissions,
the development of RESs becomes an ideal solution. However, the increment of RESs
accelerates the decommission of the conventional generators, which may cause the sys­
tem instability. For these reasons, the study of restoration strategy and procedures for
islanded microgrids powered by 100% will be demonstrated in this paper.
By doing a literature review, the common difficulties and the state­of­the­art methods used
for the offshore wind farm black start will be presented. Then by summarizing the appli­
cable and well­adopted control methods, a control strategy that uses the offshore wind
turbines with a battery energy storage system equipped with the black start capability
aims to target the offshore wind farm black start will be carried out. Moreover, the hard­
switching energization method, the build­up strategy and the grid­forming control method
will be implemented in the control algorithm, which explains how to control the compo­
nents in the offshore wind farm network to restore the system to its steady operation.
Also, based on the resource availability and loads’ criticality, a control algorithm explicitly
focusing on the reconnection of the loads will be developed.
Since the control strategy and algorithms are designed, they will be tested in the DIgSI­
LENT PowerFactory software.
However, before that, the electrical microgrid network
needs to be designed along with several scenarios. The electrical network developed
in this project uses an HVAC transmission system, and two types of self­designed loads
are connected at the onshore substation along with an external grid. The first scenario is
that after the black start and the control algorithm is followed to restore the system, the
external grid can reconnect and balance the system. Another scenario has to consider
that the external grid cannot reconnect. In that case, the remaining system has to operate
in a self­sustained mode, and the loads can only be supported by the system’s own power
source.
The frequency, voltage and active power result curves in both scenarios will be analyzed.
These will be the essential factors to test whether the designed control strategy in this
project fulfils its goal. At the end of this paper, the essential findings will be presented,
and the future improvements will be stated.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Yifan Zhang, MSc Wind Energy, DTU
First, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my supervisor Dr.Guangya Yang,
who made this work possible. His advice and guidance carried me through all the stages
of writing my thesis.
Besides my supervisor, I would like to give special thanks to my co­supervisor Dr.Mirza
Nuhic for his patience and selflessly helping me solve many detailed problems.
And finally, I would like to thank my parents and all of my friends for their encouragement
and company. Due to their support, I find my last semester at DTU fun and precious.
[Guangya Yang], [Seniorforsker], [Supervisor]
[Mirza Nuhic], [Postdoc], [Co­supervisor]
iv
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Total power generation capacity in the European Union 2008­2018[3]
. . .
1
1.2
Annual CO2 emission data til 2021[4]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Power system stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Simplified representation of a grid­forming converter[26] . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
The gird­forming converter control method[28]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
The control diagram of PLL[32] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
The model for type 4 offshore wind turbine generator[33] . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
An electrical and control schematic of a full­scale wind turbine . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
The grid connection diagram for both HVDC and HVAC transmission[36] . . 17
3.4
The synchronverter control diagram[26] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1
The electrical network for black start study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
PowerFactory objects for implementation of high­level control systems[37] . 22
4.3
The composite model frame of the synchronverter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
The block diagram of synchronverter[38] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
The reactive power control diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
The composite model frame of the wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.7
The control diagram of the load power slot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.8
The control diagram of over frequency power reduction slot . . . . . . . . . 29
4.9
The control diagram for the protection slot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.10 The control diagram for PQ controller slot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.11 The control diagram of the current controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.12 The flow chart used different scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.13 The DSL diagram for the fluctuating load connection during 20­40s . . . . . 34
4.14 The composite model frame for scenario 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.15 The composite model frame for scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.16 The DSL diagram for load connection in scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.1
The cumulative wind power of all three wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
The result curve of active power and frequency for scenario 1 . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
The connection signal of the fluctuating loads in scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
The voltage curve for all the wind turbines and the POC in scenario 1
. . . 42
5.5
The connection of the fluctuating loads in scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.6
The power values for scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.7
The frequency result for scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.8
The voltage result for scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
A.1 The fluctuating loads plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
A.2 The control diagram of the grid­forming virtual synchronous machine[26] . . 62
A.3 The grid­forming droop control diagram[26] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
5.1
The mean values result of the fluctuating loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
The events definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
vi
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Root Causes and Backgrounds of The Increasing RESs . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Challenges For The Black Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review, Methodologies, Control Strategy and Control Algorithm
7
2.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Methodologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Control Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Control Algorithm for The Black Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Develop the Microgrid Model
15
3.1
The General Description of The Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
The Electrical Network Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Offshore Wind Power Transmission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
The Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
The Grid­forming Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
DIgSILENT PowerFactory Implementation
21
4.1
The Electrical Network Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Composite Model and Composite Model Frame in DIgSILENT PowerFac­
tory Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
The Synchronverter Composite Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Wind Turbine Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
The Self_designed Composite Model for Black Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Result for Different Scenarios
39
5.1
Assumptions Before Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
The Result and Analysis for Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
The Result and Analysis for Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusion and Future Work
47
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
53
A.1 Matlab Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.2 Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, the green energy transition is the most urgent need to curb the rising impact
of global warming due to the economic increment and heavy human activities. Also, the
European Commission declares that Europe will be climate­neutral by 2050, an economy
with net­zero greenhouse gas emissions[1]. This objective not only is at the heart of
the European Green Deal but is also in line with the EU’s commitment to global climate
action under the Paris Agreement[1]. Under that background, it is important to vigorously
develop renewable energy resources (RESs) to try to reduce the proportion of traditional
power plants. The European Union (EU) has already established a target of at least 32%
renewables in total energy consumption by 2030[2]. The curve below shows the trend of
renewable energy in the last few years. As one of the world’s fastest­growing renewable
energy sources, offshore wind shows several advantages compared with other RESs,
such as high wind speed, high power generation efficiency, no land occupation, noise
and visual impact can be ignored, etc., which drag more and more attention.
Figure 1.1: Total power generation capacity in the European Union 2008­2018[3]
However, the rise in the RESs has resulted in the decommissioning of some conventional
power plants, which do not contribute to the power system stability and might be challeng­
ing for the transmission systems operators (TSO). Coupled with the declining strength of
the network, it has the potential to increase the impact of severe network disturbances
and give rise to challenges for the containment of voltages and frequency excursions,
ultimately triggering wide­area blackouts. Since conventional synchronous generation is
being phased out, the responsibility to maintain the power system stability and provide
network restoration services must be taken up by alternate sources of generation, which
in this project, the offshore wind farm. Based on the above, the study of the system
restoration strategies and procedures for restoring the system under the offshore wind
farm network during the blackout back to its steady operation will be carried out.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Root Causes and Backgrounds of The Increasing RESs
1.1.1
Global warming
Global energy­related carbon dioxide emissions rose by 6% in 2021 to 36.3 billion tonnes,
their highest ever level, as the world economy rebounded strongly from the Covid­19 crisis
and relied heavily on coal to power that growth, according to new IEA analysis released
today[4].
Figure 1.2: Annual CO2 emission data til 2021[4]
According to the IEA, the increase in worldwide CO2 emissions of more than 2 billion
tonnes was the greatest in history in absolute terms, more than compensating for the
previous year’s pandemic­induced reduction[5]. Severe weather and energy market cir­
cumstances, notably price hikes in natural gas, slowed the recovery of energy demand in
2021, resulting in more coal being burned despite renewable power generation expanding
at its highest rate ever.
Because of those hazards such as global warming and the rising of the sea level that might
be caught due to a large amount of CO2 emission, the advantages of using RESs are
apparent. Compared to those conventional energy sources, the RESs are inexhaustible.
They constitute (together with energy conservation) the most ecologically sound solution
for effectively reducing carbon dioxide emissions and combating the greenhouse effect. In
addition, replacing energy generation plants that use conventional fuel resources leads to
a reduction in the emissions of other pollutants as well, such as sulfur oxides which cause
acid rain, nitrogen oxides which cause photochemical smog, and airborne particulates,
etc.
2
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:13==
1.1.2
Increment of RESs and Its Impact
Based on the global warming condition and the objectives published by the EU, the incre­
ment of RESs can be expected. For example, in Denmark, by the end of 2020, around
80% of electricity consumption was supplied with RESs, compared with last year’s stag­
gering 76%[6]. Other countries, such as China, have exceeded 400 million kilowatts of
renewable energy installed capacity by the end of 2019, reaching 414.77 million kilowatts,
accounting for 34% of the world’s total installed capacity. Both freshly installed and cumu­
latively deployed wind and solar power generation capacity rank 1st in the world[7]. Also,
by the end of 2021, the total generation of RESs was over 1 trillion kWh, which increased
33% more than last year[8].
As for the offshore wind farm, it shows several benefits compare to the onshore wind
farm. It has the advantages of strong stability, high wind speed, high power generation
efficiency, no land occupation, and negligible noise and visual impact. Offshore wind will
be at the heart of global decarbonization between now and 2050[1]. Worldwide, 5.9GW
of new capacity was added to grid­connected offshore wind in 2019, a 40% increase from
2018[9]. Even though today’s offshore wind market does not even come close to tapping
its full potential – with high­quality resources available in most major markets, offshore
wind has the potential to generate more than 420000TWh per year worldwide[9]. It is
precisely because of the great potential shown by offshore wind power that this paper
adopts it as the electrical network to study the strategies of the black start.
While RES has its advantages, problems also arise. The rise in the RESs has resulted in
the decommissioning of some conventional generations, mostly synchronous generators
(SGs). The SGs can contribute to the system’s stability thanks to their inertia. However,
some RESs, like wind turbines and solar panels, have different characteristics than the
classical SGs. Because of the decrease of inertia in the system and high unpredictable
energy production of RESs might cause power system stability issues and, for some worst
scenarios, a blackout. Power system stability is defined by the ability of a power system
to recover to an equilibrium state upon being subjected to a system disturbance[10]. It
is typically contributed by three main parts: rotor angle, frequency and voltage stability.
However, in this report, the frequency stability will be mainly discussed.
Figure 1.3: Power system stability
For the power output of the RESs, it has a substantial uncertainty because it depends
on the wind speed or the solar irradiation. Suppose, for some scenarios, the wind speed
or the solar irradiation is low. In that case, the power produced by those RESs will be
decreased significantly, which will cause the frequency to drop if no auxiliary power is
injected. Therefore, the requirement for primary frequency reserves shows its importance
and should participate in the primary frequency control within milliseconds to avoid the
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
3
==PAGE:14==
frequency drop below its normal operating range.
Based on those concerns, the transmission system operator responsible for the system’s
safety and stability operation has already been updating their requirement regarding the
grid connection of the RESs, such as the black start capability. For the black start capa­
bility, it means the capability of a generation facility to start without an external electrical
supply to be used to energise a defined portion of the transmission system[11], which will
be explained in Section 3.3. Nevertheless, from an economic point of view, it is not con­
venient to maintain conventional power plant systems in stand­by only for the possible
risk of a blackout scenario[11]. Integrating the black start service into non­conventional
technologies to participate in the market could introduce financial gains to consumers,
such as lower costs and increased competition.
1.2
Objectives
This project focuses on the effective restoration strategy of the microgrid offshore wind
farm after the blackout. The goal is to develop a control strategy targeting the offshore
wind farm black start and test it in the Digsilent Powerfactory software. The following tasks
must be considered in the context of renewable­based off­grid systems:
• Study the control of interconnected grid black start functionalities and adapt
it for the case of microgrid or offshore wind power systems. It mainly needs
to explore how to do the black start in an offshore wind farm microgrid network
and restore the system to its stable operation by carrying out a control strategy and
implementing the idea into the microgrid offshore wind farm network to test it.
• Define priorities and processes based on the load criticality and resource
availability. Since the wind speed and loads constantly fluctuate, the connection of
the loads should follow a particular load connection algorithm. The control algorithm
should consider the loads’ criticality and, based on the available wind power, decide
whether to connect the loads.
• Suggestions on the grid preparation (resources re­dispatch and reconfigu­
ration) for achieving effective restoration. By doing resource re­dispatch, the
system could operate in a self­sustained mode. In that way, it should maintain the
system using its own available resources and balance it without the external grid.
• Verification of black start concept in Digsilent Powerfactory. This step is to test
the control strategy in the Digsilent Powerfactory environment in various scenarios.
Several factors like frequency, voltage and active power values will be utilised to
examine whether the goals of the black stark are fulfilled.
1.3
Challenges For The Black Start
Since offshore wind farms have not been designed with the purpose of black start so far,
many new challenges have arisen in their design and operation. The main challenges
identified are listed and explained below.
• Self­start Capability. Firstly, the power electronic converters used in the typical
offshore wind farm design are grid­following (GFL) converters that do not have self­
start capabilities. This is because offshore wind farms often do not help the restora­
tion strategies and are energized by the transmission grid. To incorporate the black
start capabilities, a device with self­start capabilities is required. In this project, the
battery system equipped with the black start capability could provide the voltage and
4
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:15==
frequency reference values for the black start. The detailed control method of this
battery system will be introduced in Section 3.5.
• Service Availability. For renewable generations, the wind power plants’ fluctuation
characteristics may threaten the availability requirements. The wind power produc­
tion depends on the wind speed, which can fluctuate over time. If the wind power
production is insufficient to support the loads due to the low wind speed, the under­
frequency will occur and harm the steady­state operation if no auxiliary power is
injected. Therefore, combining a battery energy storage system with the offshore
wind turbines could be a potentially attractive way to contribute to the system sta­
bility.
• Control, Stability and Interoperability. The novelty of operating the offshore wind
farm as islands and the black start units bring new opportunities for control and in­
teroperability. With the added black start capability, the control and interoperability
of the system also add challenges. Depending on the number of wind turbines that
need to be self­starting, there will be needs to coordinate the interoperability both
during the energization step and system operations step. The control algorithm and
operation designed for the system restoration will be explained in Section 2.4. Is­
sues such as energization sequence and island frequency control are of main impor­
tance. In this regard, the battery energy storage system added with the grid­forming
capability has the potential to ensure the system’s stable operation. During the en­
ergization step, the grid­forming capability will follow the energization sequence to
energize the grid and also provide the voltage and frequency set points required
from the wind turbines. Moreover, the control algorithm will try to maintain the sys­
tem stability by referring to the load priority and resource availability, which are the
essential principles of the control algorithm.
• Transient Behavior. Transient phenomena are involved in every energization op­
eration related to the offshore wind farm black start process. A first challenge is rep­
resented by the wind farm power island energization. To contain the energization
transients, novel energization methods such as soft charging can be applied. How­
ever, all the critical transmission network components like cables and transformers
are connected in a step­wise manner and, therefore, can be hard­switched. After
that, another challenge is the energization of the transmission system and loads.
As the black start procedure progresses, the loads will be reconnected when the
wind power is sufficient. The loads’ priority and resource availability will be the prin­
ciples for designing the loads’ reconnection algorithm. The sudden reconnection of
the loads can lead to a frequency drop and vast inrush currents. Hence, a detailed
black start algorithm and simulation plan will have to confirm that the offshore wind
farm system will be able to withstand the transient.
• Inertia Provision Inertia provision has been added as a black start requirement.
This is challenging for conventional offshore wind farms as they are 100% power
electronic based systems. Nevertheless, this requirement can be fulfilled either
by real or virtual inertia[12]. As virtual inertia, the requirement can be achieved
by implementing inertia emulation in the converter control. More specifically, both
grid­following control and grid­forming control can emulate inertia. The practical ex­
amples of how the synchronverter can emulate inertia are well­explained in [13]. In
[13], the idea of operating a synchronverter to mimic a synchronous generator to
emulate inertia is developed and tested.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
5
==PAGE:16==
1.4
Outline
The outline of the project consists of five chapters. Each chapter is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2 ­ Literature Review, Methodologies, Control Strategy and Control
Algorithm: First, a literature review is conducted to get an overview of the start­of­
the­art methods used for the black start and could also provide theoretical support
and guidance in this project. Second, by analyzing the methods from the literature,
some well­adopted and applicable methods will be chosen as guidelines for this
project and will be illustrated. Third, a control strategy suitable for the offshore wind
farm black start will be developed. The last step is to carry out the control algorithm,
which explains how to control the components in the network to restore the system.
• Chapter 3 ­ Develop the microgrid model Since the control strategy has been
designed, the next step is to design an electrical offshore wind farm network to test
the strategy. However, several technical backgrounds need to be presented first in
this chapter in order to test the control strategy in the Digsilent Powerfactory.
• Chapter 4 ­ DIgSILENT PowerFactory Implementation This chapter will illustrate
how to implement the offshore wind farm electrical network into the DIgSILENT Pow­
erFactory software, which follows the control strategy and control algorithm men­
tioned in Chapter 2. Moreover, the dynamic models of the wind turbine and the
synchronverter will also be defined.
• Chapter 5 ­ Testing The Control Algorithm The results for the two scenarios de­
signed to test the control strategy will be analysed in Chapter 5. Several factors such
as voltage level, frequency and active power will be analyzed to examine whether
the system restoration is fulfilled.
• Chapter 6 ­ Conclusion and future work In the end, the conclusion drawn from
this project will be illustrated together with the suggestions for the future work.
6
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:17==
2
Literature Review, Methodologies,
Control Strategy and Control Algorithm
Since chapter 1 already describes the reasons that caused the increment of the RESs and
the reasons for studying the black start procedures, this chapter will first do a literature re­
view to summarise the well­accepted and applicable methods for this project. The second
step is to design the general control strategy suits for the offshore wind farm black start,
and then a control algorithm will be introduced to state how to control the components to
restore the system.
2.1
Literature Review
In [14], a WPP is proposed to be started via the local power source, e.g. a diesel generator,
which can be disconnected afterwards. The method is based on starting only one or a
group of WTs and then more or all the WTs one by one or group by group, which is
coordinated by a WPP controller based on communication (between the WPP controller
and WTs). In addition, to operate as an island (disconnected from the external grid and
diesel generator), a black start provision to the external grid is also proposed.
In [15], a small diesel generator, which will be used for the start­up of the WT, is proposed
to be located inside one or few of the WTs in the WPP, which will be sequentially started
using the WT(s) with a diesel generator inside such that those WT(s) will supply start­up
power for the rest of the WTs.
To sum up the methods of the two papers, they both add diesel generators to provide
the power for the grid energization when a long­lasting electricity shortage caused by the
onshore blackout makes the power transmission from the onshore side to the offshore
side impossible. However, equipped with the state­of­the­art type 4 wind turbines with
fully rated power electronics converters (PECs) could help propose another method.
Today’s wind turbines are controlled as grid­following units and behave as current sources
to extract maximum power from the wind. Due to the lack of external grid voltage, wind
turbine generators must be able to provide their own voltage set points. In that case, these
fully rated power electronics converters can be controlled to provide the voltage magni­
tude and frequency for as long as the wind allows as grid­forming converters. These PECs
can allow the wind turbines to operate without the need of external auxiliary power sup­
plies by working as grid­forming converters. By using the grid­forming converters, neither
the permanently installed diesel generators nor the temporary mobile diesel generators
are needed to carry out to the offshore site, which could benefit both the operation and
insurance cost.
In [16], the background and existing solutions for wind turbine and wind power plant self­
energization using the grid­forming converters are presented, together with simulation
results of an offshore wind power plant sequentially energizing the offshore AC network,
offshore HVDC terminal, HVDC link, onshore HVDC terminal, and onshore AC terminal
and load. Several islands are formed before the energization and would be reconnected
followed by the control sequence and re­synchronized.
In[17], a method to operate the offshore wind turbines as grid­forming units are presented,
where the offshore voltage and frequency are settled via droop control at each wind tur­
bine and the generated voltage references are produced by the wind turbine front­end
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
7
==PAGE:18==
converters[18]. In [19], a simulation study focusing on different stages (soft start and fast
start) of energization of the wind power plant was introduced and compared the perfor­
mance with different control schemes.
The process of the black start with a doubly fed induction generator (DFIG) based wind
turbine is addressed, and energy storage in DC link of DFIG is used for fast restoration af­
ter the blackout, which is explained in [20]. A control sequence of the black start process is
developed, and the different stages of the restoration process, which is DFIG­Storage ab­
sorbs initial impact of black start during energizing, controlling islanded system’s voltage
and frequency and load restoration and resynchronization are tested.
A general working principle of the grid­forming control is illustrated in [21] and a simu­
lation study has been carried out to examine the different stages of the energization of
the loads using different control schemes such as power synchronization control, direct
power control and distributed PLL­based control.
By reviewing the literature listed above, the grid­forming strategy is commonly used for the
black start because of their cost­saving and control convenience. Also, the build­up strat­
egy, which follows the designed control sequence to reconnect the islands formed by the
blackout, is also widely used. Based on these facts, this project will use the grid­forming as
the main control strategy and follow the build­up strategy to reconnect the islands formed
during the blackout within the TSO requirements to do the system restoration.
2.2
Methodologies
This section consists of several parts, each of the parts will explain one methodology,
which will be used later in the black start.
2.2.1
TSO Requirements
With the increased blackout in the last few decades, considerable changes are needed in
the power system restoration strategy to facilitate the participation of alternate sources and
non­traditional technologies. ENTSO­E, the European network of transmission system
operators (TSOs), included black start and island operation as optional requirements for
both alternating current (AC) and high­voltage direct current (HVDC) connected offshore
wind farms[22]. Based on these general requirements, the Danish TSO, Energinet, also
propose their own requirements on the black start capabilities of the renewable sources,
including the offshore wind farms. By referring to the documents published by the En­
erginet, a power­generating module with black start capability[23]:
• Shall be capable of automatically regulating dips in voltage caused by the connection
of demand.
• Shall be capable of regulating load connections in block load.
• Shall be capable of operating in LFSM­O and LFSM­U.
• Shall be cable of controlling frequency in case of over­frequency and under­frequency
within the whole active power output range between minimum regulating the level
and maximum capacity as well as at houseload level.
• Shall be cable of parallel operation of a few power generating modules within one
island.
• Shall be cable of controlling voltage automatically during the system restoration
phase.
8
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:19==
• Shall be able to synchronize within the frequency limits and, where applicable, volt­
age limits specified by the relevant system operator.
• Shall be capable of starting from shutdown without any external electrical energy
supply within a time frame specified by the relevant system operator in coordination
with the relevant TSO.
2.2.2
Build­up Strategy
Traditionally, the build­up and build­down strategies are used for the black start process
in a large system.
For the build­up strategy, the system is divided into islands that are put back into service
individually and then synchronized in order to reconstruct the system as a whole[24]. Each
island must have at least one unit with black start capability to achieve this goal. Further­
more, blocks of load must be connected to each subsystem following small increments
aiming at avoiding significant frequency and voltage deviations[24].
The build­down strategy consists in energizing first the network as a whole, followed by a
progressive synchronization of the remaining sources without black start capability and the
connection of loads in an attempt to avoid wasting time for the posterior synchronization
of the network portions[24]. In this project, the build­up strategy is used, which can ensure
the continuity of power supply in an island facilitating build­up recovery[24].
2.2.3
The Gird­forming Converter
The grid­forming converter can be significant with regard to the black start. Therefore, its
control method and capabilities will be explained in this part.
The grid­forming converter is defined as a converter that behaves as an ideal voltage
source behind impedance (in Figure 2.1) with voltage amplitude and angular frequency
controlled in a closed loop. As presented in [25], this could be suitable and applicable for
different inverter­based resources in the offshore wind farms, such as HVDC­connected
offshore wind farms, the battery energy storage systems and the type 4 wind turbines.
The capabilities of the grid­forming converter, besides the black start and island operation
capability, will also be illustrated.
Figure 2.1: Simplified representation of a grid­forming converter[26]
Furthermore, the grid­forming converter can provide an inherent frequency response to
system events. It can also properly ride through cases of system split thanks to its ca­
pability to withstand a high rate of change of frequency (RoCoF). Additionally, advanced
control loops can be implemented on the basics of grid­forming converter structures in or­
der to provide higher performance, such as inertia emulation and short­circuit infeed[27].
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
9
==PAGE:20==
Based on the above capabilities and the simplified representation, the grid­forming con­
verter and its voltage source­like behaviour can satisfy the requirements of the black start.
In the next paragraph, its control method will be presented.
Figure 2.2: The gird­forming converter control method[28]
The basic control structure of the grid­forming converter control consists of two cascaded
loops, as shown in Figure 2.2. The control system inputs are the voltage amplitude V and
the angular frequency of the voltage ω that the converter forms at the point of common
coupling (PCC). In this project, the voltage magnitude will be set to 1pu in order to provide
the voltage reference during the gird energization step. Voltage control is performed in
the external loop, where the error between the measured voltage magnitude Vabc and the
reference voltage V are the inputs to the current controller, for which the output establishes
the current reference i. Subsequentially, the reference signal uabc, is fed to the pulse­width
modulation (PWM) block. Filters are commonly used, here, represented as a series filter
inductor Lf and a shunt filter capacitor Cf[29].
2.3
Control Strategy
In this part, the control strategy will be carried out and aims to provide a solution for the
offshore wind farm black start.
Using the combination of BESS equipped with the black start capability and the offshore
wind turbines would be a resilient proposal to fulfil the black start requirements. The
battery system with the black start capability can provide the voltage and frequency set
points for the wind turbines during the black start and also contribute to the active power
balancing and improve power quality.
As mentioned in Section 2.1, [14] and [15] add diesel generators to provide the power
for the grid energization when a long­lasting electricity shortage caused by the onshore
blackout makes the power transmission from the onshore side to the offshore side impos­
sible. By adding the grid­forming strategy in the BESS, diesel generators do not need to
10
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:21==
be installed on the offshore side, which could benefit both the operation and insurance
costs.
The grid­forming BESS can be controlled to provide voltage set point by soft­start or hard­
switch and provide virtual inertia[30]. The soft­start of the voltage could increase the
voltage value slowly and, therefore, avoid the significant energization transient. As for
the hard­switching, the transmission network components are connected in a step­wise
manner via breakers and could withstand a sudden step increase of voltage, which could
also be time­saving. Either way, the self­start capability as the black start required can be
achieved. Also, the virtual inertia could be provided by the grid­forming control.
Moreover, with the added grid­forming unit, the wind turbines could operate as islands.
The island operation means that the power plants can operate in isolation from the na­
tional or local electricity distribution network[31]. With the added grid­forming capability
battery system, the criteria of the island operation is fulfilled. Also, referring to the build­up
strategy, the islands will be reconnected and re­synchronized to generate power for the
system. Since the grid­forming control method has already been explained in Section 2.2,
the re­synchronization process will be illustrated.
The phase­locked loops (PLLs) are used as synchronization units and the control diagram
is shown below. The PLL takes four per­unit values as inputs, which are the real part and
the imaginary part of the positive sequence voltage (ur and ui), the voltage magnitude (u)
and the reference frequency (fref). Based on the intrinsic behavior of a voltage source
behind impedance, along with their ability of self­synchronization, the grid­forming control
is suitable for weak grid applications.
Figure 2.3: The control diagram of PLL[32]
Another critical factor is the active power balancing. The active power balance in the
power system is the precondition for the frequency stability of the power system. When
a disturbance occurs in the system (e.g., short­circuit fault, trip, tie­line breaking, system
disintegration, etc.), it may result in imbalance between the total generation power and
the total load power. With the help of the BESS, since the wind speed constantly fluctu­
ates and causes the wind power disturbance, the battery system can absorb or provide
active power based on how much power the turbines can generate and how much the
loads need. The frequency is also related to the active power, but since the grid­forming
converter has the ability to provide a reference frequency, and with the help of the BESS
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
11
==PAGE:22==
to inject active power to balance the consumption of the loads, the frequency will be able
to stable at its reference value.
2.4
Control Algorithm for The Black Start
After introducing the methodologies and the control strategy for the black start, the control
algorithm will be developed, which goal is to cover as many realistic black start scenarios
as possible that happen at the offshore wind farm.
When the blackout happens, all the loads and the offshore wind turbines will be discon­
nected, which allows limiting the unpredictability and magnitude of the frequency devia­
tions during the service­restoration phase, as well as minimizing the voltage transients for
the grid energization step.
The next step in order to restore the system back to its steady­state operation should be
the system energization. The grid­forming BESS will start to operate in this step to provide
the frequency and voltage reference value that the system needs. There are two ways
for the voltage energization, soft­start and hard­switching. The soft­start means to slowly
increase the voltage level to avoid the major energization transient. The hard­switching is
to step up the voltage level from 0 to 1pu. By comparison, hard­switching is more widely
used due to its practical simplicity. Hard­switching is preferred traditionally in the typical
restoration approach in which all critical transmission network components like cables
and transformers are connected in a step­wise manner via breakers and energized at
rated voltage, which ensures a full control from a system operation point of view and the
sequential and bounded nature allows easier fault detection due to a failed component[30].
When the voltage value energization is finished, the next step is to set the voltage values
on all substations. However, since there are two types of connection, HVAC and HVDC,
used in the offshore wind farm, the energization step will be slightly different.
First, the HVDC case will be discussed. After activating the grid­forming BESS, the next
step is to close the breaker between the point of common coupling (PCC) and the offshore
side HVDC converter and energize the HVDC link. The offshore HVDC converter uses the
grid­following control, oriented onto the offshore AC network voltage. By means of such
control, the converter regulates the voltage on its DC terminals. In this case, the voltage
value of the HVDC link will also be set to 1pu. Moreover, the onshore HVDC converter
will be deblocked to energize the AC terminal, which allows the load to reconnect. By
following the energization steps stated above, the voltage value of both the offshore side
and the onshore side will be set to 1pu and ready for the reconnection of the loads and
the offshore wind turbines.
As for the HVAC transmission system, the energization process will be more straight­
forward. The only procedure is to close the breaker between the PCC and the offshore
substation. Then on both sides, the voltage will follow the voltage reference value set by
the grid­forming converter.
After the entire grid has been energized, the following step should be to reconnect the
loads and the power generators. There will not be any connection requirements for the
generators except for the voltage and frequency values, which are provided by the grid­
forming capability of the battery system. If these values are within the wind turbines’
operational range, then they will activate to generate power.
However, the number of loads that may be allowed to connect will be determined by the
availability of the resources. The reason for that is if the connection of loads exceeds the
total production of the wind power, then the frequency will drop, and if no extra power is
12
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:23==
provided to counter the decrease of frequency, the under­frequency event will occur, which
will affect the operation of the entire system. The connection of the loads is controlled
by comparing the forecasted mean load values to the forecasted wind power production
values at a user­set time interval. If, for example, the mean load value for the next hour
is 2MW while the power generation is 2.5MW, then the connection is allowed. Also,
if the power is sufficient after supporting one load, then the next load will go through
this procedure again to decide whether multiple loads connection can be allowed. The
sequence of loads’ connections has a strict requirement as well. Loads will perform this
process according to their priority, meaning the most important load will be connected
first.
The procedures for the black start, which are listed above, are used to recover back to the
system’s steady­state operation. When the faults that caused the blackout are cleared
and the external grid is ready to reconnect, the grid­forming control will deactivate, but
the BESS will keep operating to balance the active power. From now on, there will be no
connection limitation on the loads since the external grid should be able to balance all the
power gaps between the loads and the generators. On the other hand, if the external grid
cannot be reconnected, then the black start procedures will keep running, and the system
will operate in a self­sustained way, which means the remaining system can only support
the loads by its own power production. The next chapter will present the offshore wind
farm model and test the black start algorithm.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:25==
3
Develop the Microgrid Model
It will first present the two scenarios designed for testing the control strategy presented
in Chapter 2, then the electrical components used in the offshore wind farm network will
also be explained in this chapter.
3.1
The General Description of The Scenarios
In order to cover as realistic as possible what will happen in the actual operation of the
black start, two operating scenarios are designed to test the control algorithm. Since the
HVAC transmission system is still the mainstream, it will be used in the electrical network.
The first scenario simulates an HVAC transmission system offshore wind farm. When the
black start happens, the grid­forming battery system begins to operate to energize the
grid. Second, the loads and the wind turbines will follow the control algorithm designed
to decide whether they are allowed to reconnect to the system. The last part is that the
external grid will be able to reconnect, and the system will go back to its initial network.
The second scenario is introduced when the external grid cannot be reconnected. In that
case, the remaining system has to support the loads and operates in a self­sustained
way. The grid­forming battery system could also contribute to balancing the active power.
Since now the scenarios are introduced, the next part is to illustrate the electrical network.
3.2
The Electrical Network Design
The offshore wind farm network in this project is composed of several components, the
offshore wind turbines, the offshore and onshore substations, the loads and the grid­
forming battery system. So in the following parts of this section, they will be introduced.
3.2.1
Generic Model of Offshore Wind Turbine Generators
Wind turbine generator type 4 includes all the turbines whose generator, either syn­
chronous or asynchronous, is fully decoupled from the grid utilizing an electronic con­
verter. It uses a pair of back­to­back VSCs (voltage source converter) that are directly
connected to the stator of the electrical machine[33]. Hence this converter must be rated
at the nominal power of the wind turbine, making it the most expensive wind turbine gen­
erator to manufacture. The following will explain the detailed information about the back­
to­back converters.
Figure 3.1: The model for type 4 offshore wind turbine generator[33]
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
15
==PAGE:26==
From the power quality aspect, several electrical components and capabilities are needed.
• Flicker: With the full­size converter system, it is easy to control the converters to
prevent wind power fluctuations from being reflected in the active power output.
• Harmonics: Possible, depending on the quality of the power converter but possibly
greater than type 3.
• Reactive power capability: The reactive power output of the electrical machine
and the reactive power output to the grid are completely separate in this WTG type.
The reactive power output to the grid depends on the grid­side­converter’s action.
Hence, the reactive power output range depends on the grid­side­converter’s size.
Obviously, it must also deliver the active power, so whatever capacity is left over
can be used for reactive power output.
• Fault ride through: The fault­ride­through capability of this WTG type is superior
to any of the others. When a fault occurs, the excess active power produced by the
electrical machine is dissipated in the chopper. The active power output during the
fault is a function of the retained voltage in the grid, and the gird­side­converter can
act as a STATCOM by supplying reactive power. When the fault ends, the chopper
is disconnected, and the active power is almost immediately transferred through the
grid­side­converter and back to the grid again.
• Short circuit current contribution: WTG type 4 has its stator circuit completely
decoupled from the grid. Hence when a short circuit occurs, the stator will not see
the short circuit. The shore circuit contribution depends on the control action of the
grid­side­converter. WTG type 4 has a sparse short circuit contribution due to the
stator decoupling. This may cause problems in order to detect a fault situation.
• Inertial response: Due to the decoupling by the power converter there is no natural
inertial response.
3.2.2
The Full­scale Converter
The electrical layout of a full­scale converter consists of a generator­bridge AC/DC con­
verter (GBC), a DC link with a shunt capacitor and a network­bridge DC/AC converter
(NBC), the figure is shown below.
Figure 3.2: An electrical and control schematic of a full­scale wind turbine
16
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:27==
The GBC is controlled by the inner and outer control loops. The outer control loop controls
the DC link voltage using a PI controller by measuring the DC voltage and comparing it with
the reference voltage. The inner loop controls the d and q­axis component in the GBC[34].
When the transmission losses of the converter are neglected, the current flowing into the
DC link capacitor from the GBC must be equal to the current flowing out of the DC link
capacitor to the NBC. The purpose of this is to maintain the DC link voltage constant.
The NBC is also controlled by two control loops, the inner and outer loops. The outer
loop is utilised to control the active power injected into the grid by a maximum power point
tracker by calculating the wind velocity or the rotational speed. Also, the outer loop is
to control the reactive power flow by controlling the AC voltage magnitude of the con­
verter[35]. As for the inner loop of the NBC, its goal is to control the current determined
by the outer control loop. The current loop then outputs a voltage reference which is con­
verted to PWM signals and sent to the power modules of the converter. A phase lock
loop (PLL) is utilised to synchronise the converter to the AC grid. The PLL measures the
voltage phase angle of the AC grid, which is used to create a dq reference system.
WTGs converters can be referred to as the grid­following converters, meaning that the
converters need a stable voltage reference for the PLL to measure the voltage phase
angle and inject the desired active and reactive power. As a result, instead of controlling
the frequency output, wind turbine converters follow the grid frequency.
3.3
Offshore Wind Power Transmission
3.3.1
General description and grid connection diagram
Traditionally, offshore wind power plants (OWPPs) are connected through many compo­
nents, including the controllable, variable speed wind turbines (WTs), which are connected
to the offshore alternating current (AC) substation through medium voltage (MV) subma­
rine cables. The transformer in the offshore AC substation steps up the voltage from
33 −66kV to 132 −200kV to reduce the current flow through the cables. The decreased
copper/aluminium requirement for the cables and the losses through them are also due to
the reduced current flow. Offshore AC substations can be connected directly to the grid
at the shore through high voltage alternating current (HVAC) cables or high voltage di­
rect current (HVDC) converters and HVDC cables. The grid connection diagram for both
HVAC and HVDC is shown below.
Figure 3.3: The grid connection diagram for both HVDC and HVAC transmission[36]
3.3.2
Reason for high voltage
The voltage plays a vital role in decreasing the line wastes, which also means transmission
power loss. All electrical conductors used for power transmission have some amount of
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
17
==PAGE:28==
ohmic resistance (R). These conductors produce heat energy when the current move
within them. This energy can also mean the power loss. According to the Ohms law and
the equation of power, the power loss can be deducted as follow:
V = I ∗R, P = I ∗V
Ploss = I2 ∗R
(3.1)
As can see, the power losses in the system during transmission depend on the current,
but since the total amount of power that needs to transmit remains constant, based on the
equations above, the larger the voltage, the smaller the current, which leads to a minor
power loss. So to reduce the current in the transmission paths while keeping an equal
amount of energy transmission, a high voltage is needed.
3.4
The Loads
In the offshore wind farm network, there are two types of self­defined loads. The first
one is the constant load, which has a constant value and will stay connected after the
grid energization is finished. The reason for that is that the constant load has a superior
criticality. Therefore, the system will try to connect the most critical load first and then
focus on the other less critical loads.
The second type of load is the fluctuating load. The value of the fluctuating loads varies
with time, and this type of load will follow the load connection algorithm designed in Section
2.4.
3.5
The Grid­forming Converter
Though the basic control method of the grid­forming converter has already been intro­
duced in Section 2.2.3, in this section, three different control topologies based on the basic
control method will be presented: the virtual synchronous machine, the synchronverter,
and the droop control one. However, in this project, the synchronverter will be used in the
offshore wind farm electrical network due to its applicability and higher stability margin.
3.5.1
Virtual Synchronous Machine
For the virtual synchronous machine (VSM), it has the intention of imitating the inertia
provision by the synchronous generators. There are several implementations of this type
of control, and their main core is in the application of some form of the swing equation as
shown below.
Tm −Te −kd∆ω = J dω
dt
(3.2)
In Equation 3.2, ω is the angular frequency, Tm and Te are the mechanical and electro­
magnetic torques, respectively, kd is the damping factor, and J is the moment of inertia,
which will not influence the steady­state operation but has a strong impact on the dynam­
ics[26]. The detailed control diagram of the grid­forming virtual synchronous is attached
in Figure A.2.
3.5.2
The Synchronverter
Another consolidated and popular grid­forming converter structure is the power synchro­
nization control (PSC), shown in Figure 3.4. It was developed originally for HVDC systems
to cope especially with weak grids. In this approach, active power is used for synchro­
nization as in the VSM. Nevertheless, the main difference is that the PSC loop gets the
18
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:29==
phase angle directly by a single integration of the power difference. This differs from the
swing equation in VSM, where the power difference drives the virtual rotor speed dynam­
ics, which is then changed to an electrical angle by a double integration. Due to one less
integrator, PSC has a higher stability margin[26]. The angle θ is estimated and fed to the
dq and αβ blocks in order to implement the transformation. On the other hand, the current
at the fundamental frequency is not controlled, as the PSC loop contrasts it. Nevertheless,
in power electronics, the current always needs to be limited to avoid component damage
and a current limiter block is implemented, which receives a voltage signal and generates
the Udq signal to be fed to the converter[26].
Figure 3.4: The synchronverter control diagram[26]
3.5.3
Droop control
The last type is the droop control method. Droop control for the grid­forming converter
strategy emerged as an alternative to different current sharing strategies for small­rated
parallel converters. The implementation uses the forward droop equations as seen:
Vg = (Q −Qmeas)Kv + V
(3.3)
ωg = (P −Pmeas)Kf + ω
(3.4)
where Kv and Kf are the voltage and frequency droop coefficients, Vg and ωg are the
actual grid voltage grid angular frequency, and V and ω are the reference grid voltage
and grid angular frequency, respectively. The parameters P and Q are the reference
active and reactive power, while Pmeas and Qmeas are the measured active and reactive
power[26]. The detailed control diagram is added in Figure A.3.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:31==
4
DIgSILENT PowerFactory
Implementation
In the last chapter, the electrical components which will be used in the offshore wind farm
network were discussed, and in this chapter, how to implement those into the DIgSILENT
PowerFactory software along with the control algorithm mentioned in Section 2.4 will be
illustrated.
4.1
The Electrical Network Diagram
The network designed to test the control strategy is shown below. There are in total four
loads, three fluctuating loads and one constant load, which are connected at the onshore
substation. The offshore wind farm consists of three 6MW wind turbines. In order to do
the grid energization, one battery system, which has the grid­forming capability and uses
the synchronverter control method, is connected to the ’LV1.1’ terminal along with one
offshore wind turbine. Since the control algorithm is designed to suit the microgrid, the
voltage level for both the onshore substation and the external grid is 20KV .
Figure 4.1: The electrical network for black start study
4.2
Composite Model and Composite Model Frame in
DIgSILENT PowerFactory Software
This project is done using the DIgSILENT PowerFactory software, so several terminolo­
gies need to be introduced for a better understanding. The composite model and com­
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
21
==PAGE:32==
posite model frame are used for a high­level model definition and signal interconnection;
the relationship of those is shown:
Figure 4.2: PowerFactory objects for implementation of high­level control systems[37]
For the composite model frame, each composite model frame graphically defines a high­
level control system signal flow diagram, employing a combination of slots and intercon­
necting signals. Each slot represents a placeholder for corresponding network elements
with a well­defined functionality within this high­level control system. Typically, slots are
placeholders for controlled network elements (e.g. synchronous machines, PWM convert­
ers, static generators), measurement devices (e.g. current or voltage measurements),
user­defined equipment controller components (e.g. excitation voltage regulators, power
system stabiliser units) or user­defined representations of physical components (e.g. tur­
bine mechanical shaft systems)[37].
A composite model (ElmComp) represents “an instance” in the power system of one spe­
cific library composite model frame. The graphical definition of the composite model frame
is read by the referencing composite model and, for each slot within the frame’s diagram,
a network element can be assigned at this stage. Any number of composite models can
be created on the basis of a single composite model frame, thus allowing a large num­
ber of similarly controlled power system components to share the same high­level control
structure[37]. What has to be aware is the composite model and composite model frame
objects do not hold information about equipment controllers, they only link such controllers
with network elements and other measurement devices based on the graphical diagram
of the composite model frame.
The implementation details of individual slots are not defined by the composite model
frame or the composite model[37]. In fact, any component that complies with the given
slot information is technically allowed to be assigned to a slot (via the Composite Model).
This allows flexibility in the selection of the low­level control system components.
In conclusion, the composite model frame is composed of slots, the slots can from the
library, or it could also be defined by user using the DSL (the DIgSILENT Simulation Lan­
guage). The composite model frame provides the graphical definition that the composite
model needs.
22
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:33==
4.3
The Synchronverter Composite Model
In this section, the dynamic model of the synchronverter will be illustrated. The composite
model frame is attached in Figure 4.3, and the function of each slot will be represented
below.
Figure 4.3: The composite model frame of the synchronverter
4.3.1
Measurement Slot
First, by using the current measurement slot, the real part, imaginary part and magnitude
of the positive sequence current can be acquired. These results will be transmitted to the
current conversion slot to get the magnitude and angle of the current, and later the two
signals will be used by the synchronverter control slot. There is also a voltage measure­
ment slot used to get the measured voltage magnitude, the real and imaginary part of the
voltage, the reference frequency and the nominal frequency. The voltage magnitude and
the frequency signals are the input signals for the synchronverter control slot as well.
4.3.2
Synchronverter Control Slot
Second, since the composite model of the grid­forming synchronverter has been shown
in Figure 4.3, the detailed block diagram for the synchronverter control slot is shown in
Figure 4.4, and the control methods will be illustrated below. It is worth mentioning that
the switches are in position 2 for the synchronverter. Also, the calculations for the calcu­
lated torque tcalc, the voltage magnitude umag and the calculated reactive power qcalc are
referred to as Eq.7, 8, 9 respectively in Figure 4.4 and will be explained later.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.4: The block diagram of synchronverter[38]
The synchronverter is a type of grid­forming control that emulates the mechanical part of
a synchronous machine, which is also referred to as the swing equation:
Tasω = tset
ω −tcalc
ω
−Dp(ωr −ωset)
(4.1)
where Ta is the mechanical time constant, tset and tcalc are the torque set point and the
calculated torque, Dp is the damping coefficient, ωset is the frequency set point and ωr is
the rotational speed.
In order to calculate the stator voltage magnitude, the rotor angle θr needs to be computed.
The calculation for the rotor angle takes a series of equations. The equation system based
on Figure 4.4 is shown below. It takes the active power set point pset, the speed of the
synchronverter ωr and the nominal frequency fnom as inputs and uses the dam, p_friction
and delta_ω_pu as state variables to get the final result.
p_friction = Dpdam
dam = delta_ω_pu −
(
delta_ω_pu)
ωc
ωc + s
)
delta_ω_pu =
(p_set
ωr
−tcalc −p_friction
) 1
sTa
˙θr =
(
(delta_ω_pu + f_set −fref) 2πfnom
1
s
)
modulo (2π)
(4.2)
After the angle is computed, the next three equations represented as Eq.7, 8, 9 in Fig­
ure 4.4 are the core of the synchronverter concept:
24
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:35==
tcalc = Mfif
(
ia,mea sin (θr) + ib,mea sin
(
θr −2π
3
)
+ ic, mea sin
(
θr −4π
3
))
us,mag = ˙θrMfif,
qcalc = −˙θrMfif
(
ia,mea cos (θr) + ib,mea cos
(
θr −2π
3
)
+ ic,mea cos
(
θr −4π
3
))
(4.3)
where the Mfif is the simplified excitation, the iabc,meas is the measured output current
from the current conversion slot and θr is the rotor angle. Based on these equations,
the reactive power controller can also be implemented using an integral controller (in
Figure 4.5). The reactive power error qerr depends on the reactive power set value qset,
the calculated value qcalc and the voltage droop, which is shown as follow:
qerr = qset −qcalc −Dq (umag,mea −uset)
(4.4)
In Equation 4.4,
1
K is the gain of the integral controller, the umag,mea is the measured
voltage magnitude, uset is the voltage set points and Dq is the voltage droop coefficient.
Figure 4.5: The reactive power control diagram
The stator voltage θu , which is another output of the synchronverter control slot beside
the voltage magnitude, is proportional to the change of flux induced by the rotor field and,
therefore, lags the rotor angle θr by π
2 .
4.3.3
Virtual Impedance Slot
The third step is to create the virtual impedance. By using the output converter current
and comparing it with a certain overcurrent threshold ilim, which is 1.01pu, the following
equations are used to calculate the resistance and reactance of the virtual impedance:
zvi =
{
rvi + jxvi,
if |ivi| ≤ilim
(kprrvi + jkpxxvi) (|ivi| −ilim) + rvi + jxvi
otherwise
(4.5)
In Equation 4.5, the kpr and kpx are the proportional factors for the virtual resistor and
virtual reactance respectively. The virtual impedance controller can be used to adjust
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
25
==PAGE:36==
the virtual impedance parameters to the grid condition. A typical application would be
to increase the virtual impedance during short circuit events. However, during normal
operations, the virtual resistance and reactance can be adjusted by user. The virtual
impedance is adjusted in proportion to the low­pass filtered current absolute value |ivi|
when a certain threshold ilim is exceeded[38]. The output of the virtual impedance slot
is the real and reactive voltage drop, they are calculated over an algebraic type virtual
impedance:
uvi,r = rviivi,r −xviivi,i
uvi,i = rviivi,i + xviivi,r
(4.6)
4.3.4
Output Voltage Calculation Slot
The last control slot is to compute the final output voltage of the converter. There are two
modes to select, the activated current limitation mode and the disabled mode. The mode
is decided by whether need to limit the output current to avoid overloading the converter
or not. For the following calculation steps to be continued, it needs the stator voltage, the
real and imaginary part of the virtual impedance voltage drop, the voltage angle of the
synchronverter and the magnitude as inputs. In the beginning, the voltage drop over the
converter series impedance udrop, unlim is calculated:
ur_unlim = umagcos (θu) −uvi,r
ui_unlim = umagsin (θu) −uvi,i
ur_drop_unlim = ur_unlim −uterm,r
ui_drop_unlim = ui_unlim −uterm,i
u_drop_unlim =
√
(ur_drop_unlim)2 + (ui_drop_unlim)2
θ_u_drop_unlim = arctan
( ui_drop_unlim
ur_drop_unlim
)
(4.7)
where the ur, unlim and the ui, unlim are the real and imaginary part of the unlimited
converter voltage, and the uterm is the voltage of the connected terminal. It is known in
advance that the absolute value of this voltage drop should not exceed a particular value
udrop, max, given by the converter series impedance and the maximum converter current
icon, lim. This step ensures that the maximum allowed current can be kept while keeping
the voltage drop angle. So the next step is to get the limited drop voltage based on the
equations shown below.
u_drop_lim = lim(u_drop_unlim, 0.0, u_drop_max)
ur_drop_lim = u_drop_lim ∗cos (θ_u_drop_unlim)
ui_drop_lim = u_drop_lim ∗sin (θ_u_drop_unlim)
(4.8)
Therefore, the actual absolute value of the voltage drop |u_drop_lim| is limited by u_drop_max
(while the angle of u_drop_lim remains the same as the angle of u_drop_unlim[38]). Fi­
nally, the limited converter voltage u_con_lim is derived by adding the limited voltage
u_drop_lim drop to the terminal voltage uterm:
ur_lim = urterm + ur_drop_lim
ui_lim = uiterm + ui_drop_lim
(4.9)
26
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:37==
The output of the output voltage calculation slot is to choose the values between the
ur_lim, ui_lim and ur_unlim, ui_unlim based on the mode.
4.3.5
RMS Simulation
For RMS simulation, the described templates/models of grid­forming converters imple­
mented so far are only valid for balanced RMS simulation. For RMS simulation, a small
step size for electromechanical transients of 0.5 ms might be required during dynamic
events in some cases[38].
DSL uses symmetric components transformed into the reference frame of the reference
frequency in RMS simulations. The active and reactive power in symmetrical components
is calculated as follows:
p = u0i0 cos (θu,0 −θi,0) + u1i1 cos (θu,1 −θi,1) + u2i2 cos (θu,2 −θi,2)
q = u0i0 sin (θu,0 −θi,0) + u1i1 sin (θu,1 −θi,1) + u2i2 sin (θu,2 −θi,2)
(4.10)
In the above equation, the u012 are the magnitudes of the symmetrical components of
the voltage with their angles θu012 and i012 are the magnitudes of the symmetrical com­
ponents of the current with their angles θi012. Nevertheless, since the voltage output of
a synchronverter is always symmetric, therefore only the positive sequence will be taken
into consideration which leads to:
p = u1i1 cos (θu,1 −θi,1)
q = u1i1 sin (θu,1 −θi,1)
(4.11)
For the synchronverter equations as shown in Equation 3.3, the rotor angle θr is used
instead of the voltage angle θu,1. It lags the voltage angle by pi
2 . Assuming that the
frequency is close to its nominal value, the torque tcalc are reactive power qcalc are then
reshaped into the following equations:
tcalc = Mfifimea,1 sin (θr −θi,mea,1)
qcalc = −˙θrMfifimea,1 cos (θr −θi,mea,1)
(4.12)
4.4
Wind Turbine Model
In this section, the wind turbine model will be introduced, and the function of each slot
will be explained. In total, there are 3 wind turbines which are connected to a 20kV
distribution bus. The following figure is the composite model frame of the wind turbine
which is modified based on the template from PowerFactory.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.6: The composite model frame of the wind turbine
4.4.1
The ’wf power measurement’ Slot And The ’load power’ Slot
The ’wf power measurement’ slot on the upper left of the composite model frame loads the
wind turbine’s forecast power and transfers the data to the ’load power’ slot right to it. The
forecasted power of the wind turbine is imported using the ’Measurement File’ slot, which
function is to load the data from the txt file. The output of the ’wf power measurement’ slot
is: p_forecast.
As for the ’load power’ slot, it takes the forecasted power and uses the value as the refer­
ence power of the wind turbine (p_ref = p_forecast) during the steady­state operation.
However, if the over­frequency situation happens, then another input signal of the ’load
power’ slot, which is the pred_frequ signal that represents how much power the wind
turbine needs to decrease, will come to use. The pred_frequ signal will multiply with
the p_forecast to decide how much power the wind turbine needs to curtail. Then their
product (p_lim_frequ) will first be transferred into per­unit value (p_pu) by dividing with
their rater power and then go through a limiter. The limiter will control the range of the
p_pu signal to within 0­1 pu, and the output of the limiter will be p_ref, which is the power
production of the wind turbine.
28
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.7: The control diagram of the load power slot
4.4.2
The Measurement Slots
In this part, several measurement slots will be illustrated. It includes the PQ measurement
slot, the Vac measurement slot, the Iac measurement slot and the PLL.
For this PQ measurement slot, the main goal is to get the wind turbine’s measured active
and reactive power and compare it with the reference value. The control part of the active
and reactive power will be illustrated later in the PQ controller slot.
As for the Vac measurement slot will get the voltage magnitude, the real part and the
imaginary part of the voltage. The voltage magnitude signal will be transmitted to the PQ
control slot and participate in the reactive power control. The real part and imaginary part
of the measured voltage will be used in the current controller slot together with the current
value measured by the Iac measurement slot.
The frequency signal can be obtained by the PLL. The measured frequency will be in the
over­frequency power reduction slot and the protection slot. What’s more, the voltage
angle of the wind turbine generator can also be measured and will help to control the
current.
4.4.3
Over Frequency Power Reduction Slot
The objective of this slot is to calculate how much frequency the system needs to adjust
based on the measured frequency input signal. The detailed control diagram of this slot
is shown is Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: The control diagram of over frequency power reduction slot
Based on this diagram, we can observe that the measured frequency first goes through a
first­order delay block and then goes into an over­frequency power reduction calculation
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
29
==PAGE:40==
block to examine how much frequency the system needs to adjust. The equations of this
block are shown below.
If
Fmeas ≤Fup ,
yneu = 1
(4.13)
If
Fmeas > Fup,
yneu = 1 −gradient
100
∗(Fmeas −Fup)
(4.14)
If
Fmeas < Flow,
Preduction = yneu
(4.15)
If
Fmeas ≥Flow,
Preduction = yalt
(4.16)
yalt = min (Preduction, yneu)
(4.17)
What needs to be mentioned is that all these calculations should be within the range from
0 to 1, and the yalt signal has a 0.01s delay.
4.4.4
Protection Slot
The protection slot takes the measured frequency and the measured voltage magnitude
as inputs and compares them with the pre­defined parameters to see whether the wind
turbine generator is over frequency, under frequency, over­voltage, or under­voltage.
Figure 4.9: The control diagram for the protection slot
4.4.5
PQ Controller Slot
This slot takes the active and reactive power reference values, the over­frequency power
reduction value, the power limitation signal, the measured active and reactive power val­
ues and the measured voltage magnitude as inputs. The active power control loop first
multiplies the Pref with the over frequency power reduction signal and the power limitation
signal to examine how much power needs to adjust. Second, the reference active power
signal will subtract from the measured active power to get an error. Then the error will be
sent to the PI controller to get the d­axis current.
What’s more, the voltage magnitude will be used to detect whether the system has faults
or not. If yes, then the fault detection block will be activated, and the fault ride through
procedure will start. The current value will be limited by the limiters block and transfer the
maximum allowed current values to the reference current limitation block.
30
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:41==
As for the reactive power control loop, it takes the reference reactive power value to a
limiter to get the limited reference value and then subtract with the measured reactive
power to get an error. The next step is also to put the error to a PI controller to get the
q­axis current. Since now both the currents for the d and q axis are being calculated, the
final step is to put them into a reference current limitation block along with the maximum
current for the d and q axis to get the current reference value for both d and q axis.
Figure 4.10: The control diagram for PQ controller slot
4.4.6
Current Controller
The current controller will provide the active and reactive power signal for the wind turbine
generator. It takes the d and q axis current, the measured real and imaginary part voltage
and current, along with the wind turbine generator phase angle as inputs. For the detailed
control diagram shown in Figure 4.11, a dq transformation block, two PI regulators and a
dq reverse transformation block are used.
The dq transformation block takes the current value and the phase angle as inputs and
uses the equations below to transfer the current into dq axis.
id = ir ∗cosϕ + ii ∗sinϕ
iq = −ir ∗sinϕ + ii ∗cosϕ
(4.18)
After this step the dq axis current will be sent into the PI regulators and in the end, send
the signal to the reverse dq transformation block to transfer the dq axis signal back. The
equations of that are:
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
31
==PAGE:42==
ir = id ∗cosϕ −id ∗sinϕ
ii = id ∗sinϕ + iq ∗cosϕ
(4.19)
Figure 4.11: The control diagram of the current controller
4.5
The Self_designed Composite Model for Black Start
In this part, the composite model designed for both scenarios will be explained. To get an
overview, the flow chart of the two control sequences, which follows the general control
algorithm in Section 2.4, will be shown here.
32
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.12: The flow chart used different scenarios
The flow chart above refers to the [16], it first uses the grid­forming capability of the battery
system to energize the grid, then reconnects the wind turbine and the loads based on the
designed control sequence.
4.5.1
The Control Sequence for Scenario 1
A more detailed control sequence targeting scenario 1 will be explained by referring to
the general control algorithm. At the beginning, which means at 0s that the black start
happens, all the loads, the external grid and the wind turbines should be disconnected.
For scenario 1, 2s after the black start happens, the synchronverter will start to operate
and energize the grid, and meanwhile, the wind turbines and the constant load are allowed
to be reconnected. This step is to give the voltage and frequency reference values that
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
33
==PAGE:44==
the turbines need for them to start working again. The reason why only the constant load
is allowed to connect here is due to its high priority. Also, in the beginning, the wind speed
is slow, so the wind power is insufficient to support other less prioritized loads simulta­
neously. If during this period, the total production of the wind turbines is not sufficient
enough to support the constant load, then the battery will provide the power gap between
the wind turbines and the load. In another case, if the total wind production is more than
enough, then the extra power will be stored in the battery.
From 20 to 40s, which is the time before the external grid is reconnected, the fluctuating
loads can be allowed to reconnect based on the total output of the wind turbines. It takes
the total cumulative forecast power of the turbines as input and compares it with the total
consumption power of the loads for the next 20s to decide whether they are allowed to
connect.
For example, if at 20s, the cumulative wind power of all three wind turbines is larger than
the power consumed by the first­prioritized load in the next 20s, which is the fluctuating
load 1 in this case, then this load is allowed to connect. When the additional power (the
cumulative power minus the power spent by the minimum load in the next 20s) exceeds
the power required by the second­prioritized load in the next 20s, then it is permitted to
connect, and so on. The loads will perform this process according to their priority.
This stage controls the loads’ connections by comparing their cumulative wind power to
the power that the loads required for the following 20s to determine whether the wind
power is adequate for the loads to connect. When the loads are allowed to connect, the
loads’ connection signals that govern whether the loads can connect or not are set to 1,
indicating that connections are permitted during this time period. The DSL control diagram
for scenario 1 is shown below, and this part is the control method of the ’signal for load’
slot in the composite model frame.
Figure 4.13: The DSL diagram for the fluctuating load connection during 20­40s
At 40s, the external grid will be able to reconnect, and the synchronverter will disconnect
simultaneously. Also, there will be no further limitations for the fluctuating loads since the
external grid will help to balance the system.
34
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:45==
The composite model frame for scenario 1 is shown below. The ’wf total power’ slot
outputs the total cumulative power of the wind turbines, and the ’mean data’ slot transmits
the mean load values from 20s to 40s for all three fluctuating loads to the ’signal for load’
slot. The other three ’Measurement Files’ slots imported the fluctuating loads’ data from
the txt files and sent it to the ’load processing’ slot. If the fluctuating load is allowed to
connect within the 20 to 40s period, then the load connection signal will become 1. In
the ’load processing’ slot, the load connection signal will multiply with the forecast load
value and give the value to the ’Pext’ signal, which represents the value of the load. In this
method, the connection of loads can be controlled.
Figure 4.14: The composite model frame for scenario 1
4.5.2
The Control Sequence for Scenario 2
The control sequence designed for scenario 2 shares some similarities with scenario 1
and the composite model frame is shown in Figure 4.15.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.15: The composite model frame for scenario 2
At 2s, the synchronverter will operate, and meanwhile, the constant load will reconnect to
the system. The wind turbines will also reconnect and produce the power needed for the
constant load. At 20s, all the fluctuating loads can be reconnected, and their connection
statuses are decided by the control algorithm, despite the fact that the external grid cannot
reconnect. So, in that case, the remaining system has to work in a self­sustained way.
The wind turbines will be the main power source to support all four loads, and the power
gap between the generators and the load will be supported by the synchronverter. Since
now there will be no more power from the external grid and the battery system also has its
own rated power, the connection of the fluctuating loads needs to be controlled as well.
The reason behind that is if the requirement of the loads exceeds the limit of the wind
turbines and the battery can support, then the system frequency will start to decrease,
which will cause some imbalance in the system.
The control method for the fluctuating loads’ connection in this scenario is to compare
the total mean power of the three wind turbines for the next 20s and compare it with the
mean loads’ consumption based on their priority order. It means that if the total mean
wind power for the next 20s is larger than the first­prioritized load’s requirement, then
this load is allowed to connect. Also, if there is sufficient power besides supporting the
first­prioritized load, then the second­prioritized load can be connected and so on. This
method is implemented in DSL and is used as ’signal for load’ slot in the composite model
frame in Figure 4.14, which will be shown below.
36
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.16: The DSL diagram for load connection in scenario 2
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:49==
5
Result for Different Scenarios
Since all of the models have been established, the RMS simulation in PowerFactory will
be performed to simulate both scenarios and analyze the results in this chapter. The
simulation time varies depending on the scenarios. Because the external grid will be
reconnected in scenario 1, the whole simulation period will be 80s, which corresponds
to 80 min in real life, simply to model how the synchronverter works, how the fluctuating
loads will connect, and how the system will act after the external grid is reconnected.
However, the simulation duration for scenario 2 will be substantially longer (2000s) to
simulate around 4 hours of operation because the goal is to test how the system would
self­sustain once the connection to the external grid is no longer an option.
5.1
Assumptions Before Simulation
• It is assumed that the power production of the wind turbines follows exactly
their forecast values.
• It is assumed that while running the simulation in both scenarios, no faults
happened, and all the components work well. This is to ensure that all com­
ponents can operate according to their normal conditions and to ensure that the
experimental data is reliable.
• It is assumed that the loads are allowed to connect and disconnect in a short
time. In practice, the load cannot be disconnected or connected instantaneously,
but it is assumed that this ideal situation can occur for the convenience of research.
5.2
The Result and Analysis for Scenario 1
5.2.1
Inputs and Settings
In order to run the RMS simulation, first, several inputs of the self­designed model need
to be introduced. The first input values should be the wind turbines’ cumulative power,
which, as mentioned in Section 4.5 Figure 4.14, are imported by the ’measurement file’
slot and shown in Figure 5.1. Second input should be the ’mean data’ slot as also shown
in Figure 4.14. This slot gives the mean values of the fluctuating loads from 20 to 40s,
and the result is:
The number of the fluctuating loads
The mean value result [MW]
Load 1
1.3126
Load 2
2.8878
Load 3
1.8377
Table 5.1: The mean values result of the fluctuating loads
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: The cumulative wind power of all three wind turbines
After setting all the input parameters, all the information that the models need is done,
and the RMS simulation should start. The total simulation time for scenario 1 is 80s.
Several events are added in order to follow the control sequence. At the beginning of the
simulation, since the black start happens, all the breakers of the wind turbines, the four
loads and the external grid will be open. After that, at 2s, based on the control sequence,
the grid will be energized, and the constant load and the wind turbines will be reconnected
by defining the ’switch event’ of the breakers from open to close. At 20s, the fluctuating
loads can also be reconnected by defining the switch events. Finally, at 40s, the breaker of
the synchronverter will be open, and the breaker of the external grid will close. The reason
for disconnecting the synchronverter is that the external grid can provide the frequency,
voltage and power balance.
Event type
Element
Event happen time
Switch event, breaker close
Wind turbine generator 1
2s
Switch event, breaker close
Wind turbine generator 2
2s
Switch event, breaker close
Wind turbine generator 3
2s
Switch event, breaker close
Constant load
2s
Switch event, breaker close
Fluctuating load 1
20s
Switch event, breaker close
Fluctuating load 2
20s
Switch event, breaker close
Fluctuating load 3
20s
Switch event, breaker close
External grid
40s
Switch event, breaker open
Synchronverter
40s
Table 5.2: The events definition
5.2.2
Power, Frequency, Voltage and Fluctuating Loads Result in
Scenario 1
The active power result curve will be put along with the frequency curve to show whether
the synchronverter can provide the reference frequency.
40
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.2: The result curve of active power and frequency for scenario 1
Based on the Figure 5.2, we can observe that there are several frequency fluctuation
happens. The reason for that is because each time there is a frequency fluctuating, it
corresponds to an event. At 2s and 20s, the frequency transient happens due to the
constant load and fluctuating loads’ connection. However, the cause for the frequency
fluctuation at 30s will be explained based on the following figure:
Figure 5.3: The connection signal of the fluctuating loads in scenario 1
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
41
==PAGE:52==
It can be easily observed that at around 30s the fluctuating load 3 will be connected, which
causes the frequency to drop. As for fluctuating load 2, it is never connected due to the
total power of the wind turbines is not sufficient enough to support the connection of the
three loads simultaneously. However, with the help of the external grid, the consumption
of all three fluctuating loads can be fulfilled. If we go back to Figure 5.2, the frequency
transient needs to be analyzed as well. The frequency drops below 48.5Hz when the
external grid is being reconnected, and the transient only lasts a few milliseconds. There­
fore, its impact on the whole system can be ignored. During the whole simulation, the
frequency is stable around 50Hz, which is the reference frequency, so for scenario 1 the
synchronverter works perfectly for providing the reference frequency.
Another function of the synchronverter that needs to mention is its ability to balance the
power. In the period between 2 to 20s, because of the redundancy of the active power,
there is more than enough power to support the constant load. So, in that case, the
synchronverter can absorb the extra power and store it. At 20 to 40s, the reason why
the synchronverter generates power into the system is that there are some losses for the
power transmission. Also, the constant load did not add into consideration when dealing
with the connection of the fluctuating loads since its value is small and can be supported by
the synchronverter. Otherwise, based on the control algorithm, the fluctuating loads are
only allowed to connect when the wind power is sufficient, so the synchronverter should
absorb power instead of producing.
The voltage level of the wind turbines is also essential. If the over voltage or under volt­
age happens, the wind power production will be influenced. By analyzing the voltage at
different buses, we can see that when the external grid connects, the voltage drops to
0.83pu, but is restored to around 0.98pu within a few milliseconds; therefore, the steady
operation of the system will not be influenced.
Figure 5.4: The voltage curve for all the wind turbines and the POC in scenario 1
5.3
The Result and Analysis for Scenario 2
5.3.1
The Load Connection Situation in Scenario 2
For the second scenario, the total simulation time was set to 2000s. The goal is to try to
simulate as long as possible to simulate how the wind turbines and the system works since
42
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:53==
the reconnection of the external grid cannot be achieved. This scenario’s input variables
are the mean values of the fluctuating loads in every 20s, the mean values of the wind
turbines in every 20s, and the forecasted power of the loads.
Based on the control sequence designed for scenario 2, every 20s the total energy pro­
duction mean value of the three wind turbines will compare with the mean values of the
loads based on their priority order from high to low to decide how many loads can be
allowed to connect. After running the simulation, the connection situation plot of the three
loads is like this:
Figure 5.5: The connection of the fluctuating loads in scenario 2
By observing the figure above, we can see that load 2, which is the largest load, often
being connected and disconnected due to insufficient wind power. However, in real life,
this frequent connection is not allowed, and this could be improved in the future work.
5.3.2
Power, Frequency and Voltage Result in Scenario 2
The power curve of the loads and the wind turbines is another important thing to analyze.
In the beginning, because of the low wind speed, the synchronverter will provide some
power into the system to help balance the system. As time went by, the wind speed
increased, and there was more than sufficient power to support the loads, so the extra
power was sent to the synchronverter to store.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.6: The power values for scenario 2
The frequency and voltage values in this scenario can be important because there will be
no external grid to support the frequency and voltage. Therefore the two result curves are
attached below.
Figure 5.7: The frequency result for scenario 2
44
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.8: The voltage result for scenario 2
Through analysing the Figure 5.7, it can be seen that the frequency has a peak value which
goes beyond 50.5Hz and reaches 51.5Hz at around 920s due to the sudden disconnect
of the fluctuating load 2. Moreover, the reconnection of load 2 at around 1020s causes
the frequency to drop to 48Hz. The reason for the frequency transient at the above two
times is directly related to the large value of fluctuating load 2. Except that, most of the
time, the frequency is oscillating around the reference 50Hz.
What’s more, the voltage levels at the wind turbines are going up and down around 1pu.
Based on those facts, the conclusion is that the synchronverter works perfectly to give the
wind turbines the voltage and frequency needed to operate during the disconnection of the
external grid. Also, the active power can be balanced with the help of the synchronverter.
Above all, the system can operate in a self­sustained mode following the control algorithm
and using the combination of the wind turbines and the grid­forming battery system, the
synchronverter.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
6.1
Conclusion
This project focuses on studying the control of interconnected grid black start functionali­
ties and adapting in the case of the offshore wind farm power microgrid system. A control
strategy and the control algorithms specifically designed for the offshore wind farm back
start have been developed and tested in the DIgSILENT PowerFactory software. The
control strategy combines the offshore wind turbines with a battery system equipped with
the grid­forming capability has been presented. Moreover, the control algorithm uses
the build­up strategy and the hard­switching energization method, and a load connection
algorithm is developed based on the resource availability and loads criticality.
The grid­forming control method interfaced with renewable generation has been high­
lighted as one of the key technological changes required to ensure system stability and
robust operation for maintaining a resilient power supply. Its ability to provide the ref­
erence voltage and frequency is mainly used in the grid energization stage. The hard­
switching energization method is preferred due to the critical transmission components
are connected in a step­wise manner., which could be time­saving compared to the soft­
start.
In this project, the grid­forming control method has been implemented in a battery system.
By looking at the result curves of the two scenarios, the per­unit voltage values of the
wind turbines fluctuate around 1pu. As for the frequency, it has some transients when
the loads are reconnected, but it can restore to its reference frequency value within a few
milliseconds and, therefore, will not affect the system’s stable operation. Based on these
two results, the grid­forming control method could be an ideal solution for the self­start
problem mentioned in Section 1.3. Moreover, by implementing the grid­forming control
method, the virtual inertia can also be provided.
Also, using the battery system could help balance the active power, suppress the fluctu­
ations of wind turbines, and improve power quality. After the energization step is done,
the loads and the wind turbines will be reconnected following the control algorithm. In
scenario 2, when the system operates in the self­sustaining mode, the loads will be con­
nected and disconnected based on the wind power production. However, thanks to the
battery system, it is able to balance the active power fluctuations caused due to the loads’
prioritization and resource availability specified by its control algorithm so that the system
can still have a stable operation.
In conclusion, by using the combination of the grid­forming capability battery system with
the offshore wind turbines, this control strategy is tested in two different scenarios in Pow­
erFactory software. The results for both scenarios have shown that the challenges while
performing the black start described in Section 1.3 can be overcome by adopting this
control strategy. Moreover, the system can be restored to stable operation following the
designed control strategy and the control algorithms.
6.2
Future Work
From working on this topic, some areas have emerged which have not been addressed
in this project. These areas will be presented as recommendations for future work.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
47
==PAGE:58==
• One assumption which is the fluctuating loads can be connected and disconnected
instantly is too ideal. In real life this is not allowed due to the system stability point
of view. So in the future work, when the fluctuating load is disconnected because
of the insufficient of power, a interval time should be set. This means that the load
should remain for a certain period of time from the last disconnection to the next
connection.
• In this project, two general scenarios are considered. In the future work, a more
extreme scenario should be considered. For example, in both scenarios, the syn­
chronverter is used to provide and absorb power. It may happen that the battery
drops to zero or the battery is fully charged. If the battery has no power, then it
cannot provide active power to the system anymore. In another case, if the battery
reaches its maximum value so it cannot absorb active power to help balance the
system. Based on these considerations, the state of charge of the battery should
be simulated, and more control algorithms that represent these extreme conditions
should be designed.
• The power of the fluctuating loads and the wind turbines are using their forecast
values. The simulation result can be more precise if the actual load consumption
and real­time wind speed can also be provide during the simulation.
• Some faults analysis could also be added to analysis how the system react when
the faults happen.
• At the moment when the external grid is reconnected, there is a large transient
frequency increase. This is due to the fact that a strong grid is suddenly connected,
so it will inject a large amount of active power which cause the frequency to increase.
A transient analysis at this moment might be necessary to examine whether this
transient will cause over frequency or over current events or not.
48
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Europe Commission. 2050 long­term strategy. Novemeber 2018. URL: https://ec.
europa.eu/clima/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en.
[2]
Europe Union Law. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of
the Council on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (recast).
December 2018. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=
CELEX%3A32018L2001.
[3]
Pineda Ivan Colin Walsh. Wind energy in Europe 2018. February 2019.
[4]
Max Roser Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado. “CO￿and Greenhouse Gas Emis­
sions”. In: Our World in Data (2020). https://ourworldindata.org/co2­and­other­greenhouse­
gas­emissions.
[5]
IEA. Global CO2 emissions rebounded to their highest level in history in 2021.
March, 2022. URL: https://www.iea.org/news/global- co2- emissions- rebounded-
to-their-highest-level-in-history-in-2021.
[6]
State of green. A record year: Wind and solar supplied more than half of Denmark’s
electricity in 2020. January 2021. URL: https://stateofgreen.com/en/partners/state-
of-green/news/a-record-year-wind-and-solar-supplied-more-than-half-of-denmarks-
electricity-in-2020/.
[7]
bjx.com. Data chart of China’s power generation ratio. June 2020. URL: https://
guangfu.bjx.com.cn/news/20200608/1079147.shtml.
[8]
caixin. Domestic new energy power generation. December 2021. URL: https://
www.caixin.com/2021-12-26/101822187.html.
[9]
IEA. Offshore Wind Outlook 2019. November, 2019. URL: https://www.iea.org/
reports/offshore-wind-outlook-2019.
[10]
Jussi Pikkarainen. Wind turbine inertia ­ supporting the grid with active power. May
2020. URL: https://www.skeletontech.com/skeleton- blog/wind- turbine- inertia-
supporting-the-grid-with-active-power.
[11]
Wei Sun, Chen Ching Liu, and Shanshan Liu. “Black start capability assessment in
power system restoration”. eng. In: Ieee Power and Energy Society General Meet­
ing (2011), p. 6039752. ISSN: 19449933, 19449925, 19325517. DOI: 10.1109/PES.
2011.6039752.
[12]
Daniela Pagnani et al. “Challenges and Solutions in Integrating Black Start into
Offshore Wind Farms”. eng. In: 19th Wind Integration Workshop (2020).
[13]
Qing Chang Zhong and George Weiss. “Synchronverters: Inverters that mimic syn­
chronous generators”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Industrial Electronics 58.4 (2011),
pp. 1259–1267. ISSN: 15579948, 02780046. DOI: 10.1109/TIE.2010.2048839.
[14]
Kaj Skov Nielsen. “Method of start up at least a part of a wind power plant, wind
power plant and use of the wind power plant”. eng. In: U.S. Patent 8,000,840 (2011).
[15]
Sathees Kumar Egedal Per and Kaj Skov Nielsen. “Black start of wind turbine de­
vices”. eng. In: U.S. Patent 9,509,141 (2013).
[16]
Jayachandra Naidu Sakamuri et al. “Black Start by HVdc­connected Offshore Wind
Power Plants”. eng. In: Iecon 2018 ­ 44th Annual Conference of the Ieee Indus­
trial Electronics Society 2019­ (2019), pp. 7045–7050. ISSN: 1553572x, 25771647.
DOI: 10.1109/IECON.2019.8927615.
[17]
E. Belenguer et al. “Islanded operation and control of offshore wind farms connected
through a VSC­HVDC link”. eng. In: Renewable Energy and Power Quality Journal
1.11 (2013), p. 366. ISSN: 2172038x. DOI: 10.24084/repqj11.366.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
49
==PAGE:60==
[18]
Ömer Göksu et al. “Black Start and Island Operation Capabilities of Wind Power
Plants”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 16th Wind Integration Workshop (2017).
[19]
Anubhav Jain, Jayachandra Naidu Sakamuri, and Nicolaos Antonio Cutululis. “Grid­
forming control strategies for black start by offshore wind power plants”. eng. In:
Wind Energy Science 5.4 (2020), pp. 1297–1313. ISSN: 23667451, 23667443. DOI:
10.5194/wes-5-1297-2020.
[20]
M. Aktarajjaman et al. “Black start with DFIG based distributed generation after ma­
jor emergencies”. eng. In: 2006 Ieee International Conference on Power Electronic,
Drives and Energy Systems, Vols 1 and 2 (2006), pp. 753–+. DOI: 10.1109/PEDES.
2006.344263.
[21]
Anubhav Jain, Jayachandra Naidu Sakamuri, and Nicolaos Antonio Cutululis. “Grid­
forming control strategies for black start by offshore wind power plants”. eng. In:
Wind Energy Science 5.4 (2020), pp. 1297–1313. ISSN: 23667451, 23667443. DOI:
10.5194/wes-5-1297-2020.
[22]
ENTSO­E. Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/631 of 14 April 2016 establishing
a network code on requirements for grid connection of generators (Text with EEA
relevance). 2016. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/631/oj.
[23]
Danish Utility Regulator. “Requirements laid down under EU regulation 2016/631 –
Requirements for grid connection of Generators (RfG)”. eng. In: RfG (Requirements
for Generators), articles 13­28 ().
[24]
Clara Gouveia et al. “Black start and islanding operations of microgrid”. eng. In:
Variability, Scalability and Stability of Microgrids (2019), pp. 463–495.
[25]
Daniela Pagnam et al. “Overview of Black Start Provision by Offshore Wind Farms”.
eng. In: Iecon Proceedings (industrial Electronics Conference) 2020­ (2020), pp. 1892–
1898. ISSN: 25771647, 1553572x. DOI: 10.1109/IECON43393.2020.9254743.
[26]
Daniela Pagnani et al. “Offshore wind farm black start service integration: Review
and outlook of ongoing research”. eng. In: Energies 13.23 (2020), p. 6286. ISSN:
19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en13236286.
[27]
Peter Unruh et al. “Overview on grid­forming inverter control methods”. eng. In:
Energies 13.10 (2020), en13102589. ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en13102589.
[28]
Joan Rocabert et al. “Control of power converters in AC microgrids”. eng. In: Ieee
Transactions on Power Electronics 27.11 (2012), pp. 4734–4749. ISSN: 19410107,
08858993. DOI: 10.1109/TPEL.2012.2199334.
[29]
Jakob Glasdam, Claus Leth Bak, and Jesper Hjerrild. “Transient studies in large
offshore wind farms employing detailed circuit breaker representation”. eng. In: En­
ergies 5.7 (2012), pp. 2214–2231. ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en5072214.
[30]
Anubhav Jain. “Green amp; Black­starting HVDC­connected Offshore Wind Power
Plants: Grid forming control, Energization transients and Islanding capabilities”. eng.
2021. DOI: 10.11581/10.11581/DTU:00000103.
[31]
Badrinarayanan Suresh. Single generators application. URL: https://www.deif.
com/land-power/applications/island-operation/.
[32]
“Multifilter phase­ lock loop”. und. In: Ieee Trans Commun Technol COM­19.5 (1971),
pp. 669–75. ISSN: 21622175, 00189332.
[33]
N. M. Salgado­Herrera et al. “THD mitigation in type­4 Wind Turbine through AFE
Back to back converter”. eng. In: 2015 North American Power Symposium, Naps
2015 (2015), p. 7335147. ISSN: 21634939. DOI: 10.1109/NAPS.2015.7335147.
[34]
Qiuwei Wu. Modeling and Modern Control of Wind Power. eng. Ed. by Qiuwei Wu
and Yuanzhang Sun. Wiley­IEEE press, 2018, xiii, 265 Seiten (unknown). ISBN:
1119236266, 111923638x, 1119236398, 1119236401, 1523118474, 9781119236269,
9781119236382, 9781119236399, 9781119236405, 9781523118472, 111923638X.
50
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:61==
[35]
Bin Wu et al. “Variable­Speed Wind Energy Systems with Synchronous Genera­
tors”. eng. In: Power Conversion and Control of Wind Energy Systems (2011). DOI:
10.1002/9781118029008.ch9.
[36]
Kaushik Das and Nicolaos Antonios Cutululis. Offshore Wind Power Plant Tech­
nology Catalogue ­ Components of wind power plants, AC collection systems and
HVDC systems. eng. 2017.
[37]
DIgSILENT GmbH. DIgSILENT PowerFactory Version 2022, User Manual. eng.
DIgSILENT GmbH, 2022.
[38]
DIgSILENT GmbH. Technical Reference­DIgSILENT Grid­forming Converter Tem­
plates. eng. 2022.
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
Matlab Code
1
clear all;clc;close all;
2
3
%% origin data
4
% wind_data = xmlread("Export4.xml");
5
PV_data = xlsread("pv_data.xlsx");
6
wf_data = xlsread("wf_data.xlsx");
7
wf_1 = wf_data(:,1);
8
wf_2 = wf_data(:,2);
9
wf_3 = wf_data(:,3);
10
time_1 = (1:length(wf_3))';
11
figure(1)
12
plot(time_1,wf_1);
13
hold on
14
plot(time_1,wf_2);
15
hold on
16
plot(time_1,wf_3);
17
grid();
18
legend('wf 1','wf 2','wf 3')
19
20
figure(2)
21
time_2 = (1:length(PV_data))';
22
plot(time_2,PV_data);
23
grid();
24
25
%% modified data
26
clear all;clc;close all;
27
% ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿WF6060
28
% ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿PV606090051062010080540
29
% ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿2091008
30
PV_data = xlsread("pv_data.xlsx");
31
wf_data = xlsread("wf_data.xlsx");
32
wf_1 = wf_data(:,1);
33
wf_2 = wf_data(:,2);
34
wf_3 = wf_data(:,3);
35
len = length(wf_1);
36
step_1 = 1:60:len;
37
wf_1_modi = wf_1(step_1 ,:);
38
wf_2_modi = wf_2(step_1 ,:);
39
wf_3_modi = wf_3(step_1 ,:);
40
wf_1_modi(find(isnan(wf_1_modi))) = 0;
41
wf_2_modi(find(isnan(wf_2_modi))) = 0;
42
wf_3_modi(find(isnan(wf_3_modi))) = 0; % set NaN to zero!
43
44
45
46
PV_data(1:60:length(PV_data)) = []; %delete 900 element
47
step_2 = 1:5:length(PV_data); %choose the element every 5
48
pv_modi = PV_data(step_2 ,:);
49
pv_modi(1:20:length(pv_modi)) = []; %delete every 20, elimate element number =
531
50
pv_modi = pv_modi(1:10080,1); %delete the last 9 element
51
pv_modi = pv_modi*600;
52
53
%% change the unit
54
pv_modi = pv_modi./1e6;
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
53
==PAGE:64==
55
wf_1_modi = wf_1_modi./1e6;
56
wf_2_modi = wf_2_modi./1e6;
57
wf_3_modi = wf_3_modi./1e6;
58
59
total_power = wf_1_modi+wf_2_modi+wf_3_modi+pv_modi;
60
61
%% plot
62
figure(5);
63
plot(total_power);
64
grid();
65
66
time_1 = (1:length(wf_3))';
67
figure(1)
68
plot(time_1,wf_1);
69
hold on
70
plot(time_1,wf_2);
71
hold on
72
plot(time_1,wf_3);
73
grid();
74
legend('wf 1','wf 2','wf 3')
75
76
figure(2)
77
time_2 = (1:length(PV_data))';
78
plot(time_2,PV_data);
79
grid();
80
81
figure(3);
82
time_3 = (1:length(wf_1_modi))';
83
plot(time_3,wf_1_modi);
84
hold on
85
plot(time_3,wf_2_modi);
86
hold on
87
plot(time_3,wf_3_modi);
88
grid();
89
legend('modified wf 1','modified wf 2','modified wf 3')
90
91
figure(4);
92
time_4 = (1:length(pv_modi))';
93
plot(time_4,pv_modi);
94
grid();
95
96
%% load data
97
%clear all;clc;close all;
98
99
for m = 1:360
100
load_1(m) = 3.5e6;
101
end
102
load_1 = load_1 ';
103
104
for n = 361:1080
105
load_2(n) = 12.5e6;
106
end
107
load_2 = load_2 ';
108
load_2(1:360) = [];
109
110
for i = 1081:1260
111
load_3(i) = 12.5e6 + (i-1081)*8.3799e+03;
112
end
113
load_3 = load_3 ';
114
load_3(1:1080) = [];
115
116
for j = 1261:1440
54
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:65==
117
load_4(j) = 14e6 - (j-1261)*2.2222e+04;
118
end
119
load_4 = load_4 ';
120
load_4(1:1260) = [];
121
122
load_oneday = [load_1;
123
load_2;
124
load_3;
125
load_4]./1e6;
126
figure(6)
127
plot(load_oneday)
128
grid();
129
130
total_load_week = [load_oneday;
131
load_oneday;
132
load_oneday;
133
load_oneday;
134
load_oneday;
135
load_oneday;
136
load_oneday];
137
figure(7)
138
plot(total_load_week);
139
grid();
140
141
%% data for ext file
142
143
wf_3_cheated = wf_3_modi(801:1200);
144
wf_3_cheated = wf_3_cheated - 1.5;
145
wf_3_before = wf_3_modi(1:800);
146
wf_3_after = wf_3_modi(1201:end);
147
wf_3_modi = [wf_3_before;wf_3_cheated;wf_3_after];
148
149
wf_1_time = [time_3 wf_1_modi];
150
wf_2_time = [time_3 wf_2_modi];
151
wf_3_time = [time_3 wf_3_modi];
152
load_time = [time_3 total_load_week];
153
pv_time = [time_3 pv_modi];
154
pv_1 = pv_modi./2;
155
pv_2 = pv_1;
156
pv_1(find(isnan(pv_1))) = 0;
157
pv_2(find(isnan(pv_2))) = 0; % set NaN to zero
158
pv_1_time = [time_3 pv_1];
159
pv_2_time = [time_3 pv_2];
160
161
%% load data from website
162
% clear all;clc;close all;
163
data_resi = importdata('household_power_consumption.txt');%,'headerlines ',1)
164
data_load = data_resi.data(:,1).*2; %load the load data from the file and
times two to scale it
165
for i = 1:length(data_load)
166
data_modi(2*i) = data_load(i);
167
data_modi(2*i-1) = data_load(i);
168
end
169
data_modi = data_modi(1,1:10080)';
170
171
for t = 1:300
172
load_modi(t) = data_modi(t)-3;
173
end
174
load_modi = load_modi ';
175
load_2 = data_modi(301:end,1);
176
load_modi_final = [load_modi;load_2];
177
%%
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
55
==PAGE:66==
178
load_cheated = load_modi_final(601:1200);
179
load_cheated = load_cheated + 1;
180
load_before = load_modi_final(1:600);
181
load_after = load_modi_final(1201:end);
182
load_modi_final = [load_before;load_cheated;load_after];
183
184
load_cheated_2 = load_modi_final(721:1200);
185
load_cheated_2 = load_cheated_2 + 2.5;
186
load_before_2 = load_modi_final(1:720);
187
load_after_2 = load_modi_final(1201:end);
188
load_modi_final = [load_before_2;load_cheated_2;load_after_2];
189
190
%%
191
192
figure();
193
plot(load_modi_final);
194
grid();
195
time_load = 1:10080;
196
time_load = time_load ';
197
load_time_set = [time_load ,load_modi_final];
198
199
load_test = [time_load ,load_modi_final./3];
200
201
%% calculation
202
203
delta_p =
total_power - load_modi_final; % extra power than load
204
delta_p_3_pu = (delta_p./3)./18; % extra power than load in p.u.
205
wf_1_modi_pu = wf_1_modi./18;
206
wf_2_modi_pu = wf_2_modi./18;
207
wf_3_modi_pu = wf_3_modi./18;
208
pv_1_modi_pu = pv_1./18;
209
pv_2_modi_pu = pv_2./18;
210
211
find_wf1_reduction = find(wf_1_modi_pu(find(delta_p >=0)) - delta_p_3_pu(find(
delta_p >=0)) <= 0);
212
wf1_reduction_power_pu = wf_1_modi_pu(find_wf1_reduction);
213
wf1_reduction_power = wf1_reduction_power_pu.*18;
214
%find the wf1 pu value when power is larger than load, then let each wf do
215
%power reduction and see how many of then of the reducted power is smaller
than zero
216
mean_wf1_redcution_pu = mean(wf1_reduction_power_pu); % in p.u.
217
mean_wf1_redcution = mean_wf1_redcution_pu*18;
218
219
find_wf2_reduction = find(wf_2_modi_pu(find(delta_p >=0)) - delta_p_3_pu(find(
delta_p >=0)) <= 0);
220
wf2_reduction_power_pu = wf_2_modi_pu(find_wf2_reduction);
221
wf2_reduction_power = wf2_reduction_power_pu.*18;
222
mean_wf2_redcution_pu = mean(wf2_reduction_power_pu);
223
mean_wf2_redcution = mean_wf2_redcution_pu*18;
224
225
find_wf3_reduction = find(wf_3_modi_pu(find(delta_p >=0)) - delta_p_3_pu(find(
delta_p >=0)) <= 0);
226
wf3_reduction_power_pu = wf_3_modi_pu(find_wf3_reduction);
227
wf3_reduction_power = wf3_reduction_power_pu.*18;
228
mean_wf3_redcution_pu = mean(wf3_reduction_power_pu);
229
mean_wf3_redcution = mean_wf3_redcution_pu*18;
230
231
find_pv1_reduction = find(pv_1_modi_pu(find(delta_p >=0)) - delta_p_3_pu(find(
delta_p >=0)) <= 0);
232
pv1_reduction_power_pu = pv_1_modi_pu(find_pv1_reduction);
233
pv1_reduction_power = pv1_reduction_power_pu.*18;
234
mean_pv1_redcution_pu = mean(pv1_reduction_power_pu);
56
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:67==
235
mean_pv1_redcution = mean_pv1_redcution_pu*18;
236
237
figure();
238
plot(wf1_reduction_power);
239
hold on
240
plot(wf2_reduction_power);
241
hold on
242
plot(wf3_reduction_power);
243
hold on
244
plot(pv1_reduction_power);
245
ylabel('power [MW]')
246
grid();
247
legend('reduction power for wf1','reduction power for wf2','reduction power
for wf3','reduction power for pv1')￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿
248
%power ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿reduction0
249
250
%% wf data 1h period
251
252
wf1_1h = wf_1_modi(1:360,1);
253
min_wf1_1h = min(wf1_1h);
254
mean_wf1_1h = mean(wf1_1h);
255
256
wf1_2h = wf_1_modi(361:720,1);
257
min_wf1_2h = min(wf1_2h);
258
mean_wf1_2h = mean(wf1_2h);
259
260
wf1_3h = wf_1_modi(721:1080,1);
261
min_wf1_3h = min(wf1_3h);
262
mean_wf1_3h = mean(wf1_3h);
263
264
wf1_4h = wf_1_modi(1081:1440,1);
265
min_wf1_4h = min(wf1_4h);
266
mean_wf1_4h = mean(wf1_4h);
267
%playint with wf1
268
wf1_1_4h_decend = [wf1_1h;wf1_2h;wf1_3h;wf1_4h];
269
270
time_1_4h = 1:1440;
271
272
figure;
273
plot(time_1_4h ,wf1_1_4h_decend)
274
xlabel('time [s]')
275
ylabel('power [MW]')
276
grid();
277
legend('wf1 power 1-4h decending ')
278
line([1,100],[min_wf1_1h ,min_wf1_1h],'color','r');
279
line([361,461],[min_wf1_2h ,min_wf1_2h],'color','b');
280
line([721,821],[min_wf1_3h ,min_wf1_3h],'color','g');
281
line([1081,1181],[min_wf1_4h ,min_wf1_4h],'color','y');
282
% end of wf1
283
284
wf2_1h = wf_2_modi(1:360,1);
285
min_wf2_1h = min(wf2_1h);
286
mean_wf2_1h = mean(wf2_1h);
287
288
wf2_2h = wf_2_modi(361:720,1);
289
min_wf2_2h = min(wf2_2h);
290
mean_wf2_2h = mean(wf2_2h);
291
292
wf2_3h = wf_2_modi(721:1080,1);
293
min_wf2_3h = min(wf2_3h);
294
mean_wf2_3h = mean(wf2_3h);
295
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
57
==PAGE:68==
296
wf2_4h = wf_2_modi(1081:1440,1);
297
min_wf2_4h = min(wf2_4h);
298
mean_wf2_4h = mean(wf2_4h);
299
%playing with wf2
300
301
wf2_1_4h_decend = [wf2_1h;wf2_2h;wf2_3h;wf2_4h];
302
303
figure;
304
plot(time_1_4h ,wf2_1_4h_decend)
305
xlabel('time [s]')
306
ylabel('power [MW]')
307
grid();
308
legend('wf2 power 1-4h decending ')
309
line([1,100],[min_wf2_1h ,min_wf2_1h],'color','r');
310
line([361,461],[min_wf2_2h ,min_wf2_2h],'color','b');
311
line([721,821],[min_wf2_3h ,min_wf2_3h],'color','g');
312
line([1081,1181],[min_wf2_4h ,min_wf2_4h],'color','y');
313
% end of wf2
314
315
wf3_1h = wf_3_modi(1:360,1);
316
min_wf3_1h = min(wf3_1h);
317
mean_wf3_1h = mean(wf3_1h);
318
319
wf3_2h = wf_3_modi(361:720,1);
320
min_wf3_2h = min(wf3_2h);
321
mean_wf3_2h = mean(wf3_2h);
322
323
wf3_3h = wf_3_modi(721:1080,1);
324
min_wf3_3h = min(wf3_3h);
325
mean_wf3_3h = mean(wf3_3h);
326
327
wf3_4h = wf_3_modi(1081:1440,1);
328
min_wf3_4h = min(wf3_4h);
329
mean_wf3_4h = mean(wf3_4h);
330
%playing with wf3
331
332
wf3_1_4h_decend = [wf3_1h;wf3_2h;wf3_3h;wf3_4h];
333
334
figure;
335
plot(time_1_4h ,wf3_1_4h_decend)
336
xlabel('time [s]')
337
ylabel('power [MW]')
338
grid();
339
legend('wf3 power 1-4h decending ')
340
line([1,100],[min_wf3_1h ,min_wf3_1h],'color','r');
341
line([361,461],[min_wf3_2h ,min_wf3_2h],'color','b');
342
line([721,821],[min_wf3_3h ,min_wf3_3h],'color','g');
343
line([1081,1181],[min_wf3_4h ,min_wf3_4h],'color','y');
344
%end of wf3
345
346
%% wf sum data
347
348
for x = 1:length(wf_1_modi)
349
wf_1_sum(x) = sum(wf_1_modi(1:x));
350
wf_2_sum(x) = sum(wf_2_modi(1:x));
351
wf_3_sum(x) = sum(wf_3_modi(1:x));
352
end
353
354
wf_1_sum_set = [time_load ,wf_1_sum '];
355
wf_2_sum_set = [time_load ,wf_2_sum '];
356
wf_3_sum_set = [time_load ,wf_3_sum '];
357
% time_1_10095 = 1:10095;
58
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:69==
358
% load_1_15 = ones(1,15).*1;
359
360
wf_total_sum = wf_1_sum + wf_2_sum + wf_3_sum;
361
% wf_total_sum_set = [time_1_10095 ',transpose([load_1_15 ,wf_total_sum])];
362
wf_total_sum_set = [time_load ,transpose(wf_total_sum)];
363
364
%% load seperated
365
366
load_min_constant = ones(10080,1).*0.8;
367
load_min_constant_2 = load_min_constant.*3;
368
load_min_constant_set = [time_load ,load_min_constant];
369
load_min_constant_2_set = [time_load ,load_min_constant_2];
370
371
load_fluc_1 = load_modi_final.*0.25;
372
load_fluc_2 = load_modi_final.*0.55;
373
load_fluc_3 = load_modi_final.*0.35;
374
375
load_fluc1_set = [time_load ,load_fluc_1];
376
load_fluc2_set = [time_load ,load_fluc_2];
377
load_fluc3_set = [time_load ,load_fluc_3];
378
379
%% scenario 1 data processing
380
381
wf_1_15_35 = wf_1_modi(15:35);
382
wf_1_15_35_mean = mean(wf_1_15_35); ￿￿%15-35￿￿￿￿swf
383
384
wf_2_15_35 = wf_2_modi(15:35);
385
wf_2_15_35_mean = mean(wf_2_15_35); ￿￿%15-35￿￿￿￿swf
386
387
wf_3_15_35 = wf_3_modi(15:35);
388
wf_3_15_35_mean = mean(wf_3_15_35); ￿￿%15-35￿￿￿￿swf
389
390
load_fluc1_15_35 = load_fluc_1(15:35);
391
mean_load_fluc1_15_35 = mean(load_fluc1_15_35); ￿￿%￿load15 -35￿￿￿￿s
392
393
load_fluc2_15_35 = load_fluc_2(15:35);
394
mean_load_fluc2_15_35 = mean(load_fluc2_15_35); ￿￿%￿load15 -35￿￿￿￿s
395
396
load_fluc3_15_35 = load_fluc_3(15:35);
397
mean_load_fluc3_15_35 = mean(load_fluc3_15_35); ￿￿%￿load15 -35￿￿￿￿s
398
399
% %% scenario 2 data processing wrong!
400
%
401
% space = 1:20:10080;
402
%
403
% for y = 1:504
404
%
load_1_mean_every_20s(y) = mean(load_fluc_1( (space(y):space(y)+19),1 ))
;
405
%
load_2_mean_every_20s(y) = transpose(mean(load_fluc_2( (space(y):space(y
)+19),1 )));
406
%
load_3_mean_every_20s(y) = transpose(mean(load_fluc_3( (space(y):space(y
)+19),1 )));
407
% end
408
%
409
% % time_for_mean = 1:504;
410
% % load_1_mean_time_set = [time_for_mean;load_1_mean_every_20s]';
411
% % load_2_mean_time_set = [time_for_mean;load_2_mean_every_20s]';
412
% % load_3_mean_time_set = [time_for_mean;load_3_mean_every_20s]';
413
%
414
% position_mean = 1:20:10080;
415
% load_1_mean_full_data = zeros(10080,1);
416
% load_2_mean_full_data = zeros(10080,1);
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
59
==PAGE:70==
417
% load_3_mean_full_data = zeros(10080,1);
418
%
419
% for b = 1:504
420
%
load_1_mean_full_data((position_mean(b):position_mean(b)+19) ,1) =
load_1_mean_every_20s(b);
421
%
load_2_mean_full_data((position_mean(b):position_mean(b)+19) ,1) =
load_2_mean_every_20s(b);
422
%
load_3_mean_full_data((position_mean(b):position_mean(b)+19) ,1) =
load_3_mean_every_20s(b);
423
% end
424
%
425
% load_1_mean_full_data_set = [time_load ,load_1_mean_full_data];
426
% load_2_mean_full_data_set = [time_load ,load_2_mean_full_data];
427
% load_3_mean_full_data_set = [time_load ,load_3_mean_full_data];
428
%
429
% wf_total_scenario2 = zeros(10080,1);
430
% wf_total_sum_scenario2 = wf_total_sum;
431
%
432
% for d = 1:504
433
% %
wf_total_scenario2((position_mean(d)),1) = wf_total_sum_scenario2(
position_mean(d));
434
%
wf_total_scenario2((position_mean(d):position_mean(d)+19) ,1) =
wf_total_sum_scenario2(position_mean(d));
435
% end
436
%
437
% wf_sum_scenario_set = [time_load ,wf_total_scenario2];
438
439
%% scenario 2 data processing correct one
440
441
time_step_20s = 1:20:10080;
442
load_1_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
443
load_2_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
444
load_3_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
445
wf_1_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
446
wf_2_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
447
wf_3_fulltime_value = ones(10080,1);
448
449
for f = 1:504
450
load_1_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(load_fluc_1((time_step_20s(f):
time_step_20s(f)+19),1));
451
load_2_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(load_fluc_2((time_step_20s(f):
time_step_20s(f)+19),1));
452
load_3_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(load_fluc_3((time_step_20s(f):
time_step_20s(f)+19),1));
453
454
wf_1_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(wf_1_modi((time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)
+19),1));
455
wf_2_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(wf_2_modi((time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)
+19),1));
456
wf_3_mean_every_20s(f) = mean(wf_3_modi((time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)
+19),1));
457
458
load_1_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
load_1_mean_every_20s(f);
459
load_2_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
load_2_mean_every_20s(f);
460
load_3_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
load_3_mean_every_20s(f);
461
462
wf_1_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
wf_1_mean_every_20s(f);
60
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:71==
463
wf_2_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
wf_2_mean_every_20s(f);
464
wf_3_fulltime_mean_value( ( time_step_20s(f):time_step_20s(f)+19 ) ) =
wf_3_mean_every_20s(f);
465
end
466
467
load_1_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(load_1_fulltime_mean_value);
468
load_2_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(load_2_fulltime_mean_value);
469
load_3_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(load_3_fulltime_mean_value);
470
471
wf_1_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(wf_1_fulltime_mean_value);
472
wf_2_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(wf_2_fulltime_mean_value);
473
wf_3_fulltime_mean_value = transpose(wf_3_fulltime_mean_value);
474
wf_total_mean_value = wf_3_fulltime_mean_value + wf_2_fulltime_mean_value +
wf_1_fulltime_mean_value;
475
476
load_1_fulltime_mean_set = [time_load ,load_1_fulltime_mean_value];
477
load_2_fulltime_mean_set = [time_load ,load_2_fulltime_mean_value];
478
load_3_fulltime_mean_set = [time_load ,load_3_fulltime_mean_value];
479
480
wf_1_fulltime_set = [time_load ,wf_1_fulltime_mean_value];
481
wf_2_fulltime_set = [time_load ,wf_2_fulltime_mean_value];
482
wf_3_fulltime_set = [time_load ,wf_3_fulltime_mean_value];
483
wf_total_mean_set = [time_load ,wf_total_mean_value];
484
485
%% plot the fluctuating loads
486
487
figure();
488
plot(time_load(1:2000),load_fluc_1(1:2000))
489
hold on
490
plot(time_load(1:2000),load_fluc_2(1:2000))
491
hold on
492
plot(time_load(1:2000),load_fluc_3(1:2000))
493
grid();
494
xlabel('time [s]')
495
ylabel('power [MW]')
496
legend('fluctuating load 1','fluctuating load 2','fluctuating load 3')
497
title('the power of the fluctuating loads plot ')
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
61
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Figures
Figure A.1: The fluctuating loads plot
Figure A.2: The control diagram of the grid­forming virtual synchronous machine[26]
62
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.3: The grid­forming droop control diagram[26]
Study restoration strategy and procedures for islanded microgrid powered by 100% variable resources
63
==PAGE:74==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
