==PAGE:1==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing
Organizations
Master Thesis
Author: Alec Putrih Jeza
DTU Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Implementation and Performance Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Coordination and Control in Self­managing Organizations
Master Thesis
24. 6. 2022
Author: Alec Putrih Jeza
Supervisor: Kasper Edwards, Senior Researcher at Department of Technology, Manage­
ment and Economics Management Science
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Implementation and Performance Management, Akademivej, 358,
113, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Implementation and Performance
Management, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Techni­
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Alec Putrih Jeza ­ s192411
Signature
Date
ii
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
24. 06. 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The present research attempts to develop a holistic analytical tool that allows scholars to
identify decentralized organizational processes and to understand how these processes
are controlled. Moreover, it is attempted to understand which mechanisms are used in
SMOs to coordinate tasks in the absence of centralized authority. The analysis was done
by interviewing four members of four different SMOs.
The analytical tool that was developed on top of the theory developed by Ferreira and
Otley (2009) The interviews revealed that the PMS framework designed by Ferreira and
Otley dooes not cover certain aspects that are important for control in SMOs. These
aspects are decision making, conflict resolution, behavioral standards or controls, work
execution, work design, and the question about who has authority to hire and fire employ­
ees. These aspects should be considered in further research.
The findings about organizational control revealed that the majority of processes that are
not centralized are partly decentralized, meaning that they are mainly controlled by quasi
managers who have time limited and revocable authority. Other common practices, how­
ever not present in all cases, include peer evaluation of performance; transparent salaries
that are set using a wide arrange of objective and subjective criteria; employee workshops
for participative design of vision, mission and strategy; behavioral standards; step­by­step
conflict resolution; and hiring people with a proven record of experience and commitment.
Case companies do not use any coordination mechanisms that would be different from
the ones presented in literature. They do, however, often rely on quasi­project manager
to coordinate work.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
iii
==PAGE:6==
“I despise everything that merely instructs me without augmenting or directly invigorating
my activity.”
∼J. W. von Goethe
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge and give my warmest thanks to my supervisor, Kasper Ed­
wards, PhD., for his guidance during the writing of my thesis, and allowing me to pursue
my own interests in this project.
A very special thanks also goes to the recently deceased prof. Tonči Kuzmanić, PhD.,
for his mentorship in my earlier years, his inspiring and incredibly deep and insightful
analysis and critique of managerial studies, and his willingness to always take his time to
talk to curious students.
Thanks to Macarena Mendez Ribo, PhD., and prof. Andrew M. Shepherd for valuable
opinions, criticism and insights about my thesis.
Last but not least, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my parents, Metka and
Boris, and my sister Hana and her boyfriend Martin Morset, for supporting me throughout
my education and for always standing by my side.
iv
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
• SMO: Self­Managing Organization
• MH: Managerial Hierarchy
• MCS: Management Control Systems
• PMS: Performance Management Systems
• KSF: Key Success Factor
• KPI: Key Performance Indicator
• BoD: Board of Directors
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
3
2.1
Organizational Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Historical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
The Emergence of Managerial Hierarchies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Alternative, Flatter Organizational Structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Self­Managing Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.5
Notable Examples of SMOs in Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.6
Potential Shortcomings and Research Gaps of SMOs . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Organizational Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.1
Historical Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2.2
Emergence of Management Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.3
The Performance Management Systems Framework . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2.4
Control in Decentralized Organizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Coordination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.1
Historical Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3.2
Recent Theorization of Coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3.3
Coordination in Decentralized Organizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Methodology
26
3.1
Research Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.1.1
Research Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.1.2
Research Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.1.3
Interview planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2
Case Companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.3
Interview Summaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.1
Case 1: Fountain Partnership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.2
Case 2: Qamcom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.3.3
Case 3: Satalia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.3.4
Case 4: IMP Scandinavia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4
Research Analysis
51
4.1
Analysis Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
vi
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:9==
4.2
Analysis results ­ Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.2.1
Level of decentralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.2.2
Control in PMS aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.2.3
Other Principles of Control and Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.2.4
Improved version of the analytical tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.3
Analysis results ­ Coordination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5
Critical Reflections on the Project
66
5.1
Discussion ­ Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.2
Discussion ­ Coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.4
Opportunities for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
References
72
A Appendix A
75
B Appendix B
82
C Appendix C
106
D Appendix D
116
E
Appendix E
132
F
Appendix F
148
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Research in organizational design has a longstanding presence in the tradition of western
science and thought. The inquiries about organizational structures can be traced as far
back as to the works of Plato and Aristotle, where both of them were mainly interested in
the structure of public, political organizations (Kuzmanić et al., 2010). However uninter­
ested we might be in political organizations in the field of engineering, or how distanced
we might be in their work, both Plato and Aristotle are still relevant because they stand at
the beginning of a rational approach towards understanding human affairs and organiza­
tions. One of the central concerns about their work is that every organizational structure
and every form of domination has to be legitimized, and that no form of domination can
simply legitimize itself (Arendt, 1961). Ever since Plato, the foundational argument for
the hierarchical division of authority in the in human organizations has been knowledge
(Arendt, 1961). In his famous Allegory of the cave, Plato wrote the fundamental ideas that
he later used to give authority, or the right to give orders, to those who possess knowl­
edge (Plato, 1955). Those who know the most have the right to centralize authority and
distribute it down the hierarchy however they know is best. This assumption was imple­
mented by the rulers in the Roman Republic and remained intact even after the Empire’s
demise, and re­actualized itself in the form of the Holy Empires across Europe (Arendt,
1961). According to Kuzmanić et al. (2010), this hierarchical model was taken for granted
during the emergence of the first capitalist institutions in 17th century. These for­profit and
private organizations followed an old organizational model that distinguished between a
master and apprentice, whereby the master would have authority over the work of an ap­
prentice, because the master had superior knowledge about the production processes.
Knowledge, combined with ownership, presented two fundamental arguments that would
legitimize a hierarchical division of work throughout the industrial revolution (Kuzmanić
et al., 2010). The general success of these for­profit organizations, their contribution in
technological development and increasing and continuous prosperity of human lives, left
little room for alternative approaches in organizational structure design.
Things started to change due to an increasing demand for a more equal distribution of
profits and the general need for innovation. Globalized, increasingly competitive markets,
knowledge­based economies, highly specialized work were only some of the conditions
that encouraged entrepreneurs and scholars to at least start thinking about alternative
organizational structures with decentralized authority (Lee & Edmondson, 2017; Burns
& Stalker, 1961; Volberda, 1996). Scholars started to observe that the old, bureaucratic
and hierarchical structure tends to stifle innovation and might be poorly suited for dynamic
markets (Burns & Stalker, 1961). Business owners and executives started questioning the
necessity and productivity of expensive managers (Semler, 1989). Increasingly special­
ized and complex work in advanced technological sectors encouraged people to doubt
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
1
==PAGE:12==
about whether managers still have the superior knowledge that legitimized the centraliza­
tion of authority (Puranam, 2014). These conditions encouraged a marginal amount of
entrepreneurs, executives and researchers to consider to flatten the hierarchy and decen­
tralize decision making authority, giving more power to managers and employees on the
lower levels of hierarchy. These first approaches towards flattening the hierarchy are rec­
ognized in the literature under the key work of ’post­bureaucratic’ organizations (H. Gittell
& Douglass, 2012).
Business owners of companies such as Favi, The Morning Star, Valve and others, took
more radical approaches and decided to get rid of formal hierarchy altogether, abolishing
managerial positions and giving employees the freedom to manage the organization, and
control processes without almost any interference of any higher authority (Lee & Edmond­
son, 2017; Laloux, 2014). Companies above and other similar enterprises encouraged
certain scholars to attempt to develop a formal study of flat organizations with decen­
tralized authority. In literature, these organizations are called Self­managed organiza­
tions (SMOs) (Lee & Edmondson, 2017). By definition of Lee and Edmondson, (2017),
SMOs are organizations that radically decentralize authority in a formal and systematic
way throughout the organization. This means that employees have full authority when it
comes to the execution of their tasks. The authors however state that other aspects of
organizations, such as strategy, work design, resource allocation and performance man­
agement can remain under full authority and control of the founders or the executives, as
is the case in some of the real­world examples of SMOs, such as Valve or The Morning
Star. Because of the nature of their paper, which reviews the literature and presents us
with a formal definition of SMOs, the authors leave us with no formal theoretical frame­
work that would allow us to systematically understand which other aspects besides Work
Execution are decentralized in practice, and how they are controlled. Moreover, the au­
thors of the paper suggest that it would be valuable to understand how SMOs coordinate
work.
The purpose of the present paper is therefore to develop a holistic analytical tool that al­
lows researchers to systematically discover decentralized organizational aspects in SMOs,
and use this tool to understand how these aspects are controlled. Moreover, it is at­
tempted to understand how interdependent work is coordinated in SMOs.
2
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:13==
2
State of the Art
The following chapter is comprised of three parts that describe three main theoretical
building blocks for the present research: theory on organizational structures, control and
coordination.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
3
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Organizational Design
This section includes a brief historical overview and cultural assumptions that lead to the
development of the most pervasive and most well studied structural form in business­
oriented institutions, called Managerial Hierarchies. Further on, it showcases some at­
tempts to find alternative ways of organizing, and presents us with a definition of Self­
Managing Organizations recognized in academic literature. This is followed up by the
research gaps on these institutions as well as some practical examples of SMOs.
2.1.1
Historical Background
According to Burke (1992), first scientific attempts to understand private, for­profit orga­
nizational structures precedes the formal establishment of social sciences and can be
traced to the works of Adam Smith, who discussed the division of labour and its contribu­
tion to the productivity of labour. After Durkheim’s formal establishment of social sciences,
first studies of organizational structures can be traced in the works of Max Weber, whose
works present us with a series of new arguments that justify the need for hierarchical distri­
bution of authority in what he calls bureaucratic organizations. Around the same time, first
managerial studies appeared in the studies of Frederick Winslow Taylor. His approach
is often recognized by the name Scientific Management. In line with the tradition, all of
these thinkers agreed that organizations can be best structured if authority was given to
those who had the required knowledge to control different aspects of the enterprise.
2.1.2
The Emergence of Managerial Hierarchies
In literature on organizational design, bureaucratic organizations are also referred to as
Managerial Hierarchies (MH). Following the literature review done by Lee and Edmondson
(2017), MHs are organizations that follow a hierarchical distribution of authority.
The authors of the review present us with some additional and more concrete cultural
assumptions that justified the hierarchical and authoritative organizational structure in pri­
vate and for­profit organizations. These assumptions were centered around the convic­
tion that managerial hierarchy, along with its distribution of authority, determines the roles
and appoints responsibilities to the members of organizations (Lee & Edmondson, 2017).
Moreover, the authority granted to managers supposedly provides a simple and efficient
mechanism that is used to determine goals and resolves conflicts amongst employees.
The last widely accepted assumption is that managerial authority helps to establish con­
trol and accountability in cases where work cannot be perfectly specified or contracted.
Weber (1946) argued that bureaucratic distribution of authority allows people to coordi­
nate tasks with predictability and efficiency. Another important factor is a lack of viable
and widely accepted alternatives, which means that we cannot know whether MH are
superior to other organizational structures until a comparative analysis will be done.
Overall, MHs, as defined by Lee and Edmondson (2017), that are built on top of the
assumptions described above, rely on two basic principles:
• A hierarchy of authority: managers direct and prioritize the distribution of tasks,
4
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:15==
review performance, hire and fire employees etc.
• A hierarchy of accountability: managers are accountable for the work of those below
in the hierarchy.
The core unit of managerial hierarchies is the relationship between the manager and his
subordinate that runs on principles of (Lee & Edmondson, 2017):
• Unity of command.
• Supervision of lower offices by the higher ones.
• Obedience to superiors.
These three principles ensure that those below execute the orders imposed by those
higher in the hierarchy. It also allows superiors to control the behaviors and processes of
subordinates, and make decisions of the higher levels of hierarchy irrevocable from below.
The term hierarchy is used in a broad sense that includes all institutions that are organized
in the classic pyramid­shaped organizational charts. The generic hierarchical structure is
represented in Figure 2.1. Authority is filtered down to the base of the pyramid in a way
that each successive level possesses some authority, but less than the one above it.
Despite its dominance and persistence over the years, last half of the century started
to illuminate the limitations and shortcomings of managerial hierarchies(Lee & Edmond­
son, 2017). Other literature states that managerial hierarchies are better suited for stable
conditions, but struggle in dynamic circumstances and increasingly competitive markets
(Burns & Stalker, 1961; Volberda, 1996). According to Puranam (2014, 2022), knowledge
based economies no longer enables bosses to effectively monitor subordinates. Under
the circumstances of highly specialized work, the idea that those higher in the hierarchy
have superior and more systematic knowledge about the processes has lost a lot of its
credibility. He also notes that hierarchical management tends to bottleneck innovation
and is responsible for information losses. This might be a result of the rigid top­down
flow of directions and information that was originally developed in contexts that did not
have to be responsive to rapid change (Burns & Stalker, 1961). Lee and Edmondson
(2017) argue that over the past decades, economies have moved from material flows to
flows of information, adding complexity and reducing the ability of individuals to have an
intuitive oversight of the flows. They also mention that other scholars pointed out that
MH reinforces status differences and prevents personal growth and equal fulfillment to all
organizational members.
The circumstances that affect hierarchical organizations described above, coupled with
economic uncertainties, market turbulences, fast paced technological development and
changing customer needs, present researchers and managers with the need to find al­
ternative organizational structures, in which employees are able to respond to changes
faster than it is allowed by reporting relationships and traditional managerial controls (Lee
& Edmondson, 2017). Another trend that promotes new organizational structures is a re­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: The organizational charts of Managerial Hierarchies (Jones & George, 2016)
6
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:17==
cent introduction of new generations into the workforce, which tend to see work as a place
of fulfillment rather than only a means of acquiring financial security (Yang & Guy, 2006).
In the West, people are also expressing more criticism of manager’s ideas and don’t find
it inappropriate to bypass their own upward bosses, which is in line with the idea that a
significant amount of people want to be more autonomous at work (Detert & Edmondson,
2011). Decentralized structures presumably also provide more equal solutions when it
comes to status and salaries (Puranam, 2022).
2.1.3
Alternative, Flatter Organizational Structures
Trends described above had a significant impact on the design of work in recent decades.
Literature and business articles are filled with rhetoric about the reduction of corporate hi­
erarchical levels. However, Puranam (2022) claims that this flattening is primarily not
about decentralization of authority, but the reduction of layers in multi­layered compa­
nies. Insofar as companies want to only flatten the hierarchy, but not decentralize the
authority, the remaining effective span of control of managers has to be increased, rather
than decreased.
On the other hand, literature also shows us that recent decades witnessed the emergence
of participatory management, self­managed teams, employee empowerment programs,
network organizations and workplace democracies. These approaches tried to give more
authority and autonomy to workers, allowed them to form worker committees where they
could influence their work as well as the direction of the organization, and to reduce the
formal hierarchy by establishing new relational and cultural norms (Lee & Edmondson,
2017).
In their literature review, Lee and Edmondson (2017) reviewed and attempted to cate­
gorize recent approaches to less hierarchical organizing. They recognized that literature
presents us with common themes, perspectives, methodological approaches and other
traits that allowed them to analyze them in three distinct categories: humanistic manage­
ment, organizational democracy and post­bureaucratic organizations.
They performed an analysis of these three concepts from three different perspectives.
They wanted to understand the intended benefits of each of the three organizational
designs.
Furthermore, they wanted to understand whether each approach is applied
throughout the whole organization, or only its parts. This perspective is called the level of
analysis. The third perspective are the design features of an organization.
The key elements of the three types of organizations are summarized in Figure 2.2.
Another example of an attempt of an organizational structure that is distinct from manage­
rial hierarchy is Burns and Stalker’s (1961) definition of the organic form. He defines the
organic structure as “the adjustment and continual re­definition of individual tasks through
interaction with the other”, “a network structure of control, authority and community” and
“a lateral rather than vertical direction of communication through the organization, commu­
nication of people of different rank, also, resembling consultation rather than command”.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Summary of the key elements in each research category (Lee & Edmondson,
2017).
2.1.4
Self­Managing Organizations
According to Lee and Edmondson (2017), all of the above attempts fail to make a distinc­
tion between radical and incremental decentralization of authority.
Post­bureaucratic organizations do indeed deviate from the ideal bureaucratic organiza­
tion, but most studies show that such organizations maintain the reporting relationship
between a manager and a subordinate, and the majority of decisions are still made hi­
erarchically. Research in the field of humanistic management is mainly focused on in­
cremental approaches of decentralization of authority. Empowerment studies focus on
psychological perceptions, such as self­efficacy, but do not involve formal changes in the
organizational structure. Participative studies on the other hand, focus on decentralization
of authority of frontline workers, but maintain it on higher levels of hierarchy.
The distinction between radical and incremental decentralization of authority serves as
the central piece of the definition of SMOs. In line with these observations, Lee and
Edmondson came up with a formal definition of SMOs:
“Organizations that radically decentralize authority in a formal and systematic way
throughout the organization” (Lee & Edmondson, 2017)
This definition is supported and dependent upon complete elimination of the reporting
relationship between a manager and a subordinate when in comes to work execution.
This is a “necessary condition for radical decentralization of authority”. Work execution
refers to “decisions that determine how a given task or project is to be completed” (Lee &
Edmondson, 2017).
The authors suggest that other organizational domains, such as monitoring work, work
design, performance management and firm strategy can remain centralized or are partly
decentralized. These aspects can be under the authority of the founders or the board of
directors (BoD), or under the authority of quasi­managers. Quasi managers roles might
8
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:19==
resemble the roles of managers in MH, but their authority is limited, revocable and defined
by clear boundaries.
Other research on alternative organizational structures do not provide us with many for­
mal definitions of these organizations. Some attempts have been made by Foss and
Dobrajska, who call alternative structures “wikified companies”, where the prefix ­wiki la­
bels “loosely structured, bottom­up, egalitarian structure” (2015). Laloux talks about Teal
organizations, which are built around the ideas of “transcending the ego”, the “internal
moral compass”, love, wisdom etc., but fails to provide a formal definition of this type of
organizations (2014). Therefore, the rest of the present paper will utilize the definition
developed by Lee and Edmondson (2017).
2.1.5
Notable Examples of SMOs in Literature
Lee and Edmondson (2017) provide us with three examples of radically decentralized
companies:
• Valve, a gaming and hardware development company.
• The Morning Star, an American tomato processing company.
• Zappos, an online shoe and clothing retail store.
Other, non­academic literature, such as Laloux’s Reinventing Organizations (2014) fea­
tures companies such as:
• Favi, a French pressure die casting company.
• Burtzoorg, a Dutch healthcare organization.
Both companies could be considered as Self­managed organizations, according to the
principles put forward by Lee and Edmondson (2017).
Valve
Valve’s model of organizing consists of emergent and temporary role structures that are
developed organically by those who want to participate on a proposed project. While
working on a project, some individuals are assigned quasi­management roles, but they
are neither permanent neither a stable source of authority over other participants. Roles
within project teams are fluid and require consensus from all participants. The two areas
where employees do not have decision making right are within the hiring and firing do­
main and strategic decisions when it comes to entering new markets. The authority over
strategy, as well as hiring and firing of employees remain in the hands of the founder (Lee
& Edmondson, 2017).
The Morning Star
Morning Star features an annual work design and resource allocation model. Employees,
who call themselves colleagues, voluntarily commit their work and contribute to organi­
zational goals. To ensure that those roles, commitments and relationships are clearly de­
fined, colleagues sign bilateral contracts that define their work. They are called Colleague
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
9
==PAGE:20==
Letters Of Understanding (CLOU). CLOUs allow participants to monitor and manage work
and form a transparent network of accountabilities across the entire organization. The net­
work of relationships also serves as an organizational chart, albeit it does not represent
any authoritative relationships. It represents real relationships within the company. It
is dynamic, which means that it changes according to the changing circumstances, and
contextual, meaning that the important relationships depend on the current nature of the
situation. An example of this network is represented in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Network structure comprised of bilateral CLOUs (Laloux, 2014)
Salaries at Morning Star are determined by peer feedback reviews. Hiring is executed by
work teams, but generally lead by experienced members who have a good overview of
the needed skills and compatibility with other members and tasks. Authority over strategic
decisions is the domain of the CEO, who also has the right to intervene in critical conflicts
that cannot be resolved amongst colleagues. Just like at Valve, the CEO is also the only
person who has the right to fire an employee (Lee & Edmondson, 2017; Laloux, 2014).
Zappos
Zappos, along with its Holocratic model is defined by the full autonomy of individuals to
execute the work on the tasks that they see fit to execute. Work design is made in collab­
oration with other members of their work groups. In distinction to Valve and Morning Star,
Holocratic model is a highly formalized system with very specific rules. It allows even ju­
nior employees to propose changes to roles, policies, decision rights and accountabilities
in their work group. However, performance management and firm strategy remain in the
hands of the CEO. Another distinguishing characteristic of Holacracy is that it is highly
replicable — the formalized rules can be and have been adopted in many organizations
10
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:21==
worldwide (Lee & Edmondson, 2017).
Favi
According to Laloux (2014), Favi is the only brass foundry company in their market that
managed to stay in Europe when the production in the past decades moved to developing
countries. The company is comprised of 500 employees who are divided into 21 teams
called ‘mini factories’ of 15 to 35 colleagues. They don’t have any middle management
departments and nearly all staff functions, such as sales or marketing have disappeared.
The only rules and procedures that these teams follow are the rules that they establish
themselves. Emergent roles are allowed to be filled by anyone. All employees have the
freedom to execute their tasks however they seem fit, and established a rule where they
report only to their own team members. They have no sales targets, can come to work
whenever they want and are free to use companies resources as they wish, within the
annually determined budget set by all organizational members. They have no executive
team and almost no meetings. Staffing is coordinated across groups by an elected rep­
resentative of each team. Favi colleagues rely on trust to control their work. The role of
the CEO, Jean Zobrist, is only a formal role and is subjected to the same principles as the
rest of the employees. He virtually has no authority over any decisions made by others,
and even annually asks employees whether they still want him to be their CEO. Despite
its radically flat organizational structure, FAVI pride themselves on not being late on an
order in more than 25 years.
Buurtzorg
Buurtzorg is primarily a nursing company. Nurses work in teams of 10­12 colleagues who
take care of up to 50 patients in a designed local area. According to Laloux (2014), nurses
have full autonomy to find their own office, hire new people, determine roles, plan and
execute their work and holidays and run their own administration. They want to integrate
themselves into the local community, which means they establish relationships with local
doctors and pharmacies as well as local hospitals. Moreover, they also have the right
to expand their teams or to split a team into more teams if they have too many patients.
They also monitor their own performance and decide on corrective action if productivity
drops. Instead of giving teams rigid rules or providing teams with middle management,
the director of the company offers employees with a training course called “solution driven
methods of interaction”, which provides everyone with a coherent set of skills for efficient
and effective group problem solving and decision making. The coaches can not impose
any decisions, but only give advice. The decision making does not require a consent
from all team members. For a proposed solution to be exercised, it is enough that no
one makes a principled objection. Laloux (2014) indicates that a study performed in 2009
revealed that on average, Buurtzorg’s nurses require 40% less time of care per patient in
comparison to other, hierarchically managed nursing companies. Additionally, Buurtzorg
employees have 60% less sickness leaves and 33% lower turnover rate. The company
was founded in 2006 and grew from initial 7 employees to more than 10,000 to the current
date (Buurtzorg, n.d.).
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
11
==PAGE:22==
2.1.6
Potential Shortcomings and Research Gaps of SMOs
Research literature on Valve, performed by Foss and Dobrajska (2015), notes that the lack
of functional specializations, such as a sales department, may have negative impacts in
the development of such competencies in the company. Foss and Dobrajska argue that
another latent problem of Valve’s design, which allows individuals to freely choose the
projects they want to work on, is that it promotes mechanisms of popularity of a project
amongst employees. Valve does not feature any mechanisms that would enable them to
distinguish between promising and excessively risky projects. Likeability and reputation
of certain individuals that promote their projects may overshadow the more objective po­
tential of a project. At Valve, extroverted individuals overshadow the ideas of introverts
who may not have the conditions to realize their full potential. A former employee stated
that working at Valve made him feel “a lot like high school” (Foss & Dobrajska, 2015). A
similar objection to organizations built upon personal ties was also made by Max Weber,
who warned that such relations could lead to the abuse of power, favoritism and ineffi­
ciencies, especially when decisions are made to carry a personal favor rather than by the
need to achieve organizational goals (Weber, 1946).
Soetens and Huybrechts (2022) recognized that organizational ideology and indoctrina­
tion can be utilized to manage and sustain alternative organizational forms. However,
they also found out that reliance on such cultural and informal norms can come at the
cost of individual sacrifices, exclusion of non­conforming members and a reduction in the
heterogeneity of groups, which can ironically lead to an authoritarian system.
There are also lingering questions about the potential scalability of SMOs.
At W. L.
Gore Associates, employees split up corporate divisions when the number of employees
reaches 300 (Laloux, 2014). Puranam (2014) states that Valve also started firing people
when they reached this number. He also argues that being tyrannized by the majority
might not feel that much better for employees than being overruled by a manager.
Finally, Lee and Edmondson (2017) discuss the research gaps in studying SMOs. They
mention that research should be done to uncover the coordination mechanisms that allow
SMOs to accomplish interdependent work. They also propose to investigate the subjec­
tive experience of individuals in such companies, the achievement and maintenance of de­
centralization and organizational consequences of SMOs. Lastly, they propose scholars
to investigate to what extent and through what processes does authority re­concentrate
even in self­managing organizations.
2.2
Organizational Control
The following section of the chapter was done upon a literature review on Organizational
Control theory. This was done in an attempt to see if there is any work done on control in
SMOs or to discover a framework that would allow for a systematic analysis of organiza­
tional processes that are associated with control in academic literature, and to compare
the findings with the existing theory.
12
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:23==
2.2.1
Historical Development
Organizational theory recognizes control as one of the fundamental aspects of all organi­
zations (Jones & George, 2016). Individuals who work together usually develop norms for
their behaviors and try to establish common beliefs. Some of those are taken for granted,
while others tend to get rendered into explicit codes of conduct, such as principles, laws,
edicts, maxims and adages.
The roots of private, for­profit bureaucracies, whose fundamental ideas are still present
in the majority of contemporary organizations, can be traced back to the period of early
industrialization. The development of these organizations are inextricably linked to the
developments of then new natural sciences (Arendt, 1961). The early stages of the sci­
entific revolution are historically recognized under the name of Mechanical Philosophy
(Mechanical Philosophy, 2022). This era, which contains some of the most famous names
in our history, such as Galileo, Descartes and Newton, literally understood the whole cos­
mos as an enormous, self­operating machine that is immediately available for our rational
investigation. According to Burtt (1924), this meant that the laws that govern its mo­
tions can be intuitively understood, and the whole universe reconstructed mechanically
by following these principles. In turn, this assumption gave people hope that all natural
processes could be recreated and controlled for the purposes of human progress. Due to
the initial success. the views and approaches of natural sciences were slowly mirrored,
however more superficially, to the area of humanistic studies (Arendt, 1961). The old, fun­
damental distinction between humans and nature (including machines, whose workings
follow the laws of nature) was slowly losing its significance — later on, it culminated in
the naturalization of some humanistic sciences, for example when the Philosophy of Mind
was replaced by Cognitive Science. In this period, ideas such as efficiency, effective­
ness, productivity, mechanisms, stability (all metaphors that humans first learned to use
through experiences of working with objects, rather than acting with humans), started to
be used in the understandings of human affairs, including social sciences (Arendt, 1961).
This vocabulary is predominant in the literature of organizational studies as well as our
everyday language use. The early stages of this development are encapsulated in the
words of some of the first English industrialists of 18th century, Josiah Wedgwood, whose
intent of designing a pottery factory was “to make such machines of men as cannot err”
(Sitkin, Cardinal, & Bijlsma­Frankema, 2010).
On the other side, the historical development that shaped our understanding of control is
directly connected with the hierarchical distribution of authority and power. The pottery
industry, as well as other crafts, were traditionally organized around master­worker, or
superior­subordinate relations. The masters legitimized their hierarchical authority when
they legitimately claimed to possess superior knowledge of the creative processes in com­
parison to their apprentices and mere labourers. Later, those who owned the manufac­
turing firms would soon realize that the output can be increased by imposing more strict
mechanisms of control on their workers, such as rules for punctuality, rules to prevent
waste, division of labour and so on (Sitkin et al., 2010).
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
13
==PAGE:24==
Literature recognizes the first rational approach of the design and implementation of in­
dustrial controls in the works of Frederick Taylor (Sitkin et al., 2010). He believed that
the control of industrial processes and people executing the work could be understood by
having complete knowledge of the manufacturing process. In order to achieve that, Taylor
systematically broke down machine work cycles into periods of 1 minute. He used scien­
tific methods such as experimentation, coupled with the analysis of motion and time, data
records, and tried to optimize the speed of production. Furthermore, he divided factory
personnel into managers who knew how machinery operated, and workers who would just
execute the tasks without having knowledge about the machines and processes. Taylor’s
approach is recognized under the label ’Scientific Management’. It is characterized by
trying to coerce workers and force them to follow the tempo of the machines. A significant
amount of researchers considered his approach to be dehumanizing and unethical, since
it did not seriously question the factors that motivate workers. In 1920s, Elton Mayo ap­
plied psychological methods to understand the conflicts between workers and managers,
and see if the motivations of workers could be rationally controlled (Sitkin et al., 2010).
2.2.2
Emergence of Management Control Systems
The combination of different aspects of control started a theory that was called Manage­
ment Control Systems (MCS). These aspects of control combine Taylor’s approach that
frames the essence of control in terms of formal, logical principles; and more human
centered apporach that takes into account motivation and well­being of workers. The be­
ginnings of this field is attributed to the work of prof. Robert Anthony (Langfield­Smith,
1997).
Anthony defined control as “the process by which managers ensure that resources are
obtained and used effectively and efficiently in the accomplishment of the organization’s
objectives” (Anthony & Hekimian, 1965). He divided control on the operational, manage­
rial and strategic. According to Otley (1994), the cited definition and distinction of controls
lead to MCSs to be almost exclusively concerned with accounting, aimed primarily at con­
trolling manager’s behavior. Anthony’s understanding also imposed a distinction between
formal and informal mechanisms of control, where formal mechanisms include a range of
officially sanctioned institutional mechanisms such as written rules and procedural direc­
tives. Informal mechanisms on the other hand include values, norms and beliefs that
guide employee’s actions and behavior (Langfield­Smith, 1997).
Later on, Ouchi (1979) divided organizational control to market, bureaucracy and clan
controls. Under the assumption of a free and a fair market competition, he observed that
market controls are ideally used in sales and procurement departments. In these cases,
manager would only have to supervise his subordinates by checking up on whether the
employees have made a correct choice on the competitive bids and compare their de­
cisions against simple criterion of cost minimization. The idea of a market can also be
used in other contexts, such as a platform for decision making and coordination (Kellogg,
Orlikowski, & Yates, 2006). Ouchi (1979) then describes bureaucratic mechanisms of
14
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:25==
control on the example of warehousing. He claims that in bureaucratic control, a subordi­
nate “is subject to a variety of explicit routines of monitoring and directing”. In these cases,
employees typically follow pre­established rules that tell them how to act and behave, they
delimit their roles and accountabilities and determine the output they are supposed to pro­
duce. Lastly, he describes clan controls as a mechanism that is essentially a socialization
process that tends to align the goals between individuals and the organization and also
prevents their incongruities.
According to Langfield­Smith (1997), other classifications include Hopwood’s administra­
tive and social controls, Merchant’s action, result and personnel controls and Simon’s
four levers of controls. Simons (1995) distinguishes between belief systems, boundary
systems, diagnostic control systems and interactive control systems. Belief systems are
typically associated with the core values of the company. Their purpose is to provide
basic values and direct organizational members towards organizational goals. Bound­
ary systems are defined as “formally stated rules, limits and proscriptions tied to defined
sanctions and credible threat of punishment that enable individual creativity within de­
fined limits of freedom”. Diagnostic controls are used to monitor performance indicators
and measure them up against objectives. They represent the formal information systems
and allow managers to monitor the progress towards desired outcomes and correct the
deviations that steer away from the expected performance standards. Lastly, interactive
control systems allow innovative ideas to flow through the organizational network from
bottom­up. The role of managers in these systems is to motivate employees to think
creatively. In contrast to diagnostic controls, which are essentially coercive, interactive
controls are enabling.
2.2.3
The Performance Management Systems Framework
Ferreira and Otley (2009) argue that the research frameworks that dominated the MCS
paradigm focuses only on specific aspects of control systems. In order to arrive at a
broader view of the key aspects of controls that encompasses all areas of organization’s
that are under some form of managerial control, Ferreira and Otely used a concept Per­
formance Management Systems (PMS). It is defined as
“the evolving formal and informal mechanisms, processes, systems, and networks used
by organizations for conveying the key objectives and goals elicited by management, for
assisting the strategic process and ongoing management through analysis, planning,
measurement, control, rewarding, and broadly measuring performance, and for
supporting and facilitating organizational learning and change”, (Ferreira & Otley, 2009).
According to the authors of the framework, the design was not developed with an intent to
arrive at an ‘ideal model’, since it does not include a wide range of circumstantial factors
discussed in contingency research theory. It provides a descriptive tool aimed for data
collection that can serve for further analysis. The framework is devised to understand
and gain a broader perspective of the role of control in the management of organizational
performance, which, according to the authors, ”differs from the traditional compartmen­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
15
==PAGE:26==
talised approaches to control in organizations — such as Anthony’s” (Ferreira & Otley,
2009). These aspects are the vision and mission of the organization, key success fac­
tors, organizational structure, strategies and plans, key performance measures, target
setting, performance evaluation, reward systems, information flows, the use of PMSs,
change of PMSs and strength and coherence of PMSs. All of the aspects are influenced
by the culture of the organization and contextual factors. Each PMS aspect is summa­
rized in the Appendix A. The figurative scheme of these aspects is represented in the
Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Illustrative example of the framework featuring 12 different PMS aspects
(Ferreira & Otley, 2009)
2.2.4
Control in Decentralized Organizations
Existing literature with a focus on control in SMOs is virtually non existent. However,
several articles were found using the key words ’decentralized organizations’ and ’control’.
Hales (1999) writes about the decentralization of decision­making authority that gives
more autonomy to managers as further down to the hierarchical pyramid as possible. He
claims that this would enable managers to respond quickly to changing local conditions
and make the organization more flexible. His insights align with those mentioned by Lee
16
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:27==
and Edmondson (2017) despite his definition of a decentralized organization not being
aligned with Lee and Edmondson’s. Hale’s use of the term ‘decentralized organization’
still rests on the idea that organizations are ran by empowered managers, while their
subordinates remain subjected to managerial authority.
Further on, Van der Meer­Kooistra and Scapens (2008) inquired into the mechanisms of
control in parts of organizations that are signified by lateral rather than hierarchical rela­
tions. They devised a framework for the governance of lateral relations, comprised of the
economic, institutional, social and technical structure. The framework is also called the
minimal structure model. It defines responsibilities, priorities and procedures for employ­
ees. It enables action without having to rely on one central authority without things be­
coming chaotic. However, just like Hales’ research above, this paper also does not inves­
tigate radically decentralized organizations, but self­governed teams working on projects,
or partly decentralized business units of a large corporation.
One case study was also found, performed by O’Grady (2019) in cooperation with FreightCo,
a logistics company. While the paper discusses decentralization and autonomy, FreightCo
still features four formal hierarchical levels. Moreover, the autonomy discussed in the pa­
per is given to franchise managers, who retain authority over the work of the rest of the
employees within the franchise. Most important strategic and business decisions, as well
as the design and supervision of PMSs and employees are reserved for management
roles. While the study does consider decentralization of authority, the company in ques­
tion does not fit the definition proposed by Lee and Edmondson. O’Grady states that
transparency might be one of the main features of decentralized companies that also al­
lows those who execute managerial tasks to respond to contingencies in flexible ways.
Moreover, O’Grady talks about the concept of minimal constraint that is used in FreightCo.
This concept “considers how the tension between the need for autonomy and control can
be addressed in complex systems” (O’Grady, 2019). The primary function of control in
in his version of decentralized organizations is to provide minimal constraint necessary
to maintain the performance of the whole system, while at the same time give as much
autonomy to division managers. O’Grady argues that this changes the notion of control
from a term that is associated with coercion, to a notion that allows us to see control
as something that allows managers to work freely within clearly established boundaries.
In other words, the concept of minimal constraint is an enabling, rather than a coercive
feature.
2.3
Coordination
Similarly to the section on Control, this part of the thesis is a literature review, done in
an attempt to understand the theory about coordination in organizations. This serves the
purpose of discovering a theoretical framework that enables to analyze coordination in
SMOs and to compare the findings with the theory.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
17
==PAGE:28==
2.3.1
Historical Development
Literature on organizational control recognizes coordination as one of the central purposes
of organizations (Faraj & Xiao, 2006).
Similarly to control, serious attempts to coordinate organizational processes can be traced
back to 18th century, in the period of the first industrial revolution. According to Chandler
(1962), the emergence of railroad systems represented the first account of organizations
that were big and complex enough to require serious interest into coordination. This was
requested due to emerging practical concerns, such as cargo delivery, boarding of pas­
sengers and preventing crashes of trains that initially had to share one track. The first
actualized solution to the problem was a printed timetable. This artefact enabled trains
to own a segment of the railroad for a specific amount of time, and informed passengers
and cargo customers about arrival and departure times.
Later on, the study of coordination, along with control, started to develop further with
the emergence of large­scale manufacturing organizations. Increases in the output and
speed of production required a more organized approach to coordination. The old ’drive
system’ of management, which consisted of foremen pressuring laborers to work harder
and faster was seen as inefficient, was facing an increasing amount of reluctance and
was seen as unfair (Jacoby, 1984). One of the first impactful solutions to the problem
of coordination was developed through the design of work. It’s pioneer, Frederick Taylor
called it the Scientific Management (Jacoby, 1984). Coordination was optimized by the
examination of work and its decomposition in the most simple elements. This allowed
the specialization of labor and the elimination of waste. Taylor’s methods attempted to
standardize parts that would allow them to be interchangeable. The consequences of his
rational approach to manufacturing was an increased demand for combining the inputs
from specialized tasks into an integrated output. This meant that manufacturing firms had
to improve a detailed schedule and also innovate other allocation mechanisms.
In contrast to Taylor’s bottom­up approach, Henry Fayol designed a top­down approach
to coordinate organizational activities. According to Okhuysen and Bechky (2009), Fayol
promoted the idea that production could be optimized through organizational design that
would put in place proper management systems. Soon after, other theorists would ad­
vocate that good coordination should be comprised of the exchange of roles, rules and
structures within organizations.
Okhuysen and Bechky (Okhuysen & Bechky, 2009) state that these early approaches
were made under the assumption of designability: scholars believed that systems could
be articulated with enough specificity and precision that allowed employees to perform
their jobs in one optimal way. This assumption seemed relevant because the work was
centered around physical objects that could be decomposed, transparent and in general
well understood by the management. However, the emergence of service and knowledge­
based economies in the late 20th century slowly changed this perception. In light of grow­
ing complexity, globalized markets and uncertainties, scholars shifted their focus from the
18
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:29==
optimization of coordination to exploring how coordination is executed in particular orga­
nizations. New research assumes that people and organizations must coordinate work
without having to rely on one ‘proper’, general organizational design (Okhuysen & Bechky,
2009).
2.3.2
Recent Theorization of Coordination
Reviewing the research literature, it was obvious that researchers use their own, distinct
definitions to conceptualize coordination. Seibold and Ballard (2003) define it as “the
collective accomplishment of individual goals through a cooperative process”. Faraj and
Xiao’s (2006) definition states that “at it’s core, coordination is about the integration of
organizational work under conditions of task interdependence and uncertainty”. Malone
and Crowston define it as “the act of working together harmoniously” (1994).
Upon their review, Okhuysen and Bechky(2009) came up with the following definition.
“Temporally unfolding and contextualized process of input regulation and interaction
articulation to realize a collective performance”. (Okhuysen & Bechky, 2009)
This definition of coordination will also serve as the operational definition for this thesis.
This is because the following definition highlights emergent action and contextualized
input regulation. Both things are assumed to happen in SMOs due to the ability of indi­
viduals to decide how they want to execute the allocated tasks, and due to the absence
of centralized authority in the execution of their work.
Besides providing a definition for coordination, Okhuysen and Bechky (2009) also sum­
marized the coordination mechanisms that are used in the academic literature. These
mechanisms are summarized in Table 2.1. For more detail, a reader should consider
reading the original paper. The coordination mechanisms are a generalization of con­
crete mechanisms. For example, a car assembly line: when mounting a gearbox to the
engine, it is required for the gearbox to already be set up in the previous step. The worker
mounting the gearbox can observe whether the assembler up the line has completed his
work. The assembly line coordinates by defining the responsibilities for tasks and it al­
lows workers to acknowledge and align work.The assembly line is planned in advance
and contains specific rules for the assembly. It can be recognized under a more general
coordination mechanism called Plans and Rules. At the same time, it is also a physical
object, and can be categorized as an object (or a representation).
According to the authors of the review, the interdisciplinarity of research presents us with
a variety of different approaches to the things that are being coordinated. In some cases,
research is focused on the management of interdependencies between tasks, trying to
understand the decompositions of tasks into subtasks. Other researchers have focused
on relational coordination in groups which tries to understand communication, knowledge
and shared goals (Seibold & Ballard, 2003; Carlile PR, 2002; J. H. Gittell, 2002). Addition­
ally, some scholars have inquired about how organizations coordinate knowledge (Faraj
& Sproull, 2000). All of the above explain coordination in different ways.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
19
==PAGE:30==
Table 2.1: Summary of the coordination mechanisms, done after the work of Okhuysen
and Bechky (2009)
Okhuysen and Bechky (2009) recognize another problem in the variety of different con­
texts within which coordination arrives. Coordination in manufacturing companies where
work is generally predictable, is very different to coordination in ER rooms or that of SWAT
teams. These differing contexts don’t make it obvious how comparisons and general rela­
tionships between coordination mechanisms can be established. Furthermore, literature
presents us with a number of terms that explain very similar mechanisms. In one re­
search for example, common understanding is a part of roles and a part of routines in
another study. Tools like schedules are sometimes treated as plans, and in other studies
as objects. For single cases studies, this does not represent a problem, but it becomes
problematic for a general conceptualization of coordination.
In an attempt to overcome these issues, Okhuysen and Bechky (2009) present us with
a framework that recognizes that all of the above­described mechanisms seem to fulfill
similar requirements. They were classified and organized in a set of general conditions.
20
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:31==
These conditions are: accountability, predictability and common understanding. They
represent the means by which interdependent tasks are accomplished and coordinated
across people in their workplace. Furthermore, they address demands for integration and
aid in overcoming uncertainties that emerge in interdependent work.
The relationship between the integrating conditions and coordination mechanisms is cap­
tured in Table 2.2
Table 2.2: Relationships between integrating conditions and coordination mechanisms
(Okhuysen & Bechky, 2009)
Accountability
Accountability determines responsibilities for different parts of any given task that cannot
be completed by a single person. In traditional, hierarchical organizations, accountability
is seen as a way to distribute authority and organizational standards. Two common ex­
amples of this would be standards such as on time arrivals or the allocation of specific
time for given tasks. However, the scope of accountability in the context of coordination
is broader. Accountability as an integrating condition makes different parties responsible
for their contributions. In the case of interdependent work, this also makes other par­
ties working on a task responsible for their work and allows all of them to align their work.
Additionally, this framework assumes that accountability is not achieved only through hier­
archical authority, but also through horizontal interactions. This means that accountability
can be both formal or informal and can occur in emergent work.
Objects and representations, as well as plans and rules create connections between
pieces of work and people responsible for them. Once a project manager develops a
project plan, for example, he makes people accountable for their work. In the case of
scaffolding, parties often have to rely on trust. Employees must be able to count on each
other’s ability to deliver in order to achieve reliable and consistent performance. In other
cases, accountability is achieved through roles, routines or visibility. These mechanisms
allow actors to monitor and update the work, which allows them to organize their time and
resources appropriately.
The next integrating condition allows to anticipate subsequent activities. This is done by
knowing what the tasks are and how and when they follow up on each other. This aspect
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
21
==PAGE:32==
is crucial for interdependent work because it allows organizational members to plan and
perform their own work. Besides the allocation of human resources best suited for the
task, this also allows parties to form accurate expectations about what other parties are
going to do and what are their needs.
Predictability
Predictability can be enacted through both formal and informal, emergent mechanisms.
Formal mechanisms are, for example, utilized in the coordination between sales and man­
ufacturing departments. In these cases, production planning is most often done by the
intervention of formal hierarchies. Scheduling manufacturing is the responsibility of man­
agers who make decisions on the basis of the information they get from sales depart­
ments. This establishes a predictable relationship between both departments, making
sure that the firm does not produce too much or too little, and that sales department does
not sell more than the production division is able to manufacture.
Informal mechanisms can be exemplified on the case of police work, where officers train
their subordinates to rely on common and standard operating procedures in similar situ­
ations. Over time, policemen become familiar with their responsibilities and roles which
allows them to rely on each other and anticipate who will address certain contingencies
that might emerge during missions. This means that familiarity with work, each other’s
characters and preferences in cases of emergent interaction can enhance predictability
and performance.
Other mechanisms that enhance predictability are plans, objects that can help interde­
pendent parties to define tasks and the timing of their execution. Routines can establish
the tasks that must happen. Overall, predictability allows parties to rely on successful
execution of tasks which enhances the integration of activities.
Common Understanding
The last integrating condition allows participants to share a common perspective on the
whole task and enables them to understand how their work fits within the whole. According
to the authors, research considers common understanding in three following ways.
First, as common understanding of specific strategies and actions that have to be exe­
cuted to perform a task. Second, the literature investigates the knowledge that partici­
pants have about the work of other parties in common interdependent tasks. And third,
the effects of broader contextual knowledge that surrounds coordinated activities, such
as knowledge of organizational goals. The latter has been shown to direct participants
towards a common outcome. Common understanding is also achieved through formal
and informal ways. Formal mechanisms include schedules, technical drawings or other
plans. These can be designed by managers and distributed down the hierarchy, or devel­
oped by self­managed groups through frequent interactions. These interactions develop
common understanding about how a task will unfold.
22
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:33==
Like in the case of accountability, common understanding can be achieved by all coordi­
nation mechanisms. Plans and rules creates it by allowing everyone to understand tasks
in a holistic way, which enables parties to orient their work. Familiarity allows them to
have good knowledge about how their work fits together. Similarly, routines can bring
people together and shape the understanding of collective endeavors. Objects and roles
create more specific understanding about what it takes to complete a task. Facilitation of
learning across individuals and groups tends to align differing perspectives into a common
one, like in the case of presenting a prototype of a product. This allows engineers to go
back to designing their parts with a better knowledge about how to integrate their parts
into the whole.
A high level of common understanding is achieved when interdependent parties share
knowledge about what they are doing, how it is supposed to be done, and explain which
goals they are trying to accomplish. Okhuysen and Bechky claim that it has been well
understood that effective coordination requires all of the three conditions to be met.
2.3.3
Coordination in Decentralized Organizations
Literature review did not reveal any research with a specific focus on coordination in com­
panies or other institutions that would fit the definition of a SMO. However, some articles
were found using a search string that denotes ‘coordination’, ‘decentralized’ and ’interde­
pendent work’ as their key­words, several papers were found.
Faraj and Sproull propose that effective coordination first requires processes that are dis­
tributed, heedful and emergent by nature (2000). These conditions represent a need for
coordination of overlapping knowledge and requires flexible and supportive joint action.
Answers and solutions to the problems that arise in emergent action are not predeter­
mined but generated through interactions. They require participants to know and share
knowledge about where expertise is located, they need to recognize where it is required
and bring these experts together to work on a task.
Faraj and Xiao (2006) investigate coordination in fast­response organizations, such as
hospital emergency departments or RD teams. They recognize that in these fast chang­
ing, fuzzy and dynamic environments, coordination cannot be understood and used as
a set of conscious rules, but practical schemes that are in large not systematized by
their possessors but vary according to the logic of the situation. Instead of providing a
theoretical model that focuses on administrative mechanisms for coordination, such as
resource allocation, input integration and task assignment, they provide a practical lens
that, as they claim, can be applied to dynamic, context­changing environments. They
call this framework a ‘Dialogic Coordination Practices’. It is constituted by four differ­
ent aspects: epistemic contestation, joint sensemaking, cross­boundary intervention and
protocol breaking. Epistemic contestation refers to the emergence of differing opinions
of actors with distinct expertise that have to work together, such as a surgeon and an
anesthesiologist, who have to decide whether and how to perform a surgery on a risky
patient. Joint sensemaking refers to the puzzles that doctors face when a patient does not
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
23
==PAGE:34==
respond to treatment as expected. While doctors often work in non­hierarchical settings
and have autonomy to treat their patients as they see appropriate, the case described
presents a need for more experienced, senior doctors to make decisions about the fu­
ture treatment of the patient. Cross­boundary intervention refers to instances when the
safety of the patient is compromised. A nurse, for example, may stop the surgeon from
performing a surgery if she spotted that the gloves of the surgeon might be contaminated.
Protocol breaking is a principle that allows doctors to act in emergency situation and go
against evidence­based practices to potentially save the patient if the regular procedure
would endanger the life of a patient.
H. Gittell and Douglass (2012) suggest that effective coordination in organic organiza­
tional forms is often dependent on whether individuals who work together have personal
relationships with each other. They argue that managerial hierarchies can stifle coordi­
nation across functional divisions such as the sales and software development divisions.
They claim that in MH, coordination typically happens at the top of the pyramid, where
managers do not necessarily understand the conditions below. Moreover, frontline work­
ers are largely divided and unaware of the larger picture. They suggest that these issues
can be avoided by restructuring hierarchical relationships into reciprocal relationships.
These relationships are characterized by shared goals, shared knowledge and mutual
respect. They support effective coordination by mutual reinforcement of interpretations
among participants, enabled by collective sensemaking. Moreover, reciprocal relation­
ships allow the processes amongst participants to achieve workflow and attentiveness to
the situation and to one another, further enhancing coordinating activities.
Kellogg et al. (2006) discuss the problems that emerge in the face of flat organization
structures with distributed accountability, decentralized decision making and multiple eval­
uative principles. In these conditions, communication is in large horizontal rather than
vertical. They assess those difficulties arising in cross­boundary coordination that hap­
pens between different functional divisions or teams working on a common project happen
due to the breakdown of knowledge transfer. This happens because different divisions or
teams use incompatible codes, routines or protocols to plan and execute interdependent
tasks. Furthermore, knowledge sharing can be stifled by cultural and political differences.
In turn, this can lead to issues of identity, where people refuse to display their work before
it is finished, as others might demand they change it. Second, some divisions want to
maintain the jurisdiction control of their work, despite it being interdependent with other
divisions. And lastly, the issue of accessibility, where employees have to make them con­
tinually available on projects, which forces them to continually change their schedules.
As a possible solution, Kellogg et al. (2006) propose a solution called a ‘trading zone’. In
contrast to meetings, a trading zone is an ongoing accomplishment. Since it is always in
the making, coordination is a contingent, emergent and dynamic process that cannot be
planned or prescribed. Instead, it is dependent on the situation in various communities.
A trading zone supposedly does not require the equivalence of interpretations, perma­
nence of relationships, norms and values. Individuals coordinate their work temporarily
24
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:35==
and locally and resolve differences whenever this is required.
Lastly, Alonso, Dessein, and Matouschek (2008) try to explain which conditions pose a
requirement for decentralization of coordinating activities in a multidivisional organization.
Researchers claim that decentralized organizations have an advantage at adapting de­
cisions to local conditions at divisional level. Despite the apparent danger of divisional
managers making decisions that may be bad for other organizational divisions, they ar­
gue that decentralization can still be optimal, especially when coordination becomes more
important.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
25
==PAGE:36==
3
Methodology
This chapter contains methodological considerations of this paper and the framing of the
research problem . In addition, the research planning and case companies are presented
and the interviews are summarized at the end of this chapter.
26
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:37==
3.1
Research Planning
As demonstrated above, literature on SMOs is generally very scarce. Apart from an at­
tempt to theoretically define SMOs and distinguish them from other attempts at decen­
tralization of authority, not much had been found. This is especially true when it comes to
coordination and control in SMOs, a theme that was suggested to be researched by Lee
and Edmondson(2017). Even though some case studies on decentralized organizations
indicate they might be relevant for the topic at hand, they do not fit the definition of SMOs
proposed by Lee and Edmondson. Hales’, Van der Meer­Kooistra and Scapens’s as well
as O’Grady’s studies on control focus on companies that try to decentralize authority, but
not in a radical way, as was defined by Lee and Edmondson. They retain the core unit
of MH, the relationship between a manager and a subordinate, while trying to give more
autonomy to managers that are not at the top level. Moreover, none of the papers above
present us with a framework that would allow us to identify which various organizational
aspects, besides work execution, are decentralized in SMOs, and how they are controlled.
Similarly, the research on coordination and SMOs focuses on cases where decision mak­
ing is decentralized due to the nature of work. First responders, medical professionals
and tactical units generally have more autonomy at work. But more importantly, they are
still subjected to authority of their supervisor. Their superiors still determine their work
schedule, procedures and rules of their work. They also rely on managerial authority in
critical cases (Faraj & Xiao, 2006). However the framework for identification of coordina­
tion mechanisms exists and is to be used on four SMOs.
3.1.1
Research Purpose
The purpose of the present qualitative research is twofold. Firstly, the purpose of this
paper is to develop and test a qualitative analytical tool that allows researchers to iden­
tify who controls various decentralized aspects of Performance Measurement Systems in
Self­Managed Organizations. In the second part, the purpose is to identify the coordina­
tion mechanisms Self­Managed Organizations use to manage interdependent work.
3.1.2
Research Process
The overall research process is illustrated in Figure 3.1. Research started by doing a
literature review on companies with flat hierarchies. After discovering the paper written
by Lee and Edmondson (2017) that seemed to provide a solid basis for further research,
it was decided to attempt to understand which other organizational processes can also
be decentralized besides work execution, and analyze how this is done. In addition, Lee
and Edmondson proposed that it would be valuable to try to understand how employees of
SMOs coordinate their work. After defining the purpose of the research, another literature
review was performed. This time, the review included literature on coordination and con­
trol. Around the same time, companies were contacted for the interviews. The literature
on control did not provide us with any theoretical framework that was designed to uncover
decentralized aspects in SMOs. However, the framework for Performance Management
Systems was found and adapted for the purposes of the thesis. For coordination, the
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
27
==PAGE:38==
framework developed by Okhuysen and Bechky (2009) was used. This was done be­
cause their framework recognizes that effective coordination can be achieved if an orga­
nization fulfills integrating conditions for coordination. Whether these conditions are met
can be checked upon looking if they use different generalized coordination mechanisms.
Interview was designed and tested by interviewing four companies. The interviews were
then summarized and analyzed, using both a deductive approach for some parts and an
inductive approach for others. The next step was to present the findings of the interviews.
After that, the interview questions were critically evaluated and redesigned in order to de­
velop an improved framework that allows future researchers to perform future analysis.
Last two parts were the discussion of the findings and conclusion.
Figure 3.1: Summary of the overall research process
3.1.3
Interview planning
The planning of the interviews had to be done by addressing several key questions. First,
the question was how to structure the interviews. It was decided to do them in a systematic
way, both for the part about control and the second part, about coordination. In the next
step, it had to be considered who to interview. It was decided to interview employees
who have a long tenure with the organization and presumably have a good overview of
the company’s processes. The interview structure, more concretely described below, was
planned in two iterations.
The interview design process can be seen in Figure 3.2.
28
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.2: Interview design process
Iteration 1:
The first part of the interview contains five informative and general questions about the in­
terviewee and her/his organization. In general, this allows researchers to create a link be­
tween the concrete findings with context of the organization, such as information about the
market or the domain that the organization is doing its business, the size of the company,
as well as information about the interviewee. Figure 3.3 features these five questions and
the reasoning for asking the questions.
The absence of a preexisting framework or an analytical tool that would allow researchers
to uncover decentralized approaches in organizational control, and the need for the re­
search to be done systematically, led to the decision to use the framework designed by
Ferreira and Otley (2009) that distinguishes between different organizational processes
that they call Performance Management Systems. The framework itself, described in
more detail in Appendix A, is designed to cover 12 different aspects of PMSs. According
to the authors, these 12 aspects offer researchers a holistic overview of organizational
performance management, even though it is not necessary for all organizations to have
control over all 12 aspects. It was also decided to use this framework despite the fact
that it was designed to analyse hierarchical organizations, as authors explicitly mention
(Ferreira & Otley, 2009). But as it was already noted, the absence of managers with for­
mal authority does not mean that these aspects are not under some kind of control by
employees. This part of the interview was meant to be a semi­structured interview about
each PMS aspect.
For the second part of the interview, about coordination of work, it was decided to use
Okhuysen and Bechky’s (2009) framework that already recognized and categorized dif­
ferent coordination mechanisms and proposed three integrating conditions that have to
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
29
==PAGE:40==
be fulfilled for an organization to effectively coordinate their work. These conditions are
accountability, predictability, and common understanding.
Figure 3.3: Five questions about the interviewee and the organization
Furthermore, the framework for the interviews was adapted to fit the overall purpose and
limitations of the research. In the control part, aspects about the PMSs use, change, and
strength and coherence were omitted. This was done because it was expected that the
overall interview length, including the coordination aspects, would otherwise be too long.
Another reason for the omission was that the companies that agreed to conduct the inter­
views were by no means large, longstanding corporations or manufacturing enterprises
where it would be reasonable to expect that they have a coherent and well integrated
PMS system in use. The limited length and amount of the interviews also made it so that
the part about coordination had to be compressed, which is why it was decided to ask
interviewees how (and if) the three integrating conditions fulfilled in their companies.
The aspects and things that were intended to be uncovered by the questions are described
in Table 3.1.
Iteration 2:
When contacting the companies and contact persons within them, it was negotiated that
the length of the interview would be at most one hour. Furthermore, the contact persons
were only willing to do a single interview. After doing the pilot interview, which was done
with a business owner and a former consultant that wanted to stay anonymous, it was
revealed that the interview was too long, as it took approximately an hour and a half to go
through all of the questions. This is why it was decided to merge a few aspects together in
30
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.1: Questions regarding PMSs aspects
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
31
==PAGE:42==
a single question. It was intended to still get the essence of how that aspect is managed,
but at the expense of potentially losing some detailed information.
The merged aspects were those that were recognized as closely dependent on each
other by the authors of the PMS framewrok, Ferreira and Otley (2009). These aspects
are Key Performance Indicators, Target Setting and Performance Evaluation. KPIs are
often derived from the set targets that the organization needs to achieve. KPIs are in turn
often used to evaluate individual and group performance. It was assumed that this shorter
interview would reveal the essence of each aspect, while potentially losing some detailed
information.
3.2
Case Companies
The only criteria that was applied for selecting the companies was that they have no for­
mal hierarchy and that they have decentralized authority in work execution area, which is
the condition that has to be met for an organization to be considered an SMO, according
to Lee and Edmondson (2017). This condition was checked when contacting the inter­
viewees/companies and confirmed by all respondents. Categories such as size, age,
country and domain of the company were not considered as exclusion criteria for case
companies. This was due to the scarcity of companies that seemed to fit the definition of
an SMO.
Table 3.2 features all the companies that were contacted.
Green cells represent the
companies that were willing to cooperate. The right row features the number of peo­
ple with whom the contact was attempted to be established. This was done by calling
the company’s telephone numbers, sending out emails and writing personal messages
on LinkedIn to employees. Overall, the response rate was around 15%. The majority of
requests were never answered, some were rejected due to lack of time, while two com­
panies, Buurtzoorg and Morning Star refused to cooperate because they said that a lot
of information about their companies is available in literature such as Laloux Reinventing
Organizations (2014).
32
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:43==
Table 3.2: Companies contacted for potential case studies
3.3
Interview Summaries
The discovery phase was done in collaboration with four participants from four different
organizations. The interviews were conducted online and were recorded with the consent
of the participants. The members of the organizations were founders in three cases and
a senior employee responsible for HR and Project Management in the other organization,
which presumably ensured they have a good overview of the processes and relationships
within the organization. The following cases describe each organization’s PMS aspect,
and integrating conditions for coordination.
It is important to note that most of the answers do not represent the ’real’, objective state
of affairs, but descriptions and interpretations of the interviewees from their own perspec­
tive. In order to have a more well­rounded view of the matter and to establish validity to
their answers, more interviews should have been conducted with their other colleagues.
Moreover, the quality and detail of information from each participant in the research de­
pends on their own personal style, background, current role within the company and their
values.
3.3.1
Case 1: Fountain Partnership
Fountain Partnership is a UK based digital marketing agency. They attempt to grow their
client’s sales online using search engine optimization tolls. They are a data driven com­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
33
==PAGE:44==
pany and distinguish themselves from other competitors by making good predictions about
the amount of traffic that gets converted into sales. The interviewee is a founder and a
former CEO, now a member of the board and a mentor for the new CEO. In 2017, 8
years into their existence, the founders decided to get rid of hierarchy and decentralize
authority. Reasons for going flat in 2017 were because the founders wanted to see their
business as a community where people are empowered. The interviewee also believes
that increased responsibility and autonomy makes people more passionate about their
work, which they believed would also positively contribute to the overall success of their
business. According to the interviewee, they have successfully continued to grow their
business ever since stripping the hierarchy. The transcript of the interview can be found
in Appendix B.
Participant: Founder, Director of Business ­ Rebecca Lewis Smith
Country: United Kingdom
Number of Employees: 50
Domain: Digital Marketing
Level of competition in the market: Very high
Organizational Structure
The company formally does not have any hierarchy. It is split up into different departments
with different responsibilities. These departments are Agency Growth Team, Search En­
gine Optimization Department, People and Culture Team, Client Services and Support,
Project Management Team, Paid Media Team and Innovation and Performance Team.
Each department has experienced members who act as coaches that guide their col­
leagues into becoming better at executing their role and how to manage themselves and
their work, but do not have any formal authority over how each member of the organization
executes their work.
Each individual in the organization has a role that can be shared with others, and their
responsibilities are based on their role. Each employee that fills a particular role has free
reign over how she/he executes the responsibilities within that role.
The flat organizational structure of Fountain Partnership, along with different departments,
was initially designed by the founders in 2017. New, emergent roles or departments can
be proposed by any employee to the “people and culture team”. In order to constitute a
new role, team or a department, the decision is made by the founders upon checking the
business cases, the necessity for a new role or a department, and by consulting the project
management team that needs to check for availability of the employees, and (re)allocation
of hours according to the needs for the old and the new role.
Vision and Mission
The company has an outdated vision and mission statement that is currently in the process
of rework. The new version will be centered around innovation and performance that
34
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:45==
serves the needs of their clients, and about well­being and thriving of employees, and
about growth of the company.
In its previous version, the vision and mission were designed solely by the founders. The
design of the new iteration is being led by “the Agency Growth Team”. The design is done
by “consultations through workshops with people within the company”, “including some
junior team members”. Overall, the interviewee concluded that the vision and mission
were “shaped by everyone”.
Whether the company will be on the right path towards accomplishing its vision and mis­
sion will be led by three teams that have informal authority over each aspect: People and
Culture Team for employee well­being, Agency Growth Team for Sales and Marketing,
and Innovation and Performance Team for the quality of their services to clients.
Key Success Factors
KSFs are in the design phase and will include 12 to 15 metrics, split into three areas.
First, people and culture aspect that includes scores for well­being employee engage­
ment, statistics, number of applicant for roles, staff retention levels, and employee growth.
The second aspect is the sales and marketing, featuring metrics such as reaching winning
new clients. The third aspect will reflect their success in innovation and performance. It
will measure things like how they deliver their services, how the clients respond to their
Net Performer Score surveys, and how accurate are their marketing forecasts for their
clients.
The company will have a dashboard featuring the metrics, and employees will be updated
on the collective performance against the metrics on a weekly basics. Once a month, the
Growth Team and each other department take a deep dive into the metrics to make sure
that everyone understands what goes well and what needs to be improved.
KSFs design is led by the Agency Growth Team, People and Culture Team and Innovation
and Performance Team.
Strategies and Plans
Strategies and plans are planned to be divided into three different, separate aspects, and
led by three teams, which is consistent with the division of the Vision and Mission and
the KSFs: People and Culture, Sales and Marketing, and Innovation and Performance.
The strategy in people and culture aspect is focused on well­being, which means that em­
ployees are allowed to work on their own schedules and are allowed to show up for work
whenever they want, but are strongly discouraged from overworking. Sales and market­
ing strategy is led by the Agency Growth Team and is centered around building strong
relationships with the clients, however, the interviewee did not disclose anything specific
about their approach. Lastly, innovation and performance aspect is about anticipating
changes and preparing new strategies in the previous two aspects.
Strategy is shared with people throughout the company dashboard and changes are
brought to the attention of everyone. When needed, this is done on a weekly meeting.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
35
==PAGE:46==
Target Setting
Target setting at Fountain Partnership is twofold. On one hand, the company has growth
targets, developed by the Agency Growth Team, that impose expectations on the sales
and marketing team to increase the number of sales for each period. But according to
the interviewee, since the sales industry is very volatile, she doesn’t think “we’ve ever sat
down with our salesperson and said you’re not hitting targets”.
On the other hand, target setting within each project is always done in collaboration with
their clients. Each employee responsible for a task negotiates and sets his own perfor­
mance targets on a project.
KPIs
The project targets mentioned above, in the Target Setting, are measured by simple KPIs
that come in the form of yes/no answers to the questions such as is my delivery on time or
not. The employees are trusted to have reasonably high standards, but are not supervised
by anyone.
Instead of supervision that would rely on numbers that indicate productivity, the company
has a standard about expected behaviors that have been put together by the organiza­
tion as a whole. These standards are centered around creating a culture of ambition and
accountability. Accountability is the other side of the coin that is autonomy, which is seen
as a reward for commitment to each one’s tasks, colleagues and the organization as a
whole. In all departments, employees have the ability to ask for coaching if they have
trouble setting appropriate targets, which can happen either in case they are overachiev­
ing, meaning they don’t set high­enough targets, or underachieving, which can mean that
they either have too high targets or are not working efficiently or effectively.
Performance Evaluation
Performance evaluation is partly done by each employee for themselves, based on their
own designed KPIs and standards. In addition, they try do do a 360° feedback that is
comprised of six colleague’s reflections about one’s work. It includes both appraisals as
well as criticism. In order to promote people being critical, the feedback is anonymous.
According to the interviewee, the performance evaluations are thorough and accurate.
This 360° feedback is led by the People and Culture Team. Employees who want to be a
part of this team organize the process and collect the reviews.
Performance is attempted to be enhanced by “hiring the right people and celebrating suc­
cess”. Hiring the right people is done mainly by hiring experienced people and sometimes
also by hiring new people “hungry for growth”.
Rewards Systems
According to the interviewee, the founders of Fountain decided to not “have incentives for
performance” in terms of “bonus structures”. People are “paid well”, meaning that salaries
are competitive for the market. The salary depends on the amount of responsibilities each
individual has. They are “committed to fair and equal pay”. If two people have the same
36
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:47==
responsibilities, they will receive the same amount of money. They incentivize people
with appraisals, which comes from the expectation that people “love their work and are
challenged by this rather than financial aspect”.
The amount of money each role grants was determined by the Agency Growth Team and
was approved by the founders. It is based on a percentage of turnover budget. This
means that salaries can be increased yearly based on turnover rates.
Hiring and firing is in the jurisdiction of the CEO, but in collaboration with the founders.
The CEO has to persuade the founders into any hiring or firing decisions. According to the
interviewee, firing does happen and it was increased during COVID time, when they made
some bad hiring decisions. This was due to their inability to “meet people for interviewing,
and then not being able to get people in the office to work alongside people” and “not
seeing some of the behaviors that weren’t really working”. They generally prefer to hire
experienced individuals who have shown that they are committed and passionate about
their work.
Information Flows
Feedback information loops are done using a process that they call “a black boxing pro­
cess”, which aims to learn from past mistakes. This process requires the actors to identify
who made a mistake, and introspection that wants to uncover the cause of the mistake.
Additionally, it asks for actors to come up with solutions that prevent the mistake to come
up again.
Feed­forward loops are done both externally, aimed at making better forecasts for their
clients, and internally, aimed at improve strategic innovation, evolution of the services.
The interviewee claims that they “aim to be very transparent” with their information, but
recognizes that “transparency can actually be really stressful for people”, which was the
case during COVID, when their turnover rates were very low. Which is why the founders
only share the “top line financial information”, but don’t break it down completely. Overall,
the transparency is determined by the founders.
Accountability
Tasks amongst employees, along with accountabilities are negotiated by employees with
the Project Management Team. More specifically, this group of people execute the role of
“capacity managers”. They are also acknowledged with each person’s skills and preferred
tasks. In some cases they also act as work designers. However, they do not have the final
authority over task allocation, every person has the right to reject the task. When people
are overbooked or an individual’s role is overlapping on two different projects, they depend
on “people that care so much about doing a good job, that they are the ones to tell us when
there’s a gap in accountability”. Accountabilities are shared on the company’s dashboard.
While work is being done, and when changes appear while working with clients, employ­
ees can also align their work on the meetings that they participate in. As the interviewee
said, aligning work can therefore also be “self­managed, collaboratively”. In these cases,
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
37
==PAGE:48==
the Project Manager who attends the meeting acts like a “note taker” and makes sure that
everyone’s roles are clearly defined and put on paper.
Work is also coordinated using what the interviewee called a prototype, which means
that the project lead will present the work done so far to the client and negotiate the next
steps. During this presentation, everyone involved has the ability to see how their work
fits together. In times of COVID and increasing remote work in general, the company
invested into collaborative technology that allows people to be present on presentations
online, without losing the sense of being there.
Predictability
Similarly to accountability, predictability on projects is done through meetings, prototypes
and the project information available on company’s dashboard.
Common understanding
In order to ensure that everyone understands each other, especially when people from
different expertise talk in jargon, Fountain designed a training platform specifically aimed
to level out language discrepancies. This platform, available online, has nested categories
such as media, search engine optimization or conversion rate optimization. Each of these
categories is simplified and has depth to it, meaning that each deeper nested category
has explanation of its terms. After reading each category, employees are encouraged to
take a test in order to see how well they understand the terminology. However, no one is
obliged to do the test.
Conflicts are encouraged to be solved internally. In case things don’t work out, they are
mediated by the people and culture team which tries to find a fair solution that both parties
agree with. Meaning that the mechanism to resolve conflicts is persuasion in the first step,
mediation in the second step, and consensus upon mediation in the final step, according
to what has happened so far. Since conflicts that could not be resolved have not yet
appeared, but the interviewee assumed it would be the founders who would have the final
say. However, the interviewee is also aware that some of the conflicts that are happening
might not be brought to her attention.
3.3.2
Case 2: Qamcom
Qamcom is an international RD consultancy company.
The main office is located at
Gothenburg, which is also where the interviewee is located. The company has gone
completely flat. According to the interviewee, even the CEO has only a formal role and no
more authority than anyone else in the company. The change towards complete flatten­
ing and decentralization happened in 2020 and they have continued to grow and expand
their business from telecommunications to automobile industry ever since. The intervie­
wee highlighted that one unique aspect of Quamcom is an incredible amount of trust that
is given to employees by the board. People manage themselves but are trusted to ”act in
the best of the company”. The transcript of the interview is available in Appendix C.
Participant: Project Manager and recruitment responsible, ­ Johan Salin
38
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:49==
Seniority in the company: 13 years
Country: Sweden
Number of Employees: 150
Domain: R&D, Consulting
Level of competition in the market: Very high
Organizational Structure
Quamcom has a completely flat organizational structure that they call The Group Sys­
tem. They have no managers, even the CEO has authority only on paper, due to the
requirements imposed by legislature. The board of the company has authority over a few
decisions, such as resolving critical conflict cases and determining the salary increase for
each year. When the company went completely flat, the only requirement from the board
in terms of organizing was that the employees “hold regular meetings about how to run
the organization”. These meetings are meant to determine the roles needed to execute
the needed work in all aspects of the company, from engineering, sales and marketing,
accounting and other typical tasks done in a company. In order to “separate roles from
people”, the colleagues then hold a secondary meeting where people decide who is taking
on the roles that were recognized to be needed to execute the tasks.
The standard roles that are being done regardless of the ongoing projects, such as ac­
countants, recruitment, project management, lab responsible etc. are being reviewed
and evaluated by peers on a yearly basis. Each employee gets feedback and can de­
cides if they wish to continue to fill the role. If they want to do something else, it is their
responsibility to find someone else to do the job.
Nobody has centralized authority in making decisions in this aspect. Decisions are made
after discussions. Employees who propose a new role have to present a convincing case.
All decisions are expected to be aligned with the values and principles of the organizations,
the relevant here being that they want to maintain a flat hierarchy.
In general, all decision making is defined by roles. If anyone in the company has to make
a decision that stretches the bounds of his/her role or expertise, it is their responsibility
to contact all who are affected by the decision. Moreover, they are expected to ask for
advice from the person who “knows the most” about the issue that is being decided on.
But they are not compelled to take on the advice. The guiding factor in decision making
is what is “best for the organization in mind”.
Vision and Mission
The vision of Qamcom is to “make tomorrow better than today”, while the mission is to
“turn technology into value, for clients, industry and society”, as seen on Figure Figure 3.4.
The vision and mission were drafted by all employees through workshops, with one person
who was appointed to be organization the whole process. According to the interviewee,
the vision and mission are shared to employees on project meetings and through the com­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
39
==PAGE:50==
panies’ dashboard. Moreover, the interviewee claims that employees have internalized
the values written in the document that guide them in decision making. This makes sure
that their actions are aligned with the vision and mission.
Figure 3.4: Vision and Mission of Quamcom (Snapshot from the PowerPoint presentation
of Qamocm. Image was reproduced under the permission of Johan Salin)
Key Success Factors
According to the interviewee, Quamcom does not have any KSFs that would measure
how successful they are at achieving the vision and mission of the company. In general,
he said that they are “bad in measuring that we are on the right way” and something that
“hasn’t been done yet”.
Strategies and Plans
The strategy of Qamcom into two parts. One is focusing on the internal operations of
the company, such as efficient recruitment and retainment, relating in the group system
and creating increased value in the market. The other part is focusing on their work with
clients, such as excelling in project delivery and improve their packaging and visualizing
their abilities to attract new clients. There are specific employees that are appointed to
execute the strategy, for example, the interviewee’s responsibility is to make sure for
excelling in project delivery and recruitment.
The strategy was drafted under the lead of four people, including the interviewee, where
each person is leading the strategic decisions in at least one area. The interviewee,
for example, is responsible for recruitment and project delivery. The strategy document,
available to all employees is represented in Figure Figure 3.5.
40
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.5: Vision and Mission of Quamcom (Snapshot from the PowerPoint presentation
of Qamocm. Image was reproduced under the permission of Johan Salin)
Target Setting
In attempt to grow the company and have good performance, the board of the company
sets financial targets. They are summarized “on the company level”. Individuals have no
financial targets that are set by the board. According to the interviewee, these targets are
“fairly reasonable”.
KPIs
When it comes to performance measurement, the interviewee believes that the financial
targets serve as KPIs for employees. Moreover he mentioned that employees also “de­
veloped some KPIs for ourselves to police ourselves”.
Performance Evaluation
Performance is evaluated at the end of projects and on a yearly basis and is done by
peers. However, the interviewee recognized that not having managers is “one of the
hardest parts of ensuring... that the colleagues are doing a good job” and they also strug­
gle with colleagues “when they are misbehaving or are in the wrong way”. In order to
combat some of these issues, they have ”a system with mentorship” that assists peo­
ple who have a hard time managing themselves. The interviewee also mentioned that
the evaluations are mostly subjective, but they also rely on documented material about
employee’s achievements.
The majority of behaviors that are expected from employees are not written down, but
they “stick together” with the “core values”. These core values can be seen in Figure 3.4.
In order to monitor performance, especially extreme cases of behavior, the company fea­
tures ”a whistle­blower function”, where employees can anonymously report what they
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
41
==PAGE:52==
consider dangerous our of of the line actions to the founders, who then have the authority
to take corrective action.
Rewards Systems
Qamcom does not have any individual bonuses that would incentivize employees to work
harder. Instead, bonuses are spread out equally to everyone “if the company as a whole is
doing a good job”. Instead of individual financial rewards, the company relies on employ­
ees who are intrinsically motivated. The interviewee said that “rewarding for engineers is
technology that is working”. In order to appraise the hard work, the company celebrates
“when people are doing good things”, throw parties and other activities to motivate peo­
ple. Furthermore, they usually employ “people with a PhD, and really committed people
with experience”. They don’t attract people with good salaries, but by ”having interesting
projects, and being in forefront of technology all the time”.
The salaries are determined in two steps. In the first step, the board of the company
“decides the level of yearly increase”. In the second step, an elected committee of three
employees determines the salaries depending on a myriad of factors, such as “opinions
from colleagues, product managers, from customers on the performance of each individ­
ual. We look into education, we look into all the factors that you can think of”.
Information Flows
The interviewee said that at Quamcom they gather information “in a systematic way in
any action area”, apart from following up on things like profitability, how many hours they
spend and charge to clients, and what are the hourly rates. The interviewee recognizes
the value of collecting information and have feedback and feed­forward loops to improve
and learn, but he says that “we are not there yet”, indicating that this is something that is
about to be done in future.
All information, regardless of the fact that they don’t systematically use it to improve or
learn, is “open to, of course, all the product members” and also “anybody else in the
company”, making their information flows completely transparent.
Accountability
When working on interdependent tasks, accountability is determined by a project manager
who consults employees who are best suited for the job. However, the project manager
can not force anyone to take their part on an assignment. If the company does not have
enough people available, the project manager is allowed to outsource the task to another
company or hire a temporary employee. He is allowed to do that without any approval
from the board.
Outside of project with clients, responsibilities and accountabilities are determined on
the two meetings for required roles and people that execute them, like mentioned in the
Organizational Structure part of this case.
In order to monitor and share the knowledge about who is accountable for each piece of
work that is allocated, employees use Jira boards where “we discuss what to do next and
42
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:53==
who is to do it”. In order to enable effective coordination, they also “make sure that they
(employees) are working at the same site” or “that they are located closely in the office so
that they can work efficiently together”.
Predictability
In order to make work predictable, the company uses “the same tools for predictability as
for accountability, so Jira boards and working closely together so people can always com­
municate”. Overall, the interviewee believes that Qamcom has “a fairly well developed
project process which we try to follow”. Project information is available to all employees,
even if they are not participating in the project, but simply curious to “see what’s going
on”.
Common Understanding
When it comes to technical work that includes jargon from different expertise areas, Quam­
com ”writes some type of specification, and that’s where engineers start”. Moreover, they
have weekly meeting where everyone can discuss issues and address misunderstand­
ings.
3.3.3
Case 3: Satalia
Satalia is a company that builds “AI solutions for the biggest companies in the world”.
Specifically, they are trying to figure out how to create swarm­like organizational struc­
tures for companies that allow them to quickly issue new products or services on the
market. At Satalia, they don’t operate in any fixed way, meaning that they don’t have a
fixed hierarchical structure. The structure is fluid and swarm­like. This means that they
create an AI based structure for every single project, which determines who is the most
capable person to make decisions. They call this principle a ’Liquid Democracy’. Full
transcript of the interview can be found in Appendix D
Participant: Founder of the company ­ Daniel Hulme
Seniority in the company: 12 years
Country: UK, Lithuania, Greece, Austria
Number of Employees: 120
Domain: AI, consulting
Level of competition in the market: Very high
Organizational Structure
Organizational structure at Satalia, according to the founder, is determined by roles.
These roles are predefined or emergent. The person who fills the role is proposed by
an AI algorithms that include weights on vast amount of criteria, such as “emails, Slack
data, code commits, survey data, people’s opinions” etc. The algorithm also includes
people’s preferences. The weights for each category are then adjusted, for instance, the
opinion of employees varies depending on how much time they spent working together
on projects, but also whether they have similar expertise. Upon this criteria, the algorithm
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
43
==PAGE:54==
then suggests who is the most competent person for each task. After this suggestion,
people have the right to take on the responsibility or reject it. If they reject it, they “need
to give a good enough reason for that decision”.
They also use the algorithm for projects and for their work with clients. The most appro­
priate structure will resemble ”a hierarchy, if you need a holocracy then do a holocracy,
or in other cases something that’s more anarchistic”. At Satalia, they call this AI based
structure a ’Liquid Democracy’, which is “swarm­like” meaning that they are “not wedded
to one particular structure”.
As a founder, the interviewee has an expertise in strategy, which means that most of the
time, he makes strategic decisions. But just like everyone else, his work is subjected to
the guidance of AI. He has no authority over the tasks of employees that have expertise in
other areas, such as software development or accounting. The exception is his decision
that the roles are determined by the AI algorithm.
Vision and Mission
The vision of Satalia is “to create and enable everybody in the world to live beyond them­
selves”. Or in other words, Satalia tries to create a world where ”you don’t have to worry
about food, paying and working to feed yourself and to pay for energy”. They want to
free people economically and redistribute the goods in a way where everyone would have
enough to put their attention towards finding and fulfilling their purpose.
The mission is “essentially to free innovation, to remove frictions, to come up with new
organizational structures that enable people to innovate, and to get those innovations to
market as fast as possible”.
Consistent with other roles, the decisions in this area are handed to the person who gets
recognized as the most appropriate by the AI algorithm. In this case, it happens to be the
founder. However, he puts it himself, “if somebody can show me a different path, them I’m
totally up for being challenged”. Other employees are allowed to participate in shaping
it. The interviewee was not clear about how the vision and mission are communicated to
other employees.
Key Success Factors
The only KSF that Satalia has in place as of right now is annual financial growth that
was put in place by the interviewee. According to the founder, growth is “a really good
indicator that people value you”. He also said that this is what is expected to be a key
indicator of whether they are on track towards achieving their mission for the next five
years. Later on, he expects this to change, and the growth will be replaced by impact
and fluidity or adaptability. Adaptability in a sense that it will allow people to innovate and
bring products or services to the market as soon as possible, with hopes of this eventually
leading to more prosperity for everyone.
Strategies and Plans
The strategy of Satalia, according to the founder, is implementing their vision and mission.
44
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:55==
In the words of the interviewee, “we live our vision, our product is our vision”. Satalia
uses AI algorithms to create structures that are best suited for each individual projects
internally, and also creates such structures for their clients so that they are able to issue
their innovations to the market as fast as possible.
The interviewee described his relationship with plans as a “love hate relationship”. On one
hand, he views plans as “totally useless, because they are not what is going to happen”.
On the other hand, he values them because they give you the ability “to kind of measure
how you are progressing, or at least as a decision making aid”. He also said that they “try
not to make any long term plans”.
As mentioned before, strategy is the responsibility of the founder himself. Since he has
expertise in strategic management, he is also the one who gets suggested to make strate­
gic decisions by the algorithm.
Target setting
The interviewee said that they “have a problem with our target setting”. As an organization,
they set annual objectives on what they think they might be able to achieve in terms of
growth, but are aware that in a broader context, the market is so dynamic, they don’t have
a specific process to set targets. He claims that they are ”optimistic about these things”,
so they tend to set stretch targets. Moreover, the targets are not set on individuals, but
only on a company level. This is done by the interviewee ­ CEO, and his “wider team”
and done on a quarterly basis.
KPIs
On an individual level, at Satalia, they don’t utilize any systems to measure performance.
Performance Evaluation
Performance is evaluated on the basis of how people execute their tasks on projects. In
these cases, they often fall back data gathered from their utilization of Scrum, where peo­
ple give feedback on their sprints. The reason for not utilizing any systematic performance
measurement system is because controlling people’s performance in a decentralized way
“is very hard”. But as he believes, “managerial hierarchies are generally inadaptive”, and
utilizing performance measurement on an individual level would go against their vision.
Rewards and Incentives
Up until recently, salaries at Satalia were determined in a two­step way. First, employees
would publicly propose their salary. In the second step, their colleagues would vote about
whether their salary should be increased, decreased or kept the same.
This process eventually changed. Based on the algorithm, a select group of people was
chosen to come up with a system that would determine people’s salaries depending on
their skill and the self­evaluated level of each skill. As the interviewee said, “people are
terrible at determining their own value from a monetary perspective”. But they are “much
better at determining their skill level”. The amount of money people get for possessing
each skill and skill level is then measured against market rates. The accumulation of skills
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
45
==PAGE:56==
and their levels sets a base for each person’s salary. Additionally, they are incentivized
by bonuses that individuals get for exceptional performance. The right to a bonus is
determined based on the evaluation of their peers, while the amount is determined by
a mathematical formula that is based on how well the company is achieving their yearly
financial targets.
In addition to financial rewards, they also have non­financial ones, but not in any system­
atic way. According to the founder, they are “very organic”. People are encouraged to
celebrate success, but they also celebrate failures, because “if you are not failing, you
are not learning”. Appraisals come from peers, and the interviewee believes that this is
an advantage over an appraisal from a manager, as this would be “kind of patting you on
the back”.
Satalia does not feature any financial penalties. Firing employees is done by ’the people
circle’ that fills the role of HR responsibilities. In case someone is underperforming, they
collect information from a multitude of sources and try to fairly assess whether the person
in question deserves to be fired.
Information Flows
Apart from encouraging people to celebrate failures in order to learn, Satalia does not use
information flows to learn or predict future changes. However, the founder is aware of this
shortcoming and is aware of the value that it can bring.
Accountability
When performing projects and interdependent tasks, Satalia uses a concept called project
driver or navigators, who are “a bit like project managers and product owners”, but do not
perform all of the tasks that a project owner or manager would typically do. Instead,
tasks are distributed based on availability and competencies and like already mentioned,
suggested by their AI algorithm. This means that “teams are brought together typically as
a swarm, organically”. Instead of the project manager doing performance reviews, setting
the budget, creating a timeline, these things are done by those most competent. Projects
drivers or navigators then serve as a link between the team working on the project and
the rest of the organization.
In order to track responsibilities and for employees to know who is accountable for each
task, Satalia uses Agile Scrum method, which is updated for every sprint. Moreover, they
developed their own project management platform called Hubble. “All projects that go on
at Satalia are captured in this tool”.
Predictability
In order to make work predictable, Satalia utilizes Hubble and Scrum, where people can
see future project plans and align their work depending on other people’s current contri­
butions.
Common Understanding
Information sharing in general is done through tools like Atlassian and Confluence when
46
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:57==
working with clients. To enable them to understand jargon, they create glossaries for
them. Internally, they use and Hubble and Slack to share information. Moreover, they do
not allow employees to use acronyms when they communicate on projects. They also
introduce new people with jargon they typically use, as seen on Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Jargon explanation for newcomers at Satalia (Snapshot from the PowerPoint
presentation of Satalia. Image was reproduced under the permission of Daniel Hulme)
3.3.4
Case 4: IMP Scandinavia
IMP Scandinavia is a startup company founded in February 2020. It is developing an
intelligent patch, wearable on people’s skin that is able to monitor and diagnose diseases
using artificial intelligence. According to the interviewee, the company is considered to
have a flat hierarchy. The founders of the company give a lot of autonomy to employ­
ees when it comes to how to execute their tasks, but retain a lot of authority over the
aspects of PMS as will be explained below. Full transcript of the interviews can be found
in Appendix E.
Participant: Founder of the company CTO ­ Oliver Kjæp Karlsson
Seniority in the company: 2 years
Country: Denmark
Number of Employees: 22
Domain: Healthcare
Level of competition in the market: Low
Organizational Structure
According to the interviewee, when IMP was founded, the founders decided to not orga­
nize themselves “like a hierarchy, but more like a matrix organization”. This means that
instead of having a specific hierarchy with different responsibilities, they have employees
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
47
==PAGE:58==
that “take on projects and responsibilities within different areas”. More specifically, each
founder has his domain area, such as operations, IT and marketing, and act as leaders
in those areas. The employees then have different competencies and get pooled by the
project managers on different projects according to the needs of each project. The project
manager can either be an executive or an employee with the right competencies.
Employees have a certain amount of autonomy, meaning that they can decide their own
work schedule and have freedom when it comes to how to execute the technical part of
the appointed tasks. According to the interviewee, this can possibly “change the over­
all strategy of the company”. Employees can also contribute in various aspects of the
company’s overall operations, but can not make any changes without the approval of the
founders.
Vision and Mission
According to the interviewee, the founders, who have authority in this domain, did form
a vision and a mission when they started the company two years ago, but “it kind of fell
off” and they can no longer identify with the old version. They have not yet reiterated it
and for now, “it is not clearly formulated”. Nonetheless, the interviewee believes that their
work is centered around “increasing the life quality for patients and healthcare profession­
als”. This is a well established value in the company that employees, partners and their
customers are well aware of.
Key Success Factors
The interviewee said that they have not officially set any KSFs to this date, but are planning
to instill some indicators from the financial aspect. These are going to measure their
sales, growth of employment, revenue streams, how many products they will issue on the
market, and how successful their technology will be at identifying diseases and therefore
helping patients. The precise choice of these indicators will depend on the clear and
official formulation of the vision and mission. This aspect is in authority of the founders of
the company.
Strategies and Plans
The strategy of the company is to issue products on the market as soon as possible.
Since IMP Scandinavia is developing new technology in a relatively new domain, they
recognized the value of being the ’first movers’. Therefore they sacrificed “come of the
functionalities and complexity of our technology” that they wanted to originally create, in
order to get commercial attraction earlier than expected. This early commercialization
of their “modular product” now allows them to be recognized as a viable competitor on
the market. It also allows them to scale up and design the product further based on
the increased number of opportunities and findings that they get from their existing and
potential customers.
The employees of the company as acquainted with the strategy through company meet­
ings. Just like in other aspects of PMS, employees are generally allowed to share their
48
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:59==
ideas on the strategy, but the final decision comes from the three founders of the company.
Target Setting According to the interviewee, they consider target setting as “the hardest
part” and are yet to elaborate on it.
KPIs
The interviewee claims that “due to the early stage of the company, it’s quite hard for us
to actually work upon the KPIs in a daily manner”. They therefore did not set any KPIs yet
and are also “not sure which way to go”. Consequently, they also did not set any official
targets, both on the individual as well as company level.
Performance Evaluation
The company has individual, subjective evaluation process that is done on a quarterly
basis each year. Because they are subjective, they don’t have a list of things that they go
through. The interviewee mentioned that they evaluate the “general ability to collaborate
within the team and overall interaction and communication” within the team. Moreover,
they do informal performance evaluations on a bi­weekly basis when they discuss project
plans. They discuss about what could be done better or differently. These evaluations are
done under the authority of the founders, where each founder is responsible for his domain
and project. Employees also have an opportunity to criticize the work of the founders, but
they do not do that in a systematic and formal way.
Reward Systems
With regards to financial rewards, besides the salary, the employees can get bonuses
depending on the sales. Every employee gets a bonus if the company is doing good.
Salaries and bonuses are set by the founders.
Moreover, salesmen get percentages of the individual sales that they were able to fa­
cilitate. This bonus is equal to 5% of the value of the sale. Everyone working for IMP
Scandinavia also have “an employee pool of equity shares of the company”, meaning
that in case the company gets sold, each employee is entitled to get 2 or 3% of the equity.
In terms of non­financial rewards, employees who perform good get more autonomy are
allowed to take on more responsibilities. Exceptional performance can grant employees
to take on the role of project leads on future projects.
IMP Scandinavia does not punish bad performance with any financial or even non­financial
penalties, except when someone breaches the clauses determined in the employee con­
tracts, such as disclosing company knowledge with other parties. In these cases, an
employee can get fired and can be pursued on the court of law.
Hiring and firing is in the jurisdiction of the founders, where each founder, responsible for
a particular domain, has the authority to hire and fire employees that are working within
his/her domain.
Information Flows
As a medical device company IMP Scandinavia have established a “quality management
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
49
==PAGE:60==
system” which tries to ensure that all employees are being trained properly the task that
is described in their contract. They provide training for employees in order for them to be
better at performing their jobs. They have established standard operating procedures for
employees. They also track changes in these procedures and document the information
gathered by their technology that they utilize for further development. They gather in­
formation about incidents, adverse events, quality processes, and data about production
processes. All of this information is aimed at both preventing the same mistakes from
happening again, as well as to anticipate possible future mistakes and make them more
adaptable to potential changes.
All of this information is transparent and therefore available to all employees in the com­
pany. Moreover, it is expected of project leads to be working on this information during the
ongoing projects, meaning that they have to collect and provide data to people involved.
Accountability
Accountability is set by the interviewee himself. As a CTO, this is one of his main responsi­
bilities. Moreover, accountabilities on projects are determined by each project lead. They
are then shared through emails and using SharePoint software. They also update their
and align their work on meetings.
Predictability
Predictability is also the domain that is in jurisdiction of the Project Manager or Project
Lead. This person has to make a general plan that is shared with employees on email
and SharePoint.
Common understanding
Because IMP Scandinavia is working on projects that involve both commercial, IT and
clinical expertise, they often arrive at communication problems. In order to overcome
this issue, they have people who are “trained and less technical and more commercial,
and someone who is clinically oriented but also understands the IT part”. Overall, this
means that they encourage specific individuals, good at communication in general, to
learn outside of their area of expertise, to act “like a bridge from one side to the other”.
50
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:61==
4
Research Analysis
The following chapter features an attempt to fulfil the purposes of the research.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
51
==PAGE:62==
4.1
Analysis Process
Each of the four interviews were recorded during the interview and transcribed afterwards.
This was followed by a summary of all interviews according to each aspect of PMSs for
the Control part, and three aspects for integrating conditions for Coordination. Interviews
were then analyzed. This is followed by the presentation of results, which can be read
below.
4.2
Analysis results ­ Control
Looking at the summaries of the interviews, it was first revealed that is possible to develop
an analytical tool that enables researchers to systematically obtain an overview of the
aspects that are centralized, decentralized or partially decentralized. The second part
then tries to map how the partly and fully decentralized aspects are ’controlled’ in the
absence of managers or founders/BoD that have full authority over that aspect, and what
are the general features of their approach. In the final subsection, the improved analytical
tool, based on findings and critical evaluation, is presented.
4.2.1
Level of decentralization
The first step in the analysis of the case companies is to determine the level of decentral­
ization for each PMS. In the initial design of the analytical tool, seen in subsection 3.1.3,
it was anticipated that the answers to the questions about different levels of decentral­
ization would be implicitly or explicitly revealed by asking general questions about each
PMS aspect. By analyzing the interviews, it was possible to extract this information in the
following way.
The distinctions between different levels of decentralization are described below. The
distinctions are made using theory of Lee and Edmondson who mention that some do­
mains of SMOs (excluding work execution, which has to be decentralized for a company
to qualify as an SMO) might be centralized and under the authority of the founders.
• Centralized ­ During ongoing processes, the founders/BoD have full authority over
the decisions in that aspect. Alternatively, the aspect can be controlled by a de
facto manager who has been appointed to manage the aspect. He also has full and
unlimited authority over the aspect.
• Partly Decentralized ­ Ongoing decisions are made by employees themselves, or
led by quasi­managers with time limited and revocable authority.
• Decentralized ­ Employees have full and equal authority over the aspect in ongoing
decisions.
The results of the second part of the analysis can be seen in Table 4.1.
The categorizations were made upon careful consideration and followed the argumenta­
tion such as in the following examples.
In the case of Fountain’s Organizational Structure, it was stated by the interviewee that
52
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.1: Decentralization level of each PMS for each company
the Organizational structure was designed by the founders, not employees. While the em­
ployees have an opportunity to change their roles and potentially even propose new ones,
the interviewee did not mention that they can change the actual organizational structure.
In either case, it is the founders who make the decisions in this aspect, which is why it
was decided to label the aspect as centralized in the case of Fountain Partnership.
Careful consideration was also needed in the case of of Qamcom’s Organizational Struc­
ture. According to the interviewee, “the only requirement from from the board was that we
should have a regular meeting where we discuss how to work in the organization” (Ap­
pendix C). The BoD imposed a minimal constraint to the aspect, but gave a considerable
amount of freedom to employees to determine the structure. It was therefore decided that
this aspect in the case of Qamcom was labeled as decentralized. A different conclusion
was made in the case of their Reward Systems. Here, the employees elected a commit­
tee that came up with criteria that determines the salary. However, the overall amount of
money that can be distributed amongst employees by the committee is determined by the
BoD. In comparison to the requirement that they have to hold meetings, the salary limit
was not considered as a minimal restriction. The salary limit prevents employees from
using the company’s resources however they see fit. Therefore, the Reward Systems
aspects of Qamcom was considered to be Partly Decentralized.
Looking at Fountain’s Vision and Mission, the interviewee said that in the previous ver­
sion, it was the founders who determined the aspect, but the new iteration “is being led
by our Agency Growth Team” and ”shaped by everyone” (Appendix B). This is done by
conducting ”workshops with people within the company”. Because everyone has the op­
portunity to participate in this aspect, and because the aspect is led by a quasi­managerial
team and not the founders/BoD, the aspect was labeled as Partly Decentralized. The ap­
proach was very similar at Qamcom, where the Vision and Mission were also drafted by
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
53
==PAGE:64==
everyone, but instead of a team leading the development of the PMS aspect, it was lead
by a single individual. Their approach was also labeled as Partly Decentralized.
When deciding the level of decentralization of Fountain’s Information Flows, it was clear
that the founders decided not to share all their financial information with all employees
in order to not put additional stress on employees when the company is not doing good.
Because they determine how transparent the information about the company are, this as­
pect was labeled as Centralized. A different conclusion was made in the case of Qamcom.
Even though they do not have systematic feedback or feed­forward systems in place, all
other information is transparent to all employees.
In some cases, it was not possible to determine the level of decentralization because the
aspects were not yet developed, or because it was not clear whether the aspect was cen­
tralized or not, as was the case in Satalia’s KSFs. While it could be reasonable to assume
that this aspect is done by the person that was appointed by their AI algorithm, which is
how the company consistently appoints authority, it should be confirmed by the intervie­
wee himself before classifying the aspect. In both cases, where a company does not have
a PMS in place, or where it was not possible to determine the level of decentralization,
the aspect is labeled as n/a, meaning that the categorization was not available.
Findings Summary
This part of the analysis revealed that the majority of the aspects that are not centralized,
are partially decentralized. More specifically, 6 aspects were fully decentralized, and 15
were partly decentralized. Qamcom has the most fully decentralized aspects. Satalia’s
approach is very consistent with their principle of using AI to appoint employees to make
decisions in different aspects. The exception is Performance Evaluation, which is not
controlled by anyone.
Critical evaluation of the Analytical Tool
The analytical tool developed before the interviews were conducted can be significantly
improved. The interviews revealed that it would be possible to distinguish between two
separate phases of each aspect. The initial design phase, where the rules and limits of
each aspect are imposed, and the second, ’action’ phase, where ongoing decisions about
each aspect are being made within the limits imposed in the design phase. Considering
only the design phase, it was clear that the rules and limits of an aspect can be imposed
either:
• Under the authority of the founders/BoD, rendering an aspect predetermined.
• Without the authority of the founders/BoD, designed by employees, rendering an
aspect organic.
An example of a case where an aspect was designed organically is featured in the case of
Qamcom’s organizational structure, where the employees designed their own flat struc­
ture with the minimal constraint imposed by the founders. They required that the employ­
ees have regular meetings where they discuss how organization is to be ran. They then
54
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:65==
jointly decided to have two separate meetings, one where a role is proposed, and the
other one where it is determined who is to fill the proposed role. An example of a prede­
termined aspect can be seen in the case of Satalia’s organizational structure, where the
rule to use the Algorithm to determine the structure was imposed by the CEO. Because
of this authoritative decision that can not be changed by the rest of the employees, the
aspect could be labeled as ’Predetermined’. The organic approaches for each aspect can
then be mapped in a table.
The second step would be to analyze the Action phase, which would follow the same
principle as is explained in the section above ­ 4.2.1, with a few changes. The ideas
about these changes appeared when summarizing the interviews. Some also appeared
on the basis of questions that spontaneously appeared during the interviews.
It would be possible to include three other domains that could be added to the PMS as­
pects. These domains are Work Execution, Work Design, and Hiring and Firing. The part
about Work Execution would allow interviewers to systematically check whether a com­
pany qualifies as an SMO and showcase this in the analytical tool. The part about Work
Design could be added because it was revealed that the organizational structure of SMOs
does not necessarily tell us who designs the work and who has the authority over work
execution. In SMOs, for example at Fountain, the design of work is done either by project
managers or by employees themselves. In the latter case, the project manager only acts
as “note taker” (Appendix B). In both cases, the project manager can be considered as a
quasi­project manager. Even when he breaks down a project into tasks, he only makes
proposals about who should execute individual tasks, while employees can always say
no to his proposals. The aspect of Work Design in Fountain’s case would be labeled
as ’Partly Decentralized’. Lastly, questions about who has the authority to hire and fire
employees should be asked systematically. It is important to note that this question was
asked in the interviews, but this question was not planned beforehand.
4.2.2
Control in PMS aspects
The next step in the analysis was to describe the processes that were labeled as Partly
Decentralized and Decentralized. Because Centralized aspects imply that someone re­
tains managerial authority over an aspect, which is consistent with the approach of Man­
agerial Hierarchies, these aspects were omitted from the analysis. Overall, the emphasis
in this part of analysis is on how the aspect itself is controlled, and not how the work of
employees within the aspect is controlled.
Firstly, it was decided to gather all aspects that were fully Decentralized. After that, a
summary of each approach was described, and finally, it was attempted to come up with
some general features about approaches in each aspect. This generalization was made
with a particular goals in mind. Namely, it would allow researchers, upon doing more case
studies, to create a theoretical framework that includes various approaches for decentral­
ized control over PMS aspects. Alternatively, it could allow other companies to look for
alternative decentralized approaches to organizational control in academic literature, and
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
55
==PAGE:66==
develop them with respect to their context.
Control in Decentralized Aspects
The results of this part of the analysis can be seen in Table 4.2 below, followed by argu­
mentative examples that show how the table was filled.
Table 4.2: Decentralized control principles for each PMS aspect
The Organizational Structure of Qamcom is determined by employees who hold two sep­
arate meetings. On one of the meetings, employees propose What should be done. After
the rest of the employees recognize the need for these, they hold a second meeting, where
they discuss Who should or who wants to fill a particular role. No employee has final deci­
sion making authority in this aspect. If for example someone who specializes in laboratory
equipment recognizes that they need a new role, someone who would take care of the
laboratory equipment, he presents the case to other employees. The decision is accepted
56
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:67==
if no one has a principled objection. This means that employees have to persuade others,
and that decisions must be aligned with the values and principles of the company. The
general features of control in Quamcom’s organizational structure are therefore, meetings
about what should be done, which determines a role and the second meeting where it is
determined who fills the role. Other two features are persuasive and principled decision
making. These last two features act as guiding principles in decentralized control in the
Organizational Structure aspect.
Commonalities in Decentralized Aspects
Qamcom uses their financial targets as a KPIs, but not on an individual level. Moreover,
they ”developed some KPIs for ourselves to police ourselves” (Appendix C). Unfortu­
nately, the interviewee did not specify or give any examples of these KPIs. Nonetheless,
it is possible to generalize their way of developing KPIs as a ’Self­design’, meaning that
employees of other companies can freely develop their own KPIs. A further analysis would
be needed to figure out how exactly this is done, but as an example, this could be done
by looking at theory about KPIs and deciding which KPIs would be appropriate to be used
in their own context.
Overall, no common themes were recognized across different decentralized PMS aspect.
Some commonalities are only present withing the same aspect, where different compa­
nies took a similar approach. Such is the case in Performance Evaluation, where evalua­
tion is done by peers at Qamcom and Satalia, and complete transparency of information
at Satalia and IMP Scandinavia.
Control in Partly Decentralized Aspects
The results of this part can be seen in Table 4.3. Argumentative examples of how the
table was filled can be seen below.
Fountain’s Vision and Mission, KSFs, and their Strategies and Plans were led by different
teams that design employee workshops where everyone has the opportunity to participate
in making proposals and decisions about each aspect. Similar approach was adopted by
Qamcom, except that the workshops are led by a single individual.
As already mentioned, Satalia uses their AI algorithm that looks at different data, used
as criteria to create swarm­like organizational structures and who should perform specific
roles. That’s why the general principle was labeled as ’Swarm­like structure created by
an AI algorithm’ and ’Roles determined by an AI algorithm’.
When looking at Fountain’s Target setting process, it was revealed that employees set
their individual targets in negotiations with their clients. After projects are finished, they
answer whether the targets were met or not.
After answering the yes/no questions, the People and Culture Team looks at these an­
swers. They also observe their behavior and collect opinions from 6 colleagues and clients
to arrive at a 360° feedback review for each employee. The general principles in the case
of Performance evaluation were therefore ’Self­assessment’ and ’Peer evaluation, led by
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
57
==PAGE:68==
Table 4.3: Partly Decentralized control principles for each PMS aspect
58
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:69==
quasi managers’.
Commonalities in Partly Decentrlaized Aspects
Looking at the table, it can be seen that the majority of the aspects are led by quasi
managers. This is the most general theme that can be found by looking at different aspects
taken together. The next common theme are employee workshops where employees
participate in decision making within an aspect that is led by a quasi manager. These
workshops are used in two aspects, Vision and Mission in two companies, and strategies
and plans at one company. Performance evaluation is typically done by peer evaluation.
Lastly, salaries tend to be determined systematically and objectively by considering a
broad range of criteria.
Critical Evaluation of Partly Decentralized and Decentralized aspects
The obtained findings are the reflection of the design of the interview. Looking at the
initial interview questions, it can be recognised that certain aspects could have included
additional questions.
Firstly, the Vision and Mission aspect questioned who has the authority to make decisions
in that aspect. The answers, provided by interviewees mainly responded by explaining
who created the Vision and Mission and what the Vision and Mission are. However, it was
not explicitly asked and revealed how it is made sure that the projects and processes of the
company are in line with the Vision and Mission. Similar questions could be posed when
asking the respondents about the Key Success Factors. The questions about hiring and
firing should be treated separately, and not as a part of Reward Systems, as the authority
to hire and fire was mostly different than the authority about decisions when it comes to
salaries and financial bonuses. Such is the case at Satalia, Qamcom and Fountain.
The domains asking about Work Design, Work Execution and Hiring and Firing could also
be added in this part of the analysis.
4.2.3
Other Principles of Control and Findings
Other principles were also recognized from the interviews. However, these principles are
general and do not apply to any single aspect of PMSs.
Such principles were recognized when asking questions that emerged during the inter­
views. For example, the interviewees at Qamcom and Satalia were asked about deci­
sion making principles at their company. In both companies, decisions authority is given
through a role. At Qamcom, each role describes which decisions an individual should
make. When the role responsible has to make a decision that is not described by the role,
he is expected to contact the individual in the company who knows the most about that
subject and ask for an advice. He gave an example of a researcher working in the lab,
who has to buy a missing piece of equipment he has no knowledge about. In that case,
he is supposed to find someone in the company who knows the most about the equip­
ment and ask him for advice. He then chooses the “reasonably priced” part. He also
mentioned that all decisions are expected to be made with “what is best for organization
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
59
==PAGE:70==
in mind” (Appendix C). This can be extracted from the Vision and Mission document that
also includes the Values of the company, and decisions are supposed to be aligned with
all of the things included in the document. At Fountain and IMP Scandinavia, they did not
mention that they adopted a similar principle for decision making.
In one single case, a company ­ Qamcom ­ also took up a vote to make a decision. This
was done when they decided to elect a committee that came up with criteria that deter­
mines employees’ salaries. No other companies undertook this democratic approach to
decision making. Despite it being used in an exceptional case at Qamcom, it can still be
considered as a principle for making decisions in SMOs.
Furthermore, it was revealed that SMOs rely on behavior standards that are expected from
employees. This was explicitly mentioned by the interviewees at Fountain and Quamcom.
In the first case, the interviewee mentioned that they are nurturing a culture of ambition
and accountability, and that employees are expected to be accountable for their work.
Their behaviors were monitored by the People and Culture Team. In the second case, at
Qamcom, the behaviors have to be in line with the vision, mission and the values of the
company. It was not explicitly mentioned how and who monitors the behaviors.
Hiring and firing employees were done by the founders or BoD in all cases except at
Qamcom, where the person responsible for making these decisions done by the individual
that is responsible for HR decisions. Hiring at Qamcom and Fountain follows specific
principles. At both companies, they have a preference for employing experienced and
committed individuals who see the opportunity to work on interesting projects as more
valuable than high financial rewards. At Qamcom, they often also hire PhD graduates,
who also have a proven record of commitment to a particular topic and are accustomed
to work without managerial supervision.
In all of the companies, the employees are encouraged to celebrate success, but they do
generally not do it in a systematic way. At Satalia, they are also encouraged to celebrate
failures, as this encourages people to be honest and learn from mistakes. None of the
companies had financial penalties for underperforming. However, employees can get
fired for continuous bad performance.
Conflict resolution is encouraged to be solved by the involved parties in the first step at
Qamcom, Fountain and IMP Scandinavia. In the second step, Qamcom involves the HR,
Fountain involves The People and Culture Team, while IMP Scandinavia involves the
founders. Founders are involved in the third step at Fountain and Qamcom. In addition,
Qamcom has “a whistle blower function”, where employees “can report that something
strange is happening” to the BoD (Appendix C).
All of the above principles are generalized and listed below. The questions about decision
making principles, behavioral standards and controls, and conflict resolution principles
could also be added in the analytical tool.
• Democratic decision making.
60
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:71==
• Knowledge based decision making.
• Behavioral controls.
• Step­by­step conflict resolution.
• Celebrating success and failure.
• Whistle­blower function.
• Hiring people with a proven record of commitment.
Based on these findings, additional questions could be asked systematically and added
to the analytical tool.
4.2.4
Improved version of the analytical tool
In this section, all of the improvements for the analytical tool have been gathered. The
final and full version of the tool can be seen in Appendix F.
4.3
Analysis results ­ Coordination
The following section features an analysis of the coordination mechanisms that SMOs
utilize in order to coordinate interdependent work. The analysis follows the Framework
designed by Okhuysen and Bechky’s that was also used as a guide to form the questions
used in the interviews (2009). The interviews on coordination were analyzed in a deduc­
tive way, meaning that concrete coordination processes of companies were subsumed to
theoretical coordination mechanisms developed by Okhuysen and Bechky.
Each integrating condition (Accountability, Predictability, Common Understanding) is treated
separately and features general coordination mechanisms (see Table 2.1) that each com­
pany uses to potentially a particular propose and ultimately to fulfill a particular integrating
condition (as seen in Table 2.2). Each condition also features an argumentative exam­
ple that allows readers to understand the though process behind categorizing concrete
approaches of a company into more general coordination mechanisms that companies
use.
Accountability
At Fountain Partnership, accountability is achieved through several coordination mech­
anisms. Firstly, through what can be considered ’Plans and Rules’. In order to ’deter­
mine responsibilities for tasks’, organization follows a rule that all responsibilities should
be clearly defined. Accountability is determined by quasi project managers who define
the roles for tasks according to the desires and availabilites of employees. Alternatively,
project managers can act as note takers when the project team distribute accountabilities
themselves. Responsibilities for tasks are shared on company’s dashboard and are visi­
ble to all employees. This allows them to align work and know the sequence of tasks that
come after another task is competed. They also align work through prototypes, pieces
of partially completed work that is presented to the project work team and clients by the
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
61
==PAGE:72==
project lead. Both of these examples, the dashboard and the prototype are recognized in
the literature as coordination mechanisms called ’Objects and Representations’ and they
are done to acknowledge and align work and to scaffold the tasks. Ever since COVID­
19, the employees of the company are working remotely. In order to make their remote
work easier, the company invested money into collaborative remote technology that en­
ables employees to be present on meetings without their physical participation, makes
employees and their work visible. This mechanism can be subsidized under the gen­
eral coordination mechanisms called ’Proximity’, which is another general coordination
mechanism that serves as means to achieve accountability.
The rest of the short summaries, coordination principles and for what they are used are
represented in Table 4.4.
Predictability
In literally all of the companies, the interviewees responded that they use the same meth­
ods for predictability as they use for accountability. This means that they use plans and
rules to define responsibilities and allocate resources, objects and representations, or
more concretely, their respective platforms where employees can see how project activ­
ities are scaffolded and therefore make work predictable. Therefore, no different or new
coordination mechanisms were recognized to be used for predictability.
Common understanding
Because employees of Satalia work from home and across the whole Europe, they use
platforms like Slack and their internally developed Hubble to communicate their work.
Both of these platforms allow them to share information directly, either through written
words in Slack or by showcasing their work on Hubble. Both of these platforms are (be­
sides other purposes) used for direct information sharing. Hubble also features a section
where they explain jargon. This is mainly meant for new employees and helps them to
create a common perspective. According to the literature, this way of using information
sharing to create common understanding can be categorized under the more general
coordination mechanism, ’Objects and Representations’. At Satalia, they do not allow
employees to use acronyms. This aspect falls under the category of ’Plans and Rules’,
however, the precise reasoning behind the adoption of this rule was not revealed.
Coordination mechanisms, their purpose and a short summary of how they fulfill the inte­
grating condition, common understanding, can be seen in Table 4.5 below.
Other findings
Further analysis of the interviews revealed that two case companies rely on quasi man­
agers who lead the coordination of work. Such was the case at Fountain and Fountain
and Satalia. The case of Fountain is explained above, in the section about Accountability.
At Quamcom, work is also coordinated by a quasi manager with time limited authority,
that is revocable and lasts for one year at the time.
62
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:73==
Table 4.4: Coordination mechanisms used by each company to achieve accountability for
tasks
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
63
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.5: Coordination mechanisms used by each company to achieve common under­
standing to coordinate work
64
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:75==
At Satalia, responsibilities for managing projects are determined by the AI algorithm. This
decentralizes authority for coordination, but at the same time grants full authority to those
who take on the responsibilities. It is however time limited. It lasts until the project is
finished. For each individual project, the roles can change depending on the algorithm.
At IMP Scandinavia, work is coordinated by the CTO, who has full authority over the
design of work and therefore also coordinates work.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
65
==PAGE:76==
5
Critical Reflections on the Project
This chapter includes the discussion about the project, findings, analytical tool and the
methodology. The discussion is split into two parts — control and coordination are treated
separately. After that, suggestions for future research are presented. The last two sec­
tions include conclusions about the project and what the author of the paper learned during
the project.
66
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:77==
5.1
Discussion ­ Control
Upon doing the literature review, no existing theoretical framework or analytical tool was
found to holistically discover and map decentralized organizational processes in SMOs.
For this reason, a new tool had to be developed using the PMS framework of Ferreira
and Otley (2009). Even though the original framework was developed with the inten­
tion to analyze control and performance in MHs, and even though the respondents were
meant to be managers in MHs, it still allowed for a systematic and holistic identification of
decentralized organizational processes and aspects that are essential for organizational
performance.
Before the interviews were conducted, it was first decided to omit three questions from
the original framework — change, strength and coherence of of other PMS aspects. This
was done because the purpose of this thesis was to identify how decentralized aspects
are controlled across various companies, while the original framework and the last the
questions specifically were meant for an in­depth analysis of a single organization, where
it was advised to interview several managers on different hierarchical levels.
After the interviews in this research were conducted and summarized, it was decided to
analyze the interviews in accordance with the aspects used in the interviews. This was
mainly done for two reasons. First, because the pre­exsiting aspects already allowed for
the analysis to be done systematically. Second, because the purposes of each PMS as­
pect are essentially so different from each other. Note that analyzing in a different manner
would partly also defeat the purpose of the research, which wanted to systematically iden­
tify different decentralized organizational processes, and not to only find how SMOs are
controlled in general. In combination with the findings, which also revealed little common­
alities in each aspect, this way of analyzing made it much harder to generalize the results
and find common themes. If more case studies would be done, it would be reasonable to
expect to find more commonalities, make more general conclusions and establish a new
theoretical framework for control in SMOs.
The most straightforward conclusion amongst all the findings was that were that the ma­
jority of aspects that are not centralized, are partly decentralized. The most common
general feature of the aspects was that they are controlled by quasi managers. These
managers have a time limited authority to make decisions within that aspect, but their
decisions can also be challenged by others. In some cases, they act only as leaders
of the aspect and create workshops where employees give proposals and jointly make
decisions. These workshops were the next thing that was common in different aspects
as well as in two different companies. The fact that the majority of aspects were partly
decentralized and led by quasi managers could be linked to the theoretical insights of
Puranam (2014) who mentioned that decision making processes that continually allow
all employees to participate might be very time consuming, and this is something that
companies would generally want to avoid. Granting time­limited and principally revocable
authority to quasi managers is also consistent with the decision making principle at two
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
67
==PAGE:78==
companies, Qamcom and Satalia, where they believe that decisions should generally be
made by those who have the most knowledge about the matter at hand. On this note,
it would also be interesting to see how often the decisions of quasi managers are actu­
ally revoked in practice. Other common approaches include performance evaluation that
is done by peers, and that salaries are based on a broad range of objective criteria. It
could be argued that this ensures transparency and fair pay, because the salaries do not
depend on a subjective evaluation of managers.
The findings themselves revealed that the analyzed case companies have very different
approaches at how they manage each aspect. This might be a consequence of the fact
that organizational literature does not present us with any thorough analysis and blueprints
for how to structure organizations with decentralized authority (apart from the holocratic
model, which was not investigated in the present study). Therefore, it could be argued
that the majority of aspects were designed and developed organically. This assumption
however has to be confirmed with future empirical studies.
The improved analytical tool features questions about the design process of each aspect.
Other improvements have also been made. They allow future researchers to conduct a
more holistic analysis. Unfortunately, the improved tool could not be validated because
of the time limitations of the research and the unavailability of employees in SMOs. The
analytical tool can be used for both in­depth analysis as well as for single interviews,
where the former approach can yield answers about the coherence of different aspects
that would especially be useful for consultants who would want to improve performance
of the organization, while the latter case enables researchers to identify even more mech­
anisms and principles of control of various aspects. In turn, this could lead to a theoretical
framework about control in SMOs and potentially encourage more entrepreneurs to adopt
these principles and constitute more SMOs. Ultimately, more SMOs, as far as they would
be effective and competitive, could show us whether the old assumption about knowledge,
which legitimizes centralization of authority, still has any validity or not, and whether SMOs
are a viable alternative for MHs. At least in smaller to medium organizations, as scholars
already pointed out that one of the biggest challenges of SMOs is scalability.
Another critical observation of the research is that it was mainly designed to find out who
controls each aspect, but not so much about how aspects were controlled. For example,
it was not questioned and revealed which criteria are taken into account when making
decisions in each aspect, and what principles are used to control each aspect. Only one
respondent mentioned that decisions have to be aligned with what’s best for the com­
pany, but even this response is vague. These principles could be identified if the analysis
would be done in depth by conducting several interviews with multiple respondents in
each company. In this regard it is possible to assume that the findings themselves could
be biased because the majority of the interviewees were also the founders of the com­
panies. It would be reasonable to expect that the views of the founders, which where
the respondents in three cases, may differ from the views of the rest of the employees
68
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:79==
(Maxfield, 2019). The founders and executives may want to present a picture of how they
want things to be, rather than how things are.
Looking at how the findings about control compare to existing literature, even if existing
theory did not focus just on control, it can be argued that the structure of SMOs is or­
ganic. This classification was mentioned by H. Gittell and Douglass (2012) and Burns
and Stalker (1961). Those in authority often consult their peers, rather than issue com­
mands. The communication in the organization is horizontal rather than vertical. This
observation is implicit and can be deduced from the fact that the organizational structures
of SMOs are flat by definition. The difference between Burns’ and Stalkers’ case and
the studied cases is that the old paper still assumed the existence of different hierarchi­
cal ranks. Next, O’Grady’s (2019) assumption that transparency might be the one of the
main features of decentralized companies can not be confirmed due to a small sample.
At Fountain, transparency is deliberately limited because the founder assumes that bad
financial results could stress the employees. In the same paper, O’Grady talks about a
concept of minimal restraint, which was recognized in the case of Qamcom’s organiza­
tional structure. It could also be argued that this feature is an enabling, rather than a
restricting feature that the BoD imposed on employees. Further analysis that questions
the design phase of PMS aspects could reveal more answers to these questions.
5.2
Discussion ­ Coordination
The analysis of coordination was severely limited, both in its design and consequently
in the results that were obtained. Nevertheless, the results show that each company
uses at least some coordination mechanisms that fulfill the integrating conditions and
enable effective coordination — accountability, predictability and common understanding.
The research did not reveal any new coordination mechanisms. From the point of view
of mechanisms themselves, there is no difference between MHs and SMOs. The main
difference between MHs and SMOs lies in the decentralization of authority when it comes
to coordination. More concretely, coordination is mainly managed by quasi managers.
The time limitations of the interview and the fact that only one respondent from each or­
ganization was questioned, likely did not reveal other coordination mechanisms and other
descriptive processes that enable coordination. For example, it was not questioned how
SMOs coordinate sales and production or software development. In general, the interview
should be designed in a more detailed way. Questions about all coordination mechanisms
could have been asked, along with the purposes of using each mechanism. It would be
valuable to perform an observational study of coordination, where the researcher would
observe the employees while they coordinate, and uncover which functional departments
or roles need to be aligned to coordinate different tasks. This could yield much better
insight about how coordination is done and what kind of problems emerge in the absence
of centralized authority.
Another questions, perhaps central to coordination in SMOs was not addressed, namely,
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
69
==PAGE:80==
how conflicts are managed when actors have to coordinate, but no one has authority to
make the final decision. In part, this answer was revealed in the control part of this thesis,
where some respondents said that they follow a step­by­step conflict resolution process,
where the founders have the final say. However, it is not explicitly mentioned that this way
of resolution is used for coordination.
One of the findings in coordination also seems contradictory. At IMP Scandinavia, em­
ployees supposedly have authority to execute their work freely, without any superior au­
thority, but at the same time, their CTO, who also acts as a project manager, also has
full authority in design of work. Given that a part of coordination is also to put different
parts of the projects together, does he not dictate how the tasks are done? This could
be revealed by interviewing employees themselves, and reveal whether there is some
discrepancy between the perception of the the founder of IMP, and the employees.
The comparison of the findings with existing research on coordination on decentralized
organizations (see subsection 2.3.3) is fruitless. Firstly, the cases studied in literature do
not fit the definition of SMOs. Secondly, some of the studied cases are decentralized be­
cause of the nature of the work — hospital emergency departments, SWAT Teams, police
work. The nature of work in the studied cases in the present thesis research is slower and
does not require actors to make split­second decisions. The comparison could perhaps
be possible in a better and more detailed research that could question the existence of
’trading zones’, as described by Kellogg et al. (2006).
Looking back at the research done about coordination, it could be argued that this domain
is closely related to control. Coordination mechanisms that organizations have in place
also serve as mechanisms that allow them to control work, to prevent things to go out
of hand and become chaotic. This close relationship is a consequence of the fact that
distinctions between different research areas are theoretical. This allows researchers to
systematically analyze the organizations. In practice, things are much more intertwined.
Ultimately, the analysis about coordination should be done in a separate research.
5.3
Conclusions
The analytical tool that was developed on top of the theory developed by Ferreira and
Otley (2009), and used for interviews, revealed that the PMS framework designed by
Ferreira and Otley do not cover certain aspects that are important for control in SMOs.
These aspects are decision making, conflict resolution, behavioral standards or controls,
work execution, work design, and the question about who has authority to hire and fire
employees.
Findings about organizational control revealed that the majority of PMS aspects that were
not centralized in the case studies were partly decentralized. These aspects were in large
led by quasi managers with time­limited and revocable authority. Other commonalities,
that were, however, not present across all companies, are: performance evaluation is
70
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:81==
done by peers, salaries are determined by a broad range of criteria, and information flows
can be completely transparent. Small sample size of case studies did not allow to recog­
nize a big number of common approaches or generalized conclusions.
The research about coordination in organizations that was proposed by Lee and Edmond­
son (2017) was done on the basis of the framework developed by Okhuysen and Bechky
(2009). All companies fulfilled the integrative conditions for effective coordination and
used coordination mechanisms that were described in the literature. Coordination of work
is led by quasi project managers.
Judging by the general success and growth of all four companies, and by the fact that three
of companies are facing fierce competition in their respective domains, as was stated by
the interviewees, it can be concluded that their organizational structure and decentralized
authority adds to the validity of SMOs. A bigger sample size will hopefully reveal a myriad
of factors that influence the success or failure of SMOs.
5.4
Opportunities for Future Research
Most opportunities for future research have already been mentioned in discussion section.
In summary, these opportunities are:
• Use the improved analytical tool in all future research.
• Interview more than one person within each organization to reduce bias, including
interviewing employees besides founders.
• Get a bigger sample size to potentially arrive at more general principles and even­
tually develop a theoretical framework about control in SMOs.
• Understand whether different aspects were designed organically, and map organic
processes.
• Separate the analysis of control and coordination.
• Do a more thorough and detailed research about coordination, such as a field study
research, or interview more employees.
• Understand how conflicts are managed in the absence of centralized authority.
Other research could also include subjective perception of control in SMOs. In­depth
analysis of single companies could reveal and question the coherence of different PMS
aspects. This approach would also be useful for consultants. Moreover, a study of infor­
mal hierarchies could be done, as several respondents mentioned that their structures do
feature this phenomena.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
71
==PAGE:82==
References
Alonso, R., Dessein, W., & Matouschek, N. (2008). When does coordination require
centralization? American Economic Review, 98(1), 145–179. doi: 10.1257/aer.98
.1.145
Anthony, R. N., & Hekimian, J. S. (1965). Planning and Control Systems STUDIES IN.
Arendt, H. (1961). Between Past and Future. New York: The Viking Press.
Burke, P. (1992). History and Social Theory. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Burns, T., & Stalker, G. (1961). The management of innovation. London: Tavistock
Publications.
Burtt, E. (1924). The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science. New York: Dover
Publications, Inc.
Buurtzorg. (n.d.). Buurtzorg.
Carlile PR. (2002). A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries. Organization Science,
13(4), 442–455.
Chandler, A. D. (1962). Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the American
Industrial Enterprise. New York: MIT Press.
Detert, J. R., & Edmondson, A. C. (2011). Implicit Voice Theories. Culture and Orga­
nization, 80(3), 204–220. Retrieved from http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/
10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413-091328%0Ahttp://pubsonline.informs
.org/doi/abs/10.1287/orsc.1080.0405%0Ahttp://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/
kbla9810.htm
Faraj, S., & Sproull, L. (2000). Development Teams. Institute for Operations Research
and the Management Science, 46(12), 1554–1568.
Faraj, S., & Xiao, Y. (2006). Coordination in fast­response organizations. Management
Science, 52(8), 1155–1169. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.1060.0526
Ferreira, A., & Otley, D. (2009). The design and use of performance management sys­
tems: An extended framework for analysis. Management Accounting Research,
20(4), 263–282. doi: 10.1016/j.mar.2009.07.003
Foss, N. J., & Dobrajska, M.
(2015).
Valve’s Way: Vayward, Visionary, or Voguish?
Journal of Organization Design, 4(2), 12. doi: 10.7146/jod.20162
Gittell, H., & Douglass, A. (2012). Relational Bureaucracy : Structuring. Academy of
Management Review, 37(4), 709–734.
Gittell, J. H. (2002). Coordinating mechanisms in care provider groups: Relational coor­
dination as a mediator and input uncertainty as a moderator of performance effects.
Management Science, 48(11), 1408–1426. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.48.11.1408.268
Hales, C. (1999). Leading horses to water? The impact of decentralization on managerial
behaviour. Journal of Management Studies, 36(6), 831–851. doi: 10.1111/1467
­6486.00160
72
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:83==
Jacoby, S. M. (1984). Employing bureaucracy: Managers, unions, and the transforamtion
of work in 20th century. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Jones, G., & George, J. (2016). Essentials of Contemporary Management (7th ed.). New
York: McGraw Hill Education.
Kellogg, K. C., Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. A. (2006). Life in the trading zone: Structur­
ing coordination across boundaries in postbureaucratic organizations. Organization
Science, 17(1), 22–44. doi: 10.1287/orsc.1050.0157
Kuzmanić, T. A., Biloslavo, R., Bojnec, Š., Dolinšek, S., Erčulj, J., & Vodovnik, Z. (2010).
Avtoriteta in vodenje [Authority and Management]. Znanstvene Monografije [Scien­
tific Monographies].
Laloux, F. (2014). Revinventing organizations. Brussels: Nelson Parker.
Langfield­Smith, K. (1997). Rainfall, commerce and politics. Science, 15(368), 110–111.
Lee, M. Y., & Edmondson, A. C. (2017). Self­managing organizations: Exploring the limits
of less­hierarchical organizing. Research in Organizational Behavior, 37, 35–58.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.riob.2017.10.002 doi: 10.1016/
j.riob.2017.10.002
Malone, T. W., & Crowston, K. (1994). The Interdisciplinary Study of Coordination. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 26(1), 87–119. doi: 10.1145/174666.174668
Maxfield, B.
(2019).
Corporate Culture Chasm: VitalSmarts Research Finds Bosses
Are Out of Touch with the Day­To­Day Experiences of Their Employees by Brittney
Maxfield.
Retrieved 20.6.2022,
from https://cruciallearning.com/blog/
corporate-culture-chasm-vitalsmarts-research-finds-bosses-are-out-of
-touch-with-the-day-to-day-experiences-of-their-employees/
Mechanical Philosophy. (2022). Mechanical Philosophy. Retrieved from https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_philosophy
O’Grady, W. (2019). Enabling control in a radically decentralized organization. Qualitative
Research in Accounting and Management, 16(2), 224–251. doi: 10.1108/QRAM­07
­2017­0065
Okhuysen, G. A., & Bechky, B. A. (2009). 10 Coordination in Organizations: An Integrative
Perspective. The Academy of Management Annals, 3(1), 463–502. doi: 10.1080/
19416520903047533
Otley, D. (1994). Otley 1994.pdf (Vol. 5).
Ouchi, W. G. (1979). Conceptual Framework for the Design of Organizational Control
Mechanisms. Management Science, 25(9), 833–848. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.25.9.833
Plato. (1955). The Republic. London: Penguin Books.
Puranam, P. (2014). Managing Without Authority: Notes on the Romance and Reality of
’Boss­Less’ Firms. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2495910
Puranam, P.
(2022).
Deflating the rhetoric around “flat firms”.
Journal of Organiza­
tion Design(0123456789), 1–3. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/s41469
-022-00114-w doi: 10.1007/s41469­022­00114­w
Seibold, D. R., & Ballard, D. I. (2003). Communicating and organizing in time: A Meso­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
73
==PAGE:84==
Level Model of Organizational Temporality. Management Communication Quarterly,
16(3), 380–415. doi: 10.1177/0893318902238896
Semler, R. (1989). Managing without managers.
Simons, R. (1995). Levers of Control: how managers use innovative control systems to
drive strategic renewal. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Sitkin, S., Cardinal, L., & Bijlsma­Frankema, K. (2010). Organizational Control. Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Soetens, A., & Huybrechts, B.
(2022).
Resisting the Tide: The Roles of Ideology in
Sustaining Alternative Organizing at a Self­managed Cooperative. Journal of Man­
agement Inquiry. doi: 10.1177/10564926211070429
Van der Meer­Kooistra, J., & Scapens, R. W. (2008). The governance of lateral relations
between and within organisations. Management Accounting Research, 19(4), 365–
384. doi: 10.1016/j.mar.2008.08.001
Volberda, H. W.
(1996).
Toward the Flexible Form: How to Remain Vital in Hyper­
competitive Environments. Organization Science, 7(4), 359–374. doi: 10.1287/
orsc.7.4.359
Weber, M. (1946). The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. Glencoe, IL: The
Falcon’s Wing Press.
Yang, S.­B., & Guy, M. E. (2006). GENXERS VERSUS BOOMERS: Work Motivators
and Management Implications. Public Performance Management Review, 29(3),
267–284. doi: 10.2753/pmr1530­9576290302
74
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix A
Vision and mission
The initial requirement for measuring and evaluating performance is based on the exis­
tence of objectives. They are typically set by senior managers in order to meet stakeholder
expectations. Since organizations typically have more than one objective, performance
becomes a multi­dimensional concept that can not be measured by a single overriding
parameter.
A general orientation of enterprises are sometimes articulated in their vision and mis­
sion statements. Mission describes the purpose and attracts investors, customers and
employees, while the vision intends to express the desired future state and sets the di­
rection of the organization. Both embody the core values of an organization. Together,
they guide the decisions about which activities and strategies must be changed and which
maintained. They can be outlined clearly and explicitly in mission statements or commu­
nicated by less formal means.
The focus of this aspect is to inquire about how organizational beliefs and purposes are
designed and shared, and how does the mission and vision guide the behaviors of orga­
nizational actors on different hierarchical levels.
Key success factors (KFSs)
KFSs encompass activities, competencies, capabilities and attributes that are seen as
conditions upon which the success of the organization depends on in its industry. They
codify the vision and mission statement in a concrete way, are measured against time and
allow those in charge to measure and make reports on a routine basis. Their identification
and progress towards the fulfillment of these factors is though to be an essential indicator
of organizational success. For example, annual growth in revenue in non­domestic mar­
kets is a good indicator whether a company is fulfilling its mission of becoming a global
leader in their market.
Those who manage the organizational activities have been advised not to measure factors
that have minor importance and focus only to those that are ‘truly’ critical for success.
Organizational structure
Organizations are traditionally seen as structures designed with a purpose of carrying out
activities while increasing efficiency through the reduction of transaction costs. The design
of an organizational structure intends to formally specify particular tasks and associated
roles. Roles are entrusted to individuals who are held accountable for their tasks. Fur­
thermore, the structure also specifies which tasks individuals should not do. The structure
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
75
==PAGE:86==
can be aimed to centralize/decentralize authority, standardize or differentiate processes,
and formalize rules and procedures for the execution of tasks.
According to authors, control processes that operate horizontally usually do not measure
financial factors. However, the literature is mostly concentrated on vertical controls that
are concerned with business processes.
Organizational structure also tends to shape the physical architecture and was traditionally
an overlooked aspect of MCS. Structure can either follow or shape the identifications of
KFSs and strategy. Authors mention and confirm the previously mentioned assumption
that companies that want to quickly adapt to changes in markets may require a more
decentralized structure. In its evolutionary stage, strategy typically follows the structure,
while later, revolutionary stages tend to inverse this relationship. As companies get bigger,
the structure is usually shaped by the strategy.
Strategies and plans
Authors define strategy as “the direction the organization chooses to pursue over the long
term as the means of achieving organizational objectives” (Ferreira & Otley, 2009). The
literature suggests that strategy should be matched with appropriate KFSs in order to
monitor and achieve its goals.
The focus of this aspect is on the activities that are considered to be essential for achiev­
ing the desired outcomes. It is possible that an organization has clearly defined goals,
measures appropriate KFSs but does not know which actions to undertake to achieve its
objectives. It is also possible that an organization adopts a more flexible approach. In
order to be able to respond to circumstances, some companies do not design a thorough
plan of actions needed to reach its goals. This strategy is typically used in highly volatile
and uncertain contexts, where forecasting is highly unreliable. Authors mention that liter­
ature suggests that communication of strategy is an important factor of success, as failure
to arrive at a common understanding between actors might result to a mismatch between
individual contributions and common objectives.
Strategic thinking is typically done by managers, in a top­down manner, where top man­
agers plan, make decisions and then communicate it down to their subordinates. Alter­
natively, it can be done in a bottom­up way which presents the participation of lower level
management. A greater involvement and empowerment are thought to result in greater
understanding of strategy, better organizational alignment and better conformity to com­
mon objectives.
Key performance measures
Key performance measures can be financial or non­financial metrics that are used to
evaluate success in organizations achieving their goals, strategies, objectives and KFSs.
They reflect the importance of different measures that an organization chooses to moni­
tor. This aspect is therefore concerned both with measures linked to organizational per­
76
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:87==
formance and the measures that are used by senior managers to control the behaviors of
individuals.
It is important to understand whether the performance measures are extracted from KFSs,
strategies and objectives. If they are, their derivation suggests that measures are a part
of the strategic implementation and the alignment between strategy and operations. The
choice of specific performance measures is a function of the organization’s design, its
competitive market environment and its strategy. Both financial and non­financial mea­
sures have been shown to have a positive effect on organizational performance.
Organizations choose certain performance measures and omit the use of others. Since
what is measured typically selects out what is not measured, attention should also be
given to why certain measures have been prioritized over other possibilities. In case of
hierarchical divisions, it is interesting to understand which measures, both financial and
non­financial, are utilized. In some cases, the choice of performance measures might be
causally connected and aligned with the organizational structure.
Target setting
Target setting is understood to be a critical facet of performance management. As such,
it has been receiving a good amount of attention from academic researchers. Attention
has mainly been focused on the relationship between target setting and evaluation of
performance that serves as grounds for rewards and punishments. But not much has
been said about the relationship of target setting and other aspects of PMS.
The designers of this framework have noticed that the research suggests that target set­
ting has a significant effect on performance. Moderately difficult goals are associated with
better group performance, even though they are achievable up to the rate between 80 and
90 percent. In the meantime, high performance targets do not seem to be as significant in
cases where there is a need of cooperation between different organizational units. This
is a consequence of managers of divisional units generally being unwilling to conform
to the needs of other divisional units; until cooperation becomes of primary importance,
managers take longer time to reach agreement.
Targets are also seen to be more and more important due to an increased competition
and global markets. Benchmarking, especially external, is used more and more often to
find best target setting practices. While this has been shown to increase organizational
performance, it also legitimizes the use of targets in organizations. Recognizing and set­
ting appropriate targets is therefore seen to be as important as whether the targets are
achieved or not.
Performance evaluation
Another critical aspect of control is the evaluation of performance. In most organizations,
this facet is done by senior managers as it potentially determines the development and
success of an organization. Activities in this domain can be either formal or informal,
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
77
==PAGE:88==
and they can be done by managers and human resource departments. It can be done
at an individual or group or even organizational level, whilst the individual performance
evaluation being the most common. Performance evaluations can also be objective or
subjective, or even somewhere in between. The criteria and weightings of objective eval­
uations are by definition known and they are almost always transparent, while subjective
criteria is unknown to the person being evaluated, and in some cases explicitly known by
the evaluator.
As such, subjective criteria can be prone to bias and time consuming, but are at the same
time easier to correct if they are flawed. According to authors of the article, research shows
that trust between subordinates and supervisors plays an important role in evaluation; in
cases where subordinates were rewarded based on subjective evaluations, employees
have shown greater pay satisfaction, productivity and overall profitability. Furthermore,
subjective evaluation has been found to be positively associated with time spent on train­
ing, the extent of interdependency of organizational units and the severity of punishments
when targets are not being met. Moreover, managers who had been evaluated on the ba­
sis of profitability achieve better results when they themselves evaluate their employees
as a group rather than as individuals.
Objective evaluations are mostly used in cases where there is a clear understanding of
the relationship between inputs and outputs, where performance is under a large degree
of control or in cases where it is accepted by all participants of the organization.
Reward systems
Rewards are typically granted on the basis of evaluations which is why they are the next
logical step in the analysis of PMSs. The section considers both rewards and punish­
ments. They cover a wide range and include verbal or written expressions and approvals
or criticism from managers, financial rewards such as salary increases and bonuses as
well as long­term progression and promotion. Informal rewards, such as appraisal, which
has previously been neglected, should be considered. It has been shown that they can
have a significant effect on behaviors of organizational actors. The questions about eq­
uity, inclusiveness and fairness should also be considered.
Performance has a strong relation to rewards and motivation. Literature acknowledges
the importance of rewards as an important factor that helps to align the goals of individ­
uals with the goals of an organization. Rewards are instrumental for the motivation of
employees. Research also recognized that desired behaviors that are not rewarded in
some way tend to get neglected.
Inquiries into the field of motivation have tried to understand the relationship between
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation has been shown to be better for
performance. Some studies have shown that extrinsic motivation can undermine intrinsic
motivation, but this has also been disputed. Financial incentives are beneficial for the
increase in performance quantity, but often do not result in the increased quality of perfor­
78
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:89==
mance that is usually recognized and expressed by managers. This particular relationship
gets decreased with the increasing complexity of tasks.
Group rewards, based on collective accomplishments are not to be neglected. They can
be manifested through profit­sharing schemes, gain­sharing plans or team­based incen­
tives. The looming danger of group reward systems is that they allow for free riders, lack
of equity or a feeling of detachment by individuals in the group. It might also be difficult to
properly evaluate the individual contributions to group performance. On the bright side,
group incentives tend to create an ownership culture and research has shown them to be
very effective.
Information flows, systems and networks
Systems, networks and flows of information are mechanisms that enable any performance
management and are therefore seen as one of the most important managerial systems.
They bind the system together and allow participants to share data across the organiza­
tion.
Important distinction of this aspect is between feedback and feed­forward information.
Feedback relates to correction and/or adaptation of action and behaviors on the basis of
gathered information. Feed­forward information on the other hand allows organizations to
learn from its experience and generate new ideas. It is often used to create future strate­
gies and plans. In other words, the first one is used to correct past mistakes, while the
second aims to anticipate future events and prepares the organization to be responsive
for potential changes in the future.
The notions of feedback and feed­forward are strongly related to ideas of single and dou­
ble loop learning. Single loop learning responds to performance measures. Signals are
detected that show deviance from pre­determined criteria. These signals do not intend
to question initial strategies and objectives. As such, they aim to inform managers about
deficiencies in standard operational activities. Therefore, single loop learning is linked to
feedback information. Double loop learning “involves questioning the role of the framing
and learning systems which underlie actual goals and strategies”. As such, they are linked
to feed­forward information flows.
Information systems are used to structure accounting and other controls. They have a
strong link to information technology infrastructure that is prevalent in contemporary orga­
nizations. These systems provide a platform and enable control of information. They can
be used to plan resources, control accounting and give feedback to other performance
measures. Financial information is usually more robust than non­financial information.
The latter is often subjected to manipulation and misreporting and it is interesting to see
how organizations tackle this issue.
IT is in an interdependent and mutual relationship with accounting. Accounting needs IT
to provide information, while IT needs accounting to justify its existence.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
79
==PAGE:90==
Traditionally, performance management has been centered around budgeting and ac­
counting, however, recent times have seen a shift to a more broad performance mea­
surement systems that include the control of production processes, quality control, supply
chain and customer­relationship systems. An example of this broader PMS is a balanced
scorecard.
Some organizations put a strong focus to the networks of information, where data is avail­
able to different parts of organization. Understanding which participants use particular
information can be used to optimize organizational performance.
PMSs use
Case studies suggest that the use of PMSs can have a bigger impact on performance
than their design. This aspect of PMSs is traditionally neglected in research. Use has
been categorized in ‘rigid’, ‘flexible’, ‘interactive’ and ‘diagnostic’. Diagnostic use is linked
to feedback information flows. Organizations actualize it to learn and improve existing
processes. Interactive use is more often associated with the use of information by se­
nior and operating managers to trigger debates, point out to strategic uncertainties and
improve working environments.
PMSs change
The last aspect of PMSs is linked to the frequent changes in internal or external contexts
of organizations. PMSs need to adapt to these changes to stay useful and relevant.
PMSs can be affected both in their design (changes in key performance measures and
techniques used by managers) and in their use (e.g., which measures are emphasized).
The emphasis here is not on the process of change itself. Instead, it is important to
understand the extent and type of change that takes place in response to changes in
environment. The main questions are what are the causes and consequences of change
in PMSs.
This aspect is important as contemporary markets are seeing an increasing rate of change.
Understanding the dynamics of change can uncover the interrelations of PMSs and can
reveal which PMSs are lagging behind the changes.
Strength and coherence
Even though individual PMSs can seem to be well designed, evidence suggests that fail­
ure in control systems can occur if they are also do not fit well together as a whole.
Some researchers suggest that strength and coherence of PMSs can be judged by ques­
tioning the extent to which PMSs consider multiple stakeholders, measure efficiency, ef­
fectiveness and equity, capture financial and non­financial outcomes, provide vertical links
between strategy and operations and horizontal links across the value chain. It is also im­
portant to consider how and if information flows provide links to external environment and
the ability of an organization to adapt to changing circumstances.
80
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:91==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
81
==PAGE:92==
B
Appendix B
Rebecca Lewis Smith 0:39 I am happy to share what we’ve done. And I think the one
of the things that I’m really passionate about is seeing, being able to leverage the, like,
sorry, how am I gonna put this? I see our business as a community. And that community
has power to do things, whether that’s to come together to make some kind of change
on a small scale or to fundraise something, or just to change the behavior amongst the
community. We, yeah, we have a lot of opportunities for that. We’re a very small business,
there’s 50 of us, but we’re able to by focusing on our culture, and then making these things
important, by making a sense of community important to throughout the organization.
Does that make sense?
Alec Putrih Jeza 5:22 So, the first question is just about the organization, what is your
position in found phantom partnership?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 5:31 So I’m one of the co founders and I’m the director of business,
Alec Putrih Jeza 5:35 okay, does not qualify as a CEO.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 5:38 So I used to be CEO, I stepped down as CEO in 2020, handing
the reins to new generation of leadership in the business. So I was, I mean, the job title
was managing director similar to CEO years ago, and now I sit on the sidelines and meddle
and try not to meddle.
Alec Putrih Jeza 5:59 Okay. How long have you been the part of the organization?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 6:05 So I co founded it in 2009. So we’re 13 years old now.
Alec Putrih Jeza 6:11 Okay. I’m also might just ask you, why did you decide to step down
from the position.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 6:18 So it was a combination of reasons. One is thinking about the
longevity of the business and trying to not tie that into just me and my role. But I’m really
passionate about creating space for other people in leadership. And then alongside some
personal challenges, or I have a son who has autism. So it was sort of looking at like,
actually, if I were to hand over that responsibility, and then be in a coaching mentoring role
to our new managing director, then it would also enable me to have a bit more flexibility
to be the mum that I want to be as
Alec Putrih Jeza 6:51 well. Yeah. Okay, that sounds great. Good. Could you explain
what the company fountain does? Like, what what’s your, what do you do?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 7:05 We’re a digital marketing agency. So we work with clients to
grow their sales online, using I guess, search engine optimization paid to tools, we drive
traffic to websites, and then we also help our clients to ensure that their websites convert
that traffic from visitors into sales rather than just expensive clicks.
82
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:93==
Alec Putrih Jeza 7:29 Okay. And the number of employees you said 50 earlier? Is that
an exact number?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 7:36 Yes, it is at the moment. Okay,
Alec Putrih Jeza 7:40 And then, could you also just briefly tell me, what’s the like level of
competition in the market that your business is in?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 7:49 It’s relatively high, there are a lot of digital agencies and a lot
of good digital agencies out there, we are lucky that we’ve built a reputation so that we
sort of punch a bit above our weight. So we often compete with agencies that maybe have
500 or 1000 employees. And but it Yeah, it’s relatively competitive, I would say.
Alec Putrih Jeza 8:10 Okay, so I think that will be all from like this, from these basic ques­
tions. And then I would like to move on to the organizational structure. So if it maybe will
just describe how the company is structured, you know, in terms of departments positions,
or hierarchical levels, stuff like that.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 8:31 So we took a decision in 2017, to try to strip out hierarchy from
the business.
Alec Putrih Jeza 8:31 Sorry for interrupting you, but who do you refer to when you say
we?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 8:36 Oh, of course. I mean the founders. And the honest truth
is that there is natural hierarchy that happens anyway. But we didn’t create like a tiered
pyramid structure. We have a team called agency growth team who are responsible
for the growth of the business. And then we have departments like the search engine
optimization department, paid media department, so that like our technical departments,
and also our Client Services, departments and support department, but our intention with it
is for it not to be a pyramid instead for it to what we call its roles and responsibilities based.
So each, each individual has a role and the role may be shared with other people as
well, and there are responsibilities based on that. And then, of course, where the natural
hierarchy comes in is that some responsibilities are simply bigger than others, right? So if
if someone’s responsibility is to look after one client versus someone whose responsibility
is to hire new people at the business, those end up having a natural hierarchy to them.
Alec Putrih Jeza 9:43 But let’s say that somebody’s working in hiring, basically in HR, is it
possible for him to also do other jobs if he wants to do let’s say in marketing if he wishes
to? Or any other department or role?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 10:07 The pressures of the business often means it becomes less
possible than it should, if that makes sense. Like, it shouldn’t be possible, say everyone
can move around. But often we’re running very, you know, we have a big demand for our
services, we’re running very tight with capacity. And so we don’t always have a resources
for training people from scratch into different roles. But we do have people’s careers at
fountain have sort of zigzags at times. So we have people who’ve been through almost
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
83
==PAGE:94==
every department we have, we have other people who’ve sat in one department and said
with clarity that they’d like to create a role for themselves in a different space. So for ex­
ample, we had someone in paid media department, very experienced, actually absolutely
brilliant, she was taking on more and more training of other people. And so we ended up
creating this role for her, which is about training throughout the business, not just forthe
technical people, so her career has progressed from, from being very technical into be­
ing more in the people side of things of training and development. And yeah, does that
answer your question?
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:09 Yeah, for sure. But do people, this girl for example, does she need
to gain approval from somebody? Or is she willing to, you know, proceed, maybe working
around time or work extra to do to achieve that.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 11:32 We discourage people from working extra, because we feel
like wellbeing is so important. And this sort of assumption that people are like, right, I
finished my job, now I’m going to do some more work is probably not great for mental
health and well being. So in general, in that situation, where we’re having that conver­
sation, where she’s saying, hey, I want to create a new role, we would look at what the
business case is for creating the role. Sometimes we have to say, You know what, we
can’t do that right now. Because the prep, we really need you on paid media, or some­
thing, but then look at when that would be possible, because I guess one of the aspects of
our businesses is that we are, we’re always we’re on this, like, agency life is this fine bal­
ance between selling our services, and we always need to be selling because we’re, like,
projects full off, and then having enough capacity, so people time to actually deliver the
services. So we’re always on this close balance. So we usually are saying to someone,
when they want to create more time for something, we need to know that in the system,
right, we need to, we need to be able to say, right, this person used to have 110 hours,
billable a month, and now they’re going to have 90, because we’re going to make space
for something and then it’s going to change. So that conversation happens, usually, sort
of as part of the people and culture team, and it’s not so much asking for permission, but
it’s about sort of they would she would have to say, When will I be able to have time for
that? And then we would make a plan based on that. Throughout it elaborate times using
system.
Alec Putrih Jeza 13:04 Okay, and when you say we would have to do that, is that? Do
you mean? Like the the founders of the company? Or is it collectively or how
Rebecca Lewis Smith 13:14 it would be on the project management team. So it’s who­
ever’s responsible for allocating her hours. So the way that I guess the way that it works
is that our business development team, something will they’ll sell in something to a new
client that gets passed to the project managers who work out who’s going to be assigned
to the work for it, and then the people who are doing the work, do the work and take re­
sponsibility for the client outcomes. So there’ll be a moment where communication needs
to happen probably to those project managers that right, this person is going to have less
84
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:95==
time attributed to client work and more to developing a future role.
Alec Putrih Jeza 13:51 But would you say that then, like, in this case, the foreign I mean,
there is some kind of hierarchy because like the the, like you said, the sales or marketing
department, or the project managers tell other people what to do.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 14:06 So it’s less, they don’t tell them what to do they allocate the
time. So the project managers with knowing what the jobs are, and knowing what time is
available for them, rather than them saying, Okay, this is what we need to do for this client.
Can you go and do that work? They’re saying, right, and you’ve been allocated 20 hours
for this client, and often the person who’s doing the work will come back and say, Hey,
can I be allocated some more hours for this or, Hey, you over allocated me some hours.
So it’s more of a assignment role rather than telling them what they’ll be doing? Because
the project managers don’t have any technical skills. Right? They are. Was there like,
sorting and matching okay, this so for example, you know, we might have 50 hours spare
capacity in our business, and a client comes in that’s 40 hours by And but it turns out that
all of that capacity is spread in five hour chunks among the people and that you couldn’t
do. And you couldn’t run a good account with eight different people working for five hours
on it. So then managers would then be sitting in saying, right, this is come in, we think this
would be great skills match with this person, right? Do you want this line? Great, okay.
And then they’d move things around. So they’d say, right, this other person is going to
help with five hours of your tasks here, this is going to be someone helping with it. So
they’re doing the like. But they don’t have, how can I put this, they don’t have authority to
tell someone what to do. They’re instead trying to make the pieces of the puzzle fit. Yeah.
Well, if, for example, they assigned work to someone and that person didn’t want to work
on that client, then the project manager couldn’t say, Well, you have to, right?
Alec Putrih Jeza 15:48 Yeah. Okay. So basically, you’re you’re, you’re encouraging your
employees to, to take on the responsibility. But they’re not forced to.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 16:00 Yeah, absolutely. And I think what we tried to do is to have a
clarity about roles and responsibilities. so let’s say someone in our paid media team has
their their role will involve taking responsibility for client strategy, delivering the results,
working with other people to , you know, if it’s a larger project collaborating in those ways,
and so what’s important for us is that they take ownership of that piece. So what, what I
feel very strongly about is that if the ownership of the client relationship sits with the person
who sold it, it will sit with someone who’s just in like account management, because we
also have account managers, it will account directors, who are often the main port point
of call for a client. But the technical people need to get to know the client as well on like,
as in they need to talk to them. They shouldn’t be shielded away from.
Alec Putrih Jeza 18:53 Also, yeah, I would like to ask you, like, when you still were a
CEO? What was your role? Like? How did it differ from the role of other people? So I
guess
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
85
==PAGE:96==
Rebecca Lewis Smith 19:10 there are two answers to that question. One is what the
role was supposed to be, and then what the role actually was. So I guess, ideally, my
role would have been to have an overview of the strategic decisions being made in the
business, the challenges that we have and how they’re being solved and be a little bit
stepped away from the constant doing of the work in order to have that distant overview
was a reality. Partly from historically been, you know, when we founded the business,
there were four of us and growing it to where it was. I probably had some quite bad habits
about getting involved in things that I should have delegated or maybe should have left to
other people. My focus as we grew became very much on our culture and trying to build
behaviors into the business that sort of enabled the outcomes that we wanted, which is
a thriving workforce doing work that they love, right? one of our, one of my main goals
is to create a place where people can progress without having to climb the management
ladder. So they’re able to, to progress their career by going down the rabbit hole of the
thing they love, rather than having to get further away from the thing that they love doing.
And that, I think, I ended up very much in the people and culture space, rather than in the
strategic overview space. And I imagine for any small business founder, that like yo yo of
pulling you in and out of the business all the time, you know, you should be up here with
the ocean. But then, like, you’re putting out fires, or you’re like, something happens. I
mean, I used to describe sometimes my job, I felt a bit like water that anytime something
else moved, I would like, move in and fill the gap. So oh, that person’s offset. Okay, I
can help. Oh, that person, you know, we need a new person that okay, I’ll go do that. So
I think, yeah, the ideal of the role is to be a little bit more detached than I actually was.
And it’s interesting now, mentoring our new CEO and seeing that she’s doing many of the
same things that I was doing or getting in different areas. But that’s also a growth journey
for any leader, I think, to guess what it is, it’s like not to feel guilty when other people are
really busy. And instead of like diving into health in this in the short term thinking, okay,
what are the long term strategic things I can change to support people who feel busy
instead of here I go?
Alec Putrih Jeza 22:00 So you don’t want to, if I understand correctly, you don’t want to
help them with everything. Instead, they want to find solutions so that they will be able to
handle their work on their own?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 22:17 I guess, in the role of CEO, you can implement strategic
systemic change, right, you can say, hey, we have like, two thirds of our workforce that
said, they’re feeling overloaded right now. We need to, we need to hire someone, we
need to change how things are reallocated, you can change the whole system. Whereas
like, if I’m, if I’m working with a colleague, and they say they’re overloaded, I can coach
them, I can support them, I can say, Oh, let me come and help you with that. And I think
the the challenge is that if when you do that, as a leader, you’re not doing the strategic
bit. So it’s not to say that you shouldn’t help people, Of course, you should. But it’s a
little bit, like what is it teaching someone to fish instead of just feeding them right, while
as a CEO, you have that opportunity to change the whole structure. And one of the
86
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:97==
things I will say at Fountain, we have a coaching structure, where we have 17 of the team
members who have trained to coach each other, so everyone has an internal coach. And
my my goal, my like, vision is that we could that everyone at Fountain is trained to be a
coach so that everyone could be coaching other people and that right from junior team
members onwards„ ButI know that I’m a really bad coach, because when people tell me
what talents they have on their plate, I say, oh, I can fix that. We’ll do this instead. Instead
of like listening and being a sounding board, I’m like, Oh, here’s the solution. And I, I think
that’s I feel I think it almost irresponsible to just dive in and help instead of stepping back
seeing the bigger picture, when you have the power to do that. That’s what you should
be doing rather than helping, which I know sounds counterintuitive.
Alec Putrih Jeza 24:03 Okay, the next section is about the vision and mission of your
company. So yeah, the question is just, what’s the vision and mission? And how do you
sort of share this with your employees?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 24:49 So we, our vision is so we have a vision document, actually,
that breaks our vision down into objectives and goals for the company. And so our vision
statement, I think at the moment we’re working on redoing it, because it’s only a year and
a half ahead, we’ve had it for four years. So this is the sort of vision that we had. So
it’s quite specific about the size that we want to grow to. And it’s about doing our work in
the best way possible for our clients and for us colleagues. So it’s a vision that is about
innovation and performance, as well as well being and thriving.
Alec Putrih Jeza 25:42 Okay. And, who designs the the vision and the mission, is this the
role of the founders or the also employees have a say in this?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 25:58 So previously, it was the founders at the moment, the revision
of it that’s happening is being led by our agency growth team. And they have done some
consultations through workshops with people within the company. So including some
junior team members, so I guess you could say that it was shaped by everyone. The
intention was very much to include viewpoints from across the business.
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:25 Yeah. So you’re basically increase the participation, like at least
you allow people to express their opinions about it?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 26:59 Exactly
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:34 Okay, the next section is about key success factors. So I would
like to know what they are. And, you know„ what are the key success factors that are
believed to be central to the organization’s future success? And also, how do you bring
the attention of those to the employees are they also included in that vision document?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 27:01 The vision statement that we will have is broken down into
these very specific goals, we actually have a dashboard for all of our, I think it’s got 12,
or maybe 15 metrics on it. And it’s split into areas of people and culture. So that will be
about our well being scores in the business, our engagement, employee engagement,
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
87
==PAGE:98==
statistics, things like how many applicants we have for new roles and our staff retention
levels. And then it’s in our sales and marketing. So that’s sort of our fame, like how
wide we’re reaching how successful we are in winning new clients. So a really big driver
for us as growth, we are aiming to grow steadily and quite ambitiously. So many of our
metrics lead back to this, if we, you know, in order to hit the 5 million turnover in order to
hit the next steps, what do we need to be doing in terms of leads generated, and we’re
a data driven agency. So we have a vast amount of data. And we have a mindset of
data collection, which can sometimes make us very slow at things. And then, so that
was sales and marketing. And then the other is innovation and performance. So that will
be about how we deliver our services. And in in that we’ll have things like how accurate
are our forecasts. How our clients are responding to surveys about us about their NPS
scores, that kind of thing. So, we have this dashboard of all of those data points. And it is
designed by the agency growth team, but also in collaboration with people in the business,
including the founders.
Alec Putrih Jeza 28:33 Okay. And when you said, I think it was about employee engage­
ment, you said something about statistics, like how do you measure this?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 28:41 So we use the Gallup q12. So we don’t exactly use Gallup
to do it. But we run our own Gallup q12 Surveys. So Gallup have used it in like, 1000s of
businesses around the world. And it’s sort of standard questions, which we’ve changed
the language of some of them because they were really American. So made them a little
bit more English, like one of them was do we use? Do you have a good friend at work?
The American one was, Do you have a best friend at work? And we, because in England,
people like, well, I have a friend, but not a best friend, like I have my whole life. But yeah,
it’s 12 Fix questions. And we run that on a quarterly basis. And , I’ll be really honest,
we don’t analyze it as much as we should. And we don’t have all of Gallup’s knowledge
of how to analyze it in the best possible way. So it becomes more of like a litmus test
for us that we we basically just want our score to be maintaining or going up rather than
dipping down. And it’s been something that has been very, very useful to have during the
pandemic because we had the data beforehand, so we know what’s normal. And then, as
there was like a dip in engagement because people can see each other work with each
other. We were able to sort of specifically address the areas that you We’re finding the
hardest. And then from that we list the the lowest three scoring ones. And it might, it might
actually not be the lowest scoring questions. But it might be one that has dropped low
more than we thought it should. So it might be one that we used to get five out of five, and
now it’s 4. And we’re like, whoa, what did that, you know? That’s, you know, shouldn’t
be that low. And so then we, we make a plan to address those that three problem areas
every quarter.
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:36 So you select three each time, not more, even if there are more.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 30:40 Yeah, because you just can’t please all the people all the
time. And if if you try to do things, you might only end up doing one well, whereas if you
88
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:99==
do three... So okay, you’re having a having a good friend at work, right? How do you
address that? Well, you can’t like flip a switch and be like, hey, guys be friends. Right?
You have to think about it in terms of okay, we recognize that we’ve hired a lot of new
people. We haven’t had been able to have any socials because of COVID. We haven’t
had any work there. So what you know, as we’re coming out of the COVID restrictions
here, what can we put in place and things like we used to have Fountain FC football, like
five or six teams that would go and play together. Just getting that rolling again, actually
makes a big difference to those friendship markers, having, you know, beer o’clock, or
pizza, Thursdays or whatever it is being able to do things socially, just edges, things in
that direction in a good way. But none of that is going to be like immediate, right? And
really, honestly, Gallup is really frustrating. Because it’s anonymous, so someone can be
like, so one of the questions is, do you have the equipment? You need to do your job well?
And if someone answer’s no, I’m like, take just come and tell me. So no one should be
sitting there going, Oh, I don’t have a functioning computer mouse like Jesus, you know
that. But there’s always someone who gives it like a four or three or something. So so
yeah. So I think we, we recognize that we can’t fix it all at once. And even if we do, it will
be short lived. Because then we’ll hire more people. And they’ll be like, No, I don’t have
any friends at work. And we’re like, oh, just come and have pizza with us.
Alec Putrih Jeza 32:28 Yeah, yeah. I mean, there’s no recipe for friends and right then, and
also, like the scenes, the conditions are also always changing. Like, it’s totally impossible
to maintain the same results all the time.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 32:41 We definitely, and a lot of the things that actually deliver the
outcomes and that they come from the staff themselves. Like someone says, Hey, should
we do a Vacation Club? Great. Should we do crossing club? Okay, yeah, great, you
know, and so as Fountain, we just go yes tothat kind of suggestion. But it wouldn’t be the
same if, if I said it, if I was like, guys, we’re gonna do a Baking Club. So we do it together,
if people are interested.
Alec Putrih Jeza 33:13 Fair. I think we can move on to the next section. It’s about strate­
gies and plans. And the question is, what strategies and plans did your organization
adopt? And what are the processes and activities that you, you know, figured that would
be needed to achieve the success that you want?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 33:36 So our strategies for success are, I guess there are sev­
eral, several aspects to it. So if you take those three areas, people and culture sales
and marketing and innovation and performance, each of those will have completely dif­
ferent strategies. So the people and culture element, the strategic approach is to focus
on wellbeing and that people thrive rather than survive at work. The activities that we put
in place towards that or the processes that we put in place are things like I said about
that we don’t, we are pretty strict about people going home when work finishes, we re­
ally encourage people not to overwork people do overwork and we are grateful to them
for caring so much. But we, I guess I feel like if, if we assume they will overwork, that’s
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
89
==PAGE:100==
when things go into a negative space. So for example, managing people’s workloads,
that job that the project managers were doing about making sure that people aren’t over
assigned, and are assigned the work that they want to be doing as well. That also fits in
that when it comes to sales and marketing. Strategy is usually about relationship building.
That’s a we, interestingly, as a digital marketing agency are really good at selling other
people’s services online. we know that there are so many agencies out there doing what
we do badly. And they sell themselves online in a very specific way that you were to
replicate that we just wouldn’t be as successful. So all of our growth really has come from
partnerships, from leadership pieces from engaging actively with field. So I guess that’s
our strategic approach there. And then, in terms of the actual work that we do, partly it’s
investing in strategy, is our strategic activity, if that makes sense. because we, as well
as having the, make it possible for people to do work to their best ability, we also need
to invest in people looking at what is changing what’s coming next and different types of
strategies. Does that answer your question?
Alec Putrih Jeza 35:56 Yes. Yeah, for sure, for sure. But also, you mentioned that, like
the sales and business department, for example, you said that they have to work on the
relationships, do you mean the relationship between customers, and sales, or it can
Rebecca Lewis Smith 36:12 be, it can be relationships with our existing customers or
with partner businesses, so agents. because we’re very specialist in what we do, we can
partner with design agencies, with web development agencies, with generalist marketing
agencies, who then bring us in for their specific skill set. So a lot of their work is about
looking for those partnerships that will bring us the right kind of client.
Alec Putrih Jeza 36:39 Okay. And also, is there like a specific way how you communicate
the strategies and plans to people like, you mentioned that you do, do it, I just didn’t hear
how you do it, actually, how do you?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 36:57 Yeah, so I guess, through the dashboard that we have, we
update people on it regularly. So we have a weekly stand up meeting at the beginning of
each week, where we address what’s coming up, who’s going to be on holiday a little bit,
that kind of thing. And then we include in that an update on how we’re performing against
some of those metrics. Once a month, we’ll do more of a deep dive into it. And then when
something changes, it used to be that we would like get everyone in a room together or go
and visit each room independently and chat to people about stuff. Whereas now it’s often
a video because we have we now have a hybrid remote team. So we’re back to back to
the office in Norwich. But we have seven people who are fully remote. So anything we
do can be recorded and sent to them. So there’s a lot of videos, there’s a lot of like, Hey,
I’m just going to present this slideshow to you kind of thing that goes around about.
Alec Putrih Jeza 37:54 Okay, this will actually be interesting. And maybe to the end. Can
you just maybe describe like, briefly, what, are there any other impacts on your work with
this change? After COVID?
90
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:101==
Rebecca Lewis Smith 38:07 Yeah, so we, we’ve, we’ve always had a really flexible working
policy for how people show up to work, we used to joke that like, hey, it’s not in our interest
that you have to sit in, in rush hour traffic, like, as long as the work is done, we don’t really
care where it’s done from right or and then. But I think before COVID people would maybe
use that to stay at home, if they had like a sofa being delivered or, you know, something
like that, but not on a regular basis, they would just use it for one offs. But having had
that in place, this very like trust based system where like, whenever people say to me, I
don’t want you think I’m taking advantage. I’m like, I wouldn’t have hired you I thought
you wanted didn’t want to do a good job, like, let’s do the job. So during COVID, I guess
the biggest challenge for us was not being able to look after people or really know how
someone’s getting on with something whether they’re super stressed, for example, like
because you just get the Slack message instead of that face to face interaction. And
coming through COVID, now, we are encouraging people to come to the office, but we
are completely open to it. Like some some of our local team members have just decided to
always work from home and they’ll just come in for meetings if they want to, and that’s fine
with us. We have, as I said, we have seven people working fully remotely, which means
that everything we do needs to be accessible to them. So we we have the approach of
like, always be inclusive to the people who can’t physically be here because you go like,
anyone in the office is going to be inclusive of each other anyway. And then we invested
in really good meeting technology. So we moved into a lovely new office last year. And
as part of that move we put in, like proper video conferencing The facility so that we can
have a meeting with six people in person in the boardroom, and four people or 10 people
and zoom, and it works like it doesn’t feel you don’t get that thing where the person who’s
online just sits there, like quietly, it feels a lot more interactive.
Alec Putrih Jeza 40:17 Okay. Yeah, I think that’s all for that section. And then we can
move on to target setting and performance management. I remember that you already
mentioned something about it. Specifically about performance. Right? You said that one
of like, the, one of the parts in of your vision, right, is sales performance. So I would like
to know, how do you go about setting the appropriate performance targets? And how
challenging are they? Like, do you set them above, you know, what you believe it’s going
to be possible or below?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 40:56 So for all of our clients, we have goals that have been set
between us and the clients and all of those will be achievable, within a certain timeframe.
And so what we’re then expecting of our employees is that they are hitting those goals
that they have set themselves to a reasonable level, right. So the way that we do all of our
appraisals is that we’ve so we’ve broken down instead of everything being performance
based, we’ve got performance indicators, which we try to keep very minimal, very, like,
maybe people have two or three and it will be my clients are on target or ahead of target
as a yes or no question or yeah, that kind of, basic, but catch all types of performance
indicators. And then we have a section of standards, which are about the behaviors that
we’re expecting to see. And those are ones that have been, I think they were originally
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
91
==PAGE:102==
drafted by me and my co director, six years ago, whenever it was, and then over time,
we’ve evolved them with the people in the roles as well, because the bigger we get, the
further away we are from doing the actual work. So for some of our roles, at Fountain,
they’ve actually written their own standards and KPIs. Because we just don’t know. And
then the final part of it is our capabilities as well. So that’s what so people will, they’ll have
performance indicators, standards to achieve. And then capabilities, which we identify
some training needs. It’s a sort of saying, Hey, I’m doing all of my standards, but I’m still
not achieving the performance will be like, okay, then it’s okay, then we have an issue.
Alec Putrih Jeza 42:50 Okay. And like, but when you say, performance, what about like,
for example, when it comes to sales, like do people who, yeah, who are selling, who are
engaging with potential clients or customers do they also have targets?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 43:09 So we, as a business have growth targets, and the team, the
client services team, so that’s our account managers, account directors, they will have
targets for upselling the client, so in growing the accounts, and our sales team will have
targets for achieving those overall growth of revenue. But I don’t I guess we know that
we so we don’t have a big sales team, we have one of my co directors and one person
full time and sales, they then work with lots of other people in the agency who will put
together strategies for pitches or will present that the technical expertise. So and I don’t
have to visit the marketing team then has the responsibility for generating enough leads
for the sales team to be able to hit the target. So it’s a very collaborative targets. And for
example, if we had a, an upsell to a client that was, so a client has been doing a project
this size, and then we sell in some work and they suddenly go into here. That might then
be that the salesperson says great, well, that gives me a bit more time to land this one
for next month or two months ahead. Like it’s very collaborative rather than, I don’t think
we’ve ever sat down with our salesperson and said you’re not hitting targets, because we
know the nature of selling in our industry.
Alec Putrih Jeza 44:43 Okay. I think that answers the question, but I also have a few
more. when you Do the performance measurement, like are there any, like significant
things that you’ve decided not to measure? You know, out of like, usually companies sort
of use a certain set of performance measures, and like they decide not to use some of
them.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 45:21 So I think we decided to translate some of them into the
standards rather than rather than performance indicators. So we chose to frame them
more about the behaviors that we want to see rather than the outcomes that have to be
delivered. And I guess on one level, that’s because our client outcomes are like it’s black
or white, they’re either on target or after, and yet there’s no or ahead of target, right. But
there’s no there’s no ambiguity on whether someone is performing because either the
client results are there, or they’re not. So I think we felt like heaping a lot of other KPIs on
them. Felt overkill, when actually, what we want to be doing is, so as the standard section
will be things like communicates proactively with clients, on a regular basis, my clients
92
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:103==
have bespoke dashboards, and they understand them. Right. That’s the that’s the type of
standards that we have in place. And, in theory, if you’re acing all of those standards, then
the performance will be there anyway. Right. That’s how that’s how rather than I guess,
rather than having an additional level of like success or failure that could be thrown at
someone, they’ve already got that because they’ve got it whether the client is performing,
the client accounts are performing or not.
Alec Putrih Jeza 46:45 Okay, and can you can you tell me maybe a bit more about the
behaviors that you are the culture that you’re trying to grow? Like, what are those things
that you evaluate?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 46:58 So we have, we co wrote our values together as a company
in 2018. And we’re actually at the moment deciding that we’re probably going to redo that,
again, together, because there’s so many new people that haven’t had that experience
of being involved in the creation of the values. And, what we’re aiming for is a collective
culture of ambition, where we are working together to positively or to create positive results
in a, in a way that works for us, for our clients. And so, by us, I mean for the people
working in the business and for our clients and for the company as a whole. So, part of
that is having a culture of accountability that we in fact, if we say very explicitly to people,
that we are asking them to hold themselves accountable to their colleagues, their clients
and the company. And that in return, we want to give them autonomy to do their best
work. we sort of taken approach that it’s really hard to do good work when you are in a
negative state or a negative space, or when pressures are too high. So we are committed
to and I’m not saying we always get this, right. But we’re, we endeavor to create a space
where people have the headspace to do their best work. And I’m trying to think what else
about our culture, I guess, the culture of coaching is really important to that as well, that
you that everyone has someone to talk to you that they have ways to, to talk with each
other. That will sort of support people to achieve their own goals as well. We recognize
you know, like, as a founder, it’s really easy to be like, we want to hire great people, and
they’ll stay forever, because we love them and they love us, right? But we recognize that
people are building their careers, we want people to gain the experience with us that will
set them up for whatever success that isn’t that might be successful there. So our CEO
now, she started working for us nine years ago, straight out of university and has actually
done every job in in the business pretty much and is now age 33, the CEO of a marketing
agency, and notice it’s pretty cool, right? And, like for her, that’s been an amazing thing
for other people, like I’ve recently been in touch with quite a few people who used to work
for us in the past, just, you know, catching up with them. And it’s so wonderful to see that
they’ve gone on to careers that have been enabled by the experience that they gained
from the training that we gave them and or the mindset about marketing that we have at
fountain that they’ve then been able to take on into other roles as well. So I guess that
aspect of like, we don’t want people to just be okay at work. We want people to thrive at
work, and the behaviors that drive that then are hugely about caring for each other. Like, I
don’t think you, when people say business isn’t personal, I just disagree. I think we spend
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
93
==PAGE:104==
so much of our lives at work that like if we don’t like genuinely care about the people
around us, like, I’m sort of, I was saying this to a friend the other day, like, I genuinely love
the people I work with, like, I really care for them, they are amazing people doing their
best work. And it is completely and utterly personal. If a client shouts at one of them, or
if two of them are having issues, and it’s going to cause other other people issues, it’s all
personal as well. Being professional.
Alec Putrih Jeza 50:36 That’s nice. I mean, you are working with people. Right? So
I think it’s appropriate. Yeah. And also, I would like to ask you, like, when you do the
performance evaluation, is it individual group, or like, on an organizational level.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 50:53 So in our appraisals, we do, everyone scores themselves
on the, on their KPIs and standards. And then, in addition to that, we collect 360 feed­
back, which will be maybe six people will feedback on someone, and we aim for that to
be with various different working relationships. So someone who’s maybe in the same
department, someone else from a different department, where they’ve collaborated. And
then yes, someone either from account management or sales, you know, just to get a full
picture of how someone’s working, often we have the people, if someone is training other
people, the people, their training will give feedback on them as well. And then we collate
that. And then I guess we have it alongside the people and culture team kind of have a
sense of the issues that have gone on. So whether that’s interpersonal, or whether there’s
issues with client work that’s come about and you could have someone to eat, it’s growing
themselves 10 out of 10 on everything, right? We know what’s going on?
Alec Putrih Jeza 51:58 Also, amongst friends, right? Because if you encourage people to
be friends, those who are friends, they can give themselves better reviews.. Do you have
any mechanisms to avoid that?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 52:12 So we have, the way that we give the 360 feedback is that we
anonymize the things. So we asked for two things. One is praise. And the other is things
to work on and on the things to work on, we anonymize everything. And there’s never
been an issue that we couldn’t have named, we just feel like if we anonymize it now, then
there’s no issue in the future. But they know who’s fed back on them, like that’s known,
they know that they’ve got these six people, and we named the price because that’s nice
to do. The biggest challenge that we have is actually people sitting in their appraisal
saying, but I want more to work on, I want specific things that I can do to improve. And I
guess, so what we’re working on at the moment is getting almost more critique in there,
as well. But in general, in general, people are honest, in those feedback forms, I think,
partly because they know that it’s filtered by the people and culture team that it’s not going
directly to them. So people will write things like I really think they need to improve in this
way, they’ve dropped the ball 17 times, and it’s really stressful for everyone else. And
then we as a team will be like, so we have some things for you to work on, like out the
without it being named and laden of who it’s coming from. And I guess the the benefit of
doing that is that it’s not just the huge issues, if that makes sense. Like as we’ve grown,
94
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:105==
I used to know everything that was going on in the business. And then as we’ve grown,
you just get to that point where you can’t know everything that’s going on. And then it gets
to a point where the only things that come through to me or to the new CEO are the big
problems, right? So having that 360 feedback where people are being asked What could
this person work on? Like, I think in general, I’m always impressed by how thoughtful
people are and how they give feedback and things that are that could actively be worked
on like they’re implementable.
Alec Putrih Jeza 54:15 And how often do you do these, these evaluations?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 54:19 So we kept trying for more than twice a year, but we just can’t
do them. So it’s twice a year is what we’ve ended up at. So we used to try for quarterly
and it’s just we just can’t get through the people soon enough. Suddenly were like, oh my
god, six months have gone by again.
Alec Putrih Jeza 54:33 Yeah, yeah. And from what it sounds like, like you use both like
objective and subjective evaluatzibs?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 54:42 But yeah, So the way that we went so people evaluate them­
selves and then we just talked through the form with them. So we’ll say hey, you Scott,
you gave yourself an always on this. Awesome because last time you said it was a usu­
ally not always and they go oh, yeah, yeah, no, that’s true. I have improved in that area.
And then the next one will say, Oh, we see you’ve given yourself an always on this one. I
can think of at least two examples where you didn’t and then like, oh, yeah, okay, and we
score it down. And more often than not, we’re scoring people, we’re raising it. So we’re
saying, you said you do this, sometimes we know that you do every opportunity you can.
So we’re gonna put that to always kind of thing and fine. And then so yeah, we’re we’re
we approach those conversations, like a sounding board, but they’re very rarely negative,
if that makes sense. But It’s always based on data. So they’re like, oh, yeah, no, fair
enough. Kind of thing. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 55:46 Okay, that sounds great. Okay, the next I think it’s quite related
is about the rewards and incentives. Yeah. So what rewards both financial and non
financial do the employees get for achieving performance targets? And are there any
penalties also?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 56:06 So we don’t have incentives for performance. We don’t have
bonus structures. People are paid well, and we review pay on a regular basis pay is tied
with responsibility levels. So if has expanded their responsibilities, that’s when the pay
conversation comes into it. I say that we also are in a really competitive market of recruit­
ment at the moment. So other pay conversations happen, too. We’re very committed to
fair pay and equal pay, which means that we don’t take pay decisions that can’t be spread
to other people, as well. Which also means that if someone comes to us and says, I want
to pay rise, we’ll say, Okay, well, what responsibilities do you taking on for that, because
we need to be able to justify that we haven’t just given you that, and not your colleagues
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
95
==PAGE:106==
who have the same responsibilities kind of thing. But we don’t believe, it makes it sound
like a cult, I don’t believe in incentivizing performance in that way, I want the incentive
to come from loving the work wanting more challenge doing like, I want the reward for
success to be getting a really juicy, exciting new client campaign to work on rather than
financial aspect.
Alec Putrih Jeza 57:32 So basically, you’re trying to create a culture where people would
be intrinsically motivated. Okay, and like, Who determines the salaries is also the founders
or
Rebecca Lewis Smith 57:47 so we have a percentage of turnover budget for staffing costs.
And so we always want to be able to pay people more, but we’re not going to break our
metrics on the percentage of income, total income that we’re spending on salary costings.
So our agency growth team came up with a plan for how to increase salaries over time in
line with the budget. And they presented that to the founders. And we went, Yep, looks
good. And so I did that for the agency growth team. So I created a salary increase plan for
them and ambitious one for when we hit big turnover targets. So, but otherwise, they’ve
done it for the rest of the business.
Alec Putrih Jeza 58:33 Okay. And who has the right to hire and fire? Like, is this? Also,
yeah, who, who determines these things?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 58:45 So I guess, I guess that would be the CEO, but I don’t think
she would ever do that. Without consulting the founders, we have a very close working
relationship. So I think one of the things that’s that we’re working through at the moment
as a team is that the four founders were have always been very consultative, we’ve always
worked in very what is it we, we come to agreement rather than forcing through one opinion
or another. And so that’s kind of how we’ve ended up working with her as well. So she’ll
say, I want to do this. And if we disagree with it, we don’t just say no, we say, Okay, that’s
interesting. That doesn’t make sense to me. So explain it to me, or here’s why I don’t
think it’s a good idea. What do you think and we then get to a point of agreement, so I
don’t know whether she would always say that she experiences that way because she
probably also feel that as founders, we have the we can just say yes or no kind of thing.
Our intention is to do that collaboratively. So she she is responsible for hiring. She is
responsible for firing.
Alec Putrih Jeza 59:52 Does that happen, firing?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 59:56 It’s happened more recently than it ever has been in our
history. And that’s because of her Remote hiring has been really hard for us. We made
some mistakes in remote hiring. And very grateful that COVID means that we can like sit
in a room with people again before hiring.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:00:13 Yeah, I guess what do you think that there are some things that
you can notice during an online interview?
96
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:107==
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:00:20 So, I think we also have had, I guess it’s a combination of
remote, like not meeting people for interviewing, and then not being able to get people
in the office to work alongside people. So not seeing some of the behaviors that weren’t
really working. So yeah, we’ve had more challenging recruitment paths in the last little
while with COVID. But we’ve also made some amazing hires who are like, just, yeah, who
are so fundamental to who we are as a business now.,
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:01:09 Yeah, I also wanted to ask you, like earlier already mentioned,
motivation, that you want people to be excited about the tasks that they do. But are there
any other ways how you do this? Because, you know, is it about hiring the right people
that you believe are intrinsically motivated? Or do you have any processes that, you know,
are coaching that?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:01:44 I guess it’s, it’s hiring the right people and celebrating suc­
cess, I think is a really big one is like sharing. But people whenever they start at Fountain,
it is a little bit awkward to start off with. But we we shout out each other for like, like it’s,
we have a successes channel and slack where people are encouraged. And it’s one of
the busiest channels where people like, I just came out of that meeting, Sam was amaz­
ing. He really blew the client away, kind of and having that energy of recognizing success
and recognizing achievements. And also doing it for each other. So it’s not all about like
hear are my successes. Some people do that. Some people are like, self success. self­
success. I love because I think that’s the right way to go about it. I think that’s a big part
of it. I think the coaching plays a role in it as well. I think that hiring people who want to do
that job is just so central to it. For me, like one of the things we often as founders, actually
debate is about hiring really, really experienced people versus hiring people earlier on in
their career. And my instinct is if you find people who are hungry for growth, they will
outperform people who’ve already been there done that kind of thing. But my co director
disagrees with me, he thinks we should just hire people who are super experienced, but
I feel like the motivational element of it isn’t there if you’ve already done it. Whereas if
you’re like, oh my god, I just cracked my first client. That’s over a million. Yay, you know,
really good. Where they fit like, oh, yeah, another one at a million. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:03:22 Yeah. And you also trying them to create a balance between
how many experienced and how many new people you hire?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:03:31 Yeah. And I think, well, it’s a group is it the experience,
people have the potential to be more disruptive than the less experienced people because
less experienced people will come in and adapt to the way that we do things. They’ll
they’re in a learning mindset, they’re ready to be like, Oh, this is how we do it great kind of
thing. Whereas people coming in with a lot of experience might can actually take longer
to adapt and settle into how we work. But yeah, it has to be balanced. It can’t be all one or
the other. For sure. Also, reasons if we only hired people with first experience, we would
have to build them out for a lot more.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
97
==PAGE:108==
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:04:16 But do you think, what about in terms of innovation, which people
do think are better, new ones, or old ones?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:04:26 I mean, I think you can get amazing innovative thinking from
both camps. I think that people with vast experience will be they’ll have seen things that
work that don’t work, where the gaps are, they’ll they’ll really know where the gaps are,
whereas the less experienced people bring that like magic naivety that can sometimes
see opportunity. So , I think, probably even balanced on those two.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:04:51 Okay. Yeah, that’s the last question about basically control is
about information. flows. Are you familiar with feedback and feed forward information
loops?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:05:06 Now I can kind of work out what they might be. But
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:05:11 basically, I mean, at least in in the definition of recognized from
the literature, feedback information is information that you gather from your work or pro­
cesses. And you use it to basically correct the mistakes in the past and then feed forward
is maybe the same information or other information, but it’s pointed toward the future so
that, you know, maybe you can recognize that, okay, there’s going to be some changes,
how do we make sure that we can be prepared for a change that’s coming?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:05:41 So I guess we use both at Fountain, partly because we
know the risks of only using feedback and only driving by looking in the rearview mirror
is kind of dangerous, you just repeat the same mistakes. So we do a lot of planning, we
do a lot of forecasting. So for our client work, we do a huge amount of forecasting and
planning for how we work within the business, we probably do less, but because it’s part
of the natural behaviors of the business, in the work that we do it kind of trends across
the business. Because of that. So we have a lot of plans, underway at any given time,
and we at least try to communicate clearly about them. We do a lot of tweaking that like
painting what done looks like that thing of saying, Okay, before we get started, what what
are we all aiming towards and aligning along the way. Because one of the I mean, that’s
one of the biggest challenges that we have is people doing amazing work, but not all in
the same direction.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:06:54 Okay. But you also said earlier that you you’re a data driven
company. So maybeI would like to know, actually about the predictions like, what is it
exactly exactly that they predict in with with your client.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:07:15 So we’re building digital marketing strategies based on sort
of forecasting, using their spend using the data that we have available about where we
would be able to place ads or improve their rankings, what that will bring them as returns.
So essentially, we’re making a business case to the clients, if if you spend X amount,
we’ll be able to send this much traffic of which this much will convert of which this much
revenue will come to you. So ideally, we should be able to say to them, if you put 10
pounds in, you’ll get 20 pounds back kind of conversation that we’re having with them. So
98
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:109==
we don’t really do any of our work without that forecasting piece being involved. Because
I guess that’s what a lot of marketing companies do. They’re like, give us your money,
we’ll give you results. And they don’t show what they’re actually aiming for. So we sort
of, we pride ourselves on that element of forecasting, in the work that we do. When it
comes to when it comes to the business. Like, for example, in us in our own sales, we
do a lot of forecasting, we know all of our conversion rates, we know how many leads
we need in order to hit our targets and six months time, that’s all mapped out for us, all
by us. And we work towards those in a very proactive way. And then I guess the other
areas of the business like strategic innovation, or Yeah, like the evolution of our services,
or the thought leadership pieces or things to do with people and culture, we’re probably
less specifically focused, driven with it. But for example, the way that we approach the
Gallup q12, is about long term improvement. So we’re monitoring, I don’t feel like we’re
just looking at it as feedback and being like, Oh, well, those scores went down. We’re
like, Okay, we’ve measured the scores here. Our aim is for in the next three months to
get the scores to here.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:09:20 And it is the like, the predictions are based on data, right? Is the
data your internal data? Or is it some prediction models or what
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:09:39 The data will usually come from some kind of analytics
system, whether that’s Google Analytics, or and the what we’re looking at is search volume
cost of cost of the traffic. So whether that’s paid traffic or whether it’s the amount of work
that will go into Search Engine Optimization over a certain amount of time. aim to achieve
the results. And then so yeah, the the traffic, the traffic data comes often from Google.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:10:10 Okay. Good. Yeah, also, maybe how transparent is this infor­
mation? Like, who has the access to these data that you’re collecting?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:10:33 we, we aim to be very transparent, we also recognize that
when it comes to business challenges, Transparency can actually be really stressful for
people. So, for example, if we had shown our financials to everyone in the company
throughout COVID, they would have been very, very nervous. They would have been
anxious, right? Because it was stressful, like, I definitely less if I didn’t want everyone
else to lose sleep to kind of thing. And we made it through, and that’s fine. But we are
aware that if we, when you are transparent about certain things, you have to continue
being transparent, otherwise, people are gonna think it’s so much worse. So we’ve set
some sort of transparency bounds that we have in place. So like we tell people about
Gallup q12. But we don’t let them see all of the scores that they have, because people
would look at that and immediately be like, Oh, I wonder who that person is they scored
low. And it would become like, something to focus on if they saw all of the data. So we
give them the top line scores, we give them top line financial information, but we don’t
break down exactly. However, I think we have turnover targets, we don’t show them
profit. When people have asked us about it, we have done but it’s mainly because we
don’t want to have to show them losses. Because, you know, at the end of the day, that’s
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
99
==PAGE:110==
us as founders being being like, okay, yeah, we can take a loss here or there. We don’t
need people stressing out about their jobs when they need to be getting work done so
that we don’t make a loss.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:12:08 So you’re actually just trying to create like this really positive
culture like, Okay, that sounds great. It’s impressive. Okay, the next question is a section
is actually about coordination. It only has three sections. But generally, it’s just about
how I mean, the first part is actually about countability. So you know, when you have
certain projects, who decides, on, you know, who should be accountable for what I think
we already actually discussed this, but we discussed this in this context, that you have
project managers.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:12:50 so the project managers are, they’re basically capacity
managers. So they’re managing the flow of work in an like flow of work comes in, is
distributed to the people across the business. That’s their, their role. The in terms of,
so each role will have its areas of responsibility, which I guess is what they’re account­
able for. So, for example, the technical lead on any client will have responsibility for the
strategy. And they might turn to a strategist for the support without or feedback on their
strategy, but they will own the strategy for that client, the account director, is accountable
for the communication of that strategy to the client to make sure that the client understand
it. So there’s, I guess, accountability sits hand in hand with those responsibilities that are
given to each role. And there is a lot of overlap at times, and it gets messy. And that’s just
the way it is. We’re always, how can we get this accountability thing completely sorted?
I guess we are lucky in is that we have a lot of people that people care so much about
doing a good job, that they are the ones to tell us when there’s a gap in the accountability,
that we’re like, Hey, I’m not sure who’s accountable for this, and maybe someone needs
to do that. So then the people and culture team would be like, right, let’s find someone or
Oh, who’s who’s, you know, sometimes it’s just asking the question, and we encourage
them to do that as well is that in, in their client meetings, just confirming who has respon­
sibility for which area of of which client because every client is different, and they’re the
teams that work on every client are different. So being really specific, like naming, naming
accountability, or naming responsibility, I think is the closest we can get to doing it well.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:14:44 Okay, great. And what about like, so we have a project right?
And you have multiple people working on it. How do they align their work is the project
manager that you know says okay, this first and then second, they need to work together
or do they managethemselves or?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:15:01 I, I’d say it’s very self managed collaboratively, right? So
they will have a client meeting where they sit. So probably in that situation, the project
manager is more like the note taker. So that right here, here’s where we need to get to
with the client by in six months. Oh, well, for that to happen, I’ll need to do this. Oh, okay.
So you need to do that. So that means that you’ll need to do this, by that time, great.
Well, can, can I make sure that I have all of this information by then and it’s all worked
100
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:111==
out between people. And at that point, the project manager would be like, Okay, I’ll turn
that into a project plan. Everyone’s just said, what they’re going to need when, when, and
now. And that is how the project plan comes about almost, is through that conversation.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:15:42 Okay, so you would probably, like in terms of, I mean, this
is maybe like, it’s really theoretical, I’m using this framework, but the framework says
that there are basically a number of different artifacts, they’re being used to align work,
and they’re basically plans representations for so for example, manufacturing companies
would use a prototype, you know, and then different specialists could take a look at it.
And then also roles, right? Because if people are familiar with each other’s roles, it kind
of helps them to know who does what. And then also routines, which can I guess, be
meetings or, you know, maybe some standard operating procedures that you follow, like,
do people follow any of this? Do they use this stuff?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:16:33 I mean, I think that sounds really similar to what we were
doing, probably we would have a standard ways of working is like a prototype of like, okay,
this is, and so as a client comes in the sales team have put together something which lots
of people have already worked, contributed to, and worked on together and signed off
altogether. So before the sales team has taken it to the client, the technical lead, the
strategist, everyone will have said, Yep, that looks good to me. He’s contributed. So then
that comes in, and is like the basis for the plan of what will be delivered, that might be
the prototype, then from that, they will be the rituals of regular stand up meetings. Or it
might be like, a kickoff meeting, that would be like a two and a half hour behemoth of like,
let’s get into the nitty gritty of it. But then after that, once a week, there’s a 20 minute
stand up to check in on how everyone’s getting on with things. There’ll be other clients
that don’t have that model that where, you know, what the sales team has agreed with
them is that we’re going to start by making a strategy for them. So we’re like, okay, blank
piece of paper from the start. And then at that point, someone will, someone will take a
lead, they’ll run it by someone else, then it will go into that project plan stage. Kind of be
at that. I think that model, like all of the things you said, I was like, Yep, that sounds like
us.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:17:54 Okay, okay. And, you know, what happens if someone doesn’t
deliver or if something goes wrong, they’re just what are we briefing or?
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:18:05 So we, we have a process that we call a black boxing pro­
cess, where we essentially aim to learn from any mistake that is made. So sometimes
if something happens, either someone will say, Hey, I’m gonna blackbox this or some­
one, somewhere else in the business will say, could you blackbox this for us so that we
can learn from it. And that process in and of itself asks for some introspection on why
something might have gone wrong. And also ask the person who made the mistake to
come up with any solutions for stopping it from happening again. Which we found to be
quite a positive experience. Like people are, don’t feel blamed by it, they feel heard. The
when an issue arises, I guess. It depends how big the issue is, right? Sometimes it’s
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
101
==PAGE:112==
just software, the people who are working on it already. So let’s say the project manager,
account director and technical lead to get together and say, Okay, this mistake happened.
Here’s how we communicate that to the client. Here’s how we’ll rectify it. And here’s how
we’ll make sure it doesn’t happen again, and no one else is about it’s fine. Other like, if I
hear about it, it’s pretty bad. But I guess one of my favorite things, which goes back to our
culture is when people take responsibility collectively, rather than with individuals taking
the blame for something. And my favorite things are when something goes wrong, and
I don’t know who made the mistake, because they’re all like, I’m Spartacus. Like, yeah.
That’s but we, yeah, I guess we take that approach that if every mistake is a learning
opportunity, then we actually get good information about why it happened. Whereas if it’s
like, Okay, here’s a bad mistake. Now we’re going to punish people for it, then we won’t
get the information that is really valid.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:20:01 Okay. So the next part is about predictability.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:20:07 Let me just do you how much more have you got? Just
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:20:11 actually, we can just skip this one, because you already said a lot
about it, at least I feel like but yeah, we can just go skip to the last question, which is just
about common understanding. How do you make sure that people from different depart­
ments, you know, who are working on a project together, make sure that they understand
each other because there’s probably some jargon involved or stuff like that.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:20:33 So we’ve recently rolled out a new training platform for the
company. And the aim of that is to as well as, as well as to give in depth training that we’ve
done a lot for. We’ve always had quite in depth training programs for people in technical
fields. But we’ve also put together an online version, which does like the narrower bit. So
it’s like the top. So okay, you’ve got paid media, SEO, conversion rate optimisation. Each
of those has depth. But we’ve also got like a basic level course, which might just be like
maybe just a half hour or two hour time commitment, that kind of thing, but gives people
enough knowledge that they can feel confident in communicating about those things. So
that’s relatively recently rolled out. And everyone is not everyone. Some people have
done it really well. A lot of people are too busy to have even like looks at it. What we
know is that people learn a lot from working on proposals together. Because often, that’s
where there’s a lot of creative strategy coming up where people are asking each other,
they’re like, Oh, why did you put this in here? And, that can be a really good place to
learn. And then I guess, because we have we don’t have 50 services, we have three.
And within those three, there’s a few different branches. But I don’t think it takes people
that long to to get up to speed in the other areas, because they’re also really interlinked.
Like if if you had someone in paid media who didn’t understand conversion rate, they’re
probably not very good at paid media. Yeah. Does that answer?
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:22:11 Yeah, yeah. Just one last question. What happens when conflicts
arise? How do we deal with conflicts?
102
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:113==
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:22:22 We very, very rarely have conflicts. And I would say that,
like the thinking of two conflicts, in particular one, we essentially mediated the people
and culture team mediated between two people about the decision. And about a way of
working together, which works well, and everyone was happy is happy, I hope. But like
I said, conflicts rarely happen, and we don’t have a protocol that would tell us what to
do if we can’t reach agreement. Also I guess I’m aware that we have a desert, it’s like,
you know, the difference between kind and nice when, like people who can be too nice
and said, like, instead of actually getting direct about things, and I think sometimes we
tend towards like we have such a lovely caring culture. But sometimes people don’t say
like, Okay, this needs to change, right. So they’re like, yeah, no, it’s fine. And so, like,
conflicts could bubble under the surface instead of being addressed. So that’s something
that we’re working on getting better at doing being more direct about feedback and about
things, but we don’t we’re very low complex. Business, I would say,
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:23:24 But the thing that, is it possible that you as a CEO, are kind of I
mean, the thing, it’s possible that there are conflicts, but they just never get to you like to
they never, you know, come so far that they would have to be addressed on a yeah, they
would have to be intervened by the founders.
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:23:43 So I guess, because I sit in the people and culture team,
I hear a lot about, like how people are getting on with each other. And I also to, unlike
the other founders, who maybe aren’t involved in the people and culture stuff as much,
they probably don’t know about any of them at all. I say I probably am aware of them.
But how can I put it, I think I think the consensus model, the collaborating until we reach
consensus, I think is something that is a behavior across the agency. So when people
disagree, they sit down and work out why they’re disagreeing, and then try to get to some
kind of consensus or bring other people in for their opinion as well. I guess when I say
we’re low conflict is that we’re low problematic conflicts, right? Whatever is happening
people are dealing with between them in a way that means that they’re not issues right.
We don’t have people refusing to work with each other or sort of barbarous. Yeah, exactly.
or blaming each other or like making in groups and out groups and stuff. That doesn’t
happen. I mean, I’m sure there are friendship groups or whatever, but there’s not that sort
of exclusion of people Or yeah, I guess there is a chance that there’s a lot more conflict
and that I’m aware of, but I think I would think I would know. My coaching feedback forms,
I’d be aware.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:25:17 Yeah. Plus you’re too involved as a CEO. So
Rebecca Lewis Smith 1:25:24 when you know, when something, because we’re really
responsive, so like, you know, from our coaching sessions, everyone fills out a form af­
terwards saying, How is this person doing that? What’s their well being on a scale of one
to five? So I had date, I have a lot of data on people’s well being, and any number that’s
like, if it’s three or below out of five, someone on the people and culture team checks, why
in the notes, so if it was like, these two people aren’t getting on, they can’t work together.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
103
==PAGE:114==
This is, you know, they’re disagreeing again about something that that would be coming
through that channel to us. So I think I think we’d have eyes on it.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:25:59 Okay. Yeah, I think that that rounds it up. Yeah, you’re extremely
helpful. I think I will, I will be able to use this information.
104
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:115==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
105
==PAGE:116==
C
Appendix C
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:02 So the first questions are just pretty much straightforward. And the
first one is, what is your position in Qamcom?
Johan Salin 0:23 Yeah, that’s an interesting question. I would say, since we don’t have
any position positions in the classical way. But I’m working as a project manager, and I’m
also responsible for recruiting. And I’m also responsible for the project managers domain,
which is like, just making sure that the product managers gather and change experiences
and discuss relevant topics.
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:57 Okay, and how long have you been a part of the organization?
Johan Salin 1:04 Thirteen years.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:05 And it can also describe like, what Qamcom does, like, what is your
area of
Johan Salin 1:10 We are a consultancy company. Slash design house, we are working
with embedded electronics with different customers in all over the world. We came from
background working a lot with telecommunications, but now we’re going more and more
into the automotive industry.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:35 Okay. And how many employees do this?
Johan Salin 1:40 150
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:43 And can you also briefly evaluate the competition level in your
market? Or like domain?
Johan Salin 1:50 What do you mean?
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:52 Like, you know, if you’re a consultancy for a specific market, like,
Do you have any competitors? And?
Johan Salin 2:00 Yeah, I mean, it’s, it’s a very, very competitive business, I would say, we
have a lot of big players in Sweden, it’s like sigma, Semcon, f3. And more, they are the
big, big players, but there are hundreds of different companies in this area.
Alec Putrih Jeza 2:24 Okay, and I think that then we can just move on to the second part,
which is, the first section is about organizational structure. So, I would like to know, what is
the organizational structure of kwam come like in terms of hierarchical levels, and maybe
divisions?
Johan Salin 2:45 yeah. Because from from that perspective, there were just just a bunch
of people working. So, we don’t have a structure in the in the classical sense, you cannot
you cannot ask for the software department, for instance, because there is none. And you
106
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:117==
cannot ask for the manager of hardware, because we don’t have a manager of hardware.
So, then we have I can describe it, when we decided to go flat. The only requirement
from from the board was that we should have a regular meeting where we discuss how to
work in the organization. So that was all. And then we started from there. And then we
said okay, it seems like there is a lot of mess in our labs. I think we need someone who is
taking responsibility for the labs. Okay, so if noone has a principled objection, we make
that role. Let’s let’s describe what this person should do. Then we call that the role, Lab
responsible, we could we could say that we call this role and we describe what the lab
responsible should do. And then we said okay, to separate the task from the people, we we
have a separate meeting, where we discuss who is to do this task that we have described.
So, then we ended up with having two meetings, one discussing the organization, what to
do and the other who should do things we need to do. So, then we have created several
roles. For instance, I have the role of being responsible for recruiting, some other has
have responsibility for the labs, those roles you have for a limited time. After one year the
role is evaluated, and your work is evaluated. And then there is a new decision. Okay, did
we think that you did a good job as being responsible for recruiting? Yeah, well, he was
doing fairly well. And then the question goes to me, okay, we thought you did fairly well
job, would you like to continue to be responsible for recruiting? Then I can say, well, yes,
I like if it’s good, or I can say that. No, actually, this coming year, I have a very interesting
technical project that I’m involved in, and it will take all of my time, so I won’t have time
to be responsible for recruiting the coming year. So, I have to leave this role, then you
have to find someone else to do it. So that’s how we make sure that all of the things that
classical managers are doing in a classical hierarchy or organization is done. Because
they actually do things even though you don’t believe at all? So that’s how we take care
of those things. I don’t know if that was your question.
Alec Putrih Jeza 6:06 Yeah, that was that was actually exactly what I was looking for. But
I would also like to ask you, if, you know, when, when you have to determine, let’s say
you have a project, and you have to determine who is gonna feel some particular roles,
are people assigned these roles by you as a project manager? Or do they? Do they, you
know, do they volunteer? Or?
Johan Salin 6:31 Yeah, it’s both ways, I would say, when we take on new projects, all the
decisions we take, we try to, think of okay, who will be affected by this decision and involve
those persons in the decision. So, for instance, if we are to take on a new project, and we
involve a possible Project Manager for this project, we have someone who is responsible
for that customer maybe and then we also try to involve the engineers that are to, execute
the technical work in the project. And then there is a discussion and a decision face, okay,
can we do this? How much time will it take? Do we have the resources, so that there is a
possibility of choosing your projects and so on, but But you cannot do that you cannot just
leave a project, for instance, or you cannot change projects, how you’d like so on every
decision, everything we do, you need to do with the best for the organization in mind.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
107
==PAGE:118==
Alec Putrih Jeza 7:53 But what is like the decision making process? Does it require con­
sent? Like, for example, when somebody proposes a new idea that you need consent
from everybody? Or is it comfirmed by a majority vote?
Johan Salin 8:05 No. We don’t do voting. We don’t do consent decisions either. In the
decisions we take, when it comes to the roles, I’m responsible for recruiting, then I also
have the mandate of taking all the decisions necessary when it comes to recruiting. But
if there are other things like you work in the lab, and you see that you have to buy a new
tool, then okay, who is the best, who knows most about this tool and about which exact
tool to buy, if the cost is reasonable. If the company has the money to do it, then you
have to involve those persons. And if you have involved the person that has the the right
knowledge, then you take that decision in that group. I can give you an example from one
of my project manager colleagues, he was running a project and he saw that he needed
a mechanical resource. And all of the mechanical guys were busy. So he was thinking
about asking a consultant to come in to do the work. And then he said, Okay, I will take in
this person for a year it will cost me this and this, this amount of money and so on. And
then he was like, Can I do this? How do I take the decision? So he actually ended up
going to the owner of, asking him just because he didn’t know what to do. And then the
owner turned back to the product manager asking. Okay, he was called Johnny. Okay,
Johnny? For how long time have you been thinking about this? About two weeks, and
I’ve been thinking like this and like that and like this. Okay. And then the, the owner of the
company said, okay, and then you come to me, and you expect me to take better decision
than you in like 30 seconds? Who do you think would take the best decision? So that’s
how we try to run it. The people who know us most, we depend on the people to take
good decisions. You don’t take a decision just, because you have a title or, or a manager,
you take a decision, because you are the one that knows the most.
Alec Putrih Jeza 10:44 Okay. That’s, that’s exactly what I was looking for. Can you also
tell me a little bit about what is the role of CEO like, what how does his role distinguished
from the role of other employees?
Johan Salin 11:00 We have a CEO on paper would say, because some legislation requires,
but that’s only on paper, we try to, we try to have to not have a manager in the organization,
we tried to have a flat organization.
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:19 So would you say that even like things like, I don’t know, like vision
and mission strategy of the company, like all of these things are basically managed by
everybody?
Johan Salin 11:29 Or there are a few Tdecisions that are taken by the board. The board
decides how big should the salary increase be, on average, the coming year? That’s a
decision that comes that is taken by the board and the owners. But then it’s distributed to
the organization, and then we have to find a way of setting salaries on employees.
Alec Putrih Jeza 12:01 The next section is about vision and mission. The question is
108
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:119==
basically, what’s the vision and the mission of the organization? And which processes do
you utilize, so that the company is going towards achieving them?
Johan Salin 12:23 Those questions? Yeah. We worked on those things the last years
and kind of put together fairly extensive material, but it’s been performed in workshops
with the employees, as we have had one person that was responsible for driving this work
and making the final decisions. I think that is hard, because that’s not you should have
it in your mind every day. But it’s also hard to have. I think, if I can find a few pictures,
I can show you. I guess you see, a rocket? Yeah. So this is how we how we describe
our mission position from its mission, and why we why we exist. And this has been well,
as I said, worked on with members of the board have been involved and employees have
been involved. This is how we try to, to communicate to ourselves and to others what we
are.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:00 Okay, and this is shared amongst everybody who is employed.
Johan Salin 14:04 Yeah.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:04 Okay. We also have, yeah, do you want to say something?
Johan Salin 14:09 So yeah, and I mean, this something, if I asked someone here, then I
don’t think they can answer what is our vision? What is our promise, but we try to try to
have it involved in in like launch seminars and workshops that we do from time to time.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:27 But it’s sort of like, taken for granted. I mean, people probably
know what it is right? Like, yeah.
Johan Salin 14:35 And when we come down to the core values, they are they’re, they’re
kind of known and used by parents more.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:48 Okay. Do you have any key success factors that you know, de­
termine whether you’re on the right way towards your your goals, organization? should
go?
Johan Salin 15:00 Well, we don’t really have any we are bad in measuring that we are on
the right way I would say.
Alec Putrih Jeza 15:13 Okay, and is that, like, Did you purposefully decide to omit this
aspect or
Johan Salin 15:25 we have some financial targets and targets on on growth and so on,
that are that are communicated to us by the board, but I think it’s just work that hasn’t
been done yet.
Alec Putrih Jeza 15:42 What about strategies and plans? Like do you have any, like, has
the organization adopted any, you know, processes or activities in terms of your strategies,
or plans that are going to lead you towards success, apart from growth that you already
mentioned, and this financial targets?
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
109
==PAGE:120==
Johan Salin 16:18 Think this kind of summarizes the part of the strategy we have. But
it’s, I mean, this is something that we work on from time to time, but yeah, I think we
could do more. I mean, I, I’m, I’m responsible for for project managers, and hence I’m,
I’m responsible for making sure that we excel in product delivery. So that’s kind of my
task to work towards, and then make sure that we get better all the time. And I also
work with recruitment. So I work work in this area as well. And see that we have a good
recruitment process and we work the right way there as well. And then there are other
persons responsible for the other activities we do in the in the strategy.
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:09 Okay. Do you like when you when you do have any performance
measurement mechanisms like KPIs or anything like that?
Johan Salin 17:26 We have a few KPIs, but they are mostly financials, as I said before
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:31 okay. And are they utilized on like an individual level for for different
employees? Or maybe group or organizational,
Johan Salin 17:39 they are summarized on company level.
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:44 Okay, and do you have any idea like, how high are they usually
set, because I know that some organizations, for example, set really, really high targets,
so that, you know, they want to encourage their employees to achieve even though they
will know that they’re almost impossible and then some said I’m really low or don’t have
them at all.
Johan Salin 18:06 I think they have they are fairly reasonable. We also even developed
some KPIs for ourselves to police ourselves.
Alec Putrih Jeza 18:18 Okay. And you’re already mentioned earlier that you give feed­
back to each other is this like, how in general how you approach evaluating individual
performance?
Johan Salin 18:33 Yes, I think since we since we don’t have managers, then I think that is
one of the hardest parts of ensuring in the organization to both encourage the colleagues
to say that they are doing a good job, but also when they are not taking care of people
that are misbehaving or are in the wrong way. So I would say but we have a system with
mentorship. So you can have a mentor to work with or yeah, that can can assist you.
Alec Putrih Jeza 19:27 So, basically, you have training programs and they include l any,
you know, you mentioned behavior like are there any behavioral norms or maybe also
other rules that people are expected to follow?
Johan Salin 19:46 Not any thing that is written down or so, but of course, there are rules
and norms in in an organization but nothing that is kind of written down on the side.
Alec Putrih Jeza 19:59 Okay, And what this may be, like, align with your core values like
this some of them
110
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:121==
Johan Salin 20:07 now yeah, of course they, I mean, we, since we talked about the core
values, they kind of find the base. And I mean, the core values derive how we work and
how we act so to say, so it sticks together.
Alec Putrih Jeza 20:30 Okay. Um, yeah, I also just remember that earlier said that, you
know, youas a person responsible for hiring, like, at some moment, you mentioned that,
you know, they ask that they’re basically say you did fairly well, and then do wanna, you
know, continue but who says that? How?
Johan Salin 20:50 It’s actually it’s actually in the in the meeting where we decide if we
take the decision, okay. I said that we had one meeting where we are we work on what
needs to be done and organization. In that meeting, questions are asked to me like, is the
role description really reflecting what you do. Or should we do adjustments or roll and so
on. And in the second meeting, where we decide who who is to execute, which happens
about twice a year, The roles are the things we have decided in that meeting, that actual
meeting, the ones that are participating at that day? They evaluate what I’ve done and
asked me if I want to continue, so.
Alec Putrih Jeza 21:36 Okay, so So these things are open to all employees?
Johan Salin 21:41 Exactly.
Alec Putrih Jeza 21:41 Okay. So it’s pretty much like a peer based evaluation. But since
you don’t have any cape, I mean, KPIs apart from the financial ones. On the organizational
level, would you say that they are, like more subjective than Objective evaluations?
Johan Salin 22:02 Or? Yeah, I would say so. Yeah. Absolutely. Okay, perfect.
Alec Putrih Jeza 22:07 Then we can move on to the next section, which is about rewards
and incentives. So what rewards do employees again, either financial or non financial?
And are there also any punishments?
Johan Salin 22:26 There are no punishments. There are no financial rewards, either we
have a bonus, but that’s on the financial result on the company level. So if the company
as a whole is doing a good job, all employees get a bonus. But then rewards to I mean,
the rewarding for engineers is technology that is working. Yeah, yeah. So and then, I
mean, we try to at least, some of us tried to kind of notice when people are doing good
things, and we have quite active news flow and our internal web and so on, where we
try to highlight things that’s been done and things that are good. But now, we don’t really
have any rewards or punishments in that way.
Alec Putrih Jeza 23:22 Okay, what about salaries are how are they determined? And are
they equal for everybody? Or do they differ?
Johan Salin 23:29 They differ differ quite a lot. And we as I said, the board decides the
level of the yearly increase, and then it’s up to us to set the salary on on ourselves. The
last years we have done that we have appointed three persons in the salary committee,
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
111
==PAGE:122==
and they are are setting the salaries on the rest of us.
Alec Putrih Jeza 24:05 And you are basically what the elected them or you know, your
proposed, yeah,
Johan Salin 24:09 it’s actually the only time we’ve had an election where we have been
voting. Okay, that will be voting for three persons. Okay. And they are, I’ve written a
bit like a process on how to do that, that has been discussed, so that everybody thinks
that the process is fair. And then they try to follow the process and the process is like,
Okay, we take in opinions from colleagues, from product managers, from customers on
the performance of each individual. We look into education, we look into all the factors
that you can think of, and then we tried to set the Fair, fair salary increase. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 25:27 so you don’t have any pre designed? I mean, you don’t have any.
Okay. Okay, that’s fair. They also have any mechanisms that are designed to motivate
employees, like, you know, like, workshops or, you know, like, parties.
Johan Salin 25:50 Yeah, I mean, we have, we have, every month, we have some type
of event. Since we are a consultancy company, we have colleagues that are working
at company, I mean, they are hired to someone, so they sit every day, like Exxon, or
Mobil or whatever company. So to kind of make sure that we have a calm, common cam
continuing and everybody knows each other, we have events every month, it could be,
well, last month, it was a ski trip. And sometimes it’s just after work or something like that.
So we have activities. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:33 Would you say that? I mean, you already mentioned this, but
you said that, like the satisfaction, at least for you comes from a piece of technology that
works? Would you say that in this case, case, you are intrinsically motivated to do your
job?
Johan Salin 26:49 Yeah, I don’t really understand what you mean by intrinsically
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:55 So basically, like the at least the literature and like, also, we, in my
university, we’ve been distinguishing between extrinsic motivation and intrinsic wherein
extrinsic is, you know, where you’re motivated by some external reward that you’re going
to get for your job, for example, salary increase, or some bonus, while intrinsic motivation
is the basically internal satisfaction that you get, because you did a good job. And because
you’re, you know, inherently are genuinely curious.
Johan Salin 27:31 I think then the last example, fits more in into who we try to be.
Alec Putrih Jeza 27:39 Is this also what what determines your your hiring process? Maybe?
Johan Salin 27:45 Yes, yes. I mean, we, for instance, we really look into hiring experts,
and we have a lot of people with a PhD, and really commited people with experience. But
we don’t try to attract those persons by a high salary, for instance, we have a good salary,
but we don’t try to be competing in that area, we try to compete in having interesting
112
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:123==
projects, and being in forefront of technology all the time. Look for persons that really
finds their motivation, as you said in doing a good job.
Alec Putrih Jeza 28:27 Okay, the last section on in the second part is on information flows.
So I’m basically curious about whether you collect any information. It can be any type of
formal or informal, you know, statistical or not, that you use to correct the processes. Or
maybe also to use some information that you gathered to anticipate further changes in
your market or environment or processes that you do on a regular basis.
Johan Salin 29:02 I will say no, we I don’t think we do that in a systematic way in, in any
action area. I mean, we of course, we follow up on like, are we profitable? And how many
hours do we charge customers and what are the hourly rates? But I don’t think that’s what
you asked for.
Alec Putrih Jeza 29:26 No, no. But but it’s okay. Like I read in the literature on some similar
companies that actually don’t utilize this, but for example, you know, like this managerial
hierarchies, especially corporations usually, you know, collect an enormous amount of
data to correct their processes and make them more efficient and,
Johan Salin 29:45 and I think, I mean, there’s a value of that, of course, but we are not
there yet.
Alec Putrih Jeza 29:52 Okay. And the next section is about basically how you coordinate
inter interdependent tasks. So for example, you have a project where multiple different
people with different specialities have to work together, how do you coordinate so that,
you know, things are on time so that everybody knows what to do,
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:18 we always have a project manager whose main responsibility is
to, to do that, to make sure that we coordinate and have the right resources. And that the,
I don’t know, communication within the team works and the coordination with customer
works, then we also if if the members of the team are working at the same site, to make
sure that they are located closely in the office so that they can work efficiently together.
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:54 Okay, and do your like, in terms of, you know, like, if you have
a multitude of specialists from different backgrounds, how do you ensure that they have
a common understanding? Because maybe sometimes we use jargon or stuff like that?
How do you make sure that this the meanings are aligned?
Johan Salin 31:22 Yeah. I mean, I mean, working technically. You, I mean, you write
some type of specification, and that’s where engineers start and, and then you have one,
you have meetings every week, you have discussions all the time, and you develop your,
your product and you work with I mean, we work with like in jira boards, where we were
we discuss what to do next and who is to do it so awesome. I mean, in the projects, there
are constant discussion, making sure that we go the same direction all the time.
Alec Putrih Jeza 32:02 And as a project manager, if you want to make your work pre­
dictable and visible to all participants, so that they know when to do what so? Do you use
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
113
==PAGE:124==
any maps or representations or prototypes?
Johan Salin 32:19 I would say we use the same tools for predictability as for accountability,
so Jira boards and working closely together so people can always communicate. We we
have a fairly well developed project process, which we try to follow. And we always have
like a project homepage, where we gather all the information on the on the project and the
targets and everything. So it’s transparent to everyone what we are doing and why. And
so, it’s open to, of course, all the product members, but anybody else in the company as
well. So everybody can, if they are interested, see what’s going on. All infromation that
we have is available to everyone.
Alec Putrih Jeza 33:01 Again, I think this is the last question, I would like to know, how do
you manage conflicts or you know, like, one, one, you have no formal authority, and there
would be a conflict? How do you make sure that they are the resolved nonetheless?
Johan Salin 33:17 Yeah. That’s also one of the challenges, I would say. We talked about
it on, always, when I do recruiting, for instance. And the way we do is that we try to
analyze who’s involved in the conflict, and who is affected by the conflict. And it has to
be someone that kind of steps in and make sure to, solve the conflict. But it’s hard in this
type of organization. And as you said, no one really has the authority to take action, it has
to be a discussion with the people involved. But we have had examples where project
managers have said that okay, those two guys cannot work in my project because they
can be in the same room. And then we have to do some changes in the set. But it’s a it’s
a hard thing and we have those mentors as well that that often assists in those situations.
Alec Putrih Jeza 34:26 Okay, but there is no like formal way o resolving disputes.
Johan Salin 34:31 If it goes really far, then then we have a whistleblower function, for
instance, to the board, which you can can report to that something strange is happen­
ing. And we also have someone that is assigned to take care of the psychological work
environment, something that you can talk to that person? Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 35:05 I think that concludes it like at least from the questions that I de­
signed. But I would also like to know, Do you think there’s like anything really unique
about your organization that you would like to share? Or something that you really liked?
Johan Salin 35:21 Yeah, I think I think that the trust that is put into each individual by the
board, I would say or by the owners of the company is unique. that they really trust each
and every one to act in the best on the company. Instead of having managers to make
sure that everyone walks in line, they trust each and every one to take decisions that are
beneficial for the company. Okay.
114
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:125==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
115
==PAGE:126==
D
Appendix D
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:02 So yeah, how long have you been a part of Satalia? I mean, how
long? How old is the company?
Daniel Hulme 0:09 I founded it 12 years ago. And then we were bought by WPP. Six
months ago.
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:16 Okay. But you remain in the same position right from like, Okay.
Can you please explain briefly like what’s Talia does like, what are your? Yeah, what
what’s your business
Daniel Hulme 0:30 so we we build AI solutions for biggest and the biggest companies in
the world. And I guess most companies start out with trying to take one particular product
or service to a market. And as they start to deliver that product or service, they they
form an organizational structure that is meant to be able to deliver that product or service
effectively. But then what happens is over time, they look for ways to diversify revenues,
so they look for ways to sell services off the back of product or by bringing new products to
market. And most companies have already created a structure that is rigid for one type of
offering. And so they find it very difficult to diversify their revenue streams. And the Satlia
what’s Italia is trying to do is figure out how to create an organizational structure that allows
for innovations to be created and go to market as quickly as possible those innovations
might be services or assets or products. How do we get people to swarm around taking
innovations to market? How do we use AI to remove the friction from innovations so that
we can be made maybe called as a venture builder? So suppose Italia, it does two things,
we we want to reinvent how organizations operate. And we want to prove that by using
these new ways of operating, you can take innovations to market more quickly and enable
organizations to survive.
Alec Putrih Jeza 2:09 Wow. Okay. I would have probably 1000 of questions about that.
But recently, we have to focus on these, especially because we’re short on time. You said
the number of employees
Daniel Hulme 2:23 Satalia 120.
Alec Putrih Jeza 2:27 Oh, wow. Okay. Can you also briefly evaluate the competition level
in your market for Satalia.
Daniel Hulme 2:35 I mean, everybody is doing AI, right. So whether they’re doing or
whether they’re trying to do do hire people directly, and to solve some of these problems,
or whether they’re trying to work with third party companies to start to build solutions,
that we’re up against the big companies like Microsoft, and Google and IBM, all the way
through to one person startups that are consultancies. So the market is incredibly fierce.
116
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:127==
Alec Putrih Jeza 3:05 Okay. Can you also okay, we can move on to the second section,
which is about control. And it begins with the organizational structure. So yeah, I would
just like to you to describe the organizational structure of Somalia, both in terms of either
hierarchical levels or different divisions, or if you could describe how people work.
Daniel Hulme 3:26 So we lack structure in Satalia. And that’s partly because we didn’t
want to implement structures that created fixed hierarchies. And I actually don’t believe
that flat organizations are necessarily the most innovative structure. And what we’re try­
ing to do is build an operating system built on some principles that allow for decentralized
decision making. So I guess the underlying principles are, how do you make sure the best
people are making decisions quickly and effectively and empowered to do that, whether
that’s writing code, hiring somebody giving feedback hierarchies of solve this kind of com­
plexity through creating hierarchies, but what we’re trying to do is use a concept called
Liquid democracy to identify who are the groups of people or individual people and weight,
their ability to make decisions based on how good we think they are making those deci­
sions, and then empower them to make those decisions. So we, you may or may suggest
that we’re a swarm, but actually, what I’m not wedded to one type of organizational struc­
ture, I want the right organizational structure to emerge according to the problem that
needs solving. So if you need a hierarchy to get something to market quickly use a hi­
erarchy if you need a holacracy then do a holacracy, or in other cases something that’s
more anarchistic. We are not wedded to one particular structure.
Alec Putrih Jeza 4:50 Okay. And how do you how do you assess who is the right person
do you obviously use some AI
Daniel Hulme 4:56 or yeah, this is this is the this is the paradox of Decision making is that
somebody needs to make a decision what the decision making structure should be. So
does that make sense? And that’s the paradox. And I am in some respects a benevolent
dictator. And my decision is, we need to weigh decisions based on the best person to
make that decision. And so we use people to try to identify people who are best placed to
make that decision. Or we use AI to try to identify the best people to make that decision.
Alec Putrih Jeza 5:31 And how does the AI know like what inputs to give it to make deci­
sions.
Daniel Hulme 5:34 all of the digital footprint that you’re creating your emails, your Slack
data, your code commits, we can take all of that data surveys that we asked people based,
you know, how competent is this person that making x, y, and z decision. So we take all
of that data, and then try to use that data to identify people for certain decisions. So to
give you a crazy idea that we used to do, we used to ask everybody every year to make
public recommendations for their salary. So you would publicly declare what you want
to be paid. And then people would vote on whether those salaries should be reduced
or increased or kept the same. And you had, the number of votes that you had for that
salary was dependent upon how closely you’ve worked with that person, how knowledge­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
117
==PAGE:128==
able you are about their domain. So if you’ve worked, if you’re a software engineer, and
they’re a software engineer, and you’ve worked closely on projects with them, you will
have potentially a better view of their contribution than somebody else.
Alec Putrih Jeza 6:30 Okay, and what then is your role? Like? Does your role differ from
other people’s roles in your company?
Daniel Hulme 6:40 No. And that’s why I think that one of the big battles I have is that
companies tend to default to this idea of hierarchy. And the more the higher you are, the
more the more privileged you are. And, and actually, one of the things that I want to try
to do is separate those powers of control. So in many organizations that are hierarchies,
you have people making decisions, people setting the laws in which those decisions are
made, and people then deciding whether those decisions are within the laws. The reason
why governments have tried to separate those powers is because you can get corrup­
tion if those powers are together. So so the reason why I say that is because I have
a particular set of expertise in strategy. And for me, that is no different than somebody
that’s writing code I have, I should be working on projects around organizational structure
around strategy, I spend a lot of time thinking about the future and where we should go
as a company. And but I’m not any special than anybody else. Because all I’m doing is
applying a set of skill to something that can benefit this company, which is creating our
vision. And for me, that’s no more or less valuable than somebody that’s writing some
code or somebody that’s going to hire or fire somebody.
Alec Putrih Jeza 7:56 Okay, but does that mean that you know, you as somebody who is
an expert in strategy is not allowed to write code? I mean, you know, our employees are
allowed to do other stuff, other than they were assigned.
Daniel Hulme 8:11 Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And that sometimes brings problems because
we don’t, it’s not easy, because if you give people freedom to do what they want, and
you don’t have structures in place to determining performance contribution, if you today
want to be a software developer, and tomorrow, you want to be a photographer, how do
we set your salary? How do we How to determine whether your performance how do we
make? Yeah, actually, what we find is that by giving people a granular ability to allocate
themselves to things, you start to get, the technology enables that, but you start to put
butts up against HR law. So the reason why we typically have roles in companies is
because if you are not performing within your role, you can, you can get fired. I mean you
can say no to a given task, but you need to give a good enough reason for that decision.
So we have roles, whereas actually, most companies don’t have roles. They just have
skills, people with skills that are applied to projects, it’s just very, very hard to deal with
outliers, people who are extremely performance or underperformance when you don’t
have these mechanisms in place. And so what tends to happen is organizations adopt
processes and structures that have solved outliers solve people that have behaved badly,
and then unfortunately, now everybody has to do it. Everybody has to write objectives,
and everybody has to do feedback. And actually, that’s not necessarily the right thing to
118
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:129==
do.
Alec Putrih Jeza 9:35 Okay, but what what happened like so when when a new role for
example emerges? Do you usually like is your SOP to hire new people?
Daniel Hulme 9:46 Yes, So there are three mechanisms of resourcing in some respects.
The first mechanism is we have AI that allocates people based on their preferences and
all that kind of stuff. So it says this is what you’re working on. The second mechanism is a
recommender. So the AI will say these are the five projects that are coming up, we think
that are all relevant to you which ones you want to work on. And then there’s another
mechanism, which gives people the ability to just say, I want to go and do this thing over
here. Now, there needs to be an approval process, because we can’t have everybody
going to do everything, I would love each person in the company to have enough knowl­
edge about about the organization that they can decide how to allocate their time. But
unfortunately, as you get bigger, it’s more and more difficult for individuals to understand
the bigger picture. So you need to rely a lot rely on other mechanisms that you trust to
help make recommendations for what you should be working on. Okay,
Alec Putrih Jeza 10:42 and what are these mechanisms
Daniel Hulme 10:44 like? So as I said, mechanisms are communication, communicating
between between people and the strategy and what we’re trying to achieve? The alloca­
tion, AI allocating people, or making recommendations about what people people could
work on?
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:01 Okay. So I think we can move on to the second aspect, which is
vision and mission. And the question is, what is just what is the vision and mission of the
organization? How do you make sure that everybody knows what the vision and mission
are? Yeah,
Daniel Hulme 11:19 I speak about it as frequently as possible. And the vision is to the
vision is to create a enable everybody in the world to live beyond themselves. And so we
believe that AI technology can remove the friction of the creation of food, education, health
care, energy, and be able to move so much friction from the creation and dissemination of
those goods that they become free. Imagine being born into a world where you don’t have
to worry about food, paying and working to feed yourself and to pay for energy. And so we
our vision is to try and use AI to, to free people up economically, by giving them access
to goods for free. And then also creating a platform for them to come up with innovations
that people can swarm around and get more and more innovations to market. Yeah, so
that’s the vision. And the mission is essentially to free innovation, to remove frictions, to
come up with new organizational structures that enable people to innovate, and to get
those innovations to market as fast as possible.
Alec Putrih Jeza 12:34 Okay, I remember you’re I was listening to your TED Talks. Re­
member, you were talking about these things. And I was really happy to see somebody,
you know, thinking in that line, because I remember that, you know, when I was, for ex­
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
119
==PAGE:130==
ample, studying the ancient Greek democracy, like their notion of freedom was actually
defined by you know, kind of dialectically as an opposition to, what is not free, and what
is not free, is everything that’s necessary. Yeah. So if you’re born, nature, imposes these
conditions on you that you have to work, you have to get food, you have to do all the
things you mention. And they believed that as long as you have to do those things, you
are not free, which is why they outsourced their work to slaves, right. But this is how they
call themselves free. Like I have all the free time in the world, like, what am I going to do?
And I also felt like, you know, it’s below human dignity to work for money. And that’s also
one of my one of my motivations, like, I don’t want to, you know, have a job where I will
do it so that I can have money, I want to, I want to fulfill myself, I want to, you know, bring
the best out of myself and contribute something right, indeed.
Daniel Hulme 13:39 That’s the heart of our vision. So thank you. Yes, good.
Alec Putrih Jeza 13:43 Okay. And were you the one who came up with this idea? I mean,
like, do your employees have the ability? Or, you know, are they allowed to participate in
shaping the vision and mission?
Daniel Hulme 13:54 Yeah, absolutely. I don’t want to waste a little time that I have on
this planet. I want to try and make the lives of people better. And at the moment, that’s
the best the optimal path for me. But if somebody can show me a different path, then I’m
totally up for for being challenged and coming. Yeah. But I mean, I came up with a vision,
but in collaboration and conversation with people over many, many years. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:21 Okay, the next section is key success factors, what are the key
success factors that are, you know, you believe are going to bring you to achieve your
mission and vision? And, yeah, also, how do you how do you, you know, do you have
any specific mechanisms, again, to bring the attention to this term place.
Daniel Hulme 14:41 Now, now that we’ve been acquired, there’s there’s a lot more em­
phasis on on growth, financial growth, and ever since I decided to use it, I have been
uncomfortable with the concept of financial growth because money is just one mecha­
nism to value things. But what I want to do is, but what it is is a really good indicator that
People value you. And I want to be able to grow our impact as much as possible. And
over the next five years, I think growth is going to be a key indicator. I think that once we
reach a certain level, it won’t be about growth, it will be about impact, or even how fluid we
are as an organization, how adaptable we are. One, if you’ve seen any of my talks, you’ll
see that adaptability is synonymous with intelligence. And so being able to measure an
organization’s adaptability, I think, is critical. But right now, I think it’s about about growth,
unfortunately.
Alec Putrih Jeza 15:44 Okay, it’s fair.
Daniel Hulme 15:47 And it’s not just, it’s not just annual financial growth, but it’s building
assets, building things that are valuable, or that we think is valuable.
120
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:131==
Alec Putrih Jeza 16:00 The next is strategies and plans. So which strategies and plans
do you did you adopt? And what are the processes and activities that you decided will be
required to achieve?
Daniel Hulme 16:10 The Yeah, I have, I have a love, love hate relationship with plans. First
of all, I think plans are, on the one hand, totally useless, because they are not what what
is going to happen. But at the same time, they give you a way to kind of measure how you
are progressing, or at least a decision making aid. But we try not to make any long term
plans. And so I have a real a real problem with plans in terms of strategy that the strategy
is, is what I’ve described, which is we will build innovations, we will try and understand
how we can get innovations to market. So all of that. We were very fortunate that we live,
we live our vision, we’re trying to live our vision, which is how do we or even, our product
is our vision. How do we enable people to become better and faster innovation? And so
yeah, we’re very lucky in that respect. I don’t know if I understood that. I don’t know if I
answered the question there. Sorry.
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:05 Yeah, I think it kind of overlaps with what we already talked about.
If you feel like you have, you know, you feel the same way. As I do that, you know, we
already kind of answered this question, then need to repeat ourselves. The next section
is about target setting and performance measurements, you know, I would like to know,
well, you know, what kind of targets do you set? And, you know, do you set them like
below or above what, what you think it’s possible?
Daniel Hulme 17:35 So the answer is we don’t at the moment, and because I’ve got a big
problem with with, with our target setting, I think that as an organization, we’ve agreed
on what we think we might be able to achieve this year in terms of growth. And what I
mean by growth is people revenues, number of clients impact. So this is what we would
like to achieve based on what we what we can see in our ahead of us, and the world
changes. So maybe that maybe we’ll do better than that, maybe we’ll do as we humans
tend to be optimistic about these things. So I think by by default, most plans are stretch
targets anyway. Because we tend to be optimistic about it. But we don’t have a way of
cascading that to across the organization in a way that I’m comfortable with. We have
projects that are created, that are meant to help achieve us have those targets. And we
have people working on those projects. So by working on a project, you are working on
something that’s intended to help us achieve our our objectives, but it that doesn’t happen
at an individual level. So you can’t I won’t ask you, what are you doing this week that helps
us achieve our strategy, because he’ll just say, Well, I’m working on this project. And that
project is there to help achieve our strategy.
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:55 So you don’t you don’t measure the performance of anybody, both
individually or like on an organization?
Daniel Hulme 19:10 Correct. what we will do, and we will probably not use our objectives
to measure performance, we will use Scrum. Essentially, feedback mechanisms to talk
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
121
==PAGE:132==
about performance, most smart people know that they’re not performing. And then you
can say, why are you not performing? Is it something in your personal life and you’re
not working on the right projects? Is this not the right company for you, and it’s not the
right company for you, we can help you move on. It’s it doesn’t have to be where they’re
going to put you on a three months performance review, and we’re going to check to
see your output because that’s just an inhumane reason why the reason why to answer
your big macro question, the reason why we see a lot of these structures not there yet,
is because to do this in a decentralized way, to do performance management in a way
that is, adaptive, organic and decentralized is extremely hard. Hierarchies have allowed
you to do this. But managerial hierarchies are indaptive. And they also bring lots of other
structural problems. But you so we’re gonna see lots of dows, decentralized autonomous
organizations appear over the coming years But the ones that are going to survive are
the ones that are really going to understand how to deal with the, the outliers, the human
aspects where I don’t know somebody is, is having a, I don’t know, a crisis at home, they’re
off sick because of stress. Now, who needs to have access to that information? HR, that’s
privileged information, it may not necessarily be can be shared across the dow. So there’s
different there are HR or legal reasons. restrictions in what and how companies operate
that need to be built in to dat dows as well.
Alec Putrih Jeza 20:59 Yeah, okay, that’s, that’s actually a new, a new take on it, because
I read across literature and you know, like, my idea was basically that, you know, this, the
hierarchical structure, at least, like in the tradition of Western thinking, actually originates
with from Plato, right? Because he, he wrote, like, especially his political dialogues with
an idea that, you know, people are not to be trusted, right? Democracy is bad, because
people tend to be misinformed. And this is why he formed, you know, , basically, his whole
philosophical work is trying to legitimize the power of the philosophers, becuse they are
the ones who know. And since they know, this is why they give orders. And on the other
hand you have people who don’t know, and therefore just execute the orders. And I feel
like this also transmitted to, the more modern political thinking, especially in times of the
early scientific revolution, when people realized that, okay, wait, we can really understand
nature beyond what’s written in the Bible, and we don’t have to rely on the authority of
the Church anymore. But now we’re going to use knowledge to legitimize authority. Of
course, ownership was one thing, but the other one was, you know, if I know better about
these processes, I’m also going to be telling you what to do. But I think that this also
comes into question in the settings where you have highly, highly specialized work. And
this comes into question when one person cannot understand modern complex processes
as well as he used to in 17th century, right?
Daniel Hulme 22:31 So it’s interesting, because these are, these are questions I’ve been
battling with for many, many, many years. And so let me, let me ask you a question. So if
you if you had a child and wanted to them to learn ballet, would you go to the first 20 people
off the street and say, Can I crowdsource from you? How to teach my, my daughter or son
ballet? The answer is probably no, you’re gonna go to somebody that knows or is expert
122
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:133==
at that. And so, but that doesn’t necessarily have to be a part of a hierarchy if they are in
a hierarchy, because they know more about ballet than those those those 20 people. So.
But in more traditional organizations, those hierarchies are fixed. And you end up having
people in situations where they’re making decisions where they don’t know, and so how
do you make sure that the right people are empowered to make the right decision? So in
some respects, if we’re going back to Plato, it would be how do you create a fluid version
of that? Because there will be situations in your company, like nobody in my company
will be able to know whether I’m a good strategist or not. So how can I? How can I get
somebody to understand my value. or to do performance management on me, you need
to find an expert, somebody that’s maybe knows about what I do or is better, to be able
to determine the quality of my contribution. And I’m not being very clear about this. But
does that make sense that might make sense to you is it? Let me let me give you another
example. Sorry. If I, if I said to people in my company, I’m going to give you five tests.
Okay, the first test is, I want you to all design a logo for the company. The next one is I
want you to all write the pseudocode for the traveling salesman problem. The next one,
I want you to write a Python script for cross correlation matrix. Next one is I want you to
come up with a mechanism to set salaries. The next one, I want you to whatever, right?
All of them will have a go at writing doing a logo, and all of them will probably ever go doing
salaries. But they’ll most of them will say I’ve got no idea about what even the traveling
salesman is. I don’t even know how to write Python code. And what you need to do is you
need the people that think that they could go and draw a logo or to go and set salaries to
acknowledge that they I was naive about that as they are about writing Python code and
about writing traveling salesman problems. We have this there’s a delusion that people
think that they can do certain things. And actually, I would defer to somebody that’s been
drawing logos for the past 20 years and assume that they are better placed. But yeah, we
would all have a go at doing a logo. We would think that that’s acceptable. That, but not,
but we know that it’s unacceptable to go and try and write the pseudocode for a traveling
salesman problem.
Alec Putrih Jeza 25:29 Yeah. That makes sense. I mean,in the settings where you have
to write the code. I mean, it’s pretty obvious who does it better isn’t? But there are other
ares, where we don’t rely on formalities that we see in mathematics or logic, but have to
rely on taste, like in the case of logo design, or in justice, or in general when we use our
ability to judge human action, there are no objecive, preset standards, we just create our
own, but we are free to use whichever we deem important right? So in this way, we are not
free when it comes to natural sciences or maths or logic, but we are much more free when
it comes to human affairs. And if we use knowledge for the former, we get into the realm
of opinions when we talk about human affairs. And Plato tried to force knowledge into the
realm of opinons, and here is my point, you can’t really know these things in the same
sense as you can know the laws of nature, so you know, his legitimization of authority is
actually absurd, and his contemporaries understood that very well, which is why his ideas
only got implemented a few hundred years later in Rome, where people didn’t understand
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
123
==PAGE:134==
this distinction between knowledge and opinions , or nature and human affairs anymore.
Daniel Hulme 26:02 Ok, i get that, but I think that if you’ve got if you were in a room full of
people, were design designers, it would be obvious to them that, that there’d be people in
that room who are experts at designing the concepts of logo design that I don’t even know,
I don’t know about that about? I don’t even know. So I think we need to be very careful
about thinking that we can contribute to decision making, but actually, we’re undermining
somebody that studied that domain for that for 15 years.
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:37 yeah, that’s that’s also true. Yes. Yes, I agree. Definitely. Okay. .
So my next question was about rewards and incentives. So how do you set I mean, you
already talked about it is that the salaries are set, so that each person proposes their own
Daniel Hulme 26:56 It’s going to change now, we’re going to change it so that people
determine their skill level. And we can map those skill levels against market rate. So rather
than you trying to set your salary, which by the way, people are terrible at determining their
own value from a monetary perspective, but if you, if you say to them, what skill level, do
you think you are on this on this matrix? They’re much better at that, or at least they’re
much better at assessing their peers. But there’s, there’s also, we’re having to bring in
bonuses into the company, the reason why bonuses are being brought in is because if
you if you increase people’s salaries, it’s very difficult to decrease them. So again, if
you decided you wanted to be a photographer tomorrow, and you weren’t a very good
photographer, how can I safely adjust your salary? The answer is I can’t, again, HR law
prevents me from adjusting people salaries lower. So bonuses are typically used for for
that dynamic part. So you’ve got kind of a base, and then you can flex according to other
things that you’re doing. It’s not a beautiful solution, the beautiful solution would be to pay
you based on the contribution that you made today, to a particular domain. But that’s not
unfortunately, how the law works.
Daniel Hulme 26:56 Yeah, yeah. But what about they also have like, either penalties?
Does that exist?
Daniel Hulme 28:18 No. Now we one of the again, the challenge that I don’t know, if
you’ve worked in companies, but asking people to do their time reports. So for us as an
organization to operate in a decentralized way, we need to understand what people are
working on. So rather than having managers that can tell I can that can tell me what we’re
working on what we need people to be able to self declare, I’ve been working on this
project, and I’ve been applying the skill, and people don’t. And the reason why they don’t
is because they don’t understand the value, the value that it has on them. And for years
and years and years, I’ve been trying to get people to show them graphs and showing
them decision making structures, or why they should go and spend five minutes a week
to write to do their time reports. And they still don’t. And most of organizations I know they
also get people to struggle. So this is another problem that you’re facing in when thinking
about decentralized organizations. Despite people doing this, despite giving them the
124
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:135==
opportunity to go and have that freedom and responsibility to go and do the things that
they want to do. They won’t do the things that are needed for the organization to operate.
Okay. Yes. And so so we to answer your question. One of the things I was thinking about
doing is that based on your bonus, I will, I will pro rata your bonus according to the amount
of reports that you’ve done the amount of time so if you’ve only done 50
Alec Putrih Jeza 29:56 Yeah, but the bonus is gonna be assigned by you particulary?
Daniel Hulme 30:00 know, they are determined using some mathematical formula based
on how we are, how we’re achieving our targets.
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:07 But who could who creates the formula?
Daniel Hulme 30:11 Being a group of people? Yea
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:14 so employees basically.
Daniel Hulme 30:16 Yeah, people who are best placed to make that decision.
Alec Putrih Jeza 30:20 Yeah. What about non financial rewards? Do they exist?
Daniel Hulme 30:31 Yeah, I guess, I guess they do. But again, it’s very organic. So people
are encouraged to celebrate success, people are also encouraged to celebrate failures.
Because we want to, we want to learn from failures, you don’t, if you are not failing, you
are not learning. So we want to celebrate where we’ve failed, and then learn from them.
And so we do try to encourage people to kind of call out where we’ve learned something,
or something successful has happened. And that we have, you know, we use Slack. So
we just encourage people to kind of give kudos to others. But not as a manager, that’s
kind of patting you on the on your back, you need to kind of decentralize that.
Alec Putrih Jeza 31:19 Yeah. But what about firing? Like, does it also follow this? This
principle of, you know, the whole crew fires? Like, is it the person who has the the ability
to make the best decision about this, or, yeah, and
Daniel Hulme 31:35 sort of, so people will bring lack of performance people to our atten­
tion, and then we’ll try to, you know, help them become more performant. And really,
it’s just an adult conversation. And again, this is probably between HR, which will be
called the people circle, because they’re experts at having that conversation. But they’re
not necessarily experts on understanding whether that person’s performance, so they will
pull in information from different sources to make a call on how best to support? And if
that means having a conversation about exiting the company, then then that’s the con­
versation that we have.
Alec Putrih Jeza 32:11 Okay. What about motivate? Do you have like, any ways how you
motivate the employees? Or do you just trust them to be motivated themselves?
Daniel Hulme 32:22 I think this is one of our failings is that I assume that a lot of people
are like me, and that, that you are set, you get up in the morning wanted to try and save
the world. And, of course, not everybody is motivated by the same things. So at the
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
125
==PAGE:136==
moment, the majority of people in the company are genuinely self motivated by working on
interesting things, and all that kind of stuff. But we do need to be smarter at identifying the
influences, and encouraging them, to encourage other people to motivate other people.
So again, rather than having managers and expecting a manager to make decisions about
budget, hiring, firing, motivating and all that kind of stuff. The question is, can you identify
the best place people who are best placed and motivating other people?
Alec Putrih Jeza 33:10 Okay, that’s fair. Yeah, I think we have five minutes more. So let’s,
first the information flows, like you have the utilize any feedback or feed forward data to
either learn or, you know, set some future?
Daniel Hulme 33:28 Not really not really. No, that’s not to say that we shouldn’t be we def­
initely should. Because adaptation is synonymous with intelligence. So by the minimum,
we were still trying to create or invent structures that allow us to operate in a decentralized
way. So we’re still in some respects, that it’s only a part of the foundation of this house
that’s been built. We still don’t have walls and sofas and things like that. So we need
to kind of build the rest of the house for them to start to learn about what’s working and
what’s not.
Alec Putrih Jeza 34:06 Okay. The first part is about coordination. So yeah, maybe just
to go briefly through it. Like if you have a project, right? How do you assign people to
different to different roles, like how do you make them accountable? And how do you
make sure that they stay accountable?
Daniel Hulme 34:28 Yeah, we have a concept called drivers and navigators in some re­
spects, they’re a bit like project managers and product owners. They’re not quite like
that, because because we don’t think that those people should be doing all of the things
that traditional project managers and project owners do. So we’ve tried to only identify
the tasks that are the core to a project manager and a project driver, project owner, and
they are the interface between the rest of the organization and the Team. But teams are
brought together typically as a swarm organically based on availability and skills, and then
they drop what we call drivers, navigators are the interface between the team and the rest
of the organization.
Alec Putrih Jeza 35:13 Okay, why do you believe that this project owner, project manager
is not is not good?
Daniel Hulme 35:22 Because I think that if you look at go and Google, you know what
a project manager does, and you’ll get lots of different opinions, but there will be some,
there’ll be some core set of activities. But sometimes project managers are meant to be
doing performance reviews, or setting budget, but actually, we believe that those decisions
need to be made by other people. So if that, let’s say there are 30 different things that
a project manager traditionally has to do, we would probably have them only doing 10 of
those 10 of those things. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 36:05 Yeah. Yeah. Project Manager management. So I’m kind of familiar
126
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:137==
with this. But, yeah, I mean, with what the project manager does, but I’ve never, I mean, it
didn’t encourage us to think critically really about this. And you know, I never encountered
any form of criticism about these processes or roles,
Daniel Hulme 36:27 even things like coaching, running one on ones, I don’t necessarily
think that we’re all managers and great at doing that. And actually, you might need to have
somebody that’s better at coaching, working across projects, as opposed to expecting
managers to have that particular skill, even even budgeting for projects with me. In some
companies, the project manager is meant to be tracking invoices and things like that. And
again, that’s not necessarily always the best thing for that person to be doing.
Alec Putrih Jeza 36:58 Yeah, and I also read statistics that like, I don’t know, like, an
enormous amount of projects are usually under budget under time. I mean, like, overtime
and the goals. You know, what? Like, what happens if somebody doesn’t deliver on his
part? Or, you know, if he’s absent, you know, what happens in this?
Daniel Hulme 37:22 We don’t, it really just is about having an adult conversation, saying,
What can we do to support you? Where are you struggling? Do you need some time off
whatever, whatever? And in sometimes it’s like, well, maybe no, this isn’t the best place
for you to thrive. Maybe there are other places out there. Let’s help you find a better place
for you to have impact. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 37:47 Okay. But what about the also, like, when you have a project, you
know, how to make sure like, Do you have any systems of representation or you know,
some objects or meetings or stuff like that, so that everybody knows where the project is?
And yeah, use time or
Daniel Hulme 38:04 Scrum? Yeah, we use agile scrum. So, we’ve also built our own
internal project management platform, so not much. But all of the projects that go on at
Satalia are captured in this tool. And I can now for example, I can drill down into this one
here, this project, and I can see who’s been booking their time against that tool. I can see
what is been forecasted on all the different projects.
Alec Putrih Jeza 38:34 Okay, so you also predict in future, make things predictable?
Daniel Hulme 38:38 Yeah, yeah. So this, this is an internal platform that then also linked
to slack so that when a new project is created, it automatically creates all of the all of the
projects channels in Slack so that people can go and swarm around them and all that kind
of stuff. So yeah, we manage all of our projects through this tool that we’ve built ourselves
called Hubble. Okay,
Alec Putrih Jeza 38:41 perfect. The last question is about, like, how do you make sure that
you know, people with different expertise achieve like common understanding, because I
can imagine that there’s some jargon that’s being used maybe when you do your projects,
or maybe when you work with clients?
Daniel Hulme 39:20 Yeah, glossary is, yeah, Business Glossary, but we also try and ban
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
127
==PAGE:138==
acronyms into Italia. So we so so when you join the company, the big the big difference
is that we don’t have departments like HR and sales, we have circles. And so the biggest
challenge that people have initially is understanding what’s the vision circle, what’s the
base circle that we’ve got eight circles that are like departments, but once you’ve got your
head around those circles, which I teach people, by the way, I help people understand
what they are. The rest of it is self explanatory, but we also ban acronyms when we work
on projects. And so that people don’t have to learn about but when we We work with
clients, we typically have to build glossaries. So that and use, you know, typical tools like
chair and Atlassian Confluence to bring all of that information together.
Alec Putrih Jeza 40:14 Can you show me these circles?
Daniel Hulme 40:43 So. So you got all of this, like you say, you’ve got all this business
jargon, KPIs and beliefs and all that kind of stuff. And so we’ve got these eight circles,
they actually all hold each other accountable. So vision sets, the future brand, which
might be historically regarded as marketing creates the plan to achieve the vision. So
I say we’re where we need to be in three years time. And actually, it’s marketing the
developers strategy. Focus is like operations, they, they are putting together all of the
metrics, whatever tools, we need to understand how we’re progressing along our strategy.
So if you’re a car, that how much petrol is in the car? What are the hazards ahead of you
on the road? Blah, blah, anyway? Base is it is actually the car itself, people are the
the skills, the people that are driving the car, things like sales, which is what, what do
we have have ahead of us? What choices do we have ahead of ourselves? Do we go
this this direction, this direction? Like, do we go with this client? Do we partner with this
company, based on where we’re currently at? X is the creation of our stuff, and capitalist
finance, making sure that we are creating a company that’s going to achieve our vision
in a sustainable way. But But yeah, this is this. I could talk a lot about this, I could talk
about Go on, please. I could talk for hours about it. But I well, but yeah, those are.
So that’s, that’s our purpose, we solve hard problems. And our mission, and our vision
enable everybody to free to live beyond themselves. And we operate like a, like a matrix.
So we have this kind of horizontal capability. So these are like departments providing HR
services, financial services, and these are different ventures. So these are the different
innovations that we’re trying to take to market.
Alec Putrih Jeza 42:48 So what for every project you Mark, who does what is this?
Daniel Hulme 42:53 Exactly, exactly so within inside here is where where people populate
themselves. So they say, I am seeing them, and working on the X octogon project, which
might be here as a data scientist on this date. And this is what I did. So you, you can
triangulate what people are doing. So that’s their report, that’s their time. They take their
timecard that they do and they just they don’t do a we built around timecard mechanisms.
So if I go into kind of my reports, and I could say for example, today, me and you that
this could be linked to I don’t know, vision, which is it’s my my main circle, and I could
have been doing I don’t know, driving, so I was at fault for this hour and 15 minutes. And
128
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:139==
so that’s my timecard but it pulls this information from calendar and stuff like that. Okay,
that’s
Alec Putrih Jeza 43:53 that’s impressive. Can I also ask you, like you mentioned the oper­
ation circle, the people who are responsible for basically determining what the resources
are? Yeah. You have the right resources on the project or stuff like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yep.
You mentioned that they’re measuring something to do maybe just give a few examples.
Oh, sorry.
Daniel Hulme 44:16 So, the focus circle is is like operations they are trying to determine
what what metrics should we be capturing to understand how we are progressing on our
journey so do we have a we? Do we have the enough resources to be working on projects
I use the example of a car do I have enough gas in my in my car to be able to go on my
journey? Do I need to go and fill up the gas? Do I have the right tires to deal with what’s
coming up on the road ahead of me? So I’m using it as an analogy but but focus is trying
to figure out what information should we be surfacing to help us understand how we’re
progressing towards our vision They’re not necessarily they’re not the ones necessarily
doing the the making the decisions, but they’re trying to figure out what information do we
need to make decisions?
Alec Putrih Jeza 45:15 Yeah. Yeah. But But I just thought it was curious to me because
I remember when I asked you about key performance measurements, you said that you
apart from your growth, you don’t really measure everything. And then yeah, there’s
Daniel Hulme 45:28 no we don’t, actually, we don’t have actually a circle driver focused
driver right now. So that focus circle is the circle that we have least amount of activity in.
Alec Putrih Jeza 45:37 Okay, but are you like planning to develop it?
Daniel Hulme 45:40 Yeah, absolutely.
Alec Putrih Jeza 45:42 Yeah. Okay, is there like any, um, you know, maybe you already
mentioned some, you know, shortcomings of like this flight organizing, but what about like
your particular model? Like? Do you recognize any of the things that you’re struggling
with, because of the way that you organize?
Daniel Hulme 46:04 Yeah, I think the idea of the idea of having people have a granular
understanding of people’s skills, and where and giving them the total freedom to be able
to allocate themselves is a real challenge, because because of HR law. So it’s how do
you then determine people’s performance? And how do you if they’re not reporting their
reports? How do you determine what people are doing? How do you make sure that
people are aligned with your vision, or that kind of stuff, so So you end up putting in
constraints that restrict people’s freedom to operate, I mean, ultimately, I want to remove
some of those constraints. But they always go back to the same principle, which is the
best people are the people, the best people place to make the decision should be making
this. And that, and that that’s the absolute main principle that we need to build all of our
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
129
==PAGE:140==
processes and structures around. But there are scenarios where it falls down.
Alec Putrih Jeza 47:03 Okay. There’s one more thing. I mean, unless you want to leave.
And this is just out of my curiosity, what what does I mean, I’m maybe I’m also going
to include it, but what what what do you define a swarm intelligence are like the swarm
clusters of people is associated with like, because I saw some videos online about how
you know, animals, like the flocks of birds are? Yes. Is it associated with that? Yeah,
Daniel Hulme 47:31 it is, in some respects, and rather than there being kind of a central­
ized authority, saying, You need to go and do this, and you so there’s no centralized bird
saying, You need to fly this way. And you need to fly this way, what each bird has a local
set of information, and a local set of rules. And, and by having that they’re able to self
organize and move towards their goal. They don’t have a commanding bird. And actually
there are, I think, again, going back to the principle, I think that there are various degrees
of decisions. So in a swarm, the birds are homogeneous, they’re all quite similar. They’ve
got similar local information in similar roles. In a company it is quite heterogeneous, I will
have very different set of information and skills than somebody that’s currently writing
writing some code. And it’s easy if it was all heterogeneous, if it was all homogeneous.
The reason why companies have created hierarchies is to solve lots many of the things
that we spoken about. So it’s how do you create a swarm like structure, where you have
heterogeneous agents that have different pieces of information, different decision making
capability?
Alec Putrih Jeza 48:58 Different values? Different values? Much more diverse points of
view also.
Daniel Hulme 49:02 Indeed, indeed.
Alec Putrih Jeza 49:04 Yeah, , I remember when I was watching these videos, you know,
and especially when it came to the potential application on on humans, I started consid­
ering that these animals are one of the reasons why animals are so efficient. And sort of
communicating where they’re all going to move is because they don’t rely on language,
because they are doing this instinctively, they basically have internal mechanisms that
allow them to, you know, just see a symbol that they all recognize to be the same, but,
you know, language, in this sense is a very, very inefficient. It’s very inefficient when you
want to make decisions with other people. And one of the reasons is also that, like one
of the most striking, at least of the past 10 years in linguistics and cognitive science, is
that they thought, like, you know, for 2500 years, we thought that language was a system
designed for communication. And now they’re figuring out that it’s probably not, and they
have good empirical evidence to prove it’s not that it’s actually for thinking. Language
is designed for thinking, and the purpose of thinking is to find meaning, it’s for an inter­
nal dialogue with yourself, because you usually understand yourself, you know, in some
ways, a lot better than you do with other people, as maybe, you know, and it’s something
we do literally all the time. We have different definitions, different perspectives, and then
130
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:141==
you have to communicate with other people. And you see that, you know, you’re actually
not talking to each other when we talk to other people, maybe you’re running past each
other. Which I think is again demostrated by Plato in his dialogues, where he always de­
mands from people he is talking with to first define a concept so that they don’t talk for two
hours and nod, and in the end figure out that they meant different things all along. And
I think there’s a very good reason why, for example, in the army, you know, the relying
on symbols, because they are unambiguous. I mean, one of the one of the reasons it’s
okay, we have to be quiet on special operations. But the other one is, everybody knows
exactly what this means, because a symbol is a visual representation, and it’s something
that animals also rely on. But when you know, and if we talk about love, you know, how
complicated it is, right, and how many different things it can mean to people.
Daniel Hulme 51:07 Like, one thing that’s not many people know, but my I was born without
a dialogue. So I don’t have a dialogue in my head, I assume that you’ve got a voice in
your head that says things and they assume you got Yeah, I don’t I My head’s empty.
Alec Putrih Jeza 51:24 like, are you? Sorry? How can you think that? I mean, you’re
you’re obviously very thoughtful.
Daniel Hulme 51:31 yeah, it’s, I think that it’s, it’s primarily going back to your point about
instinct. I. So I promise you and you can Google it, that it there was a big, big thing that,
um, Twitter a few years ago, where it kind of blew up, were some people that don’t have
an internal dialogue. And not not people. Not many people was aware of that. But yeah,
I don’t have an internal dialogue, I completely empty.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
131
==PAGE:142==
E
Appendix E
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:02 So yeah, so what’s what’s the first question? What is your position
in your company?
Oliver Karlsson 0:12 I am co founder and currently, CEO slash CTO.
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:21 Okay, and then how long have you been a part of the company?
Oliver Karlsson 0:26 We founded the company in February 2020. So I think that is two
years and two months.
Alec Putrih Jeza 0:36 Okay, so it’s still a startup, right? Check. Okay, I’m gonna explain
what what the company does.
Oliver Karlsson 0:46 Yeah, so we are developing an intelligent patch, wearable device
for the healthcare sector, utilizing artificial intelligence to monitor and diagnose patients
within the healthcare sector, basically, developing a product that can automate healthcare
professionals processes.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:14 Okay. And how many employees Does the company have?
Oliver Karlsson 1:21 Currently, we are consists of what we refer to as members. Meaning
both employees advises, board of directors, full time employees, part time employees,
etc. where it currently consists of 22 members. Were a significant part of them are part
times and only six, six is full time. And yeah, I said the vast majority is part time. And then
I think around five members are advisors and investors. So not functioning or a part of
the company full time.
Alec Putrih Jeza 2:17 But everybody’s on the contract, right?
Oliver Karlsson 2:20 Yeah, so all 22 members is associated with a contract, either as an
advisor, investor, or full time slash part time employee.
Alec Putrih Jeza 2:31 Okay. Yeah, that’s okay. And could you just briefly just tell me like,
what’s the competition level in this in this market? Okay, are you are you facing any fierce
competition? Or is it like a new market or
Oliver Karlsson 2:48 so it’s like, a bit of both. In general, we have a lot of big competitors
or to say that institutions but companies that functions and thrives within the healthcare
sector and healthcare market, especially in Europe and in the Nordics and we are also in
a market that is quite conservative. So it is not so willing for new technology adoption, as
you would see in a consumer market. So we’re currently not facing critical competitions
competition, we are aware of the market we’re looking into is becoming bright as a blue
ocean, but it’s becoming a red ocean in the coming years since this has been projected for
a couple of financial institutions to be to be in extreme growth. So we are tracking potential
132
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:143==
competitors and we are aware of that there are some in the US that is also starting up or
at least launching similar products concept services as we are looking into.
Alec Putrih Jeza 4:05 Okay, can I can I just ask you what do you mean by blue? Blue
Ocean and red ocean?
Oliver Karlsson 4:14 Yeah, so no, so blue ocean is like a market strategy term meaning
that we are looking into an ocean or a market environment where there is no competitors.
So the first movers and red ocean meaning that there’s a lot of competitors. So right now
we don’t read right now we look at our market as a potential gap in the market meaning
a blue ocean, but we are aware of that within the next 20 years. 30 years, it will be a red
ocean. Okay with with large competitors.
Alec Putrih Jeza 4:52 Okay, I think that’s that’s a really elaborate answer. And I think they
are now we can move on to On to the control section, which is basically it’s not strictly
about control, I think it’s a bit broader than that, like in the literature that I was reviewing,
it’s actually called the performance management systems and it really encompasses five
different aspects and the first one is about organizational structure. So, if you could just
describe the organizational structure your company like both in terms of like hierarchical
levels, if there are any and you know, functional divisions, all of this stuff like just go ahead.
Oliver Karlsson 5:44 Yeah, so, in general, we do not work with like in a hierarchy, but
more like a a matrix organization. Firstly, we obviously have like a corporate hierarchy
with regards to the Board of Directors versus our General Chief of operation and sad to
direct etc. But going going from there and on which we don’t like have a specific hierarchy
with different responsibilities, but more like matrix organization that takes on projects and
responsibilities within different areas. So, we have like, each of our co­founders has
his main domain or is responsible for a domain that he or she likes to drive and be the
main lead of. And they are within have these different resources of both part time full
time and advisors to basically include in each project and and work stream, based on
the capabilities but also resources allocated for each employee. Then we have some
employees that are more dedicated to other tasks and projects than others based on
his capabilities and competencies. For the most part is a major organization where we
basically establish a team based upon the scope and the format of the project. And also
based on how upon how it should contribute to the business strategy of our company. So
if there’s any findings or attributes that we would like to investigate during the project, we
might include employee with specific competencies in order to highlight that aspect of the
project. And so on. So we don’t work with a specific hierarchy, but we work with a cover
hierarchy was board of directors and at General, executive suite with the chief of different
areas. And then from there on, we have an employee pool to kind of draw upon what
specific competencies etc. And then we have, obviously have the advisory board where
we can also draw on competencies.
Alec Putrih Jeza 8:24 Okay. And, like when you have a project, can you can you just
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
133
==PAGE:144==
explain to me, basically, is do you have like a project management manager that has the
authority to, you know, determine who is going to be on the project. And like, if there are
any chance for the employees to participate in this.
Oliver Karlsson 8:45 So, yeah, so, for the main part, it’s the core team, which is the co
founders, that decides on our product portfolio. So, we kind of have an overview of what
we would like to do in order to support the business strategy. And thereby we’re also
deciding on who to allocate where. And it will for the most times be that we also appoint
a project manager for that project as well. That could either be one of the cofounders or
one of our employees either an employee, who has the right competencies capabilities to
lead a certain project or even a co project lead for specific project. So, it could be that the
project manager is a co founder, but a co Project Lead The one that’s running the project
and executing it in a daily manner could be a co lead, which is equally to be a part time
employee or a full time employee or even an advisor or board of directors member. So to
kind of capsulation could also vary based upon the the kind of nature of the project.
Alec Putrih Jeza 10:00 And what would be the most essential competences to have in
order to lead the project?
Oliver Karlsson 10:06 Okay, and, and then as soon as we have some employees or re­
sources that is more dedicated into certain areas, we sometimes also have dedicated
forums where we include these competencies in order to design the right project team.
So, for example, if we are in to develop a new algorithm, we are aware that it will both need
software competencies, hardware, electronic competences artificial data, artificial intelli­
gence data competencies, but it will also need a clinical understanding of what we’re trying
to develop and it will also need some competencies regards to the regulatory and quality
management part of driving the project. So, and perhaps also if it’s a more commercial
orientated, we might need to involve some competence with regard to market research
and strategy and have competitor analysis made etc. So, as I said, it will be based on the
nature of the project also based on the input of each of the individual that is allocated for
the project and what the view is on what is required for this to be performed.
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:18 Okay, so So is this like the level of autonomy? Like the employees
are not the members of the board? Have? They can they can basically participate in
designing? Do they have any any more?
Oliver Karlsson 11:32 So, we don’t like it’s not, it’s not always up for our discretion that
everyone can come in with input. But we will elaborate and discuss the nature of the
project with the team and, and the one we have chosen to elaborate on to come with
input on what would be needed and what they think could be valuable for the project
execution.
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:53 Are there any basically decisions that are made bottom up in the
company?
Oliver Karlsson 12:56 Okay. So what I was saying that is to some extent, with regards
134
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:145==
some more technical in depth questions, that decision will usually be made bottom­up,
meaning that the co founder or policy directors have an idea of with regard to the business
strategy and the activities, which should be played out to support this. But as the technical
point of view kind of goes on and becomes more clear for the individual team working on
the project, they sometimes have to make the decision on what we should prioritize and
what is what is possible for us to pursue, and thereby changing the overall strategy of
the company. Okay. So it can sometimes be quite not I wasn’t going to I was going to
say unfortunate, but that’s not correct. Sometimes we have we have laid out a plan that
say, Okay, we were going to do this. But then the team that’s working on the project has
some kind of conclusion, elaboration result. And when they elaborate on how we should
kind of reformat or re change the project and the strategy for the project, etc. So we tried
to make them as independent as possible in order to evaluate results on their own and
thereby drive and change the project based upon these results that they get in each of
the iterations.
Alec Putrih Jeza 14:34 Okay. Yeah, that seems fair. But what about like, you mentioned
earlier that you’re CEO of the company, like can you describe your specific role? Like
what exactly do you do?
Oliver Karlsson 14:50 Yeah. Could you ask something someone else cannot because I’m
not aware of it either. You know. So, I, that’s always a slice because we do not have
like official titles, I do not have a contract that states CEO, I’m just a co founder that has
been, unfortunately been allocated as the CEO slash CTO, meaning I have responsibili­
ties for the daily operations and, and strategy of the company with the financial aspects of
it regarding projecting different costs for projects and the potential synergies, the syner­
gies for our budgeting period, and also ensuring that we have information from the sales
commercialization team regarding forecasting, in order to plan ahead, supply chain, activ­
ities, etc. but also have the responsibility to drive the development projects with regards
to our products, software, and algorithms. And ensuring that these are aligned with the
general operation strategy of the company, and also to facilitate the communication to the
commercialization and clinical team to ensure that we are communicating the right things
to the commercialization team. But also, because I’m responsible for the regulatory and
quality assurance part as well. So aligning the activities we are performing with regard to
documenting our our development in ensuring that we are able to get the certificate that
is critical for our medical device.
Alec Putrih Jeza 16:37 Okay. And does that mean that you have a role based structure?
Oliver Karlsson 16:40 It’s not really, not role based, but you’re hired to do a certain thing.
So we hire based on the competencies, capabilities needed in general, so we need some
competencies for software, something for machine learning algorithms, something for
clinical studies, something for quality management, and, and, or something for like market
strategy, research, commercialization aspects, etc. But that does not mean that you are
not going to be formed other kinds of works, work streams or projects or be included in that
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
135
==PAGE:146==
one. So for example, even though you are let’s say, a software engineer that’s focusing
on AI, you might be involved in document and some development projects. Or you might
be involved in evaluating a given clinical study that we are going to be performing.
Alec Putrih Jeza 18:20 Okay, but what would that be done on a like a voluntary? You
know, what, do you allow people to do that? Or you do you assign them to these tests?
Oliver Karlsson 18:33 Both. So, I, as I have, like, a lot overview of what’s going on, I’m
more capable and aware of what is going on and thereby to allocate people. But we also
encourage them to voluntarily participate and communicate with each other in order to
understand where they can bring the best common sense or database consensus, but
been the necessary competencies to other projects within the company. Sometimes we
also ask around in the organization, on if someone has some spare times, and would help
assist a given project certain projects that might not fall within the categories of competen­
cies they acquire. So, we sometimes we need to make a quick analysis of why the coffee
machine is not working. And yes, sometimes happen. And we, we don’t specifically ask
the hardware or or electronic engineer, we just ask around to understand on who would
also be willing to learn the necessary skills in order to in order to fix this or solve this
problem or task.
Alec Putrih Jeza 19:55 Okay, and not necessarily just things like coffee machines. Right,
this is like an illustrative example.
Oliver Karlsson 20:02 Yeah, that was just an illustrative example to like, because there
might be reasons behind showing this example. It’s just that it could be anything. And
it could also be some skills that no one actually acquire or will have at this stage of a
company. And also, because like fixing a coffee machine, or something, a specialist that’s
working for a coffee company has, that’s the test that comes into yours. That wouldn’t,
that would necessarily not be something that we would have in our company, because we
have hired people that has some competence within clinical studies, artificial intelligence,
electric, electronics engineer engineering, so some of them might have the indication
idea on how to approach a coffee machine. But they weren’t the most important thing is
that why we hired him was to have the eager to learn the necessary skills to fix a coffee
machine, and they have the courage to actually approach the coffee machine and try to
fix it.
Alec Putrih Jeza 20:56 Yeah, plus, they are probably, like, intrinsically motivated.
Oliver Karlsson 21:02 Yeah, I mean, exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Alec Putrih Jeza 21:08 Okay, um, I think we can move on to the next aspect, which is vision
and mission. So the question is, like, What is the vision and mission of the organization,
who determines it? And then also, like, one of the important things to consider is how do
you convey this purpose as to organizational members?
Oliver Karlsson 21:36 Yeah, so this is actually a source also something I’m a bit embar­
136
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:147==
rassed regard. But we actually don’t have an established vision or mission. We had one
couple of years ago, when we established the company, but it kind of fell off and a bit bit
where we could not like recognize ourselves within that established vision and mission,
and we never like re established it or we I reiterated upon it. So now, like now, it does
not exist, but what we do have is like an extreme well defined set of values that we are
looking into, and also something that we are promoting regard regards to talent attraction
and tell them retention and in general with regards to promoting ourselves as a company
towards our customers and potential partners to work alongside with. But it is something
that is done by the founders.
Alec Putrih Jeza 22:42 And could you please describe those values?
Oliver Karlsson 22:44 Yeah, so, but what is important also to understand is that is it is
divided or into different categories based upon who we are also like, not targeting but
kind of communicating to. So we have a set of core values with regards to what we are
trying to do within the in the healthcare sector, where we want to increase the life quality
for patients and healthcare professionals. But then we also have a set of values with
regards to how we as a company are social. Have some corporate social responsibilities,
ensuring that what we’re doing is ethically correct clinical studies, we are performance
is everything right. And in general, what we as a company do is transparent. And then
we also have a set of values with regards to our organization and what we promote with
regards to diversity inclusion, ensuring that we are not not only white guy’s name Oliver,
but we all we actually try to promote and live the idea of diversity and inclusion because
we have experienced that this set of diverse competences, backgrounds, personalities,
has an effect upon the results that we have. And this is also something that we try to
promote with regards to our partners that we also believe that smart collaboration across
different entities is the way forward. So that’s also something we try to communicate that
once we interact with a partner that could for example, be consultancy that we will try that
we would like to do something for us. It’s important for us that they also understand the
values that we live upon and and trying to kind of establish as well.
Alec Putrih Jeza 24:54 Okay. And like Do you have any like specific mechanisms or
processes are whatever networks may be that by which you convey these values.
Oliver Karlsson 25:08 So we both so we were both communicating it to like the networks
environments within the startup environment. So when you go to teach you, you can go
around the deep tech Skylab or deep tech Park, around future books etc, where you will
have a deep check foundry community. And this is this is where we are trying to commu­
nicate the positive impact we have have regards to having a more diverse inclusive team
setup. I don’t think you will find many keepsake weapons within future books. But also, if
we are trying to communicate to in in different customer forums and patient forums, this is
also something that we are trying to convey that do not with regards to the team aspects,
but with regards to the patient outcome, and kind of creating a better life and increased life
quality for the patients and healthcare professionals. Because it also becomes important
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
137
==PAGE:148==
that the healthcare professional can looks look at the company and get an understanding
that this is this is also driven by a medical health care professional that has been in this
exact same position. I don’t understand why we’re doing what we’re doing.
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:35 Okay. I mean, that also kind of sounds like a mission to me. I
mean,
Oliver Karlsson 26:39 yeah, but I do agree that we have an idea of what the mission vision
is, is just not clearly formulated.
Alec Putrih Jeza 26:44 Okay. And was there? Is there like a conscious decision to ommit
it?
Oliver Karlsson 26:50 No, I think I think it’s just due to like, a first too much work to do.
And now just laziness. I think I think it’s a combination that we have, we have like, to some
extent decline, quite clear purpose. And people that interact with us or even employees,
partners customers, are also quite aware of what we are trying to do and what we are
trying to like, create. So it also becomes, it’s not unclear for us what we attract, and to
do and what we kind of why we are here, what our goal is, and what we’re trying to do
differently. But it’s not just formulated in a in a perfect manner, like you will see for more
established corporations, right.
Alec Putrih Jeza 27:41 Okay, the next aspect is, is the key success factors? Like did
you define any key success factors? And yeah, how do you also how do you bring the
attention of this to your employees?
Oliver Karlsson 28:02 What what do you what do you mean by key factors?
Alec Putrih Jeza 28:06 key success factors, for example, you know, if you have, if you
have a goal of you know, becoming a global leader, like a key success factor would be the
growth on international markets.s that I interviewed told me that like, the only key success
factors that they have are actually financial metrics.
Oliver Karlsson 29:08 I wouldn’t say that’ll be our kind of materialized any Key success
factors we do how ever have some, like, initial indications of what we are looking into.
But that’s also more on like, commercial financial aspect as well. And not really, based
on that, like, it’s more like how much we would like to sell within a given year and how
many employees we would like to have grown within etc. How many revenue streams
we would like to establish how many products we would we would like to have launched,
etc, but it also depends on how we officially form our vision and mission. Okay, but not
not really with regard to like, we tried at some point to have like a factor with regards to
we were trying to make our own measurement with regards to ensuring how diverse our
team was, and that we in in the in the hiring process had some kind of inclusion criteria
as well. But we never really like went on to perform upon it, or he took it upon upon him
to track the performance of it, because we also found it more natural to just do it.
Oliver Karlsson 0:03 No. So if you could, what I was trying to finalize before, I’m not sure if
138
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:149==
you would like that point as well, it’s just that we also have with regards to our commercial
commercial commercialization strategy, some key success factors with regard to clinical
performance as well. So it’s also like a multivariate aspects will have metrics, we’re looking
into that. It’s not just for a financial perspective with regards to revenue and how much
money we make on the baseline, on a baseline, but also with regards to how much clinical
output performance we are creating in a certain amount of time. And, and with and with
specific institutions, etc. Okay,
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:05 so this would be like, basically, how many patients you are able to
help, like, just
Oliver Karlsson 1:09 Yeah, exactly how many patient, Are we able to diagnose, How many
clinical studies have we performed? What was the outcome of these research projects,
etc. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 1:20 And then, okay, I think that’s fine for this section, and then we can
move on to strategies and plans. So with strategies and you know, What strategies did the
organization adopt? And what are the processes or activities that you know, you decided
will be required to ensure the success of the company?
Oliver Karlsson 1:45 I can ensure anything? If I could do so, I would be rich already.
Because our, our CO founding team is so technical foundation as we are, we are trying
to adopt it a couple of commercialization strategies with regards to driving the company
or achieving commercial attractiveness earlier than originally expected. So like, normally,
you would have like, a timeline that says three to five years before you market launch
a medical device, and a lot of money spent. So what we try we’re trying to do was to
basically, cut some of the functionalities and complexity of our technology off their ideal
product that we wanted to create it in order to get commercial attract commercial results
early on and first expected. Does that make sense? I know, it’s hard to understand.
Alec Putrih Jeza 3:03 Yeah. I mean, so you have expectations, but your strategy was,
okay, let’s see if we can do it faster. Yeah, exactly. Okay, yeah. Yeah, that’s fair. And like,
could you go maybe a bit more in detail about how Yeah,
Oliver Karlsson 3:25 So, for a company of metric medical device is extremely important
that like, our eyes is mostly for all companies, but but in especially in a Danish setup is
important that you fulfill some kind of need for a a a specific customer group right. So
you have something that is willing to buy the product at a certain stage of its maturity.
So, what we tried at first was just developing like the ideal version of our product, not
considering like the cost and competences slash capabilities, it would require for us to like
build this product. Because at first we were not aware of the necessities of capabilities
and resources, it will require to build first of all a medical device, but also to get it certified
and in order to sell it, drive the company operations around it, etc. So we kind of took this
approach of building a more model, module, platform and product, which then could be
scaled and designed into different opportunities based upon the findings we would get.
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
139
==PAGE:150==
Oliver Karlsson 3:25 Okay, so so it was like, Yeah, you mean modular? Right? Yeah,
exactly. Okay, so it can be adapted to specific needs, and it’s Yeah,
Oliver Karlsson 5:01 exactly. So, so, like based upon what we receive of indications from
the customers, we can kind of like a tap what we will offering the customers based upon
what they want as well that could be it both both beaver regards to what we are measuring,
but also with regards to the software portal itself etc
Alec Putrih Jeza 5:27 and then how do you how do your employees know about the
strategy like you just share it in a meeting or do you have any other any other ways of like
everybody be on board and you know, aligned.
Oliver Karlsson 5:44 So, we have like an overall strategy which everyone has been come
acquainted with, as we have presented with for them in our meetings. So, we we invited
for like and strategy meeting sort of say, the headline was actually in strategy. But then
we kind of elaborate upon our general plan. And as we onboard people we work we work
I kind of introducing and elaborating upon what their purpose was with regards to this
overall strategy. Okay, and then it’s kind of become a process of kind of elaborating and
iterating upon the strategy based upon this, as said earlier on the results we get, like, if
we, if we get some news result that indicates that we need to go in a different direction
or rethink what we originally thought was the best way. That’s also like part of it, and we
will then afterwards communicate and elaborate upon didn’t necessary all the changes
for the necessary stakeholders or employees, right. Yeah.
Alec Putrih Jeza 7:02 Okay. Let’s move on to the next aspect, which is target setting and
performance measurement. So did you set any, you know, basically, you can call them
KPIs performance targets for the both on the individual and organizational level? And
could you also tell me, how challenging are the targets if you haven’t?
Oliver Karlsson 7:27 Well, I said before, we have some with regards to revenue, cus­
tomers, clinical studies performed, etc. I think the hardest part is to basically elaborate
upon on an elaborate target setting when we are not sure on which way to go and which
way we are going in which way should be the best way to go as well. Like, we don’t know
what we don’t know yet. So first, so first, to ensure that this is the perfect way to go. And
to kind of measure upon a metric we are not aware of would create, like benefits for us
yet, or it will be beneficial for us to track upon. It has been extremely hard for us to kind of
uncover it in the daily manner. Like it would make sense for us to elaborate or establish a
bunch of KPIs once we have like 70 revenue streams, for example. But as or due to the
early stage of the company, it’s it’s quite hard for us to actually work upon these KPIs in a
daily manner. It’s something that we have established for, like future strategy purposes.
But not something like we use in a daily manner. Also, because some of them as some of
the caveats we would like to track upon now. It’s also for us like something that perhaps
does not create the same value or business impact as it would on a later stage where the
complexity increases for the company.
140
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:151==
Alec Putrih Jeza 9:20 Yeah, yeah, that makes sense. Like, you’re basically just testing
things out and like, on the way right,
Oliver Karlsson 9:26 exactly. And also as we get results from like, the strategy itself, like
okay, what what, what, what actually worked and what could we then start tracking on
how well it works like for example, for us to pursuing new customers, like if we have a
key vitesses. Okay, every customer we contact without any reference point. Feels then
we might should contact new customers without any reference point. But the thing is that
as we don’t have as many contacts, yet, we’re not we’re not aware of this. Like, we don’t
have to use indications in order to track and keep it either. So we’re not sure if we should
track on it or not yet.
Alec Putrih Jeza 10:16 But what about like, you know, like, you’re basically what you’re
talking right now are kind of like, KPIs that are, you know, kind of more like objective, be­
cause you can, you can basically are talking about some number measurements, probably
right, like, how many clinical trials do like, all this stuff, but what about like subjective? You
know, performance evaluations? Or, you know, we,
Oliver Karlsson 10:42 yeah, we do. Like, we don’t measure performance, but we do
like a quarterly subjective evaluation of each employee’s performance with regards to its
individual performance, in general ability to collaborate within the team, and overall, like
interaction and communication within it. Where would you like an assessment of each
and play and then do like a review with the employee on what they could improve? Or
what we should improve for them to be in a better environment, etc.
Alec Putrih Jeza 11:22 Okay, and is that done? Top down? So for example, you the
founders do that, you evaluate the What about amongst you yourself? Like, you know,
for example, you the CEO, CTO?
Oliver Karlsson 11:42 Yeah, that we do on a bi weekly basis. So every Monday, we do like
a review of, on where we’re at with regards to the, to the old plan we have, and thereby
also elaborating upon who could do what better or should do other things differently, or
perform basically other activities than originally attended or performed activities differently
to what that specific person are doing.
Alec Putrih Jeza 12:16 okay, what about the other way, like, the, your employees also
have the opportunity to give you feedback or you know, to
Oliver Karlsson 12:26 So doing like these quarterly interviews, or evaluations, meetings,
it’s also the opportunity for them to get in, give us feedback with regards to what we are
doing well, and what we’re not doing so well, in order to improve like, the team dynamics,
the general organization environment of the company, how we communicate, etc.
Alec Putrih Jeza 12:48 And is this done? Like faced, basically, you know, is it anonymous?
Or is it or does everybody know who is speaking,
Oliver Karlsson 12:56 it is anonymous if they want to, so that they are encouraged to do
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
141
==PAGE:152==
it, but I know, and it helped the individual employee know that I know. Okay, so it’s like
face to face interview where they get your feedback.
Alec Putrih Jeza 13:09 Okay. Okay, the next the next section is about rewards and incen­
tives. So what rewards either financial or not financial, do employees gain by you know,
performing good or achieving the targets. So,
Oliver Karlsson 13:29 most of the rewards we have incorporated is financial based, that
you kind of, if you are co assisting potential sales, or you are creating a contract for a
potential sale, then you have seized upon each contract, you could have an upside with
a potential financial reward.
Alec Putrih Jeza 13:54 So, that’s like, the salary.
Oliver Karlsson 13:57 Yeah, exactly. So if you, for example, facilitating a sales or you’re
creating contact for a sale, then you will, for example, have 5
Alec Putrih Jeza 16:03 Could you also tell me like, Are there any penalties that employees
can suffer because they underperform? Or you muted yourself? I can see it now. You’re
definitely
Oliver Karlsson 16:17 No, we don’t have any like penalties with regards to the performance
of the employee. We do however, have penalties if they act with different disregards to
the contract we have established with them fly for example, if someone breaks something
that is disclosed within the company some knowledge, IP related or technical related, then
there will be a penalty associated with that, so someone can get fired for that, and we can
take this on the court.
Alec Putrih Jeza 17:08 Okay. Can you also tell me like who has the right to hire and fire?
And who determines like these rewards? And? Yeah, okay.
Oliver Karlsson 17:19 Yeah, so like, we as founders suggest something like we founded as
values for the company with regards to hiring exposed based upon the general strategy
of the company, so like the core team is aware of what competencies are needed and
capabilities and also a resources. But then it’s mostly up to like the domain responsible.
So if, for example, one of the co founders was responsible for the sales, then he will be
in charge of hiring people necessary for that, as long as we have agreed upon a budget.
So the salaries are set by us, the founders.
Alec Putrih Jeza 18:05 the same with firing like, Yeah, okay.
Oliver Karlsson 18:11 We, of course, come with input, if we have upset some something,
let’s say not optimal in a different domain. The same for example, I observed that someone
is not performing as I thought he was with regards to sales. I will mention an or notify the
respective responsible of this observation. So, what I was saying was just that, we also
have like, the possibility of notifying each of the main responsibilities of some observations
and thereby clarifying that, hey, this guy, or this girl is performing XYZ and blah, blah,
142
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:153==
blah, you should be aware of this. And then they this is domain responsible, can take into
consideration this observation and then decide on what to do. Of course, we are several
other co responsibles for the company advocating for potential firing, then I think it we’re
not spin we’re not we have not been in a specific situation where this has been needed
to take into consideration but I’m pretty sure that in our like corporate documents with the
company that if we have like a I’m not sure how we will say this in English, but it’s like if we
are more than half of the percentages of equity shares agreeing upon something in the
board of directors, we don’t then have the mandate to kind of fire something for someone
for precision. For him, the CEO, if we in the board of directors is agreeing upon, he’s not
performing well, we can then fire him. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 20:20 We’re about like, that’s just maybe it’s a bit of the topic, but I was
wondering, how do you manage conflicts in the company?
Oliver Karlsson 20:59 We encourage people to, at first handle them their self. And it’s so it
has not been solved result. Within that interaction, we encouraged him to take contact with
us and elaborate upon the situation. We have done we have not established any formal
procedures other than we have explicitly, both by documents and in speech, told them in
the hiring or onboarding process, that if there’s anything we can talk about confidentially
and missed, and we can also communicate this going onwards. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 21:41 So the last section on this is about information flows, and you
already talked something about how you’re basically in the process of learning, but do you
have like any, you know, specific or established information flows, either data or you know,
some networks or whatever, to facilitate learning either feedback loops, where feedback
means that you’re gathering data and looking back how to correct the past mistakes,
but then you also have feed forward which is looking for basically potential opportunities,
when you look at the data or whatever information flows that you have.
Oliver Karlsson 22:22 we have like a couple of system with regards to that. So as a med­
ical device company, our general standard operating procedures and quality assurance
is extremely important for us to being able to operate. So, we have a established quality
management system, where one of our most important thing is ensuring that our employ­
ees is being trained properly to perform the task that is described within their contract. And
this also elaborates upon this learning and development ensuring that the competences
or the or the employees, continually will require or will be provided with the necessary
committees and learning material to to perform the task placed before them, right. And
this is also where we track or have a standard operating procedure with regards to track­
ing changes, documented data to basically be the foundation for further development of
technology, oh, as the company with regards to different policies and processes that we
have established, that could either be for like, incident reporting, adverse event reporting,
quality processes with regards to the production, etc.
Oliver Karlsson 22:54 And how, like, who has the access to this information flows? Like
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
143
==PAGE:154==
is it transparent to everybody? Or is it reserved for
Oliver Karlsson 24:24 everyone has access to it, and then we have a main coordinator
here. That’s also making them aware of what is possible to learn and to or what they
should be trained in as well because it’s also they are obligated to do the training in order
to work at the company. And this is this is also the coordinator that is aware of or ensuring
that this documentation of data and learning is being provided for the necessary people.
Alec Putrih Jeza 24:58 Okay, um, That’s it for control. And the next one is coordination.
And like, I just want to tell you, like, I know that we are basically over time, but the thing
is that so far, like this part has been like really, really short. Because like, my initial suspi­
cion was that, you know, the companies that are flagged have like different coordination
mechanisms in place to, you know, coordinate work. But so far, if the, there’s actually no
difference whatsoever, like, you know, except maybe to the part where, you know, peo­
ple can voluntarily decide which projects they want to participate on, rather than being
assigned, you know, a particular role on a project. So, yeah, like, it’s, it’s basically, yet,
you already told me basically, how could accountability or, you know, responsibilities is
determined, it’s done by a project manager, right? Or somebody who is the lead project,
decides, you know, who is going to do what and what are the resources? But maybe,
maybe from from, how can you maybe explain me just briefly, like, how do you make
things predictable when you’re working on a project? So there’s, you know, different par­
ties, let’s say you have a software engineer, and then you have a guy from sales. And,
you know, basically people come from different specialities. You know, how do you make
sure that people who are working from these different aspects of the project know how to
anticipate the work so that they can plan accordingly themselves?
Oliver Karlsson 26:42 That’s done by me, consoling me. Due to my like, as a CTO and
CEO, I’m aware of what is going on operationally aware of what’s going on technology
with regards well development, and due to my placement within the co founder and CO
team, I’m also aware of what’s happening on the sales conversation part, and thereby
ensuring that we are aligning and coordinating activities and projects. So that’s done at
one point in the company. Okay.
Alec Putrih Jeza 27:13 Could you maybe just briefly describe how you do it?
Oliver Karlsson 27:21 So other people know, when, like, we document our work, and we
document our plans and projects and scheduled for them and thereby. And once this
is done, I aligned with the necessary team that we would like to include and collaborate
within the project, to be aware of this specific milestone or involvement at a given stage in
the in the, in the company. Oh, and I’m coming in project. Okay. I’m also involved in the
in the project that I would like to involve within the other project, it becomes quite easy for
me to take on the consideration of this aspect.
Alec Putrih Jeza 28:00 And like, how, like, do you have like any platform or like a software,
specifically,
144
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:155==
Oliver Karlsson 28:08 we both have, like our, we have like a mailing system where we can
communicate. And where we also like on SharePoint, I think it’s called, where we have
like the document documents saved so everyone can access them. And then we use
Slack as a communication channel as well. Okay, to people to interact and communicate
and like be aware of, hey, let’s say for example, I will reach out to you to make you aware
of I’m going to reach out to you next week with regards to data. I agree to read your mail,
references to specific documents, so they aware of what we’re going to talk about, or if it’s
something less formal, I could communicate with you over slack, or just give you a call.
Alec Putrih Jeza 28:59 Okay, and just the gonna be the last section. Basically, it’s about
common understanding, because you mentioned earlier that we have people from pretty
diverse, you know, probably national backgrounds, or racial or whatever, like continental
maybe at the same time. Yeah, you have special specialists for you have software engi­
neers, medical specialists, sales like management. So how do you make sure that these
people understand each other considering that, you know, there might be some jargon
involved in the project that not everybody could understand?
Oliver Karlsson 29:43 It is quite hard actually. And I’m not sure that we have ensured, that
is this is not a problem yet. For example, we have a couple of people which like technical
skills is like a top level, really, really build clever engineers. Their communication skills is
however, a bit lacking. And not that evolved. And for them to communicate with clinical
people to, like, describe and elaborate on what the algorithm does, is sometimes a bit
hard. So what we have tried to do is within each of our tech teams, we have someone
who’s trained and less technical and more commercial, and someone who is clinically
oriented but also understands the IT part. So like a kind of a bridge. Meaning that they
have the necessary knowledge to understand what’s going on from a technical point of
view. And they also have additional knowledge to convey or communicate the necessary
necessities for a clinical or commercial understanding. Like some kind of like, like a bridge
from one side to the other. So we have tried to establish this kind of such kind of personal
profile or person in each of our teams.
Alec Putrih Jeza 31:12 Oh, okay. That that’s actually sounds kind of good, like a thing that
a lot of doors, the free companies had something similar to that basically, either person, or
one of the companies even had like they had on their platform, like on their web platform,
they have explained, but maybe it’s also not that difficult. Because yeah, like when you’re
a medical professional. It’s probably amazing. Like, the amount of these terms.
Oliver Karlsson 31:48 Yeah, but it is important because they don’t understand the impor­
tance of each of the other works if we don’t have like a mitigator in between to kind of
elaborate and convey on why each individual step or activity is important. And what is
going on in general.
Alec Putrih Jeza 32:07 Yeah, yeah. That’s almost it. The only thing is that I remembered
that I forgot to also ask you one question in regards to decision making, because you
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
145
==PAGE:156==
mentioned that, you know, basically, if, if you’re one of your employees, like a software
engineer has an idea that’s potentially better than the one that you have planned. How
How do you know? Can you describe this process? Like, you know, when he comes
up with an idea is does he have to persuade you that He can have to give you sufficient
arguments? Yeah. So this, is it idea is adopted? Or is it any other process? For example,
Some people can, you know, voting or stuff like that?
Oliver Karlsson 32:50 No, no. If it’s something less formal, we will just agree and plan
on like, is this something that we would like to pursue, or this is how we are going to do
it, if everyone agrees, we will just communicate it on. If it’s something that is, let’s say,
significantly, changing the plan or drastically out of scope. This is something where the
software engineer or whatever it is, has to persuade the responsible of the project. And in
the end, it might be a segment which needed to be discussed within the board of directors.
So the pit depending like of the significance of the idea or change, it would be determined
in a specific layer, the decision upon making this change, if that makes sense. So I give
something that’s significant, we can discuss it. If it’s something medium, you would have
to persuade me or the responsible of the projects. And in the end, if it’s something quite
significant, you would have to persuade or discuss this within the Board of Directors where
a potential vote voting would happen as well. Okay. Yeah.
Alec Putrih Jeza 34:07 Perfect. That’s, that’s what I was looking for. Yeah, I think we are
done so I can let it go now. Yeah, perfect,
146
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:157==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
147
==PAGE:158==
F
Appendix F
The final and improved analytical tool for identification of control of PMS aspects and other
organizational processes.
General questions about the organization and the interviewee
Table F.1: General questions about the interviewee and the organization
Interview guide
The interview is split in two sections: First, it asks about the ’design phase’ of each PMS
and other domains, and then about the ’action phase’.
148
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:159==
Table F.2: Interview guide ­ 1st part
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
149
==PAGE:160==
Table F.3: Interview guide ­ 2nd part
Additional questions:
150
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:161==
Table F.4: Additional questions
Determining the design phase and the level of decentralization in the action phase
Considering only the design phase, the rules and limits of an aspect were imposed either:
• under the authority of the founders/BoD, rendering an aspect predetermined
• without the authority of the founders/BoD, designed by employees, rendering an
aspect organic
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
151
==PAGE:162==
Table F.5: Tool that allows to map which aspects are organic and which predetermined
Different levels of decentralization are:
• Centralized ­ During ongoing processes, the founders/BoD have full authority over
the decisions in that aspect. Alternatively, the aspect can be controlled by a de
facto manager who has been appointed to manage the aspect. He also has full and
unlimited authority over the aspect.
• Partly Decentralized ­ Ongoing decisions are made by employees themselves, or
led by quasi­managers with time limited and revocable authority
• Decentralized ­ Employees have full authority over the aspect in ongoing decisions
Table F.6: Tools that allows to map the level of decentralization of each aspect
Mapping how each aspect is controlled
The researcher/consultant can map the identified organic processes and general features
in the first table, and then control processes of decentralized and partly decentralized
aspects and general features in the last two tables.
152
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:163==
Table F.7: Table for mapping the organic design process of each aspect for a given com­
pany
Table F.8: Table for mapping the control processes of decentralized aspects for a given
company
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
153
==PAGE:164==
Table F.9: Table for mapping the control processes of partly decentralized aspects for a
given company
154
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
==PAGE:165==
Control and Coordination in Self­managing Organizations
155
==PAGE:166==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, 358, 113
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
