==PAGE:1==
Numerical simulation of cross­shore transport of
microplastic particles
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Numerical simulation of cross­shore transport of microplastic particles
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Jeppe Mathiasen
Supervisors
David R. Fuhrman
Bjarke Eltard Larsen
Hasan Gökhan Güler
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Building 403, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
rrrX/imX/F
==PAGE:4==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Approval
This thesis has been prepared from January 2022 to June 2022, at the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulﬁlment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jeppe Mathiasen - s165039
Signature
Date
03-06-2022
==PAGE:5==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors David R. Fuhrman, Bjarke Eltard Larsen and Hasan
G¨okhan G¨uler for their feedback, guidance and assistance throughout the whole project.
It has been a pleasure having the three of you as supervisors.
I want to thank my girlfriend and family for the support throughout the project and
the proofreading of the project.
==PAGE:6==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Abstract
Plastic litter in the marine environments are an increasing problem.
With time the
plastic litter will degrade to smaller plastic fractions, such as microplastic particles. The
microplastic particles are a damage to the marine environment. However, the severity of
the damage is not yet well known.
Knowledge of transport of microplastic particles in marine environments is also limited
at this point.
Therefore, it is important to investigate the transport of microplastic
particles, to be able to predict where microplastics will accumulate. In this thesis the
applicability of the program CFDEM will be examined. Computational simulations will
be compared with experimental data from Guler et al. (2022), Alsina et al. (2020) and
Forsberg et al. (2019) in order to investigate microplastic settling velocities and transport
of microplastics in both non-breaking and breaking waves.
In the settling velocity simulation it was found that the simulated settling velocity
with the use of the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) matched
the experimental data well. The drag formulation has been used by DiBenedetto et al.
(2022) as well for calculating settling velocities and transport of microplastics in waves
(DiBenedetto et al. (2022)).
In the simulation of transport of microplastic particles in non-breaking waves, a simu-
lation with zero Stokes drift and zero Eulerian velocity were considered. It was found that
the transport of the non-ﬂoating particles for the simulation with zero Eulerian velocity
were in congruence with the experimental data by Alsina et al. (2020). However, both
simulations were overestimating the transport of the ﬂoating particles due to the changing
velocity proﬁle beneath the wave crest and trough.
In the simulation of transport of microplastic particles in breaking waves it was seen
that the non-ﬂoating particles moved onshore up the mildly sloped sea bed. These results
were in agreement with the experiments by Forsberg et al. (2019). A clear distinction
between the direction of movement was seen between the particles. Floating low-density
particles had a tendency of onshore movement, while particles with densities just below
the density of water moved o↵shore. All the ﬂoating particles were though moving onshore
in the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019).
==PAGE:7==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Model Description
3
2.1
Model Setup - Settling Velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Model Setup - Non-Breaking Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Model Setup - Breaking Waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Settling Velocity
8
4
Non-Breaking Waves
14
4.1
Non-ﬂoating particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Floating particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Breaking Waves
33
6
Conclusion
37
7
Further Studies
39
8
Appendix
42
A
Script for section Settling Velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B
Script for section Non-Breaking Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C
Script for section Breaking Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
D
Script for LIGGGHTS initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
E
Script for LIGGGHTS run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:8==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
1
Introduction
Plastic pollution in the ocean is a rapidly growing challenge that has to be solved. With
plastic litter having been reported in almost all types of marine environments Kerpen et al.
(2020) and with a still increasing demand of plastic production, it is important to ﬁnd
the source from where plastic enters the ocean. The primary source from where plastic is
entering the ocean is still not clear. However, it is widely assumed that the main plastic
litter source entering the ocean is from terrestrial environments such as rivers (Alsina
et al. (2020) and Waldschl¨ager and Sch¨uttrumpf (2019)).
Plastic litter in the ocean are found in di↵erent sizes and shapes. Plastics are typically
divided into macro- (≥25 mm), meso- (5 mm−25 mm), micro- (1 mm−5 mm), mini-micro-
(1 µm −1 mm) and nanoplastics (< 1 µm) Forsberg et al. (2019). The larger plastic litter
will degrade to small microplastic particles with time, which can cause damage to the
marine environment. The severity of the damage is not yet well known.
Size, density and shape are just three properties of plastics, all of which impact the
movement and transport of plastics in the ocean. The density of the plastic particles is of
great interest, since it decides whether the plastic particle will be ﬂoating or non-ﬂoating.
The density of plastics are less than the one of natural sediment. Natural sediment is
usually assumed to obtain an averaged density of 2650 kg/m3, while the density of mi-
croplastics usually have a density ranging between 20 kg/m3 and 1400 kg/m3 Waldschl¨ager
and Sch¨uttrumpf (2019). The vertical position of plastics in the water column will change
the transport of it due to the change in the hydrodynamics. The ﬂoating particles will
experience the Stokes drift, which is given as the di↵erence between the averaged La-
grangian velocity and the average Eulerian ﬂuid velocity. The non-ﬂoating particles will
not experience the Stokes drift, as it is approximately zero at the bed. However, the
non-ﬂoating particles can experience other hydrodynamic contributions such as return
currents and boundary layer streaming, dependent on the boundary layer thickness and
the particle size.
Another important parameter of the microplastic is the settling velocity. The settling
velocity determines how fast the particle will settle either to the sea bed or the free-surface.
The settling velocity formulation for natural sediment is insuﬃcient when dealing with
microplastics, due to the large di↵erences in the densities Waldschl¨ager and Sch¨uttrumpf
(2019).
It is of great interest to clarify if other transport mechanisms of the microplastic
particles behave the same way as for natural sediment. If the plastic particles behave
di↵erently, it is necessary to adopt new formulas for estimating the transport of the
microplastic particles.
The goal of the thesis is to contribute to the knowledge of transport of microplastic
particles in nearshore regions. To create usable simulations for transport of microplastic
particles, a coupled computational ﬂuid dynamics and discrete element method will be
used. The coupling between computational ﬂuid dynamics and discrete element method,
is a way to couple the particle movement with the ﬂow dynamics. However, not all equa-
tions used for natural sediment transport can be directly transferred to the calculations of
transport of microplastics. Therefore, several authors have made experiments to investi-
gate the transportation of microplastic particles (Guler et al. (2022), Alsina et al. (2020)
and Forsberg et al. (2019)). These experiments will be used to ﬁnd the applicability of a
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 1 of 63
==PAGE:9==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
coupled computational ﬂuid dynamics and discrete element method simulation. The ﬁrst
experiment that is considered is a settling velocity experiment of microplastic particles in
still water carried out by Guler et al. (2022). In the experiment the settling velocity of
multiple non-ﬂoating particles with di↵erent sizes, shapes and densities were considered.
The second experiment is an experiment of transport of microplastic particles in non-
breaking waves carried out by Alsina et al. (2020). In the experiment the authors examined
the transport of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles in non-breaking waves. In
the nearshore region, the non-breaking waves will at some point break, and a new type of
transport of the microplastic has to be considered. Therefore, the last experiment regards
the transport of microplastic particles in breaking waves. The breaking waves simulation
will be compared with the experiment carried out by Forsberg et al. (2019), where ﬂoating
and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles were examined.
In Chapter 2 a description of the program used to simulate the di↵erent cases will be
explained along with the setup of the three main simulations that was carried out as a
part of this thesis.
In Chapter 3 the settling velocities obtained from the simulations will be examined
and compared with the obtained settling velocities from the experiments performed by
Guler et al. (2022). In the experiments by Guler et al. (2022), one microplastic particle
was released at a time in a glass ﬁlled with water. The experiment was done for various
shapes, densities and sizes of the microplastics to gain knowledge of the settling velocity
for microplastics.
In Chapter 4 the transport of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles in non-
breaking waves from simulations with zero Stokes drift and zero Eulerian velocity, will be
compared with experimental data carried out by Alsina et al. (2020). In the experiments
by Alsina et al. (2020), they released spherical microplastic particles with di↵erent sizes
and densities such the transport of both ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating particles were consid-
ered. They ran the simulation for four di↵erent wave conditions to see the impact of the
wave properties on the transport of the microplastic particles.
In Chapter 5 the transport of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles in break-
ing waves from the simulation will be compared with experimental data carried out by
Forsberg et al. (2019). In the experiments by Forsberg et al. (2019), they tracked the
transport of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating plastic particles with di↵erent shapes, sizes and
densities in breaking waves. At the end of the experiment they counted the di↵erent
microplastic particles for each region, namely the shoaling region, breaking region, surf
zone and beach. By doing that, they could conclude which microplastic particle types
would be transported to the di↵erent regions.
In Chapter 6 a conclusion of the thesis work will be presented. After the conclusion
the further studies will be presented.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 2 of 63
==PAGE:10==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
2
Model Description
To describe the movement of microplastic particles in the near-shore region, a program
that can resolve the ﬂuid ﬂow and track the particles within the ﬂow will be used. The
program which is used is called CFDEM (Goniva et al.). The program combines com-
putational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) and discrete element method (DEM ), which is used
to resolve the ﬂow and track the particle trajectory respectively. The CFD part in the
program CFDEM is resolved by the use of OpenFOAM (OF), which is an open source
CFD software. The software OF has multiple di↵erent solvers, which can be used for
various simulations. In this thesis three di↵erent types of simulations are considered. The
ﬁrst simulation in section Settling Velocity will determine the settling velocity of mul-
tiple spherical microplastic particles in a domain with a steady non-moving ﬂow. The
obtained results will be compared with settling velocity experiments performed by Guler
et al. (2022). The second simulation is the Non-Breaking Waves simulation, where the
movement of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating particles in non-breaking waves will be examined
and compared with experimental data from Alsina et al. (2020). The ﬁnal simulation is
for Breaking Waves, where the movement of the microplastic particles from the simulation
will be compared with the experiment carried out by Forsberg et al. (2019).
One of the solvers which will be used in OF is the interFoam solver.
interFoam
is a solver which include the volume of ﬂuid (VOF) method. The VOF method is a
free-surface modelling technique, which can be used to model the ﬂuid-air interface in
the simulations. The ﬂuid-air interface is essential when the ﬂoating particles are to be
considered later on, since it will create the free-surface, where the ﬂoating particles will
remain.
The interFoam solver is resolving the ﬂow by coupling two governing equations. The
two governing equations are the continuity equation and the momentum equation in the
three directions, given as Equation 1 and Equation 2 respectively by Larsen et al. (2019).
The continuity equation solves the mass conservation, while the momentum equations
solves the momentum of the ﬂuid in the three directions in a Cartesian coordinate system.
The two governing equations assume the ﬂuid to be incompressible i.e. a ﬂuid with a
constant density ⇢.
@ui
@xi
= 0
(1)
xi are the Cartesian coordinates and ui are the velocities in the three Cartesian coordinate
directions. The momentum equations in the Cartesian coordinates are given as
@⇢ui
@t
+ uj
@⇢ui
@xj
= −@p⇤
@xi
−gjxj
@⇢
@xi
+ @(2µSij)
@xj
+ σT@↵
@xi
(2)
where ⇢is the ﬂuid density, which can obtain two di↵erent values ⇢= ⇢water or ⇢= ⇢air
depending on whether it is for water or air. p⇤is the pressure, gjxj⇢is the hydrostatic
pressure, where g is the gravitational acceleration, µ is the dynamic viscosity, Sij is the
strain-rate tensor given as Equation 3, σT is the surface tension, is the local surface
curvature and ↵is a ﬁeld indicating whether the ﬁeld represent water or air. The ↵ﬁeld
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 3 of 63
==PAGE:11==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
is given as Equation 4, which obtain a value of 1 in water and 0 in air.
Sij = 1
2
✓@ui
@xj
+ @uj
@xi
◆
(3)
↵=
⇢−⇢air
⇢water −⇢air
(4)
To get good results, the resolution of the mesh cells is important. Too large mesh
cells can make the resolved ﬂow nonphysical, while too small mesh cells can make the
computational cost too large. The mesh size has to be chosen wisely for each simulation.
The DEM part of the program CFDEM is solved by the use of LIGGGHTS, which
is an open source DEM particle simulation software. When a particle is inserted in the
simulated by the use of LIGGGHTS, the particle will be exposed to multiple forces from
the ﬂuid and surroundings. The DEM part works by reading the ﬂow conditions, which
is calculated by OF. The CFD data will then be used to calculate the chosen forces on
the particle. DEM is a Lagrangian method, meaning all solved particle trajectories will
be tracked by solving the two governing equations given in Equation 5 and Equation 6
by Kloss et al. (2012).
m@2x
@t2 = Fn + Ft + Ff + Fb
(5)
Here m is the mass of the particle, @2x
@t2 is the acceleration of the particle, Fn is the normal
particle-particle contact force, Ft is the tangential particle-particle contact force, Ff is
the force exerted by the surrounding ﬂuid and Fb is the body forces on the particles e.g.
gravity.
I @!
@t = r ⇥Ft + Tr
(6)
I is the moment of inertia, @!
@t is the angular acceleration, r is the radius of the particle
and Tr is an additional torque, which can be used if non-spherical particles are considered.
Three essential forces will be used throughout this thesis. The three forces are the
particle-based viscous force, the particle-based pressure gradient force and the Archimedes
force on the particle, given by Zhou et al. (2010) in Equation 7, Equation 8 and Equation 9
respectively. In addition to the three mentioned force models, a drag force model will be
used as well. However, multiple drag force models will be used in the section Settling
Velocity to investigate, which drag force model gives the closest results to the experiments
performed by Guler et al. (2022). The simulations and results with the di↵erent drag force
models will be explained in section Settling Velocity.
The viscous force stems from the friction between the particle’s surface and the ﬂuid
surface. The viscous force can also be seen as the ﬂuid friction for the particle.
The pressure gradient force is the force that occur due to di↵erences in pressure across
the particle’s surface. The pressure di↵erence can cause an acceleration of the particle
unless the force is balanced by other forces. The pressure gradient force is directed from
the region of high pressure towards the region of low pressure.
The Archimedes force is calculating the volumetric lift force of the particle stemming
from the di↵erence between the ﬂuid and particle density. The Archimedes’ principle
states that the upward directed buoyancy force exerted on a particle immersed in a ﬂuid,
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 4 of 63
==PAGE:12==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
is equal to the weight of the displaced ﬂuid by the particle.
Fvisc = −@⌧i
@xi
Vp
(7)
Where ⌧is the shear stress and Vp is the volume of the particle.
FgradP = −@p⇤
@xi
Vp
(8)
FArchimedes = g⇢Vp
(9)
The public version of the program CFDEM has been used in this thesis even though
it has some limitations. The public version does not have any solvers which can use the
VOF method, to resolve the free-surface. CFDEM is built such it can run the CFD and
DEM simultaneous. However, since CFDEM does not have a solver which uses the VOF
method, the ﬂow had to be resolved, before it was coupled with the DEM. Therefore, the
ﬂow is resolved in advance for all the simulations by the use of a solver which has the
VOF method incorporated. To be able to only read the data from the previously ran CFD
simulation in CFDEM, a customized CFDEM -solver had to be created. The customized
solver was created, such it was reading the necessary data from the CFD case, to be able
to calculate the forces and thereby the movement of the particle in the ﬂow.
2.1
Model Setup - Settling Velocity
The settling velocity simulations are done in order to examine how well the settling
velocities simulated with CFDEM match the settling velocities from the experiments
carried out by Guler et al. (2022). In the experiments by Guler et al. (2022) they were
using a glass with a height of h = 53.5 cm and a diameter of d = 6.9 cm, ﬁlled with distilled
water. Multiple di↵erent microplastic particles were tested by releasing one particle at a
time 1 cm below the free surface. The particle movement was then captured by using a
camera with 60 fps. From the captured movement of the particles, their settling velocities
were found. In the experiments by Guler et al. (2022) the size, shape and density varied
for the tested microplastics. However, in this thesis only the spherical microplastics have
been simulated, due to the lack of treating various particle shapes in the public version
of CFDEM.
The experiments done by Guler et al. (2022) with the spherical microplastic particles
are reproduced in CFDEM. The domain is created as a rectangular domain rather than
a circular domain for simplicity in the program. The rectangular domain has the same
dimensions as the glass used for the experiments. The height of the domain is therefore
h = 53.5 cm while the width and depth of the domain is equal to the diameter d = 6.9 cm
of the glass. Furthermore, the sides, top and bottom of the domain were all set in the
LIGGGHTS script as walls, such the particle could not move outside the boundary. The
ﬂuid in the domain was then initialized to be a steady non-moving ﬂow, just as it was done
in the experiments by Guler et al. (2022). When the particle is released 1 cm below the
water surface, the ﬂow will not remain steady. The ﬂow will change around the particle,
due to the particle movement. The particle’s movement will induce a disturbance in the
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 5 of 63
==PAGE:13==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
ﬂow, which will put the ﬂow into motion. The ﬂow in the simulation was also initialized as
a steady non-moving ﬂow. However, to minimize the computational time and due to OF-
version compatibility problems with CFDEM, the ﬂow would not be updated simultaneous
with the particle movement. A test with the original solver in CFDEM was carried out
to check if the particle’s disturbance of the ﬂow would a↵ect the simulation results. The
results from the settling velocity case with a simultaneous update of CFD and DEM gave
the same results as obtained without updating the CFD part as the particle moved. The
simulations were therefore done without updating the ﬂow simultaneous with the particle
movement. This is only reasonable to do if a single small particle is simulated. If one was
to simulated multiple particles, the change in the ﬂow could cause wrong results.
2.2
Model Setup - Non-Breaking Waves
The simulation of microplastic particle transport in non-breaking waves with CFDEM
are done in order to verify the usage of the program. To be able to compare the results
from the simulation, the simulation will be a reproduction of the physical experiment
carried out by Alsina et al. (2020). The experiment was done in a wave ﬂume with a
length of 16 m and a water depth of 0.3 m. At one end of the ﬂume a wave paddle is
placed, which generated waves by ﬁrst order theory. At the other end of the ﬂume, a
dissipative beach was placed. The dissipative beach should absorb the incoming waves.
The microplastic particles were placed in the wave ﬂume before the waves were generated.
The ﬁrst 12-15 seconds of the recorded data were discarded due to the potential inﬂuence
of the wave paddle ramp up. The positions of the microplastics were then captured until
the wave experiment had ran for 41 s.
To make a simulation with new waves being generated for 41 s would be computational
costly. Therefore, a simulation domain with the exact same length as the simulated wave
length will be create. The simulation domain will then have a periodic boundary at the
wave propagation direction, such that only a single wave will be resolved. When only a
single wave will be resolved and ran periodically, the computational cost will be decreased
signiﬁcantly.
The resolution of the wave in the simulation is important, to obtain results which can
be relied upon. To have a suﬃcient resolution of the wave in the vertical direction, a rule
of thumb is that H/(∆y) = 15 where ∆y is the cell height in the y-direction and H is the
wave height. It is chosen that the size of the cells are equal in the vertical and horizontal
direction such that ∆x/(∆y) = 1, where ∆x is the cell width in the x-direction.
In contrast to the ﬁrst-order wave which was produced in the wave ﬂume by Alsina
et al. (2020), the simulated wave will be resolved by the use of stream function theory.
The simulation will be ran as a laminar ﬂow, since no waves will be breaking in this
simulation.
The same procedure as explained in Model Setup - Settling Velocity for running the
CFDEM simulation is done. However, in this case the solver waveFoam will be utilized.
waveFoam is a solver which can be used when the add-on program called waves2Foam by
Jacobsen et al. (2012) to OF is used. The waveFoam solver can be used for generating
waves in the CFD simulation.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 6 of 63
==PAGE:14==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
2.3
Model Setup - Breaking Waves
The model setup for the breaking waves case is done in order to verify the usage of
CFDEM to estimate the transport of microplastic particles in breaking waves.
To make the simulated data comparable with the experimental data, the simulation
will be a reproduction of the experiment carried out by Forsberg et al. (2019). In the
experiment the transport of microplastics is considered in a 6 m long wave ﬂume with a
mildly sloped bed. The maximum depth of the ﬂume is 0.22 m. Waves were generated at
one end of the ﬂume with a wave length of T = 1.2 s and a wave height of H = 9.2 cm. At
the other end of the ﬂume, a beach at y = 0 was present, to see if some of the microplastic
particles would be beaching. The experiment was running for ﬁve minutes, where it was
observed that the particles remained almost stationary towards the end of the experiment.
In the simulation of the breaking waves it was not possible to create a periodic bound-
ary, such that only a single wave would be resolved. The reason for this is that the waves
will change in height and period as they enter the shoaling region and will eventually
break. Therefore, it was necessary to simulate all the waves to obtain the wanted results.
Due to limitations in regards to time, the length of the ﬁnished simulation is only two
and a half minute, where the ﬁrst two minutes were considered as start up time, such the
hydrodynamics in the simulation were developed.
In the simulation the same wave parameters and the size of the ﬂume was recreated
as it was done in the experiments carried out by Forsberg et al. (2019). The simulation
is done with a two equation k −! turbulence closure model by Wilcox (2006).
The
k −! turbulence closure model is widely used and have been noticed to perform well for
simulations with breaking waves Sumer and Fuhrman (2020).
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 7 of 63
==PAGE:15==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
3
Settling Velocity
The settling velocity simulations are done in order to examine how well the simulated
results from CFDEM match with the settling velocities obtain from the experiments by
Guler et al. (2022). The settling velocity for ﬁve di↵erent spheres, whose data are given
in Table 1, will be reproduced as in the paper by Guler et al. (2022) and in accordance
to earlier noted in Model Setup - Settling Velocity. Additional simulations with di↵erent
sizes and densities will be simulated, to get a broader range of the grain Reynolds number.
The settling velocity of a particle is deﬁned as the terminal velocity the particle attain
when falling through a ﬂuid due to the action of gravity. To check whether the particles
reached their terminal velocities the velocities as function of the time was investigated. It
was noticed that all the simulated particles reached their terminal velocities before they
reached the bottom of the simulation domain.
In CFDEM it is possible to choose which force models that are wanted in the simu-
lation. As explained in Model Setup - Settling Velocity three essential force models are
included in the simulation, but an additional force model has to be chosen, namely the
drag force. Multiple drag force models are used for the simulations of each particle to
identify which drag force model gives the closest result to the experimental result carried
out by Guler et al. (2022). To examine the most ﬁtting drag force formulation to the
experimental data, six di↵erent drag force formulations were used for all the simulations.
The six drag force formulations are the drag force formulations by Fredsøe and Deigaard
(1992), Hill et al. (2001), Felice (1994), Schiller and Naumann (1935), Gidaspow (1994)
and a customized drag force formulation with constant drag cD = 1.
The mesh of the water column is split into ﬁve cells in the vertical direction and one
in the two horizontal directions for the DEM part. By increasing the size of the mesh
cells, the void fraction of water is approximately one in all the cells. If the mesh cell size
is decreased to a small value, the void fraction of the ﬂuid will decrease as well and at
some point the void fraction of the ﬂuid in the cells with particles will be approximately
zero. At this point it will create results where the drag force will be zero. These results
will be avoided by having large enough mesh cells when simulating the DEM part. The
void fraction of the water will therefore be approximately one for all simulations. The
size of the mesh cells in the CFD simulation is not increased. If the size of the mesh cells
in the CFD simulation was increased rapidly, the results would be nonphysical, since a
suﬃcient small size of the mesh cells are needed in order to obtain good results for the
CFD simulation.
The general expression for the drag force exerted on a submerged body can be ex-
Table 1: Data of the spherical microplastic particle diameter, density and settling velocity
used in the experiments by Guler et al. (2022).
Diameter
Particle density
Settling velocity
d [mm]
⇢p [kg/m3]
ws [m/s]
5.0
1358
0.223
4.0
1352
0.203
3.0
1352
0.161
2.0
1353
0.116
3.1
1062
0.059
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 8 of 63
==PAGE:16==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
pressed as
FD = 1
2cD⇢U 2A
(10)
where cD is the drag coeﬃcient, U is the velocity and A is the projection of the particle
area upon a plane normal to the direction of the ﬂow.
The combined force of gravity and buoyancy on a spherical particle can be expressed
as
Fgb = (γp −γ)⇡
6 d3
(11)
where γ is the speciﬁc gravity of the ﬂuid and γp is the speciﬁc gravity of the particle.
The drag coeﬃcient for a single spherical particle can now be found by setting up the
equilibrium condition, where the combined gravity and buoyancy force Fgb is balanced
by the drag force FD on the particle, where the velocity in the drag force expression is
replaced by the settling velocity ws.
(γp −γ)⇡
6 d3 = cD
2 ⇢w2
s
⇡
4 d2
(12)
From the equilibrium condition the expression for the drag coeﬃcient can be given as
cD = 4(s −1)gd
3w2
s
(13)
where s is the relative density given as Equation 14.
s = γp
γ = ⇢p
⇢
(14)
The drag coeﬃcient on a single spherical particle is dependent on the grain Reynolds
number which is expressed as
Red = wsd
⌫
(15)
where ⌫is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid.
The drag formulation by Hill et al. (2001) is dependent on the ﬂuid void fraction φ,
grain Reynolds number Red and the dimensionless drag force F.
cD,KH = 24 φ2
Red
F
(16)
The dimensionless drag force is dependent on the particle void fraction.
F = φ(F0 + 0.5F3Red)
(17)
F0 =
8
>
<
>
:
(1+3p 1−φ
2 + 135
64 (1−φ) log(1−φ)+16.14(1−φ))
1+0.681(1−φ)−8.48(1−φ)2+8.16(1−φ)3
1 −φ < 0.4
10 (1−φ))
φ3
1 −φ ≥0.4
(18)
F3 = 0.0673 + 0.212(1 −φ) + 0.0232
φ5
(19)
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 9 of 63
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
In contrast to the drag formulation by Hill et al. (2001), the drag formulation by
Felice (1994) is not a function of the ﬂuid void fraction, but solely a function of the grain
Reynolds number.
cD,DF =
✓
0.63 +
4.8
pRed
◆2
(20)
The drag formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) is solely a function of the
grain Reynolds number as well. However, the drag formulation by Schiller and Naumann
(1935) assume that for Red > 1000, the drag coeﬃcient will obtain a constant drag value
of cD = 0.44.
cD,SN =
8
<
:
24
Red(1.0 + 0.15Red)0.687
Red 1000
0.44
Red > 1000
(21)
The drag formulation by Gidaspow (1994) is an extension of the drag formulation by
Schiller and Naumann (1935), where the ﬂuid void fraction is included, and the constant
drag coeﬃcient value for large grain Reynolds numbers is not present. In contrast to
the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935), the drag coeﬃcient by
Gidaspow (1994) will keep decreasing as the grain Reynolds number increase. However,
due to the void fraction being approximately one in all simulations, the drag coeﬃcient
will be identical for the formulation by Gidaspow (1994) and Schiller and Naumann (1935)
for Red 1000.
cD,G =
24
φRed
'
1.0 + 0.15(φRed)0.687(
(22)
The drag coeﬃcient by Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992), is given as Equation 23. This
formulation is commonly used in sediment transport. It is therefore interesting to include
this drag formulation to see if it ﬁts transport of microplastics as well.
cD = 1.4 + 36
Red
(23)
In Guler et al. (2022) ﬁve spherical microplastic particles were simulated, with the
data given in Table 1. For each microplastic particle six simulations are carried out, one
simulation with each drag formulation. From the simulation it is possible to track the
particle position and its settling velocity. In Figure 1 the settling velocities measured from
experiments by Guler et al. (2022) are shown on the x-axis, while the calculated settling
velocities calculated by the use of CFDEM are shown on the y-axis. A line with a slope
of exactly one is shown on the graph. If the data are lying on the line, it means that the
calculated value is identical to the measured one. The two dashed lines in the ﬁgure are
the 10% deviation lines.
In Figure 1 six di↵erent drag formulations used to calculate the settling velocities are
shown. As seen in the ﬁgure the small settling velocities are almost identical regardless
of the used drag formulation. However, when the settling velocity increases, the drag
formulations return di↵erent results for the settling velocities. The drag formulation by
Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992), Hill et al. (2001), Felice (1994) and the constant drag
model cD = 1 all underestimate the microplastics settling velocities compared to the
results obtained in the experiments by Guler et al. (2022).
In Figure 1 it is noticed that the settling velocity simulated with the commonly used
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 10 of 63
==PAGE:18==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Figure 1: Measured settling velocities by Guler et al. (2022) against calculated settling
velocities in CFDEM for di↵erent drag coeﬃcient models.
The data of the simulated
particles can be seen in Table 1. For comparison a perfect line ﬁt with a slope of one is
showed as the solid line, while the dashed lines are 10% deviation lines.
formulation for sediment transport (Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992)) is deviating from the
experimentally obtained results by Guler et al. (2022). This results is in agreement with
the statement by Waldschl¨ager and Sch¨uttrumpf (2019), who found that the settling
velocity of microplastics could not be suﬃciently resolved by the use of the formulations
used for natural sediment, due to the large density di↵erence between microplastics and
natural sediments.
The settling velocities calculated from the drag formulation by Schiller and Naumann
(1935) and Gidaspow (1994) obtain settling velocities close to the measured ones. It can
be seen that the drag formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) is the one which obtain
settling velocities closest to the measured results by Guler et al. (2022).
In Figure 2 the six drag coeﬃcient formulations are shown (Fredsøe and Deigaard
(1992), Hill et al. (2001), Felice (1994), Schiller and Naumann (1935), Gidaspow (1994)
and the constant drag formulation). The drag coeﬃcient obtained by the experimentally
found settling velocity by Guler et al. (2022) is shown in Figure 2 as black stars. These
drag coeﬃcient values are the reference values, which the other drag formulations will be
compared with. The drag coeﬃcient value is calculated by the use of Equation 13, where
the experimentally found settling velocity is inserted.
The lines in Figure 2 are the six di↵erent drag coeﬃcient values as function of the
grain Reynolds number. The drag coeﬃcient calculated from Hill et al. (2001) is shown
as the magenta line, Felice (1994) as the green line, Schiller and Naumann (1935) as the
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 11 of 63
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
10 1
10 2
10 3
10 4
10 0
Figure 2: Variation in drag coeﬃcient with grain Reynolds number for various drag
formulas including experimental data points from Guler et al. (2022) and simulation data
points for the various drag formulations.
blue line, Gidaspow (1994) as the red line, the constant drag formulation as the solid
black line and the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Fredsøe and Deigaard (1992) as the
black dashed line. The symbols in the ﬁgure show the drag coeﬃcient values, where the
settling velocities in Equation 13 are found from the simulations, for the respective drag
coeﬃcient formulations.
From Figure 2 it is seen that the commonly used drag coeﬃcient formulation for
sediment transport is the one whose values are farthest from the experimental values by
Guler et al. (2022).
It is also noticed that all the drag coeﬃcient formulations, except the one by Gidaspow
(1994), are obtaining a constant drag coeﬃcient value for high grain Reynolds numbers.
However, the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Gidaspow (1994) is not progressing towards
a constant value of the drag coeﬃcient even for high grain Reynolds numbers.
The grain Reynolds numbers of the experimentally collected settling velocities by
Guler et al. (2022) are ranging between 180 < Red < 1150. Additional simulations are
done such the drag coeﬃcient for a larger grain Reynolds number span can be seen.
As seen in Figure 1 the obtained settling velocity with the drag coeﬃcient formulation
by Schiller and Naumann (1935) was the one, whose results were closest to the experi-
mental settling velocities by Guler et al. (2022). The same trend is seen in Figure 2. The
drag coeﬃcient values for the formulation by Gidaspow (1994) and Schiller and Naumann
(1935) are identical for Red 1000 due to the void fraction being one. The last compa-
rable settling velocity measured by Guler et al. (2022) showed that the settling velocity
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 12 of 63
==PAGE:20==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
by Gidaspow (1994) was slightly overestimated in Figure 1, which thereby underestimate
the drag coeﬃcient, since the drag coeﬃcient is / w−2
s .
The drag coeﬃcient formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) is a formulation,
which has been used for simulations of settling velocities and transport of microplastics
in waves by other authors. In the recently published paper by DiBenedetto et al. (2022),
where the transport of non-ﬂoating particles and their settling velocities in waves where
investigated, the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) was used.
The constant drag formulation is seen to obtain the constant drag coeﬃcient value,
independently of the grain Reynolds number. This can be seen from Figure 2, where the
simulated cases are shown as black triangles. To obtain the constant drag coeﬃcient the
settling velocity must change such the drag coeﬃcient is obtaining its constant value, since
all other terms in the calculation of the drag coeﬃcient are constants (Equation 13). This
implies that if one wants to simulate other particle geometries in CFDEM, it is possible
assuming the particle has reached a constant drag coeﬃcient at high grain Reynolds num-
bers or instance. However, if one is looking at particle interactions or considering particles
rolling at a bed, the results might di↵er signiﬁcantly, due to the incorrect geometry.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 13 of 63
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
4
Non-Breaking Waves
In this section the transport of microplastic particles in non-breaking waves will be simu-
lated and compared with the data obtained from experiments carried out by Alsina et al.
(2020). In the experiments the transport of the microplastic particles were tested for four
di↵erent wave conditions, which can be seen in Table 2.
Before running the simulations, it is important to estimate the thickness of the wave
boundary layer (WBL). The WBL will be calculated by the use of linear wave theory, to
give an estimate of the WBL thickness. The size of the laminar WBL thickness can be
estimated as
δ = 3⇡
4 δ1
(24)
where δ1 is the Stokes length, which is calculated from Equation 25.
δ1 =
r
2⌫
!
(25)
Here ⌫is the kinematic viscosity given as ⌫= µ/⇢and ! is the wave angular frequency
given as ! = 2⇡/T.
However, the expression in Equation 24 is for a laminar WBL.
Therefore, it is necessary to verify if the WBL is laminar, which can be done by calculating
the Reynolds number. Before the Reynolds number is calculated some essential linear
wave hydrodynamic terms will be calculated. First, the horizontal velocity for a linear
progressive wave can be expressed as
u(x, y, t) = ⇡H
T
cosh (ky)
sinh(kh) cos (!t −kx)
(26)
where it is known that the wave angular frequency ! and the wave number k are linked
to each other by the linear dispersion relation, given as Equation 27.
!2 = gk tanh (kh)
(27)
The surface elevation of a linear progressive wave can be expressed as Equation 28.
⌘= H
2 cos (!t −kx)
(28)
The Reynolds number at the sea bed, close to the WBL is expressed from linear wave
Table 2: Wave conditions of the experimentally generated waves by Alsina et al. (2020),
where H is the wave height, T is the wave period, S is the wave steepness, h is the water
depth, k is the wave number and c is the wave celerity.
Wave condition
H [m]
T [s]
S = H
2 k [-]
h [m]
kh [-]
c [m/s]
H
gT 2 [-]
h
gT 2 [-]
M1
0.060
0.75
0.219
0.30
2.20
1.136
0.0108
0.0544
M2
0.063
1.00
0.144
0.30
1.37
1.373
0.0064
0.0306
M3
0.064
1.50
0.0866
0.30
0.80
1.577
0.0029
0.0136
M4
0.056
2.00
0.0544
0.30
0.58
1.629
0.0014
0.0076
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 14 of 63
==PAGE:22==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
theory as
Re = aU0m
⌫
(29)
where U0m is the free stream velocity near the boundary layer and a is the amplitude of
the orbital bottom motion. The expression for the free stream velocity near the boundary
layer can be approximated by investigating the horizontal velocity near the bed. This is
done in Equation 30 by inserting zero at the y-position.
u0(x, t) = u(x, 0, t) = ⇡H
T
1
sinh (kh) cos (!t −kx)
(30)
This expression can be rewritten as
u0(x, t) = U0m cos (!t −kx)
(31)
where the free stream velocity U0m is expressed as Equation 32.
U0m = ⇡H
T
1
sinh(kh)
(32)
When the free stream velocity near the bed U0m is found, the amplitude of the orbital
bottom motion can be approximated from Equation 33.
a = U0m
!
(33)
The Reynolds number expressed as Equation 29 can now be calculated. It is known
from Sumer and Fuhrman (2020) that the WBL is laminar as long as the Reynolds number
is smaller than the critical Reynolds number Recr = 1.5 · 105. As seen in Table 3 the
largest WBL thickness and Reynolds number occurs for the fourth wave condition M4.
This wave condition obtain a WBL thickness of δ = 1.9 mm and a Reynolds number of
Re = 6.55 · 103. As noticed earlier, the Reynolds number had to be smaller than the
critical Reynolds number to maintain a laminar WBL. In all the four wave conditions,
the Reynolds number is smaller than the critical Reynolds number, which indicates that
the WBL in all the wave conditions are laminar.
In Alsina et al. (2020) the size of the simulated particles are ranging from d = 4 mm to
d = 12 mm. It it seen in Table 3 that the maximum WBL thickness is δ = 1.9 mm, which
means that all the simulated particles will be larger than the laminar WBL thickness.
Therefore all particles will be exposed to the outer ﬂow. Since all the particles will be
Table 3:
Values of the WBL thickness and the Reynolds number for the four wave
conditions.
Wave condition
WBL thickness
Reynolds number
δ [mm]
Re [-]
M1
1.2
0.38 · 103
M2
1.3
1.84 · 103
M3
1.6
5.44 · 103
M4
1.9
6.55 · 103
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 15 of 63
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
exposed to the outer ﬂow, the boundary condition for the velocity at the bed, can simply
be set to a slip condition for all the simulations. This also means that the WBL will not
be resolved in the simulations, due to all the particles being exposed to the outer ﬂow.
The di↵erence between a slip and no-slip condition is the velocity at the wall/bed. For a
no-slip condition, the velocity at the wall will be zero, while the velocity at the wall will
be estimated to have a certain value for the slip condition.
For each wave condition given in Table 2, a wave with zero Stokes drift (uS = 0) and
zero Eulerian velocity (uE = 0) will be created. The wave with uS = 0, will experience a
return current, while the wave with uE = 0 will not experience any return current. The
expression for the return current, derived from linear wave theory, can be found by time
averaging the discharge below a wave for a ﬁxed position in the x-direction. This is done
in Equation 34.
qdrift = 1
T
Z T
0
Z h+⌘
0
u dydt
(34)
The horizontal velocity u in Equation 34 can be replaced by the horizontal still water
velocity. The still water velocity is found by inserting the water depth h at the y-position
in Equation 26, with y = 0 being the sea bed.
us(x, t) = u(x, h, t) = ⇡H
T
1
tanh (kh) cosh (!t −kx)
(35)
The integral leads to a time averaged discharge of:
qdrift = H2⇡
4T
1
tanh (kh)
(36)
The magnitude of the return current can now be found by ensuring a zero net volume
ﬂux by dividing the time averaged discharge with the depth, given as Equation 37. This
will give a uniform return current through the water column.
Ur = H2⇡
4Th
1
tanh (kh)
(37)
Simulations with uS = 0 and uE = 0 are made for each wave condition to see if the
results from Alsina et al. (2020) experienced the return current, even though the wave
ﬂume was only running for 41 s. Normally the return current will not be felt by the ﬂow
until the experiment has been running for a certain time period. The reason for this is
that all the water will be pushed in one direction at the wave generation. However, to
compensate for the water ﬂowing in the wave direction the water must go back again,
which is known as the return current.
The second order Lagrangian drift solution is computed as Equation 38 in Alsina et al.
(2020), where the ﬁrst term is the classical Stokes solution, while the second term is the
return current, which ensures a zero net volume ﬂux.
uL2nd =
' H
2
(2 !k cosh (2k(y + h))
2 sinh2 kh
−
' H
2
(2 !
2h
coth (kh)
(38)
The return current in Equation 38 is written in another way than shown earlier. However,
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 16 of 63
==PAGE:24==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
by inserting the formula for the wave angular frequency ! = 2⇡/T and using the knowledge
of coth (kh) = 1/ tanh (kh), the return current will obtain the exact same result as in
Equation 37.
For all four wave conditions the waves will propagate in intermediate water depth,
since ⇡/10 kh ⇡, which is seen from Table 2.
If kh ⇡/10 it can be treated
as shallow water, while kh > ⇡is treated as deep water. The value of the two terms
H/(gT 2) and h/(gT 2) determines which wave theory that has to be used to resolve the
waves. In Figure 3 the wave theories applicability for the di↵erent values of the non-
dimensionalized wave heights H/(gT 2) and the non-dimensionalized depth h/(gT 2) are
shown. The wave conditions M1 and M2 can be resolved by the third order Stokes theory
while M3 and M4 can be resolved by the second order Stokes theory. However, in the
simulations all the waves will be resolved with the stream function theory, which can
resolve all the other mentioned wave theories.
Figure 3: Wave theory applicability as function of the non-dimensionalized wave height
H/(gT 2) and the non-dimensionalized wave depth h/(gT 2).
T
= ⌧.
Figure from
Wikipedia.
In the paper by Alsina et al. (2020) both non-ﬂoating and ﬂoating particles are in-
vestigated experimentally. In this thesis the non-ﬂoating and ﬂoating particles will be
evaluated in their respective sections. The non-ﬂoating particles are deﬁned as sp > 1
and the ﬂoating particles as sp < 1.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 17 of 63
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
4.1
Non-ﬂoating particles
The movement of the non-ﬂoating particles will be evaluated in this section, where the
non-ﬂoating particles are particles with larger densities than the water density sp > 1.
These particles will settle on the bottom and move parallel to the bed. The experiments
done in the wave ﬂume by Alsina et al. (2020) with non-ﬂoating particles have been
imitated in the simulations. Here each simulation has been done with both a wave with
uS = 0 and uE = 0. For each simulation, the same particles as they use in the paper by
Alsina et al. (2020) will be simulated. The non-ﬂoating particles which are considered in
Alsina et al. (2020) are shown in Table 4. In the table the particles material, diameter,
density and settling velocity are shown.
In Figure 4 the non-dimensionalized time evolution (t/T) of the non-dimensionalized
horizontal particle position (xp/a) is shown.
The horizontal particle position is non-
dimensionalized by the amplitude of the orbital bottom motion calculated from Equa-
tion 33. In the ﬁgure the particle position for a single particle with a diameter of d = 4 mm
and a relative density of sp = 1.10 is shown. The particle which is shown in Figure 4 is
simulated in the four wave conditions (Table 2) with both uS = 0 and uE = 0. In the
ﬁgure the data by Alsina et al. (2020) is digitized and shown as the black circles together
with the simulations. In the paper by Alsina et al. (2020) the horizontal particle position
is non-dimensionalized by the wave amplitude (H/2) instead of the amplitude of the or-
bital bottom motion. The data by Alsina et al. (2020) is therefore non-dimensionalized
the same way as done for the simulations in the ﬁgure. It is chosen to non-dimensionalize
the particle position with a near bed quantity rather than the wave amplitude, since the
non-ﬂoating particles will move parallel to the sea bed.
Table 4: Data of the spherical non-ﬂoating plastic particles tested in the experiments by
Alsina et al. (2020). Polyoxymethylene (POM).
Material
Particle diameter
Particle density
Settling velocity
d [mm]
⇢p [kg/m3]
ws [m/s]
Wax
8.0
1022
0.039
Nylon
4.0
1100
0.058
Nylon
8.0
1100
0.085
POM
4.0
1340
0.110
POM
8.0
1340
0.158
POM
12.0
1340
0.194
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 18 of 63
==PAGE:26==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-6
-4
-2
0
2
(d)
Zero Stokes drift
Zero Eulerian velocity
Alsina et al. (2020)
Figure 4: Non-dimensional time evolution of non-dimensionalized horizontal particle
position (xp/a) for a non-ﬂoating particle. In the ﬁgure data from Alsina et al. (2020)
and simulations done in CFDEM with uS = 0 and uE = 0, are shown for a particle with
d = 4 mm and sp = 1.10. (a) is for wave condition M1, (b) is for wave condition M2, (c)
is for wave condition M3 and (d) is for wave condition M4.
In Figure 4 the simulation with uS = 0 is shown as the black dashed line, the simula-
tion with uE = 0 as the black full line and the data from Alsina et al. (2020) as the black
circles. The ﬁgure is split into four sub-ﬁgures, where sub-ﬁgure (a) is for the M1 wave
condition, (b) M2 wave condition, (c) M3 wave condition and (d) M4 wave condition. The
data from the experiments made by Alsina et al. (2020) reported that the non-ﬂoating
particles were transported onshore i.e. in the wave direction. When comparing the data
from Alsina et al. (2020) with the simulated data, it is clearly seen that the horizontal
particle position for the simulation with uS = 0 is in opposition to the data collected by
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 19 of 63
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Alsina et al. (2020). In the simulated case with uS = 0, the particle is seen to be moving
o↵shore rather than onshore. Only the trajectory of one particle is shown in the ﬁgure,
but all the non-ﬂoating particles for the simulation with uS = 0 was found to be moving
o↵shore. The non-dimensionalized horizontal particle position for the simulation with
uE = 0 is, in contrast to the simulation with uS = 0, following the same trajectory as the
data from Alsina et al. (2020). The simulation with uE = 0 is, as mentioned earlier, not
including the return current. This indicates that the particles in the experiment by Alsina
et al. (2020) were not feeling the return current, due to the rather short start up period.
The time it takes the waves to approach the dissipative beach in the setup by Alsina et al.
(2020) can be estimated from the group velocity. The group velocity is deﬁned as
cg = c
2 (1 + G)
(39)
where G is deﬁned as below.
G =
2kh
sinh (2kh)
(40)
In the experiments by Alsina et al. (2020), the wave ﬂume had a length of Lflume =
9.5 m from the wave paddle to the dissipative beach. To check how long time it would take
the waves to approach the dissipative beach, the wave condition that gave the smallest
group velocity is considered. The smallest group velocity is the one for the wave condition
M1. The group velocity is cg,M1 = 0.6294 m/s. In this wave condition the time it takes
the waves to reach the beach is Lflume/cg,M1 = 15.1 s. In the experiments they started
measuring the particle trajectories from 12 to 15 s after the wave paddle starts, which
is seen to be enough time for the wave to propagate to the beach. However, the return
current have not settled yet. The return current can be estimated from Equation 36. The
smallest return current value would be obtained in wave condition M4, where kh = 0.58.
In this case the return current would travel with a velocity of qdrift = 2.4 · 10−3m/s. The
time it would take the return current to reach the wave paddle in the ﬂume would take
approximately Lflume/qdrift = 66 min. This indicates that the return current in the wave
ﬂume is not fully developed, since the wave ﬂume was only running for a total time of
41 s.
The result from the simulation with uE = 0 had a good agreement with the results
from Alsina et al. (2020). This shows that the simulation with uE = 0 in CFDEM match
the experimental results well, due to the not fully developed return current.
The simulations show that if the experiment by Alsina et al. (2020) had ran for a
longer time, such the return current would be fully developed, the transport of the non-
ﬂoating microplastic particles would be o↵shore. This shows the importance of having a
fully developed ﬂow, since the transport of the microplastic particles would be reversed
with a fully developed return current.
In Figure 5 the non-dimensional time evolution t/T of the non-dimensionalized hor-
izontal particle velocity up/U0m is shown for a microplastic particle with a diameter of
d = 4 mm and a relative density of sp = 1.10. The simulations with uS = 0 and uE = 0
are shown for the particle for the four wave conditions together with the data by Alsina
et al. (2020). The full black line is the simulation with uE = 0, the dashed black line is
the simulation with uS = 0, while the data by Alsina et al. (2020) is given as the black
circles.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 20 of 63
==PAGE:28==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1
0
1
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1
0
1
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1
0
1
(c)
Zero Stokes drift
Zero Eulerian velocity
Alsina et al. (2020)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1
0
1
(d)
Figure 5: Non-dimensional time evolution of non-dimensionalized horizontal particle
velocity (up/U0m) for a non-ﬂoating particle. In the ﬁgure data from Alsina et al. (2020)
and simulations done in CFDEM with uS = 0 and uE = 0, are shown for a particle with
d = 4 mm and sp = 1.10. (a) is for wave condition M1, (b) is for wave condition M2, (c)
is for wave condition M3 and (d) is for wave condition M4.
The horizontal particle velocity up is non-dimensionalized with the free stream ve-
locity near the bed U0m instead of the celerity as done in Alsina et al. (2020). By non-
dimensionalizing the horizontal particle velocity with the free stream velocity near the
bed, the magnitude of the particle velocity will oscillate from minimum −1 to maximum
1, since the maximum velocity near the bed is U0m.
In Figure 5 it is seen that the particle velocity for the fourth wave condition Fig-
ure 5 (d) is closer to obtain the maximum velocity, while the particle velocity for the
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 21 of 63
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
ﬁrst wave condition Figure 5 (a) is further away from the free stream velocity amplitude.
The fourth wave condition (M4) has the smallest kh value, close being in shallow water,
while the ﬁrst wave condition (M1) has the largest kh value, close being in deep water.
When the waves enter shallower water, the vertical velocity proﬁle can be assumed to be
constant throughout the depth. In deep water, the velocity at the surface is much larger
than the one at the bottom.
It was noticed in Figure 4 (a) that the microplastic particle traveled o↵shore for
the simulation with uS = 0, while it traveled onshore for the simulation with uE = 0. In
Figure 5 (a) a distinct di↵erence in the non-dimensional horizontal particle velocity can be
observed between the simulation with uE = 0 and uS = 0. In the simulation with uS = 0
it is noticed that the non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocity is shifted downwards
compared to the simulation with uE = 0. Due to the downwards shifted velocity for the
simulation with uS = 0, the net particle movement will be o↵shore directed. The non-
dimensionalized horizontal particle velocity for the simulation with uE = 0 is seen to be
slightly shifted in the positive direction, which results in a net onshore directed movement
of the plastic particle. The oscillation amplitude of the non-dimensionalized horizontal
particle velocity is seen to be less than the one from the data by Alsina et al. (2020) for the
ﬁrst wave condition. However, for the three other wave conditions the oscillations of the
velocity are seen to match well. As the kh value is decreased, the di↵erence between the
simulation with uS = 0 and uE = 0 is seen to decrease as well, due to entering shallower
water, where the velocity proﬁle is approximately uniform throughout the depth.
Until now only one particle has been examined in the two previous ﬁgures. However,
multiple particles have been simulated which were displayed in Table 4. For the non-
ﬂoating particles, it is seen that the simulation with uE = 0 is the one which mimics
the experimental data the best. Therefore, in Figure 6 the horizontal particle velocity
obtained from the simulation with uE = 0 is shown against the particle velocity obtained
from experiments by Alsina et al. (2020). In the ﬁgure a perfect line ﬁt with a slope
of exactly one is shown as the full black line, while the black dashed lines are the 10%
deviation lines. Each symbol in the ﬁgure symbolize a speciﬁc particle.
As seen in the ﬁgure the horizontal particle velocities for the di↵erent particles seems to
match well for most of the cases. It is seen that some of the particles have an overestimated
horizontal particle velocity in the simulated case compared to the data by Alsina et al.
(2020). However, some of the simulated particles are slightly underestimated as well. The
reason for the slightly overestimation of the horizontal particle velocity can be due to the
lack of the return current in the simulation, while the particles from Alsina et al. (2020)
could be slowed down by the build up of the return current. However, it was noticed from
the experiments by Alsina et al. (2020), that the variability of the non-ﬂoating particles’
velocities were large. The variability of the experimental non-ﬂoating particle velocities
are large due to the relative small velocities which the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles
are moving with. Therefore, the velocities from the experiments and the simulations with
uE = 0 seem to match well.
The value of the second order Lagrangian drift with the return current term excluded
is shown in Table 5 for the di↵erent wave conditions. Here it is noticed that the maximum
Lagrangian drift is occurring for the M3 wave condition, while the smallest Lagrangian
drift is for the M1 wave condition.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 22 of 63
==PAGE:30==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
2
4
6
8
10 -3
0
2
4
6
8
10 -3
Figure 6: Simulated horizontal particle velocity for non-ﬂoating particles (see Table 4)
with uE = 0 against the experimental values by Alsina et al. (2020). For comparison a
perfect line ﬁt with a slope of one is showed as a full line, while the dashed lines are 10%
deviation lines.
In Figure 7 the horizontal particle velocity for the simulation with uE = 0 is shown
together with the particle velocity obtained from the experiments carried out by Alsina
et al. (2020) against the second order Lagrangian drift solution, where the return current is
excluded. The black symbols are the experimentally obtained particle velocities by Alsina
et al. (2020), while the red symbols are the particle velocities obtained from simulations
with uE = 0. Each symbol type symbolize a speciﬁc particle, which are the same particle
as shown in Figure 6. From the ﬁgure it is seen that both the experimentally collected data
and the one from the simulation with uE = 0 are underestimating the particle velocities
Table 5: Magnitude of second order Lagrangian drift solution for non-ﬂoating particles
simulated with uE = 0 (return current excluded in Equation 38) for the four wave condi-
tions.
Wave
Condition
Second Order Lagrangian Drift Solution - Non-Floating Particles
uL2nd = ( H
2 )
2!k cosh (2k(y+h))
2 sinh2 kh
[m/s]
M1
1.4 · 10−3
M2
4.2 · 10−3
M3
7.3 · 10−3
M4
6.3 · 10−3
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 23 of 63
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
compared to the second order Lagrangian drift solution with the return current excluded.
The simulated horizontal particle velocities for the fourth wave condition (M4) are the
ones which are closest to obtain the value of the second order Lagrangian drift solution.
0
2
4
6
8
10 -3
0
2
4
6
8
10 -3
Figure 7: Simulated horizontal particle velocity and experimental particle velocity by
Alsina et al. (2020) for non-ﬂoating particles (see Table 4) against the second order La-
grangian drift solution with the return current excluded. For comparison a perfect line ﬁt
with a slope of one is showed as a full line, while the dashed lines are 10% deviation lines.
In Figure 8 the non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocity from simulations with
uE = 0 and from experimental data by Alsina et al. (2020), are shown against the skewness
of the near bed velocity. The simulated particles are the same as Alsina et al. (2020) used
for their experiments, which is given in Table 4. Each symbol in the ﬁgure symbolise a
speciﬁc particle, where the settling velocity for the particle is shown in the legend. The
black colored symbols refers to the data from Alsina et al. (2020), while the red colored
symbols are the ones obtained from the simulation with uE = 0.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 24 of 63
==PAGE:32==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Figure 8:
Non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocity (up/U0m) for non-ﬂoating
particles as a function of the near bed velocity skewness Su0. Each symbol symbolise a
particle from Table 4. The black symbols are data from Alsina et al. (2020), while the red
symbols are values obtained from simulations with zero Eulerian velocity.
The near bed velocity skewness is calculated by Equation 41, where u0 is the mean of
the near bed velocity and σu0 is the standard deviation of the near bed velocity.
Su0 =
u3
0
'
σ2
u0
( 3
2
(41)
The magnitude of the near bed velocity skewness are shown in Table 6 for the simu-
lations with uS = 0 and uE = 0 for the four wave conditions. As seen in the table, the
near bed velocity skewness is increasing when entering shallower waters i.e. the near bed
velocity skewness increase for a decreasing value kh.
The horizontal near bed velocity skewness was not given for the data by Alsina et al.
(2020), therefore the velocity skewness for the respective wave condition calculated from
the simulation is used for the data by Alsina et al. (2020) as well.
In Figure 8 it is seen that the non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocities for
wave condition M1 with the largest kh value (smallest velocity skewness) are obtaining
larger non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocities than they obtain in the exper-
iments by Alsina et al. (2020). For the wave conditions with smaller kh-value (larger
near bed velocity skewness), it is seen that the simulated particle velocities are in good
agreement with the experimental data. The di↵erent simulated plastic particles show an
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 25 of 63
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Table 6: Skewness of the near bed velocity for simulations with uS = 0 and uE = 0 for
the four wave conditions.
Wave Condition
Wave Data
Velocity Skewness - Su0
M1
uS = 0
0.97 · 10−2
uE = 0
1.00 · 10−2
M2
uS = 0
4.14 · 10−2
uE = 0
4.33 · 10−2
M3
uS = 0
18.76 · 10−2
uE = 0
19.14 · 10−2
M4
uS = 0
35.08 · 10−2
uE = 0
35.40 · 10−2
increase in the non-dimensionalized horizontal particle velocity for an increasing near bed
velocity skewness. From the data by Alsina et al. (2020) or the simulation with uE = 0, it
is not conclusive how the density and size of the microplastic particle a↵ects its movement.
4.2
Floating particles
Floating particles are deﬁned as having a relative density sp < 1, which means the density
of the particle is less than the density of the surrounding ﬂuid ⇢p < ⇢water. Due to the
smaller density than the surrounding ﬂuid, the particles will be ﬂoating. The ﬁve ﬂoating
particles which Alsina et al. (2020) have tested in their experiments are listed in Table 7.
These particles will be used for the simulations with uS = 0 and uE = 0. In Table 7 the
ﬂoating particles settling velocity is given as one of the parameters, but in this section
the settling velocity direction is positive vertical upwards toward the free surface rather
than downwards toward the sea bed, as it was for the non-ﬂoating particles.
In Alsina et al. (2020) the particle position is shown for a single particle with a diame-
ter of d = 8 mm and a relative density of sp = 0.760. The particle position is digitized to be
able to compare the data with the simulations. In Figure 9 the non-dimensionalized time
evolution (t/T) of the non-dimensionalized horizontal particle position (xp/H) is shown.
The experimental data from Alsina et al. (2020) are shown as the black circles while the
full line is the result from the simulation uE = 0 and the dashed line is the result from
the simulation with uS = 0. In the ﬁgure it is clearly seen that the two simulations and
the data by Alsina et al. (2020) all have the same tendency to move the particle onshore.
However, the onshore movement are seen to be larger in both simulations compared to
Table 7: The material, diameter, density and settling velocity of the spherical ﬂoating
plastic particles tested in the experiments by Alsina et al. (2020). Polypropylene (PP).
Material
Particle diameter
Particle density
Settling velocity
d [mm]
⇢p [kg/m3]
ws [m/s]
Wax
8.0
760
0.132
Wax
8.0
910
0.080
PP
4.0
840
0.074
PP
8.0
840
0.108
PP
12.0
840
0.133
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 26 of 63
==PAGE:34==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Figure 9: Non-dimensional time evolution (t/T) of non-dimensionalized horizontal parti-
cle position (xp/H) for a ﬂoating particle in wave condition M2. In the ﬁgure simulations
done in CFDEM with uS = 0 and uE = 0, are shown for a particle with d = 8 mm and
sp = 0.760.
the experimental data.
In the simulations of the non-ﬂoating particles the simulation with uS = 0 and the
simulation with uE = 0 had an opposite net transport of the simulated particles. The
simulation with uS = 0 was transporting all the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles o↵shore
due to the presence of the return current. However, for the simulation with uE = 0,
the return current was not present, which resulted in a net onshore transport of the
microplastic particles, just as Alsina et al. (2020) found from their experiments. When
ﬂoating particles are considered it is seen from the simulations with uS = 0 and uE = 0,
that the presence of the return current does not have as large inﬂuence on the result. The
reason for the smaller impact on the net transport of the microplastic particles are due to
the larger velocities for ﬂoating particles. The velocity for the ﬂoating particles are much
larger than the velocity for the non-ﬂoating particles. The return current can therefore
not reverse the direction of the transport, but only decrease the magnitude of the onshore
directed motion.
In Figure 10 the simulated ﬂoating particle velocities for the simulation with uE = 0
and the experimental data by Alsina et al. (2020) are shown against the second order
Lagrangian drift solution where the return current term in Equation 38 is set to zero,
since the simulation is done with uE = 0. In the ﬁgure the black symbols are the particle
velocities obtain from the experiments by Alsina et al. (2020), while the red symbols are
the simulated particle velocities with uE = 0.
Each symbol type is a speciﬁc plastic
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 27 of 63
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Figure 10: Simulated horizontal particle velocity for ﬂoating particles with uE = 0 (see
Table 7) and experimental values from Alsina et al. (2020) against the second order La-
grangian drift solution with the return current excluded. For comparison a perfect line ﬁt
with a slope of one is shown as the full line, while the dashed lines are the 10% deviation
lines.
particle, with its properties given in Table 7. The full black line is a perfect ﬁt line with
a slope of exactly one, while the two dashed lines are the 10% deviation lines.
From Table 8 it is noticed that the wave condition with the largest kh value (M1) is
obtaining the largest Lagrangian drift. As the kh value decrease for the following wave
conditions, so is the magnitude of the Lagrangian drift.
In Figure 10 it is seen that
the data simulated with uE = 0 is obtaining slightly larger values than expected from
the second order Lagrangian drift solution.
The reason for the overestimation of the
particle velocities will be explained later in this section. The velocities captured in the
experiments by Alsina et al. (2020) are slightly smaller than the expected velocities for
the second order Lagrangian drift solution with uE = 0.
The data by Alsina et al. (2020) was found to have a good agreement with the second
order Lagrangian drift solution, which is given as Equation 38. In Figure 11 the simulated
ﬂoating particles with uS = 0 and the data by Alsina et al. (2020) are shown against the
second order Lagrangian drift solution. In the ﬁgure the black symbols are the experimen-
tally obtained particle velocities by Alsina et al. (2020), while the green symbols are the
particle velocities obtained from simulations with uS = 0. The magnitude of the second
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 28 of 63
==PAGE:36==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
Table 8: Magnitude of second order Lagrangian drift solution for ﬂoating particles sim-
ulated with uE = 0 (return current excluded in Equation 38) for the four wave conditions.
Wave
Condition
Second Order Lagrangian Drift Solution - Floating Particles
uL2nd = ( H
2 )
2!k cosh (2k(y+h))
2 sinh2 kh
[m/s]
M1
5.67 · 10−2
M2
3.27 · 10−2
M3
1.87 · 10−2
M4
1.11 · 10−2
order Lagrangian drift solution for the di↵erent wave conditions are shown in Table 9.
In Figure 11 it is seen that the particle velocities from the experiments performed by
Alsina et al. (2020) are matching the theoretical expected velocity from the second order
Lagrangian drift solution very well, where the return current is included. The particle
velocities from the simulation with uS = 0 are seen to be closer to the data by Alsina et al.
(2020) and the second order Lagrangian drift solution compared to the simulation with
uE = 0 (Figure 10). However, the particle velocities are still seen to be overestimated, just
as the case was for the simulation with uE = 0. The magnitude of the overestimation is
though smaller for the simulation with uS = 0, due to the presence of the return current.
For the non-ﬂoating particles it was found that the simulation with uE = 0 had the
best match with the data by Alsina et al. (2020). This was due to the return current not
being fully developed. In Figure 9 it was clearly seen that the simulation with uE = 0
was overestimating the ﬂoating particle velocities signiﬁcant. The particle position for
the simulation with uS = 0 was closer to the results obtained from experiments by Alsina
et al. (2020).
In the simulation with uE = 0 (Figure 10) it is seen that only a few particles are
close to the second order Lagrangian drift solution and the experimental data by Alsina
et al. (2020). The rest of the particle velocities are seen to be overestimated. For the
simulation with uS = 0 it is noticed that the particle velocities are closer to the second
order Lagrangian drift solution and the experimental data, but the particle velocities are
still slightly overestimated.
For the ﬁrst wave period in Figure 9 the non-dimensionalized particle position from
the simulations and the experiments seemed to be close to each other. One di↵erence in
the ﬁrst wave period is the amplitude of the o↵shore directed movement in the trough
region. It is seen that the o↵shore directed movement is larger in the experimental case
Table 9: Magnitude of second order Lagrangian drift solution for ﬂoating particles sim-
ulated with uS = 0 for the four wave conditions.
Wave
Condition
Second Order Lagrangian Drift Solution - Floating Particles
uL2nd = ( H
2 )
2!k cosh (2k(y+h))
2 sinh2 kh
−( H
2 )
2!
2h
coth (kh)
[m/s]
M1
4.38 · 10−2
M2
2.08 · 10−2
M3
0.79 · 10−2
M4
0.32 · 10−2
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 29 of 63
==PAGE:37==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Figure 11: Simulated horizontal particle velocity for ﬂoating particles with uS = 0 (see
Table 7) and experimental values from Alsina et al. (2020) against the second order La-
grangian drift solution without the return current term. For comparison a perfect line ﬁt
with a slope of one is shown as the full line, while the dashed lines are the 10% deviation
lines.
than for both of the simulated cases. The deviation in the non-dimensionalized horizontal
particle position between the experimental data and the simulated are seen to increase
with time. To ﬁnd the reason for the deviation in the particle position over time, the
velocity proﬁle beneath the wave crest and trough are investigated for each wave period.
In Figure 12 the velocity proﬁle for wave condition M2 beneath the wave crest is
measured for each wave period. The initial velocity proﬁle (shown as the full black line)
is obtained by the use of stream function theory. The dashed line is the threshold for
↵water = 0.5. As explained in Model Setup - Non-Breaking Waves the computational
domain is made, such the same wave is running periodically in the direction of the wave
propagation. The length of the domain is exactly one wave length. The velocity proﬁles
beneath the crests and troughs are therefore calculated at the same position in the domain,
but with an interval of a wave period. This is done in order to verify whether the simulated
velocity proﬁles are constant or changing throughout the simulation.
At the crest of a wave, the velocity will be pointing in the direction of the wave
propagation. To compensate for the velocity in the direction of the wave propagation, at
the wave trough the velocity proﬁle would point in the opposite direction of the the wave
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 30 of 63
==PAGE:38==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Figure 12:
Vertical velocity proﬁle underneath the wave crest at di↵erent times for
simulation of M2 wave condition with uS = 0. The ↵water = 0.5 threshold is shown as the
black dashed line.
propagation. The ﬂoating particles will therefore be transported onshore at the wave
crest and o↵shore at the wave trough. If the velocity proﬁles are changing throughout the
simulation, it could result in a wrong transport of the ﬂoating particles.
In Figure 12 the velocity proﬁle beneath the crest is measured over four wave periods.
The air velocity is captured in the velocity proﬁle as well. The air velocity is seen to
have reversed sign of the wave velocity and is eventually going to zero at the top of the
domain. The velocity proﬁle beneath the crest is seen to obtain its maximum value just
at the free-surface. When the depth increases the velocity is seen to decrease. The proﬁle
is seen to have a velocity of around u = 0.1 m/s at the sea bed. The velocity proﬁle is
obtained from the M2 wave condition, which has a value of kh = 1.37. This means the
waves are travelling in intermediate water depth, where the velocity is changing dependent
on the water depth, but not as exaggerated as if the wave was travelling in deep water.
The initial velocity proﬁle calculated by the use of stream function theory is noticed
to change signiﬁcantly over the ﬁrst wave period. The velocity proﬁle after one wave
period has a signiﬁcant larger crest velocity at the free-surface than the original velocity
proﬁle. The velocity proﬁle further down towards the sea bed is though seen to be constant
throughout the simulation. The crest velocity at the free-surface is seen to increase its
velocity with nearly 20% in the ﬁrst wave period. For the next three wave periods, the
crest velocity at the free-surface will remain close to constant. The large increase in the
crest velocity at the free-surface will move the ﬂoating particles onshore with a larger
velocity than the expected one, which originally was calculated by the stream function
theory. This is one of the sources which cause the simulated ﬂoating particles to move
too fast onshore. The overestimation of the transport of microplastic particles were not
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 31 of 63
==PAGE:39==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Figure 13: Vertical velocity proﬁle underneath the wave trough at di↵erent times for
simulation of M2 wave condition with uS = 0. The ↵water = 0.5 threshold is shown as the
black dashed line.
present for the non-ﬂoating particles. The reason for this is due to the non-changing
velocity proﬁle further down the water column.
The velocity proﬁle beneath the wave trough is investigated as well. In Figure 13
the velocity proﬁle at the wave trough is shown at di↵erent times together with the
↵water = 0.5 threshold. Here it is noted that the trough velocity just beneath the free-
surface is decreasing for each new wave period. The decreased trough velocity just below
the free-surface will reduce the transport of the plastic particle in the o↵shore direction.
The decrease in the trough velocity proﬁle at the free-surface will together with the
increase in the crest velocity at the surface, increase the net onshore directed transport
of the ﬂoating microplastic particles.
Additionally it is noticed that the velocity at the bed beneath the wave trough is
obtaining a larger velocity (opposite directed) than the velocity beneath the wave crest.
This was also noticed in the section for the non-ﬂoating particles, that the net transport
in the simulation with uS = 0 was o↵shore directed.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 32 of 63
==PAGE:40==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
5
Breaking Waves
In the previous section Non-Breaking Waves the transport of microplastics in non-breaking
waves were considered. When the sea bed begins to slope towards the beach, the non-
breaking waves will break at some point. When a wave is travelling up a sloped bed, the
wave will begin to shoal. When a wave is shoaling the wave height will increase, while
the wave period will decrease. This phenomenon will eventually cause the wave height to
exceed the breaking limit, which is given as Equation 42 as a ﬁrst approximation.
H
h = 0.8
(42)
During the shoaling process the mean water level will decrease, while it will increase
in the surf zone. The surf zone is deﬁned as the zone between the breaking point and the
beach. The change in the mean water level in the two regions are due to the presence
of radiation stresses caused by the waves. The radiation stresses are an excess ﬂow of
momentum consisting of a momentum and a pressure contribution. The radiation stresses
can be given as a tensor, where the presence of a slope is included. The expression for
the radiation stress tensor is given as
S = E
2
(1 + G) cos2(↵) + G
(1 + G) sin(↵) cos(↵)
(1 + G) sin(↵) cos(↵)
(1 + G) sin2(↵) + G
,
(43)
where E is given in Equation 44 and ↵is the slope of the sea bed.
E = 1
8⇢gH2
(44)
The momentum equation for a sloped sea bed with the slope going upwards in the
positive x-direction can be expressed as
dSxx
dx −dP
dx = 0
(45)
where Sxx = (1 + G) cos2(↵) + G and P is the pressure. From the momentum equation
it is seen that the radiation stress and the pressure gradient is balancing each other. By
balancing the hydrostatic pressure the pressure gradient can be expressed as
dP
dx = −⇢gh@(∆h)
@x
(46)
where ∆h is the di↵erence between the still water level and the mean water level. This
di↵erence is occurring due to the slopped sea bed. By inserting the expression for the
pressure gradient into the momentum equation (Equation 45) the following expression is
obtained
dSxx
dx
= −⇢gh@(∆h)
@x
(47)
where it is noticed that an increase in the radiation stress will force a decrease in the mean
water level. This will occur in the shoaling zone, where the wave height will increase,
hence the radiation stress will increase. The maximum decrease in the water level will
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 33 of 63
==PAGE:41==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
occur at the breaking point. This is typically called for the wave set-down and can be
approximated as ⌘/hb ⇡−0.04, where ⌘is the mean water level and hb is the depth at
the breaking point. After the breaking point, the wave height will decrease, which will
decrease the radiation stress as well. To balance the momentum equation (Equation 45)
the mean water level will increase. This is known as the wave set-up, whose maximum
value is obtained at the shoreline, where the depth is zero. The maximum value of the
set-up can be approximated as ⌘max/hb ⇡0.2.
Wave breaking is typically classiﬁed into three types of breakers. The three types are
dependent on the surf similarity parameter, which is given as
⇣0 =
S
p
H0/L0
(48)
where H0 is the deep water wave height which is given in Equation 49, L0 is the deep
water wave length which is given in Equation 50 and S is the slope of the sea bed.
H2
0 = H2(1 + G) tanh(kh)
(49)
L0 = gT 2
2⇡
(50)
The three main breaker types are the spilling breaker (⇣0 < 0.5), plunging breaker
(0.5 < ⇣0 < 3.3) and surging breaker (⇣0 > 3.3). The surf similarity parameter is seen to
be dependent on the sea bed slope. Typically the spilling breaker is seen for almost ﬂat
sea bed slopes, while the plunging breaker occur for steep sea bed slopes. The surging
breaker only occur for very steep sea bed slopes.
In the paper published by Forsberg et al. (2019) experiments with transport of mi-
croplastics in breaking waves were conducted. The experiment was done in a 6 m long
wave ﬂume, which had an initially ﬂat bed with a depth of h = 0.22 m, followed by a
mildly linear sloped bed. Regular waves with a period of T = 1.2 s and a wave height of
H = 9.2 cm were generated. Multiple di↵erent shapes, sizes and densities of microplastics
were considered. The microplastic particles were released at a depth of −0.1 m in the
shoaling zone. The experiment was then ran for ﬁve minutes until the transport of the
microplastic particles were close to stationary.
The breaker type in the experiments by Forsberg et al. (2019) is seen to be a spilling
breaker, due to its surf similarity parameter being ⇣0 < 0.5.
The experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019) is reproduced as a simulation in CFDEM,
where only the spherical microplastic particles are considered.
In Figure 14 the non-
dimensional time evolution (t/T) of the non-dimensional horizontal particle position
(xp/H) of the simulated microplastic particles are seen. The positive x-direction is on-
shore directed. All the simulated spheres have a diameter of d = 3 mm, while the density
ranges from 700 kg/m3 to 1380 kg/m3. It is seen that the particle which is moving fastest
onshore is the ﬂoating microplastic particle with a density of ⇢= 700 kg/m3. This result
is in good agreement with the one from the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019). In
the experiment it was noticed that the ﬂoating particles were transported onshore, and
some of them were even ending up at the beach. In the simulation the particles were only
tracked for eleven wave periods, due to the lack of time.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 34 of 63
==PAGE:42==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
0
2
4
6
8
10
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 14: Non-dimensional time evolution of the non-dimensional particle position of
the spherical microplastic particles. All the particles have a diameter of d = 3 mm and
varying densities.
From the ﬁgure it is noticed that the two non-ﬂoating microplastic particles are moving
onshore up the sloped bed due to the wave non-linearity in the shoaling region. It is
seen that the non-ﬂoating plastic particle with the smallest density is moving fastest
onshore.
The result for the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles are in good agreement
with the obtained data from the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019). In the experiment
it was noticed that the non-ﬂoating particles would move onshore up the sloped bed
until reaching the breaking zone. At the breaking zone it was found that the particles
remained stationary due to the local balance between the return ﬂow and wave forcing.
The simulation was not ran for long enough time to see if the non-ﬂoating particles would
remain at the breaking zone or keep moving onshore.
The particle position for the microplastic particle with a density of ⇢= 950 kg/m3 is
seen to be tracked for a shorter time. The reason for this, is due to the particle moving
out of the measured domain, since it is moving o↵shore. This result is in opposition
to the other ﬂoating particles, which was seen to move onshore. The experiments by
Forsberg et al. (2019) showed that the particle with a density of ⇢= 950 kg/m3 would
move onshore as well. The o↵shore directed movement of the particle might be due to
the particle position in the water column at the wave crest. In the simulation it is seen
that the particle is not at the free-surface when a wave crest arrive. The particle is be
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 35 of 63
==PAGE:43==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
pulled beneath the wave crest, where the ﬂuid velocity is smaller than at the free-surface.
This results in a net o↵shore transport of the particle due to the larger o↵shore directed
velocity at the wave trough than the onshore directed velocity at the wave crest. If the
particle had stayed at the wave crest, it would move onshore just as the other ﬂoating
particle with a density of ⇢= 700 kg/m3 did. This problem should be looked closer at,
since the particle should follow the free-surface more closely than it did in the simulation.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 36 of 63
==PAGE:44==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
6
Conclusion
In this thesis multiple simulations regarding transport of microplastic particles have been
performed in CFDEM and compared with experiments carried out by multiple authors
Guler et al. (2022), Alsina et al. (2020) and Forsberg et al. (2019).
The comparison
with the experimental data was done in order to verify the applicability of the program
CFDEM.
The ﬁrst simulation case dealt with simulations of settling velocities of multiple spheri-
cal microplastic particles in CFDEM and compare the results with the data obtained from
experiments by Guler et al. (2022). In the settling velocity simulations of microplastic
particles, multiple drag coeﬃcient formulations were considered. It was found that the
simulations with the drag coeﬃcient formulation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) had
the best match with the experimental data by Guler et al. (2022). Additionally, it was
found that other authors DiBenedetto et al. (2022) had used the drag coeﬃcient formu-
lation by Schiller and Naumann (1935) to calculate the settling velocities and transport
of microplastic particles in non-breaking waves as well.
The second simulation case were considering the transport of microplastic particles in
non-breaking waves. The simulations were performed with zero Stokes drift (uS = 0) and
zero Eulerian velocity (uE = 0) for ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles. This
was done to check whether the return ﬂow in the experiment by Alsina et al. (2020) was
fully developed, due to the short running time of the wave ﬂume. For the non-ﬂoating
particles it was found that the simulation with uE = 0 was in good agreement with the
experimental results for the non-ﬂoating particles by Alsina et al. (2020). The simulation
and experiment had a net onshore movement for the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles.
However, it was found that the simulation with uS = 0 had a net o↵shore transport for
non-ﬂoating microplastic particles. This indicated that the return current was not fully
developed before the tracking of the particles were conducted.
The transport of ﬂoating particles in non-breaking waves were estimated to move
onshore for both simulation types. The same result was conducted from the experiment
by Alsina et al. (2020) and second order Lagrangian drift solution.
The experimental particle velocities found by Alsina et al. (2020) were noticed to
match the second order Lagrangian drift solution well. However, the simulations with
uS = 0 and uE = 0 were found to overestimate the particle velocities compared to
the second order Lagrangian drift solution. The overestimation of the ﬂoating particle
velocities in non-breaking waves was due to the changing velocity proﬁle beneath the wave
crest and trough. The velocity proﬁle was initialized by the use of stream function theory.
However, the crest velocity at the free-surface was increased rapidly in the ﬁrst simulated
wave period. For the following wave periods the velocity proﬁle seemed to remain close
to constant. The trough velocity at the free-surface was on the other hand decreasing for
each wave period. The two changing velocity proﬁles both contributed to an increased
onshore directed transport of the ﬂoating microplastic particles.
The third simulation case was a simulation of the transport of microplastic particles
in breaking waves. An experiment was carried out by Forsberg et al. (2019), where the
transport of ﬂoating and non-ﬂoating microplastic particles were considered in breaking
waves. In the experiment it was found that the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles were
moving onshore until they reached the point of breaking. At the point of breaking the non-
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 37 of 63
==PAGE:45==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
ﬂoating microplastic particles would remain stationary due to the local balance between
the return ﬂow and wave forcing. From the simulation it was noticed that the non-ﬂoating
plastic particles were moving onshore up the mildly sloped bed, which was in agreement
the experimentally obtained results. However, due to limitations in regards to time, the
simulation was not ran long enough to examine if the non-ﬂoating microplastic particles
would remain stationary at the point of breaking, as they did in the experiment.
The ﬂoating particles in the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019) was seen to move
onshore, with some of the particles ending up on the beach. In the simulation, a particle
with a density of ⇢= 700 kg/m3 was noticed to move onshore as the experiment showed.
However, a ﬂoating particle with a density of ⇢= 950 kg/m3 was seen to move o↵shore.
The exact same particle moved onshore in the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019).
The reason for the opposite movement of the simulated particle was due to the particle
being dragged under the wave crest rather than following it. This caused the microplastic
particle to be exposed to a smaller velocity than at the free-surface. The net transport
of the particle then resulted in an o↵shore directed transport rather than an onshore
transport, which was observed in the experiment by Forsberg et al. (2019).
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 38 of 63
==PAGE:46==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
7
Further Studies
In the simulation for the transport of ﬂoating microplastic particles in non-breaking waves
it was seen that the onshore directed transport of the particles were overestimated com-
pared to the experiments by Alsina et al. (2020) and the second order Lagrangian drift
solution. The overestimation were caused by the changing velocity proﬁle beneath the
wave crest and trough. For further studies, the problem with the changing velocity proﬁle
should be investigated.
For the simulation of ﬂoating particles in breaking waves, particles with densities close
to the density of water should be further investigated. These particles were seen to be
moving o↵shore, rather than onshore, which the experiments by Forsberg et al. (2019)
showed. The reason for the o↵shore directed transport of the particles were found to be
caused by the particle being dragged beneath the wave crest rather than staying close to
the free-surface. The movement of the particle around the free-surface should be further
investigated.
The movement of the non-ﬂoating particles in breaking waves were found to be mov-
ing onshore as they did in the experiments by Forsberg et al. (2019). However, in the
experiments the non-ﬂoating particles were found to remain stationary around the break-
ing point, due to the local balance between the return ﬂow and the wave forcing. The
simulation was only ran for eleven wave periods due to lack of time. The non-ﬂoating
particles should be investigated for a longer period, to check if the particles would remain
stationary around the breaking point.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 39 of 63
==PAGE:47==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
References
J. M. Alsina, C. E. Jongedijk, and E. van Sebille.
Laboratory measurements of the
wave-induced motion of plastic particles: Inﬂuence of wave period, plastic size and
plastic density. Journal Geophysical Reasearch: Oceans, 125, e2020JC016294, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JC016294.
M. H. DiBenedetto, L. K. Clark, and N. Pujara. Enhanced settling and dispersion of
inertial particles in surface waves. Cambridge University Press, 2022.
R. D. Felice. The voidage function for ﬂuid-particle interaction systems. International
Journal of Multiphase ﬂow, 20(1), pages 153–159, 1994.
P. L. Forsberg, D. Sous, A. Stocchino, and R. Chemin. Behaviour of plastic litter in
nearshore waters: First insights from wind and wave laboratory experiments.
Ma-
rine Pollution Bulletin, 153:111023, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020
.111023.
J. Fredsøe and R. Deigaard. Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport. World Scientiﬁc,
1992. ISBN 9810208405.
D. Gidaspow. Multiphase ﬂow and ﬂuidization-continuum and kinetic theory descriptions.
Academic Press, San Diego, 1994.
Goniva, C. Kloss, C. Deen, N. Kuipers, J.A.M, and S. Pirker. Inﬂuence of rolling friction
modelling on single spout ﬂuidized bed simulations.
H. G. Guler, B. E. Larsen, O. de Quintana Bosch, K. D. Goral, S. Carstensen, E. D.
Christensen, N. B. Kerpen, T. Schlurmann, and D. R. Fuhrman. Experimental investi-
gation on the cross-shore transport of non-buoyant microplastic particles on a live bed.
Science of the Total Environment, 2022.
R. Hill, D. Koch, and J. Ladd. The ﬁrst e↵ects of ﬂuid inertia on ﬂows in orded and
random arrays of spheres. J. Fluid Mech. 448, pages 213–241, 2001.
N. G. Jacobsen, D. R. Fuhrman, and J. Fredsøe. A Wave Generation Toolbox for the Open-
Source CFD Library: OpenFoam®. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Fluids, 70(9):1073–1088, 2012. {10.1002/ﬂd.2726}.
N. B. Kerpen, T. Schlurmann, A. Schendel, J. Gundlach, D. Marquard, and M. H¨upgen.
Wave-induced distribution of microplastic in the surf zone. Front. Sci. 7:590565, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.590565.
C. Kloss, C. Goniva, A. Hager, S. Amberger, and S. Pirker. Models, algorithms and
validation for opensource dem and cfd-dem. Progress in Computational Fluid Dynamics,
Vol. 12, Nos. 2/3, pp.140-152, 2012.
B. E. Larsen, D. R. Fuhrman, and J. Roenby. Performance of interfoam on the simulation
of progressive waves.
Coastal Engineering Journal, 61(3), 380-400, 2019.
https://
doi.org/10.1080/21664250.2019.1609713.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 40 of 63
==PAGE:48==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
L. Schiller and A. Naumann.
A drag coeﬃcient correlation.
VDI Zeitung, 77, pages
318–320, 1935.
B. M. Sumer and D. R. Fuhrman. Turbulence in coastal and civil engineering. World
Scientiﬁc, 2020. ISBN 978-981-3234-30-7.
K. Waldschl¨ager and H. Sch¨uttrumpf. Erosion behavior of di↵erent microplastic particles
in comparison to natural sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol., 53, 13219-13227, 2019.
Wikipedia. Stokes wave. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stokes wave.
D. C. Wilcox. Turbulence modeling for cfd. 3rd ed. DCW Industries. La Canada, 2006.
Z. Y. Zhou, S. B. Kuang, K. W. Chu, and A. B. Yu. Discrete particle simulation of
particle-ﬂuid ﬂow: model formulations and their applicability. Cambridge University
Press, 2010.
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 41 of 63
==PAGE:49==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
8
Appendix
A
Script for section Settling Velocity
clear
all
close
all
clc
%% Data
g = 9.81;
nu = 1.0e -6;
voidfraction = 1;
%_FD = Freds\o{}e and
Deigaard
(1992)
%_KH = Hill et al. (2001)
%_DF = Felice
(1994)
%_SN = Shiller
and
Naumann
(1935)
%_G = Gidaspow
(1994)
%_CONST = Constant
drag model , with
c_D = 1
%_Data = Data by Guler et al. (2022)
ddata = [0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.0031];
sdata = [1.358
1.352
1.352
1.353
1.062];
d = [0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.0031
0.001
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.0015]; %Diameter
s = [1.358
1.352
1.352
1.353
1.062
1.352
1.352
1.352
1.352
1.352]; %Relative
density
ws_Data = [0.2233
0.2030
0.1611
0.1164
0.0589];
ws_FD = [0.1268
0.1115
0.0951
0.0749
0.0384];
ws_KH = [0.1446
0.1275
0.1091
0.0867
0.0447
0.0550
0.1576
0.1706
0.1827
0.0727];
ws_DF = [0.1952
0.1663
0.1354
0.0988
0.0492
0.0525
0.2179
0.2403
0.2610
0.0772];
ws_SN = [0.2307
0.1964
0.1545
0.1088
0.0538
0.0565
0.2506
0.2706
0.2893
0.0838];
ws_G = [0.2383
0.1964
0.1545
0.1088
0.0538
0.0565
0.2734
0.3095
0.3443
0.0838];
ws_CONST = [0.1530
0.1357
0.1175
0.0960
0.0501];
% Drag
coefficients
points: C_D = 4*(s -1)*g*d/(3* w_s ^2)
CD_Data = 4.*( sdata -1)*g.* ddata ./(3* ws_Data .^2);
CD_KH = 4.*(s -1)*g.*d./(3* ws_KH .^2);
CD_DF = 4.*(s -1)*g.*d./(3* ws_DF .^2);
CD_SN = 4.*(s -1)*g.*d./(3* ws_SN .^2);
CD_G = 4.*(s -1)*g.*d./(3* ws_G .^2);
CD_CONST = 4.*( sdata -1)*g.* ddata ./(3* ws_CONST .^2);
% Reynolds
numbers
for
points: Re_d = w_s*d/nu
Re_Data = ws_Data .* ddata ./nu;
Re_KH = ws_KH .*d./nu;
Re_DF = ws_DF .*d./nu;
Re_SN = ws_SN .*d./nu;
Re_G = ws_G .*d./nu;
Re_CONST = ws_CONST .* ddata ./nu;
Rep = 10:1:10000;
%% Drag
coefficients
%Sediment
Transport
c_D_Data = 1.4 + 36./ Rep;
%KochHill
Drag
Coefficient :
SMALL = 1e -9;
volumefraction = max(SMALL ,min(1-SMALL ,1- voidfraction ));
if
volumefraction
< 0.4
F0 = (1+3* sqrt( volumefraction /2) +135/64* volumefraction *log( volumefraction )+16.14*
volumefraction ) /(1+0.681* volumefraction -8.48* volumefraction ^2+8.16* volumefraction
^3);
else
F0 = 10* volumefraction /( voidfraction ^3);
end
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 42 of 63
==PAGE:50==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
F3 = 0.0673 + 0.212* volumefraction + 0.0232/( voidfraction ^5);
F = voidfraction *(F0 + 0.5* F3.* Rep);
c_D_KH = 24* voidfraction ^2./( Rep).*F;
% DiFelice
Drag
Coefficient :
c_D_DF = (0.63 + 4.8./ sqrt(Rep)).^2;
% SchillerNaumann
Drag
Coefficient :
c_D_SN = max (0.44 ,24./( Rep).*(1.0 + 0.15* Rep .^(0.687)));
% Gidaspow
Drag
Coefficient :
c_D_G = 24./( voidfraction .* Rep .* voidfraction ) .*(1+0.15*( voidfraction .* Rep .* voidfraction )
.^(0.687));
% Constant
Drag
Coefficient :
c_D_CONST = ones(1, length(Rep));
figure
loglog(Rep ,c_D_Data ,'--k'), hold on
plot(Rep ,c_D_KH ,'-','color ','magenta ','Linewidth ' ,1)
plot(Rep ,c_D_DF ,'-','color ','green ','Linewidth ' ,1)
plot(Rep ,c_D_SN ,'-','color ','blue ','Linewidth ' ,1)
plot(Rep ,c_D_G ,'-','color ','red ','Linewidth ' ,1)
plot(Rep ,c_D_CONST ,'-k','Linewidth ' ,1)
plot(Re_Data ,CD_Data ,'*k',Re_KH ,CD_KH ,'om',Re_DF ,CD_DF ,'og',Re_SN ,CD_SN ,'ob',Re_G ,CD_G ,'
or',Re_CONST ,CD_CONST ,'ok')
grid on
xlabel('$ Re_d = w_s d/\nu$','FontSize ' ,14,'interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$ c_D$','FontSize ' ,14,'interpreter ','latex ')
legend('Freds\o{}e and
Deigaard
(1992) ','Hill et al. (2001) ','Felice
(1994) ','Schiller
and
Naumann
(1935) ','Gidaspow
(1994) ','Constant $c_D$','Guler et al. (2022) ','$w_{s}$
by Hill et al. (2001) ','$w_{s}$ by Felice
(1994) ','$w_{s}$ by
Schiller
and
Naumann
(1935) ','$w_{s}$ by
Gidaspow
(1994) ','$w_{s}$ by
Constant
drag ','FontSize ' ,10,'
location ','Southwest ','interpreter ','latex ')
figure
plot(ws_Data ,ws_FD ,'pk'), hold on
plot(ws_Data ,ws_KH (1:5) ,'dm')
plot(ws_Data ,ws_DF (1:5) ,'sg')
plot(ws_Data ,ws_SN (1:5) ,'ob')
plot(ws_Data ,ws_G (1:5) ,'*r')
plot(ws_Data ,ws_CONST (1:5) ,'^k')
plot ([.0
.3] ,[.0 .3],'-k')
grid on
xlabel('$w_s$ [m/s] measured ','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$w_s$ [m/s] calculated ','interpreter ','latex ')
legend('Freds\o{}e and
Deigaard
(1992) ','Hill et al. (2001) ','Felice
(1994) ','Schiller
and
Naumann
(1935) ','Gidaspow
(1994) ','Constant $c_D$','location ','Northwest ','
interpreter ','latex ')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 43 of 63
==PAGE:51==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
B
Script for section Non-Breaking Waves
close
all
clear
all
clc
%%
Importing
data
from
Alsina
T1b = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T0 .75b.csv ')));
T2b = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T1 .00b.csv ')));
T3b = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T1 .5b.csv ')));
T4b = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T2 .0b.csv ')));
%
T1c = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T0 .75c.csv ')));
T2c = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T1 .00c.csv ')));
T3c = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T1 .5c.csv ')));
T3c (27 ,:) =[];
T4c = sortrows( table2array (readtable('Alsina_T2 .0c.csv ')));
%% Data
nu = 1e -6;
H = [0.060
0.063
0.064
0.056];
% [m] Wave
Height
T = [0.75
1.00
1.50
2.00];
% [s] Wave
Period
S = [0.219
0.144
0.0866
0.0544];
% [-] Wave
Steepness
h = 0.30;
% [m] Water
Depth
kh = [2.20
1.37
0.80
0.58];
% [-]
k = kh./h;
% [1/m] Wave
Number
c = [1.136
1.373
1.577
1.629];
% [m/s] Wave
Celerity
amp = H./2;
% [m] Wave
Amplitude
omega = 2*pi./T;
% [1/s] Frequency
L = 2*pi./k;
% [m] Wave
Length
U0m = pi.*H./T./ sinh(k.*h);
% Free
stream
magnitude
velocity (m/s)
a = U0m ./( omega);
% Amplitude
of
orbital
bottom
motion (m)
Re = a.* U0m ./nu;
% Reynolds
number
delta1 = sqrt (2* nu./ omega);
% Stokes
length (m)
delta = 3*pi ./4.* delta1;
% Wave
boundary
layer
thickness (m)
%% Time
vectors
tInit = 0.01;
tEnd1 = 3.55;
tvec1 = tInit:tInit:tEnd1;
path21 = string(tvec1);
tEnd2 = 5;
tvec2 = tInit:tInit:tEnd2;
path22 = string(tvec2);
tEnd3 = 7;
tvec3 = tInit:tInit:tEnd3;
path23 = string(tvec3);
tEnd4 = 10;
tvec4 = tInit:tInit:tEnd4;
path24 = string(tvec4);
%% Load of
particle
data
p1 = 'M1';
p2 = 'M2';
p3 = 'M3';
p4 = 'M4';
p1S = 'M1Stokes/CFD ';
p1E = 'M1Eulerian /CFD ';
p2S = 'M2Stokes/CFD ';
p2E = 'M2Eulerian /CFD ';
p3S = 'M3Stokes/CFD ';
p3E = 'M3Eulerian /CFD ';
p4S = 'M4Stokes/CFD ';
p4E = 'M4Eulerian /CFD ';
path00 = 'processor0 ';
path3 = 'lagrangian / particleCloud /positions ';
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 44 of 63
==PAGE:52==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
path4 = 'lagrangian / particleCloud /v';
%Zero
Stokes
drift
for i=1: length(tvec1)
%p1
posS1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,path00 ,path21(i),path3));
xpS1(:,i) = table2array (posS1 (1:11 ,2));
ypS1(:,i) = table2array (posS1 (1:11 ,3));
velS1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,path00 ,path21(i),path4));
vS1(:,i) = table2array (velS1 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec2)
%p2
posS2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,path00 ,path22(i),path3));
xpS2(:,i) = table2array (posS2 (1:11 ,2));
ypS2(:,i) = table2array (posS2 (1:11 ,3));
velS2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,path00 ,path22(i),path4));
vS2(:,i) = table2array (velS2 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec3)
%p3
posS3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3S ,path00 ,path23(i),path3));
xpS3(:,i) = table2array (posS3 (1:11 ,2));
ypS3(:,i) = table2array (posS3 (1:11 ,3));
velS3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3S ,path00 ,path23(i),path4));
vS3(:,i) = table2array (velS3 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec4)
%p4
posS4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4S ,path00 ,path24(i),path3));
xpS4(:,i) = table2array (posS4 (1:11 ,2));
ypS4(:,i) = table2array (posS4 (1:11 ,3));
velS4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4S ,path00 ,path24(i),path4));
vS4(:,i) = table2array (velS4 (1:11 ,2));
end
%Zero
Eulerian
drift
for i=1: length(tvec1)
%p1
posE1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,path00 ,path21(i),path3));
xpE1(:,i) = table2array (posE1 (1:11 ,2));
ypE1(:,i) = table2array (posE1 (1:11 ,3));
velE1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,path00 ,path21(i),path4));
vE1(:,i) = table2array (velE1 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec2)
%p2
posE2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,path00 ,path22(i),path3));
xpE2(:,i) = table2array (posE2 (1:11 ,2));
ypE2(:,i) = table2array (posE2 (1:11 ,3));
velE2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,path00 ,path22(i),path4));
vE2(:,i) = table2array (velE2 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec3)
%p3
posE3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3E ,path00 ,path23(i),path3));
xpE3(:,i) = table2array (posE3 (1:11 ,2));
ypE3(:,i) = table2array (posE3 (1:11 ,3));
velE3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3E ,path00 ,path23(i),path4));
vE3(:,i) = table2array (velE3 (1:11 ,2));
end
for i=1: length(tvec4)
%p4
posE4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4E ,path00 ,path24(i),path3));
xpE4(:,i) = table2array (posE4 (1:11 ,2));
ypE4(:,i) = table2array (posE4 (1:11 ,3));
velE4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4E ,path00 ,path24(i),path4));
vE4(:,i) = table2array (velE4 (1:11 ,2));
end
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 45 of 63
==PAGE:53==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
%% Load of single
particle
data
% for i=1: length(tvec1)
%
%p1
%
posS1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,path00 ,path21(i),path3));
%
xpS = str2double (split( table2array (posS1 (1 ,2))));
%
xpS1(i) = xpS (1);
%
%ypS1(i) = table2array (posS1 (1 ,3));
%
velS1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,path00 ,path21(i),path4));
%
vS = str2double (split( table2array (velS1 (1 ,2))));
%
vS1(i) = vS (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec2)
%
%p2
%
posS2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,path00 ,path22(i),path3));
%
xpS = str2double (split( table2array (posS2 (1 ,2))));
%
xpS2(i) = xpS (1);
%
%ypS2(i) = table2array (posS2 (1 ,3));
%
velS2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,path00 ,path22(i),path4));
%
vS = str2double (split( table2array (velS2 (1 ,2))));
%
vS2(i) = vS (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec3)
%
%p3
%
posS3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3S ,path00 ,path23(i),path3));
%
xpS = str2double (split( table2array (posS3 (1 ,2))));
%
xpS3(i) = xpS (1);
%
%ypS3(i) = table2array (posS3 (1 ,3));
%
velS3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3S ,path00 ,path23(i),path4));
%
vS = str2double (split( table2array (velS3 (1 ,2))));
%
vS3(i) = vS (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec4)
%
%p4
%
posS4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4S ,path00 ,path24(i),path3));
%
xpS = str2double (split( table2array (posS4 (1 ,2))));
%
xpS4(i) = xpS (1);
%
%ypS4(i) = table2array (posS4 (1 ,3));
%
velS4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4S ,path00 ,path24(i),path4));
%
vS = str2double (split( table2array (velS4 (1 ,2))));
%
vS4(i) = vS (1);
% end
%
% %Zero
Eulerian
drift
% for i=1: length(tvec1)
%
%p1
%
posE1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,path00 ,path21(i),path3));
%
xpE = str2double (split( table2array (posE1 (1 ,2))));
%
xpE1(i) = xpE (1);
%
%ypE1(i) = table2array (posE1 (1 ,3));
%
velE1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,path00 ,path21(i),path4));
%
vE = str2double (split( table2array (velE1 (1 ,2))));
%
vE1(i) = vE (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec2)
%
%p2
%
posE2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,path00 ,path22(i),path3));
%
xpE = str2double (split( table2array (posE2 (1 ,2))));
%
xpE2(i) = xpE (1);
%
%ypE2(i) = table2array (posE2 (1 ,3));
%
velE2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,path00 ,path22(i),path4));
%
vE = str2double (split( table2array (velE2 (1 ,2))));
%
vE2(i) = vE (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec3)
%
%p3
%
posE3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3E ,path00 ,path23(i),path3));
%
xpE = str2double (split( table2array (posE3 (1 ,2))));
%
xpE3(i) = xpE (1);
%
%ypE3(i) = table2array (posE3 (1 ,3));
%
velE3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3E ,path00 ,path23(i),path4));
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 46 of 63
==PAGE:54==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
%
vE = str2double (split( table2array (velE3 (1 ,2))));
%
vE3(i) = vE (1);
% end
% for i=1: length(tvec4)
%
%p4
%
posE4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4E ,path00 ,path24(i),path3));
%
xpE = str2double (split( table2array (posE4 (1 ,2))));
%
xpE4(i) = xpE (1);
%
%ypE4(i) = table2array (posE4 (1 ,3));
%
velE4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4E ,path00 ,path24(i),path4));
%
vE = str2double (split( table2array (velE4 (1 ,2))));
%
vE4(i) = vE (1);
% end
%% Figure 8b (Alsina
et al. (2020))
figure
subplot (4,1,1)
plot(tvec1 (1:end -42) ./T(1) ,((xpS1 (1 ,43: end) -0.17) ./a(1))+0.39 , '--k',tvec1 (1:end -42) ./T(1)
,((xpE1 (1 ,43: end) -0.11) ./a(1)) -9.06,'-k',T1b (2:end -5 ,1),T1b (7:end ,2)*amp (1)/a(1) ,'ok'
,'MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(a)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$x_p $/a','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
xlim ([0 6])
ylim ([ -7.1 3])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southeast ')
legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
velocity ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southwest ')
subplot (4,1,2)
plot(tvec2 (1:end -52) ./T(2) ,((xpS2 (1 ,53: end) -0.17) ./a(2)) -0.25,'--k',tvec2 (1:end -52) ./T(2)
,((xpE2 (1 ,53: end) -0.17) ./a(2)) -0.49,'-k',T2b (1:end -6 ,1),T2b (7:end ,2)*amp (2)/a(2) ,'ok'
,'MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(b)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$x_p $/a','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
xlim ([0 6])
ylim ([ -7.1 3])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southwest ')
subplot (4,1,3)
plot(tvec3 (1:end -73) ./T(3) ,((xpS3 (1 ,74: end) -0.17) ./a(3))+0.12 , '--k',tvec3 (1:end -73) ./T(3)
,((xpE3 (1 ,74: end) -0.3)./a(3))+3.5 ,'-k',T3b (2:end -7 ,1),T3b (9:end ,2)*amp (3)/a(3) ,'ok','
MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(c)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$x_p $/a','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
xlim ([0 6])
ylim ([ -7.1 3])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southeast ')
subplot (4,1,4)
plot(tvec4 (1:end -91) ./T(4) ,((xpS4 (1 ,92: end) -0.17) ./a(4))+0.35 , '--k',tvec4 (1:end -91) ./T(4)
,((xpE4 (1 ,92: end) -0.41) ./a(4))+5.45 , '-k',T4b (1:end -9 ,1),T4b (10:end ,2)*amp (4)/a(4) ,'ok
','MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(d)')
xlabel('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylabel('$x_p $/a','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
xlim ([0 6])
ylim ([ -7.1 3])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southwest ')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 47 of 63
==PAGE:55==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
%% Figure 8c Modified (Alsina
et al. (2020))
figure
subplot (4,1,1)
plot(tvec1 (1:end -42) ./T(1) ,vS1 (1 ,43: end)./ U0m (1) ,'--k',tvec1 (1:end -42) ./T(1) ,vE1 (1 ,43: end
)./ U0m (1) ,'-k',T1c (1:end -8 ,1),T1c (9:end ,2) .*c(1)/U0m (1) ,'ok','MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(a)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$u_p/U_{0m}$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylim ([-1 1])
xlim ([0 6])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Northeast ')
subplot (4,1,2)
plot(tvec2 (1:end -52) ./T(2) ,vS2 (1 ,53: end)./ U0m (2) ,'--k',tvec2 (1:end -52) ./T(2) ,vE2 (1 ,53: end
)./ U0m (2) ,'-k',T2c (1:end -7 ,1),T2c (8:end ,2) .*c(2)/U0m (2) ,'ok','MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(b)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$u_p/U_{0m}$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylim ([-1 1])
xlim ([0 6])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Northeast ')
subplot (4,1,3)
plot(tvec3 (1:end -73) ./T(3) ,vS3 (1 ,74: end)./ U0m (3) ,'--k',tvec3 (1:end -73) ./T(3) ,vE3 (1 ,74: end
)./ U0m (3) ,'-k',T3c (1:end -10 ,1) ,T3c (11:end ,2) .*c(3)/U0m (3) ,'ok','MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(c)')
%xlabel ('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$u_p/U_{0m}$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylim ([-1 1])
xlim ([0 6])
legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
velocity ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Southeast ')
subplot (4,1,4)
plot(tvec4 (1:end -91) ./T(4) ,vS4 (1 ,92: end)./ U0m (4) ,'--k',tvec4 (1:end -91) ./T(4) ,vE4 (1 ,92: end
)./ U0m (4) ,'-k',T4c (1:end -13 ,1) ,T4c (14:end ,2) .*c(4)/U0m (4) ,'ok','MarkerSize ' ,3)
grid on
title('(d)')
xlabel('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylabel('$u_p/U_{0m}$','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,12)
ylim ([-1 1])
xlim ([0 6])
%legend('Zero
Stokes
drift ','Zero
Eulerian
drift ','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','
Northeast ')
%% Figure 7 Modified (Alsina
et al. (2020))
y_NF =
-0.3;
u_LS = amp .^2.* omega .*k.* cosh (2*k.*( y_NF+h))./(2* sinh(k.*h).^2) - amp .^2.* omega ./(2*h).*
coth(k.*h);
u_LE = amp .^2.* omega .*k.* cosh (2*k.*( y_NF+h))./(2* sinh(k.*h).^2);
% Wave
Condition
M1
upS1 (1) = xpS1 (1 ,343) - xpS1 (1 ,43);
upS1 (2) = xpS1 (2 ,342) - xpS1 (2 ,42);
upS1 (3) = xpS1 (3 ,342) - xpS1 (3 ,42);
upS1 (4) = xpS1 (4 ,340) - xpS1 (4 ,40);
upS1 (5) = xpS1 (5 ,343) - xpS1 (5 ,43);
upS1 (6) = xpS1 (6 ,345) - xpS1 (6 ,45);
upS1 (7) = xpS1 (7 ,339) - xpS1 (7 ,39);
upS1 (8) = xpS1 (8 ,342) - xpS1 (8 ,42);
upS1 (9) = xpS1 (9 ,340) - xpS1 (9 ,40);
upS1 (10) = xpS1 (10 ,343) - xpS1 (10 ,43);
upS1 (11) = xpS1 (11 ,344) - xpS1 (11 ,44);
upE1 (1) = xpE1 (1 ,344) - xpE1 (1 ,44);
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 48 of 63
==PAGE:56==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
upE1 (2) = xpE1 (2 ,343) - xpE1 (2 ,43);
upE1 (3) = xpE1 (3 ,347) - xpE1 (3 ,47);
upE1 (4) = xpE1 (4 ,341) - xpE1 (4 ,41);
upE1 (5) = xpE1 (5 ,344) - xpE1 (5 ,44);
upE1 (6) = xpE1 (6 ,346) - xpE1 (6 ,46);
upE1 (7) = xpE1 (7 ,343) - xpE1 (7 ,43);
upE1 (8) = xpE1 (8 ,348) - xpE1 (8 ,48);
upE1 (9) = xpE1 (9 ,344) - xpE1 (9 ,44);
upE1 (10) = xpE1 (10 ,349) - xpE1 (10 ,49);
upE1 (11) = xpE1 (11 ,352) - xpE1 (11 ,52);
% Wave
Condition
M2
upS2 (1) = xpS2 (1 ,452) - xpS2 (1 ,52);
upS2 (2) = xpS2 (2 ,453) - xpS2 (2 ,53);
upS2 (3) = xpS2 (3 ,455) - xpS2 (3 ,55);
upS2 (4) = xpS2 (4 ,449) - xpS2 (4 ,49);
upS2 (5) = xpS2 (5 ,454) - xpS2 (5 ,54);
upS2 (6) = xpS2 (6 ,456) - xpS2 (6 ,56);
upS2 (7) = xpS2 (7 ,451) - xpS2 (7 ,51);
upS2 (8) = xpS2 (8 ,456) - xpS2 (8 ,56);
upS2 (9) = xpS2 (9 ,452) - xpS2 (9 ,52);
upS2 (10) = xpS2 (10 ,457) - xpS2 (10 ,57);
upS2 (11) = xpS2 (11 ,459) - xpS2 (11 ,59);
upE2 (1) = xpE2 (1 ,453) - xpE2 (1 ,53);
upE2 (2) = xpE2 (2 ,455) - xpE2 (2 ,55);
upE2 (3) = xpE2 (3 ,458) - xpE2 (3 ,58);
upE2 (4) = xpE2 (4 ,450) - xpE2 (4 ,50);
upE2 (5) = xpE2 (5 ,455) - xpE2 (5 ,55);
upE2 (6) = xpE2 (6 ,458) - xpE2 (6 ,58);
upE2 (7) = xpE2 (7 ,453) - xpE2 (7 ,53);
upE2 (8) = xpE2 (8 ,459) - xpE2 (8 ,59);
upE2 (9) = xpE2 (9 ,454) - xpE2 (9 ,54);
upE2 (10) = xpE2 (10 ,461) - xpE2 (10 ,61);
upE2 (11) = xpE2 (11 ,464) - xpE2 (11 ,64);
% Wave
Condition
M3
upS3 (1) = xpS3 (1 ,676) - xpS3 (1 ,76);
upS3 (2) = xpS3 (2 ,675) - xpS3 (2 ,75);
upS3 (3) = xpS3 (3 ,678) - xpS3 (3 ,78);
upS3 (4) = xpS3 (4 ,669) - xpS3 (4 ,69);
upS3 (5) = xpS3 (5 ,674) - xpS3 (5 ,74);
upS3 (6) = xpS3 (6 ,677) - xpS3 (6 ,77);
upS3 (7) = xpS3 (7 ,672) - xpS3 (7 ,72);
upS3 (8) = xpS3 (8 ,680) - xpS3 (8 ,80);
upS3 (9) = xpS3 (9 ,673) - xpS3 (9 ,73);
upS3 (10) = xpS3 (10 ,682) - xpS3 (10 ,82);
upS3 (11) = xpS3 (11 ,686) - xpS3 (11 ,86);
upE3 (1) = xpE3 (1 ,677) - xpE3 (1 ,77);
upE3 (2) = xpE3 (2 ,677) - xpE3 (2 ,77);
upE3 (3) = xpE3 (3 ,681) - xpE3 (3 ,81);
upE3 (4) = xpE3 (4 ,671) - xpE3 (4 ,71);
upE3 (5) = xpE3 (5 ,677) - xpE3 (5 ,77);
upE3 (6) = xpE3 (6 ,679) - xpE3 (6 ,79);
upE3 (7) = xpE3 (7 ,674) - xpE3 (7 ,74);
upE3 (8) = xpE3 (8 ,683) - xpE3 (8 ,83);
upE3 (9) = xpE3 (9 ,676) - xpE3 (9 ,76);
upE3 (10) = xpE3 (10 ,685) - xpE3 (10 ,85);
upE3 (11) = xpE3 (11 ,690) - xpE3 (11 ,90);
% Wave
Condition
M4
upS4 (1) = xpS4 (1 ,889) - xpS4 (1 ,89);
upS4 (2) = xpS4 (2 ,894) - xpS4 (2 ,94);
upS4 (3) = xpS4 (3 ,900) - xpS4 (3 ,100);
upS4 (4) = xpS4 (4 ,886) - xpS4 (4 ,86);
upS4 (5) = xpS4 (5 ,893) - xpS4 (5 ,93);
upS4 (6) = xpS4 (6 ,899) - xpS4 (6 ,99);
upS4 (7) = xpS4 (7 ,890) - xpS4 (7 ,90);
upS4 (8) = xpS4 (8 ,902) - xpS4 (8 ,102);
upS4 (9) = xpS4 (9 ,892) - xpS4 (9 ,92);
upS4 (10) = xpS4 (10 ,905) - xpS4 (10 ,105);
upS4 (11) = xpS4 (11 ,911) - xpS4 (11 ,111);
upE4 (1) = xpE4 (1 ,893) - xpE4 (1 ,93);
upE4 (2) = xpE4 (2 ,897) - xpE4 (2 ,97);
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 49 of 63
==PAGE:57==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
upE4 (3) = xpE4 (3 ,903) - xpE4 (3 ,103);
upE4 (4) = xpE4 (4 ,887) - xpE4 (4 ,87);
upE4 (5) = xpE4 (5 ,892) - xpE4 (5 ,92);
upE4 (6) = xpE4 (6 ,902) - xpE4 (6 ,102);
upE4 (7) = xpE4 (7 ,893) - xpE4 (7 ,93);
upE4 (8) = xpE4 (8 ,905) - xpE4 (8 ,105);
upE4 (9) = xpE4 (9 ,895) - xpE4 (9 ,95);
upE4 (10) = xpE4 (10 ,908) - xpE4 (10 ,108);
upE4 (11) = xpE4 (11 ,915) - xpE4 (11 ,115);
upS1Avg = upS1 ./(4*T(1));
upE1Avg = upE1 ./(4*T(1));
upS2Avg = upS2 ./(4*T(2));
upE2Avg = upE2 ./(4*T(2));
upS3Avg = upS3 ./(4*T(3));
upE3Avg = upE3 ./(4*T(3));
upS4Avg = upS4 ./(4*T(4));
upE4Avg = upE4 ./(4*T(4));
%Alsina
data non -floating (from
figure
7)
%[M1 M2 M3 M4]
P3 = [0.06
1.00
2.62
2.54].*10^( -3) .*c;
P7 = [0.12
1.62
3.75
5.19].*10^( -3) .*c;
P8 = [NaN
0.11
2.48
3.30].*10^( -3) .*c;
P9 = [0.38
0.71
4.11
5.03].*10^( -3) .*c;
P10 = [0.02
0.81
1.87
1.67].*10^( -3) .*c;
P11 = [NaN
0.11
0.38
3.90].*10^( -3) .*c;
% ------------ Velocity
skewness
-------------%
%paths
p1En = 'postProcessing / sampleDict ';
p11En = 'postProcessing / sampleDict2 ';
p11Sn = 'postProcessing / sampleDictVelProfile ';
p2SExtra = 'StokesTest /CFD ';
for i=1:(T(1)/tInit)
r1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,p1En ,path21(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E1(i) = table2array (r1(1 ,2));
r1 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,p1En ,path21(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S1(i) = table2array (r1(1 ,2));
r11 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1E ,p11En ,path21(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E1s(i) = table2array (r11 (1 ,2));
r11 = readtable(fullfile(p1 ,p1S ,p11En ,path21(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S1s(i) = table2array (r11 (1 ,2));
end
for i=1:(T(2)/tInit)
r2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,p1En ,path22(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E2(i) = table2array (r2(1 ,2));
r2 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,p1En ,path22(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S2(i) = table2array (r2(1 ,2));
r21 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2E ,p11En ,path22(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E2s(i) = table2array (r21 (1 ,2));
r21 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,p11En ,path22(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S2s(i) = table2array (r21 (1 ,2));
end
for i=1:(T(3)/tInit)
r3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3E ,p1En ,path23(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E3(i) = table2array (r3(1 ,2));
r3 = readtable(fullfile(p3 ,p3S ,p1En ,path23(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S3(i) = table2array (r3(1 ,2));
end
for i=1:(T(4)/tInit)
r4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4E ,p1En ,path24(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0E4(i) = table2array (r4(1 ,2));
r4 = readtable(fullfile(p4 ,p4S ,p1En ,path24(i),'data_U.csv '));
u0S4(i) = table2array (r4(1 ,2));
end
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 50 of 63
==PAGE:58==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
for i=1:(T(2) *5/ tInit)
r1 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,p11Sn ,path22(i),'data_U.csv '));
uProfS2(i ,:) = table2array (r1(: ,2));
r1 = readtable(fullfile(p2 ,p2S ,p11Sn ,path22(i),'data_alpha .water.csv '));
alphaWater (i ,:) = table2array (r1(: ,2));
end
depth = linspace (0.3 , -0.3 ,500);
% -------------- Velocity
profile
underneath
crest
--------------%
figure
plot(uProfS2 (1 ,:),depth ,'-k'), hold on
plot(uProfS2 (100 ,:) ,depth ,'-r')
plot(uProfS2 (200 ,:) ,depth ,'-g')
plot(uProfS2 (300 ,:) ,depth ,'-m')
plot(uProfS2 (400 ,:) ,depth ,'-b')
plot ([ -0.3 0.4] ,[ depth (221)
depth (221)],'--k')
grid on
xlabel('u [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('y [m]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
legend('u(y,t=0) ','u(y,t=T)','u(y,t=2T)','u(y,t=3T)','u(y,t=4T)','$\ alpha_{water }$ = 0.5 '
,'interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,10)
% -------------- Velocity
profile
underneath
trough
--------------%
figure
plot(uProfS2 (50 ,:) ,depth ,'-k'), hold on
plot(uProfS2 (150 ,:) ,depth ,'-r')
plot(uProfS2 (250 ,:) ,depth ,'-g')
plot(uProfS2 (350 ,:) ,depth ,'-m')
plot(uProfS2 (450 ,:) ,depth ,'-b')
plot ([ -0.25
0.2] ,[ depth (273)
depth (273)],'--k')
grid on
xlabel('u [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('y [m]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
legend('u(y,t=0) ','u(y,t=T)','u(y,t=2T)','u(y,t=3T)','u(y,t=4T)','$\ alpha_{water }$ = 0.5 '
,'interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,10,'location ','Northwest ')
% Velocity
skewness
at sea bed u_0
sku0E1 = skewness(u0E1);
sku0E2 = skewness(u0E2);
sku0E3 = skewness(u0E3);
sku0E4 = skewness(u0E4);
sku0S1 = skewness(u0S1);
sku0S2 = skewness(u0S2);
sku0S3 = skewness(u0S3);
sku0S4 = skewness(u0S4);
%% Non -Floating
% My
velocity
vs
Alsina
velocity
with
perfect one -slope -line.
figure
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1.0] ,'-k'), hold on
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*0.9] , '--k' ,[0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*1.1] , '--k')
grid on
plot(upE1Avg (3) ,P3 (1) ,'ok')
plot(upE1Avg (7) ,P7 (1) ,'sk')
plot(upE1Avg (9) ,P9 (1) ,'^k')
plot(upE1Avg (10) ,P10 (1) ,'pk')
plot(upE2Avg (3) ,P3 (2) ,'ok')
plot(upE2Avg (7) ,P7 (2) ,'sk')
plot(upE2Avg (8) ,P8 (2) ,'dk')
plot(upE2Avg (9) ,P9 (2) ,'^k')
plot(upE2Avg (10) ,P10 (2) ,'pk')
plot(upE2Avg (11) ,P11 (2) ,'*k')
plot(upE3Avg (3) ,P3 (3) ,'ok')
plot(upE3Avg (7) ,P7 (3) ,'sk')
plot(upE3Avg (8) ,P8 (3) ,'dk')
plot(upE3Avg (9) ,P9 (3) ,'^k')
plot(upE3Avg (10) ,P10 (3) ,'pk')
plot(upE3Avg (11) ,P11 (3) ,'*k')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 51 of 63
==PAGE:59==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
plot(upE4Avg (3) ,P3 (4) ,'ok')
plot(upE4Avg (7) ,P7 (4) ,'sk')
plot(upE4Avg (8) ,P8 (4) ,'dk')
plot(upE4Avg (9) ,P9 (4) ,'^k')
plot(upE4Avg (10) ,P10 (4) ,'pk')
plot(upE4Avg (11) ,P11 (4) ,'*k')
t = zeros (6, 1);
axis
equal
yticks ([0 2 4 6 8]*10^( -3));
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'ok');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sk');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dk');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^k');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pk');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*k');%, 'visible ', 'off ');
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s',
'$w_s$ = 0.158 m/s','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s','location ','Northwest ','interpreter ','latex ')
;
xlim ([0
0.008])
ylim ([0
0.008])
xlabel('$u_{p}$ [m/s] - Simulation
with $u_E$ = 0','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$u_p$ [m/s] - Alsina
et al. (2020) ','interpreter ','latex ')
% -----------------------------------------------------%
% My
velocity
and
Alsina
vs 2. order
Lagrangian
drift
solution
for u_E =0.
figure
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1.0] ,'-k'), hold on
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*0.9] , '--k' ,[0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*1.1] , '--k')
grid on
plot(u_LE (1) ,P3 (1) ,'ok')
plot(u_LE (1) ,P7 (1) ,'sk')
plot(u_LE (1) ,P9 (1) ,'^k')
plot(u_LE (1) ,P10 (1) ,'pk')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P3 (2) ,'ok')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P7 (2) ,'sk')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P8 (2) ,'dk')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P9 (2) ,'^k')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P10 (2) ,'pk')
plot(u_LE (2) ,P11 (2) ,'*k')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P3 (3) ,'ok')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P7 (3) ,'sk')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P8 (3) ,'dk')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P9 (3) ,'^k')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P10 (3) ,'pk')
plot(u_LE (3) ,P11 (3) ,'*k')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P3 (4) ,'ok')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P7 (4) ,'sk')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P8 (4) ,'dk')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P9 (4) ,'^k')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P10 (4) ,'pk')
plot(u_LE (4) ,P11 (4) ,'*k')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (3) ,'or')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (3) ,'or')
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (3) ,'or')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (3) ,'or')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (7) ,'sr')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (7) ,'sr')
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (7) ,'sr')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (7) ,'sr')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (8) ,'dr')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (8) ,'dr')
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (8) ,'dr')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (8) ,'dr')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (9) ,'^r')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (9) ,'^r')
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (9) ,'^r')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (9) ,'^r')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (10) ,'pr')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (10) ,'pr')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 52 of 63
==PAGE:60==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (10) ,'pr')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (10) ,'pr')
plot(u_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (11) ,'*r')
plot(u_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (11) ,'*r')
plot(u_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (11) ,'*r')
plot(u_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (11) ,'*r')
t = zeros (12, 1);
axis
equal
yticks ([0 2 4 6 8]*10^( -3));
xticks ([0 2 4 6 8]*10^( -3));
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'ok');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sk');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dk');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^k');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pk');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*k');
t(7) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'or');
t(8) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sr');
t(9) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dr');
t(10) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^r');
t(11) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pr');
t(12) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*r');
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for
Alsina et al
. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.158 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for $u_E$
= 0','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ =
0.158 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','location ','Northwest ','
interpreter ','latex ');
xlim ([0
0.008])
ylim ([0
0.008])
xlabel('$u_{L2nd }$ [m/s] for $u_E$ = 0','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$u_p$ [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ')
% ----------------------------------------------------------------------%
% My
velocity
and
Alsina
vs 2. order
Lagrangian
drift
solution
for u_S =0.
figure
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1.0] ,'-k'), hold on
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*0.9] , '--k' ,[0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*1.1] , '--k')
grid on
plot(u_LS (1) ,P3 (1) ,'ok')
plot(u_LS (1) ,P7 (1) ,'sk')
plot(u_LS (1) ,P9 (1) ,'^k')
plot(u_LS (1) ,P10 (1) ,'pk')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P3 (2) ,'ok')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P7 (2) ,'sk')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P8 (2) ,'dk')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P9 (2) ,'^k')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P10 (2) ,'pk')
plot(u_LS (2) ,P11 (2) ,'*k')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P3 (3) ,'ok')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P7 (3) ,'sk')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P8 (3) ,'dk')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P9 (3) ,'^k')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P10 (3) ,'pk')
plot(u_LS (3) ,P11 (3) ,'*k')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P3 (4) ,'ok')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P7 (4) ,'sk')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P8 (4) ,'dk')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P9 (4) ,'^k')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P10 (4) ,'pk')
plot(u_LS (4) ,P11 (4) ,'*k')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (3) ,'og')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (3) ,'og')
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (3) ,'og')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (3) ,'og')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (7) ,'sg')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (7) ,'sg')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 53 of 63
==PAGE:61==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (7) ,'sg')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (7) ,'sg')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (8) ,'dg')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (8) ,'dg')
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (8) ,'dg')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (8) ,'dg')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (9) ,'^g')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (9) ,'^g')
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (9) ,'^g')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (9) ,'^g')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (10) ,'pg')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (10) ,'pg')
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (10) ,'pg')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (10) ,'pg')
plot(u_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (11) ,'*g')
plot(u_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (11) ,'*g')
plot(u_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (11) ,'*g')
plot(u_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (11) ,'*g')
t = zeros (12, 1);
axis
equal
yticks ([0 2 4 6 8]*10^( -3));
xticks ([0 2 4 6 8]*10^( -3));
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'ok');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sk');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dk');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^k');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pk');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*k');
t(7) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'or');
t(8) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sr');
t(9) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dr');
t(10) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^r');
t(11) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pr');
t(12) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*r');
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for
Alsina et al
. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.158 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for $u_S$
= 0','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ =
0.158 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','location ','Northwest ','
interpreter ','latex ');
xlim ([0
0.008])
ylim ([0
0.008])
xlabel('$u_{L2nd }$ [m/s] for $u_s$ = 0','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$u_p$ [m/s] - Alsina
et al. (2020) ','interpreter ','latex ')
% ------------ up/U0m
plot
--------------%
figure
plot(sku0E1 ,P3 (1)/U0m (1) ,'ok'), hold on
plot(sku0E2 ,P3 (2)/U0m (2) ,'ok')
plot(sku0E3 ,P3 (3)/U0m (3) ,'ok')
plot(sku0E4 ,P3 (4)/U0m (4) ,'ok')
plot(sku0E1 ,P7 (1)/U0m (1) ,'sk')
plot(sku0E2 ,P7 (2)/U0m (2) ,'sk')
plot(sku0E3 ,P7 (3)/U0m (3) ,'sk')
plot(sku0E4 ,P7 (4)/U0m (4) ,'sk')
plot(sku0E2 ,P8 (2)/U0m (2) ,'dk')
plot(sku0E3 ,P8 (3)/U0m (3) ,'dk')
plot(sku0E4 ,P8 (4)/U0m (4) ,'dk')
plot(sku0E1 ,P9 (1)/U0m (1) ,'^k')
plot(sku0E2 ,P9 (2)/U0m (2) ,'^k')
plot(sku0E3 ,P9 (3)/U0m (3) ,'^k')
plot(sku0E4 ,P9 (4)/U0m (4) ,'^k')
plot(sku0E1 ,P10 (1)/U0m (1) ,'pk')
plot(sku0E2 ,P10 (2)/U0m (2) ,'pk')
plot(sku0E3 ,P10 (3)/U0m (3) ,'pk')
plot(sku0E4 ,P10 (4)/U0m (4) ,'pk')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 54 of 63
==PAGE:62==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
plot(sku0E2 ,P11 (2)/U0m (2) ,'*k')
plot(sku0E3 ,P11 (3)/U0m (3) ,'*k')
plot(sku0E4 ,P11 (4)/U0m (4) ,'*k')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (3)/U0m (1) ,'or')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (7)/U0m (1) ,'sr')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (8)/U0m (1) ,'dr')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (9)/U0m (1) ,'^r')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (10)/U0m (1) ,'pr')
plot(sku0E1 ,upE1Avg (11)/U0m (1) ,'*r')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (3)/U0m (2) ,'or')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (7)/U0m (2) ,'sr')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (8)/U0m (2) ,'dr')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (9)/U0m (2) ,'^r')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (10)/U0m (2) ,'pr')
plot(sku0E2 ,upE2Avg (11)/U0m (2) ,'*r')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (3)/U0m (3) ,'or')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (7)/U0m (3) ,'sr')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (8)/U0m (3) ,'dr')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (9)/U0m (3) ,'^r')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (10)/U0m (3) ,'pr')
plot(sku0E3 ,upE3Avg (11)/U0m (3) ,'*r')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (3)/U0m (4) ,'or')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (7)/U0m (4) ,'sr')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (8)/U0m (4) ,'dr')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (9)/U0m (4) ,'^r')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (10)/U0m (4) ,'pr')
plot(sku0E4 ,upE4Avg (11)/U0m (4) ,'*r')
grid on
t = zeros (12, 1);
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'ok');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sk');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dk');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^k');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pk');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*k');
t(7) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'or');
t(8) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'sr');
t(9) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'dr');
t(10) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'^r');
t(11) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'pr');
t(12) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'*r');
xlim ([0.0
0.4])
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for
Alsina et al
. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.158 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.039 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.058 m/s for $u_E$
= 0','$w_s$ = 0.085 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.110 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ =
0.158 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.194 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','Fontsize ' ,10,'location ','
Northwest ','interpreter ','latex ');
xlabel('$S_{u_0 }$','Fontsize ' ,14,'interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$u_p/U_{0m}$','Fontsize ' ,14,'interpreter ','latex ')
%%
Floating
y_F = 0.0;
uF_LS = amp .^2.* omega .*k.* cosh (2*k.*( y_F+h))./(2* sinh(k.*h).^2) - amp .^2.* omega ./(2*h).*
coth(k.*h);
uF_LE = amp .^2.* omega .*k.* cosh (2*k.*( y_F+h))./(2* sinh(k.*h).^2);
uF_LS_crest = amp .^2.* omega .*k.* cosh (2*k.*(H(1) /2+h))./(2* sinh(k.*h).^2) - amp .^2.* omega
./(2*h).* coth(k.*h);
P1x = [0.211
0.138
0.065];
P1y = [0.031
0.013
0.002];
P2x = [0.107
0.094
0.085
0.059];
P2y = [0.0152
0.0085
0.0081
0.0025];
P4x = [0.202
0.142];
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 55 of 63
==PAGE:63==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
P4y = [0.0352
0.0142];
P6x = [0.198
0.141
0.097
0.095
0.061];
P6y = [0.0353
0.0165
0.0062
0.0080
0.0026];
% Figure 5b Alsina
digitized
M2 = sortrows( table2array (readtable('M2Float.csv ')));
M2Fx = M2(: ,1) -14;
M2Fy = M2(: ,2);
% My
velocity
vs
Alsina
velocity
with
perfect one -slope -line
for u_S =0
figure
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1.0] ,'-k'), hold on
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*0.9] , '--k' ,[0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*1.1] , '--k')
grid on
plot(uF_LS (1) ,P1y (1)*c(1) ,'<k')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,P1y (2)*c(2) ,'<k')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,P1y (3)*c(4) ,'<k')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,P2y (2)*c(3) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,P2y (3)*c(3) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,P2y (4)*c(4) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LS (1) ,P4y (1)*c(1) ,'hk')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,P4y (2)*c(2) ,'hk')
plot(uF_LS (1) ,P6y (1)*c(1) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,P6y (2)*c(2) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,P6y (3)*c(3) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,P6y (4)*c(3) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,P6y (5)*c(4) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (1) ,'<g')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (1) ,'<g')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (1) ,'<g')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (2) ,'+g')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (2) ,'+g')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (2) ,'+g')
plot(uF_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (4) ,'hg')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (4) ,'hg')
plot(uF_LS (1) ,upS1Avg (6) ,'vg')
plot(uF_LS (2) ,upS2Avg (6) ,'vg')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (6) ,'vg')
plot(uF_LS (3) ,upS3Avg (6) ,'vg')
plot(uF_LS (4) ,upS4Avg (6) ,'vg')
axis
equal
yticks ([0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05])
t = zeros (8, 1);
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'<k');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'+k');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'hk');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'vk');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'<g');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'+g');
t(7) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'hg');
t(8) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'vg');
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.132 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.080 m/s for
Alsina et al
. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.074 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.133 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.132 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.080 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$
w_s$ = 0.074 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.133 m/s for $u_S$ = 0','location ','
Northwest ','interpreter ','latex ');
xlim ([0
0.05])
ylim ([0
0.05])
xlabel('$u_{L2nd }$ [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$u_p$ [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
% -------------------------------------------------------------------%
% My
velocity
vs
Alsina
velocity
with
perfect one -slope -line
for u_E =0
figure
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1.0] ,'-k'), hold on
plot ([0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*0.9] , '--k' ,[0.0
1.0] ,[0.0
1*1.1] , '--k')
grid on
plot(uF_LE (1) ,P1y (1)*c(1) ,'<k')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 56 of 63
==PAGE:64==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
plot(uF_LE (2) ,P1y (2)*c(2) ,'<k')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,P1y (3)*c(4) ,'<k')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,P2y (2)*c(3) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,P2y (3)*c(3) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,P2y (4)*c(4) ,'+k')
plot(uF_LE (1) ,P4y (1)*c(1) ,'hk')
plot(uF_LE (2) ,P4y (2)*c(2) ,'hk')
plot(uF_LE (1) ,P6y (1)*c(1) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LE (2) ,P6y (2)*c(2) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,P6y (3)*c(3) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,P6y (4)*c(3) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,P6y (5)*c(4) ,'vk')
plot(uF_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (1) ,'<r')
plot(uF_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (1) ,'<r')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (1) ,'<r')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (2) ,'+r')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (2) ,'+r')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (2) ,'+r')
plot(uF_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (4) ,'hr')
plot(uF_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (4) ,'hr')
plot(uF_LE (1) ,upE1Avg (6) ,'vr')
plot(uF_LE (2) ,upE2Avg (6) ,'vr')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (6) ,'vr')
plot(uF_LE (3) ,upE3Avg (6) ,'vr')
plot(uF_LE (4) ,upE4Avg (6) ,'vr')
axis
equal
yticks ([0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06])
t = zeros (8, 1);
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'<k');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'+k');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'hk');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'vk');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'<r');
t(6) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'+r');
t(7) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'hr');
t(8) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'vr');
legend(t,'$w_s$ = 0.132 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.080 m/s for
Alsina et al
. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.074 m/s for
Alsina et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.133 m/s for
Alsina
et al. (2020) ','$w_s$ = 0.132 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.080 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$
w_s$ = 0.074 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','$w_s$ = 0.133 m/s for $u_E$ = 0','location ','
Northwest ','interpreter ','latex ');
xlim ([0
0.06])
ylim ([0
0.06])
xlabel('$u_{L2nd }$ [m/s] for $u_E$ = 0','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
ylabel('$u_p$ [m/s]','interpreter ','latex ','FontSize ' ,14)
% -------- Floating
particle
(4)
path xp/H with
zSd & zEv
------------%
figure
plot(tvec2 (1:end -51) ,(xpS2 (1 ,52: end)-xpS2 (1 ,52))./H(2) ,'--k'), hold on
plot(tvec2 (1:end -55) ,(xpE2 (1 ,56: end)-xpE2 (1 ,56))./H(2) ,'-k')
plot(M2Fx ,M2Fy ./H(2) ,'ok','MarkerSize ' ,5)
grid on
xlabel('$t/T$','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$x_p/H$','interpreter ','latex ')
xlim ([0 6])
legend('$u_S$ = 0','$u_E$ = 0','Alsina
et al. (2020) ','location ','Northwest ','interpreter
','latex ')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 57 of 63
==PAGE:65==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
C
Script for section Breaking Waves
clear
all
close
all
clc
%%
tstart = 136.005;
deltat = 0.005;
tend = 154;
tvec = tstart:deltat:tend;
path21 = string(tvec);
p0 = 'processor0 ';
p1 = 'processor1 ';
p2 = 'processor2 ';
p3 = 'processor3 ';
p4 = 'processor4 ';
p5 = 'processor5 ';
p6 = 'processor6 ';
p7 = 'processor7 ';
path3 = 'lagrangian / particleCloud /positions ';
for i=1: length(tvec)
x1 = readtable(fullfile(p5 ,path21(i),path3));
x(:,i) = table2array (x1 (1:4 ,2));
y(:,i) = table2array (x1 (1:4 ,3));
end
for i=1: length(tvec)
x1 = readtable(fullfile(p5 ,path21(i),path3));
xnew(:,i) = table2array (x1 (1:6 ,2));
ynew(:,i) = table2array (x1 (1:6 ,3));
end
%%
figure
plot(x(1 ,:),y(1 ,:),'.k'), hold on
plot(x(2 ,:),y(2 ,:),'.r')
plot(x(3 ,:),y(3 ,:),'.c')
plot(x(4 ,:),y(4 ,:),'.b')
grid on
xlabel('t/T','interpreter ','latex ')
ylabel('$x_p $/H','interpreter ','latex ')
legend('d=3mm , sp =1.00 ','d=3mm , sp =1.15 ','d=3mm , sp =1.38 ','d=3mm , sp =0.70 ','interpreter ',
'latex ','location ','Northwest ')
figure
plot (( tvec (1:3360) -136) /1.2 ,(x(1 ,1:3360) -x(1 ,1))/0.092 , '-k'), hold on
plot (( tvec (1:3360) -136) /1.2 ,(x(2 ,1:3360) -x(2 ,1))/0.092 , '-r')
plot (( tvec (1:3360) -136) /1.2 ,(x(3 ,1:3360) -x(3 ,1))/0.092 , '-c')
plot (( tvec (1:160) -136) /1.2 ,(x(4 ,1:160) -x(4 ,1))/0.092 , '-b')
plot (( tvec (168:3360) -136) /1.2 ,(x(4 ,168:3360) -x(1 ,1))/0.092 , '-b')
plot (( tvec (1:160) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (6 ,1:160) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
plot (( tvec (161:166) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (5 ,161:166) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
plot (( tvec (167:385) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (6 ,167:385) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
plot (( tvec (386:420) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (5 ,386:420) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
plot (( tvec (421:609) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (6 ,421:609) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
plot (( tvec (610:627) -136) /1.2 ,( xnew (5 ,610:627) -xnew (6 ,1))/0.092 , '-g')
grid on
t = zeros (5, 1);
t(1) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'-b');
t(2) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'-g');
t(3) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'-k');
t(4) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'-r');
t(5) = plot(NaN ,NaN ,'-c');
xlim ([0
11])
xlabel('t/T','interpreter ','latex ')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 58 of 63
==PAGE:66==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
ylabel('$x_p $/H','interpreter ','latex ')
legend(t,'d=3mm , sp =0.70 ','d=3mm , sp =0.95 ','d=3mm , sp =1.00 ','d=3mm , sp =1.15 ','d=3mm , sp
=1.38 ','interpreter ','latex ','location ','Northwest ')
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 59 of 63
==PAGE:67==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
D
Script for LIGGGHTS initialization
echo
both
log
../ DEM/log.liggghts
thermo_log
../ DEM/post/thermo.txt
atom_style
granular
atom_modify
map
array
communicate
single
vel yes
boundary
p f f
newton
off
units
si
region
reg
block 0 1.385288835597893
-0.3 0.3 0.0 0.1
units
box # (M2)
create_box
1 reg
neighbor
0.6 bin
neigh_modify
delay 0 binsize
0.6
# Material
properties
required
for
granular
pair
styles
fix
m1 all
property/global
youngsModulus
peratomtype
5.e6
fix
m2 all
property/global
poissonsRatio
peratomtype
0.45
fix
m3 all
property/global
coefficientRestitution
peratomtypepair 1 0.3
fix
m4 all
property/global
coefficientFriction
peratomtypepair 1 0.5
# pair
style
pair_style
gran
model
hertz
tangential
history # Hertzian
without
cohesion
pair_coeff
* *
# timestep , gravity
timestep
0.00001
fix
gravi
all
gravity
9.81
vector
0.0
-1.0 0.0
# walls
#fix
xwalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
xplane
0.0
#fix
xwalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
xplane
0.3
fix
ywalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
yplane
-0.3
fix
ywalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
yplane
0.3
fix
zwalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
zplane
0.0
fix
zwalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
zplane
0.1
#Insertion
place
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.005
0.010
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.005
0.025
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.295
0.010
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.005
0.040
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.005
0.055
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.005
0.070
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.295
0.025
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.295
0.040
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.295
0.055
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.295
0.070
units
box
create_atoms 1 single
0.17
-0.292
0.085
units
box
#Particle
properties
set
atom 1 diameter
0.008
density
760 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 1 - P1
set
atom 2 diameter
0.008
density
910 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 2 - P2
set
atom 3 diameter
0.008
density
1022 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 3 - P3
set
atom 4 diameter
0.004
density
840 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 4 - P4
set
atom 5 diameter
0.008
density
840 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 5 - P5
set
atom 6 diameter
0.012
density
840 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 6 - P6
set
atom 7 diameter
0.004
density
1100 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 7 - P7
set
atom 8 diameter
0.008
density
1100 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 8 - P8
set
atom 9 diameter
0.004
density
1340 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle 9 - P9
set
atom 10
diameter
0.008
density
1340 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle
10 - P10
set
atom 11
diameter
0.012
density
1340 vx 0 vy 0 vz 0
# Particle
11 - P11
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 60 of 63
==PAGE:68==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
# apply
nve
integration
to all
particles
that
are
inserted
as single
particles
fix
integr
all nve/sphere
# screen
output
compute
1 all
erotate/sphere
thermo_style
custom
step
atoms ke c_1 vol
thermo
1000
thermo_modify
lost
ignore
norm no
compute_modify
thermo_temp
dynamic
yes
# insert
the
first
particles
so that
dump is not
empty
run
1
dump
dmp all
custom
5000
post/dump *. liggghts_init
id type
type x y z ix iy iz vx vy vz
fx fy fz omegax
omegay
omegaz
radius
write_restart
post/restart/liggghts.restart
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 61 of 63
==PAGE:69==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
E
Script for LIGGGHTS run
echo
both
log
../ DEM/log.liggghts
thermo_log
../ DEM/post/thermo.txt
atom_style
granular
atom_modify
map
array
communicate
single
vel yes
boundary
p f f
newton
off
units
si
processors
2 1 1
#read
the
restart
file
read_restart
../ DEM/post/restart/liggghts.restart
neighbor
0.6 bin
neigh_modify
delay 0 binsize
0.6
#Material
properties
required
for new
pair
styles
fix
m1 all
property/global
youngsModulus
peratomtype
5.e6
fix
m2 all
property/global
poissonsRatio
peratomtype
0.45
fix
m3 all
property/global
coefficientRestitution
peratomtypepair 1 0.3
fix
m4 all
property/global
coefficientFriction
peratomtypepair 1 0.5
#pair
style
pair_style
gran
model
hertz
tangential
history #Hertzian
without
cohesion
pair_coeff
* *
#timestep , gravity
timestep
0.00001
fix
gravi
all
gravity
9.81
vector
0.0
-1.0 0.0
# walls
#fix
xwalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
xplane
0.0
#fix
xwalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
xplane
0.3
fix
ywalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
yplane
-0.3
fix
ywalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
yplane
0.3
fix
zwalls1
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
zplane
0.0
fix
zwalls2
all
wall/gran
model
hertz
tangential
history
primitive
type 1
zplane
0.1
#cfd
coupling
fix
cfd all
couple/cfd
couple_every 1 mpi
fix
cfd2
all
couple/cfd/force/implicit
#apply
nve
integration
to all
particles
that
are
inserted
as single
particles
fix
integr
all nve/sphere
#center
of mass
compute
centerOfMass
all com
#compute
total
dragforce
compute
dragtotal
all
reduce
sum
f_dragforce [1]
f_dragforce [2]
f_dragforce [3]
#screen
output
compute
1 all
erotate/sphere
thermo_style
custom
step
atoms ke c_1 vol
c_centerOfMass [3]
c_dragtotal [1]
c_dragtotal
[2]
c_dragtotal [3]
thermo
1000
thermo_modify
lost
ignore
norm no
compute_modify
thermo_temp
dynamic
yes
#insert
the
first
particles
so that
dump is not
empty
dump
dmp all
custom
5000
../ DEM/post/dump *. liggghts_resume
id type
type x y z
vx vy vz fx fy fz
f_dragforce [1]
f_dragforce [2]
f_dragforce [3]
radius
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 62 of 63
==PAGE:70==
Technical University of Denmark
June 3, 2022
run
0
Numerical simulation of cross-shore transport of microplastic particles
Page 63 of 63
==PAGE:71==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
rrrX/imX/F
