==PAGE:1==
Avoiding negative effects when using co-
solvents in closed biodegradation and toxi-
city test systems
Dimensioning of test vessels and revision of testing guidelines
Master Thesis
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and
toxicity test systems
Dimensioning of test vessels and revision of testing guidelines
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Mats Cautaerts
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Mats Cautaerts, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build-
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months within the Circularity & Environmental
Impact research group, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Environmental engineering Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mats Cautaerts - s202641
Signature
Date
ii
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The identification and characterisation of chemicals’ harmful properties towards human
health and the environment has become increasingly important. The Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has introduced guidelines that describe
standardized test procedures to determine these properties, which include aquatic toxi-
city and degradation test methods.
However, some chemicals are hydrophobic and/or
highly volatile, making them diﬀicult to handle and test in aquatic systems. Previous
studies showed that closed test setups prevent evaporative losses, making them particu-
larly effective when determining biodegradation and toxic properties of these diﬀicult to
test chemicals. Additionally, some OECD guidelines permit the use of co-solvents to help
solubilize volatile or hydrophobic test compounds and facilitate their introduction to the
system. Using co-solvents can however cause adverse effects in test systems, including oxy-
gen depletion, changes in the microbial community, biofilm formation, and interactions
with the test substance. OECD guidelines therefore allow a maximal solvent concentration
of 0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml (whichever is lowest) and recommend that the solvent be stripped
from the solution before the test is started. However, co-solvent addition in closed test
system is more precarious since the solvent remains in the test system.
Within this study, oxygen depletion caused by solvent degradation in closed systems was
investigated. A mass balance was calculated which compared the total oxygen available
inside a closed system to the total oxygen demand required to degrade any added solvent,
serving as a conservative approach.
The mass balance highlighted the importance of
the headspace fraction to ensure suﬀicient oxygen is available in a system.
To verify
whether systems could be dimensioned properly by varying the headspace fraction, two
commonly applied solvents (i.e. ethanol and acetone) were introduced separately at the
OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l) to closed 20 ml vials containing river water with
a varying headspace fraction. The oxygen concentration in each vial was measured over
7 days to determine how much of the initial oxygen had been depleted. High levels of
oxygen depletion were measured in systems designed with less than 25% headspace when
solvent was introduced at the OECD guideline concentration. Mass balance simulations
also indicated that systems can turn anaerobic when solvent is introduced at the OECD
level and less than 30% headspace is present. It is therefore suggested to include a minimal
requirement of 30% headspace in testing guidelines when operating any closed test-setup
at maximal solvent concentration.
To investigate a second negative effect of co-solvents in closed systems, the dose response
effect of solvent concentration on a microbial community’s composition was investigated.
Ethanol was introduced at varying concentrations (0.01 to 0.3 ml/l) to 1 l bottles con-
taining river water and a fixed headspace that ensured suﬀicient oxygen would be present.
After 7 days of incubation, the samples were sent to an external laboratory for DNA anal-
ysis. Sample analysis was however not performed in time, offering no conclusion regarding
the dose-response effect of ethanol on a microbial community’s composition. Visual obser-
vations suggested however that even the lowest tested ethanol concentration (0.01 ml/l)
stimulated microbial growth.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Philipp Mayer, Professor in Applied Environmental Chemistry, DTU
I want to thank you for providing guidance and insight along the way and giving great
suggestions. The experimental design in particular was a big challenge where your advice
was of great value. Introducing me to a research area which I was not so familiar with
and remaining patient with me, is something that I’m grateful for.
Heidi Birch, Senior Researcher, DTU
As my co-supervisor, you enabled me to progress my study and provided useful feedback
along the way. Without your expertise and critical thinking, this study would not have
been successful. Also a big thank you for helping out in the lab whenever I struggled.
Isabella,
Thank you for helping me take water samples, we had a good time falling to our knees in
the mud. But most of all I want to thank you for helping me stay motivated and cheering
me up.
iv
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal and scope of the present study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Testing guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Closed test systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Co-solvents in toxicity and biodegradability testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Alternatives to co-solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Volatilization of chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Materials and methods
11
3.1
Oxygen mass balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Oxygen depletion thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Planned experiments and surface water sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Oxygen depletion experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Microbial composition experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results and discussion
19
4.1
Oxygen mass balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Oxygen depletion experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Microbial composition experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Conclusion
30
5.1
Follow-up research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Bibliography
32
A Theoretical oxygen demand of solvents
37
B Pilot oxygen depletion experiment
38
C Field sample measurements
41
D Oxygen depletion experiment
42
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the past 40-50 years, overall awareness of the negative environmental and health ef-
fects attributed to the use of chemicals has increased. Moreover, our understanding of en-
vironmental processes, chemical properties, and regulatory requirements has advanced. In
2007, the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) was formed and the Registration, Evalua-
tion, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) entered into force [1]. REACH
is an EU regulation that aims to reduce the risk posed by all chemicals to human health
and the environment. To comply with REACH, companies are required to determine, doc-
ument, and communicate hazardous properties of substances they manufacture and import
in the EU. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has
introduced guidelines for the testing of chemicals, with the intent to promote good lab
practice and improve the quality and reproducibility of test results [2]. These guidelines are
divided into five sections and detail internationally agreed testing methods that identify
and characterise potential hazards of chemicals.
Biodegradability and toxicity data of chemicals are essential when determining their envi-
ronmental fate and effect on organisms [3]. Test methods to identify the effects of chemicals
on biotic systems and environmental fate are detailed in OECD guideline sections 2 and 3
respectively. Some of the test procedures in these sections are designed to determine tox-
icity to aquatic organisms or degradation in test systems that contain an aqueous phase
[4, 5]. However, some chemicals are hydrophobic and/or highly volatile, making them
diﬀicult to handle and test in aquatic test systems [6]. Hydrophobic chemicals are poorly
water soluble and tend to sorb to glassware, polymers or other organic materials present in
the test setup, which lowers bioavailability to organisms in toxicity testing. This may lead
to decreased exposure concentrations and underestimation of toxic properties. Similarly,
evaporative losses of a volatile test compound in ecotoxicity testing may lead to underes-
timation of toxicity and underestimated effects in the environment [7, 8]. Losses during
biodegradation testing may lead to over- or underestimation of biodegradation, depending
on the test method.
Varied test results may therefore lead to a biased environmental
hazard classification [9].
Several exposure systems can be considered to address the loss of test substance from the
system [6]. In a static-renewal system the test substance is replenished on a batch basis,
while a flow-through system allows the test solution to be replaced continuously or inter-
mittently. In a flow-through setup the displaced solutions run to waste and the volatiles
are trapped [10]. However, testing volatile chemicals in flow-through setups resulted in in-
complete mass balances, and OECD’s test chemical recovery validity criteria was not met
[9, 11]. This indicated that the test chemical escaped from the setup or sorbed to plastic
or silicone materials present in the fittings of the setup. On the other hand, complete mass
balances were obtained when testing in completely closed setups using a plastic-free lock
system and special adsorption tube to trap the volatile fraction [9, 11]. This demonstrated
the effectiveness of closed test setups to limit volatilization losses of test chemicals.
In aquatic toxicity testing, the dissolved fraction of a substance is bioavailable to organisms
and is therefore considered responsible for the true aquatic toxicity [12]. Volatile chemi-
cals still partition from the aqueous phase to the headspace in closed test systems until
equilibrium is reached, making it challenging to define effective exposure concentrations
[13]. Some OECD guidelines permit the addition of water-miscible co-solvent wherein the
test compound is dissolved. While the addition of solvents does not increase the solubility
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
1
==PAGE:10==
in water significantly, the saturation limit in the water-solvent mixture may be improved
to some extent [14]. More importantly, using solvents accelerates the preparation of con-
centrated solutions and facilitates the addition of test chemical to the test system with
negligible evaporative losses [14]. Solvents are particularly helpful when adding hydrolyti-
cally unstable or highly viscous or volatile chemicals.
OECD guidelines that permit the use of co-solvents state that solvent concentration should
not exceed 0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml (whichever is lowest) [6, 10, 15]. Moreover, it is recom-
mended that the solvent be stripped from the test solution after mixing or before the test
medium is added. This demonstrates that OECD guidelines are not intended for closed
exposure systems as the solvent can’t be evaporated after the system is closed. The OECD
guidelines express that solvents should not have any adverse effects on the system. How-
ever, it has been shown that co-solvents can in fact influence test responses [16]. Closed
test setups in particular are more sensitive to the addition of co-solvents since evaporative
losses are limited and the solvent remains in the test system. For example, the co-solvent
can be utilized as substrate by microorganisms present in degradation test systems. This
can lead to oxygen depletion, increased CO2 levels, and a consequent shift in pH, further af-
fecting biodegradation kinetics [9, 14]. A co-solvent can also be toxic to the organism itself
or modify the toxicity of the test substance by facilitating the uptake into test organisms,
resulting in increased toxicity [17, 18]. Furthermore, co-solvents can alter the composition
of microbial community by promoting the growth of specific degraders [19, 20]. When
testing volatile chemicals in closed water-sediment systems, the formation of a biofilm was
observed between the air and water boundary when using acetone as co-solvent [11]. This
biofilm potentially prevented the diffusion of oxygen into the aqueous phase, which in turn
impeded the degradation of the test chemical in solution.
Although both the application of solvents and the use of closed systems are permitted in
some guidelines, prior work has demonstrated that their combination is expected to cause
issues. Therefore, further research is required to fully understand and avoid adverse effects
caused by solvents in closed test setups and to improve standardized testing guidelines.
2
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Goal and scope of the present study
The goal of the current study was to investigate and avoid negative effects associated
with the use of co-solvents in closed biodegradability and toxicity test systems. Using co-
solvents in closed systems is particularly intricate since evaporative losses are minimized
and the solvent remains in the system. Considering co-solvent testing guidelines are often
intended for open systems, the current study assesses solvent guideline levels in closed
systems and provides suggestions for further testing.
A major adverse effect of co-solvents is their contribution towards oxygen depletion when
they are degraded.
Ensuring there is enough oxygen present in the test system could
serve as a means to prevent this. As a first step, an oxygen mass balance was set up
which compared the total oxygen available inside the exposure system to the total oxygen
demand required to degrade the solvent.
Based on the results from this oxygen mass
balance simulation, the headspace to aqueous phase ratio was determined to be one of
the most important factors to ensure suﬀicient oxygen is present in the system. It was
hypothesized that the current OECD co-solvent levels (0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml) would
cause oxygen depletion in closed systems that are designed with insuﬀicient headspace. It
was therefore hypothesized that proper dimensioning of a test system could be achieved by
varying the headspace fraction of systems. This was verified experimentally by introducing
two commonly used solvents (i.e. ethanol and acetone) to systems with varying headspace
and monitoring the oxygen content over time.
A second negative effect when using co-solvents is their influence on the microbial com-
munity. It was hypothesized that varying co-solvent concentrations can cause changes to
the composition of a microbial community. Therefore, a dose-response experiment was
performed to determine which solvent concentration caused significant changes in the mi-
crobial composition within a water sample.
It was also decided to compare microbial
community changes in both open and closed systems.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
2.1
Testing guidelines
The Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) is
an EU regulation which entered into force in 2007 [1]. REACH aims to reduce the risk
posed by all chemicals to human health and the environment. To comply with REACH,
companies are required to determine, document, and communicate hazardous properties
of substances they manufacture and import in the EU. The Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development’s (OECD) is an intergovernmental economic organisation that
has introduced guidelines for the testing of chemicals [2]. The guidelines are a collection
of internationally agreed testing methods which are split into five sections. The topics
covered in each section are shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals
Section
Subject
1
Physical-Chemical properties
2
Effects on Biotic Systems
3
Environmental fate and behaviour
4
Health Effects
5
Other Test Guidelines
Section 2 contains guidelines regarding acute and chronic toxicity testing in various model
organisms and is thus of particular importance for toxicology research. The guidelines in
Section 3 describe test methods to investigate a chemical’s fate and effect in the environ-
ment. Both sets are used as tools for regulatory safety screening, evaluation, reporting,
and subsequent chemical registration [21].
2.2
Closed test systems
Many OECD guidelines describe test procedures using open exposure systems. However,
handling volatile and hydrophobic chemicals in open test systems compromises the test
due to evaporative losses. The loss of test compound in ecotoxicity testing may lead to
underestimation of toxicity and underestimated effects in the environment [7, 8]. Losses
during biodegradation testing may lead to over- or underestimation of biodegradation, de-
pending on the test method. Hydrophobic chemicals are poorly water soluble and tend to
sorb to glassware, polymers or other organic materials present in the test setup, which low-
ers bioavailability to organisms in toxicity testing. This may lead to decreased exposure
concentrations and underestimation of toxic properties [13, 22]. Handling hydrophobic,
volatile chemicals in conventional test setups may therefore result in a more or less favor-
able hazard classification [7].
Various alternative systems have been suggested to reduce or eliminate evaporative losses
of the test compound. Open systems have been designed with a static or flow-through
renewal of the test solution, where the test compound is replaced on a batch or continual
basis. However, flow-through and renewal exposure procedures are considered impractical
when testing with microalgae [23].
Moreover, studies that tested volatile chemicals in
flow-through setups resulted in incomplete mass balances and found that OECD’s test
4
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:13==
validity of 90-110% recovery (for radiolabeled chemicals) and 70-110% recovery (for non-
labeled chemicals) was not met [9, 24]. It suggested that the test chemical escaped or
sorbed to any plastic or silicone materials present the setup. On the other hand, complete
mass balances were obtained when using completely closed systems with a plastic-free
lock system and special adsorption tubes to trap the volatile fraction [9, 11]. Therefore,
their simplicity and effectiveness at limiting evaporative losses of the test substance, make
closed test setups particularly advantageous when testing volatile, hydrophobic chemicals.
2.3
Co-solvents in toxicity and biodegradability testing
Some OECD guidelines allow the use of co-solvents to solubilize the test compound and
facilitate its introduction to the test system [6]. To be applicable in aquatic test systems,
a solvent must meet certain prerequisites. A solvent should be miscible in water while also
be suﬀiciently non-polar to dissolve hydrophobic test compounds. These solvents often
have a non-polar and polar group that enable them to interact with non-polar organic
molecules and water respectively. As second prerequisite, the solvent should not be toxic
or have any other adverse effect on test organisms or the test system itself. Therefore, it
is advised to keep solvent level at least one order of magnitude below the corresponding
no-observed effect concentration (NOEC), taking the type of test species and the length of
the test into account, or in any case below 0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml [25]. Decades of testing
has shown that the aforementioned solvent level is below any concentration that induces
direct toxic effects [26].
Table 2.2 contains chemicals that have been used as co-solvents in aquatic testing and
corresponding references which illustrate their application when handling diﬀicult to test
substances. Ethanol, methanol, acetone, and DMSO are most commonly used, though
other solvents have been used [27].
Table 2.2: Solvents used in toxicity and biodegradability testing
Solvent
CAS No.
Use as co-solvent
Ethanol
64-17-5
[18, 28, 29, 30, 31]
Methanol
67-56-1
[9, 7, 11, 13, 18, 32, 30]
Acetone
67-64-1
[9, 8, 11, 18, 28, 30, 33]
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
67-68-5
[7, 18, 20, 28, 34, 35, 36]
Dimethylformamide (DMF)
68-12-2
[33, 37]
Acetonitrile
75-05-8
[38, 39]
Triethylene glycol
112-27-6
[30]
2-Methoxyethanol (EGME)
109-86-4
[30]
Dimethoxyethane (EGDE)
110-71-4
[30]
2.3.1
Advantages of co-solvents
Carrier solvents can be used in aquatic testing to create stable, homogeneous solutions
of hydrolytically unstable or highly viscous substances, making them easier to handle
and introduce into exposure systems [40]. Solvents are also particularly useful to prepare
concentrated stock solutions of highly volatile chemicals and the subsequent dilution to
the desired test concentrations [25]. The direct addition of small test chemical volumes is
hereby omitted, limiting evaporative losses, and the preparation of saturated solutions for
poorly water soluble substances is accelerated [14]. Additionally, solvents may improve the
saturation limit of hydrophobic compounds in the water-solvent mixture to some extent
[14, 28]. However, co-solvent concentrations in aquatic tests are typically kept below the
level which affects the water solubility of hydrophobic organic chemicals.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
5
==PAGE:14==
Hydrophobic organic compounds have the tendency to adsorb to glassware, filters, plastic
fittings, particulate matter and centrifuge tubes, which reduces bioavailability and nom-
inal exposure concentrations inside the test media [14]. While agitation (i.e. shaking or
stirring) during testing is generally essential to prevent biofilm formation and ensure chem-
ical equilibrium between different phases inside the exposure system, excess mechanical
agitation promotes the contact between the test substance and colloidal material or soil
particles, leading to increased sorption [41].
Co-solvents hereby offer an additional advantage as they can help solubilize the test chem-
ical, improving bioavailability and allowing degradation at the water/solvent interface
[40, 42]. Therefore, the use of a solvent can be warranted to avoid excessive agitation of
the test system [14]. For instance, the presence of an organic co-solvent in water-sediment
systems facilitates the transfer of hydrophobic chemicals to the aqueous phase and reduces
their sorption onto soil particles [29]. It should be noted that a test chemical spiked with
a co-solvent is often considered dissolved because it appears dissolved in the solvent, but
may still result in precipitation or a heterogeneous distribution of test substance when
added to the aqueous test medium above solubility [7, 18, 28].
2.3.2
Negative effects of co-solvents
A co-solvent has the ability to interact with test organisms and the test system, which
can alter test results and increase variability [16]. Within this subsection, several negative
effects are discussed. In toxicity testing, it is important to consider the inherent toxicity
of the solvent or any solvent-chemical interactions. In biodegradation testing, co-solvents
can cause changes in the composition of a microbial community and stimulate growth of
microorganisms. This can lead to oxygen depletion and the formation of a biofilm which
is also considered problematic in toxicity testing.
Toxicity and interaction with test substance
As a first major negative effect in toxicity testing, a co-solvent may be inherently toxic
to the test organisms. Therefore, OECD guidelines state solvent concentrations should
not exceed 0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml (whichever is lowest) [6, 10]. Additionally, additive,
antagonistic, or synergistic solvent-toxicant interactions may occur [25]. For example, a
study from 2007 found that diazepam and digoxin solutions in DMSO (1% v/v) were
more toxic to D. magna compared to tests conducted without DMSO [18]. This could be
explained by the increased bioavailability of the test chemical in the system along with a
facilitated uptake through the cell membranes of the organisms [20]. On the other hand, an
antagonistic effect was observed when malathion in DMSO (1% v/v) was approximately
ten times less toxic compared to systems where no solvent was introduced [18].
This
might be because one chemical activates or inhibits microsomal enzymes, which in turn
stimulates the metabolism of a second chemical or interferes with its uptake in the organism
[43]. It should be noted that the DMSO concentration (1% v/v) was 100 times higher than
the current OECD guideline level (0.1 ml/l), but still demonstrates potential unforeseen
interactions with the test chemical. In another study, lake trout were exposed to PCBs
without and with acetone at 0.01 ml/l (ten times below the current OECD guideline level)
[17]. Acetone increased gill assimilation eﬀiciency and ventilation, resulting in an increased
uptake of PCBs.
Synergistic or antagonistic solvent-chemical interactions are diﬀicult to predict and poorly
understood but should be taken into account as they can lead to the over- or underesti-
mation of a substance’s intrinsic toxicity, biodegradability, or persistence [40].
6
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:15==
Changes in microbial community
In biodegradation testing, a challenge arises when introducing co-solvents to test systems
as they can cause changes in the composition of the microbial community in the system
[20]. Chemicals are used as substrate by microorganisms, which promotes the growth of
specific degraders. In a recent study, sampled river water was incubated with over 40
petroleum hydrocarbons at low test concentrations [19]. Although limited, an increased
presence of specific petroleum hydrocarbon degraders such as Nevskia and Sulfuritalea
was observed [19]. A rich species diversity is beneficial for biodegradation as some species
are more eﬀicient at degrading certain pollutants than others.
The interaction where
the metabolites produced by one microorganism can act as substrate for others is also
called syntrophy, and facilitates complete mineralization of contaminants [44]. On the
other hand, antagonistic microbe-microbe interactions can occur when they compete for
the same resources, leading to the exclusion of microorganisms that are at a competitive
disadvantage [45].
The presence of a co-solvent in test systems can stimulate the growth of specific microor-
ganisms that exclude competent test chemical degraders [46]. Additionally, a co-solvent
can inhibit the growth of competent degraders entirely. For instance, a study that deter-
mined the effect of DMSO, ethanol, and methanol on the growth of five different bacteria
found that some bacteria were more resilient than others to the inhibitory effect of a
specific solvent [47]. The effect of a co-solvent on the microbial composition is therefore
important to consider when performing biodegradation tests. Currently, OECD biodegra-
dation guidelines don’t include microbial community characterisation (e.g. cell density and
presence or absence of competent degraders) which often leads to little insight into the
degradation pathways. However, recent research has advocated for the characterisation
and standardisation (via e.g. filtration or centrifugation) of inoculum and test medium to
improve reproducibility of results [48].
Oxygen depletion
Co-solvents not only cause changes to a microbial community’s composition, they also
stimulate microbial growth and oxygen consumption, ultimately leading to oxygen deple-
tion in exposure systems [14]. Onset of hypoxic (typically 2-3 mg/L dissolved oxygen in
water) or anoxic (absence of oxygen) conditions can have detrimental consequences for test
organisms in toxicity testing that require suﬀiciently high oxygen levels for survival [49].
In biodegradation testing, low levels of dissolved oxygen in the water may lead to changes
in microbial community, the consequent change of metabolic activity, and can therefore
affect biodegradation rates of test chemicals [25]. Readily biodegradable solvents such as
acetone, ethanol, and methanol are known to decrease dissolved oxygen in test media [40].
This problem could be prevented by using solvents such as dimethylformamide (DMF)
or triethylene glycol, which are degraded gradually but still dissolve many hydrophobic
organic substances.
Care should still be taken however when choosing an appropriate
co-solvent for a corresponding test. For instance, it was determined that DMF stimulates
the growth of algae in algal toxicity tests by providing additional nutrients [50].
OECD guidelines that allow the use of solvents to introduce the test chemical to the test
medium, are generally intended for open test systems. In fact, It is suggested that the
solvent be stripped off entirely before the test begins [2, 10, 15]. However, in a closed
test system evaporative losses of the solvent are minimized, which leads to more dissolved
organic carbon (DOC) and increased oxygen consumption. Therefore, special care should
be taken to maintain an ample oxygen supply when introducing co-solvents to closed test
setups.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Formation of biofilms
Another negative effect that has been linked to the use of co-solvents is the growth of
microorganisms in a film within the test system. Following OECD 308, a biodegradation
simulation of several aromatic hydrocarbons (i.e. benzo[a]pyrene, phenanthrene, biphenyl,
tetralin) was performed in closed water-sediment systems [11]. As the guideline recom-
mends adding test chemicals via aqueous solutions, acetone (at OECD level 0.1 mg/ml)
was used to solubilize the test chemicals and introduce them to the system. In test systems
containing co-solvent, a bio-film formed on top of the water layer, confirming that acetone
had an adverse impact on test conditions. Microbial activity likely increased at the air-
water interface as oxygen depleted in the water phase, resulting in the biofilm formation.
Oxygen from the headspace was consumed by the biofilm but couldn’t diffuse through the
microbial layer, leading to anaerobic conditions in the water phase.
Biofilm formation at the air-water can prevent the diffusion of oxygen into the aqueous
phase.
It is therefore problematic in both toxicity and degradation testing since test
organisms require oxygen to survive and the degradation of test chemicals can be impeded.
To prevent biofilm formation and increase oxygen diffusion into the water phase, agitation
of the exposure system is recommended in a closed test setup.
Other negative effects
Another negative effect can occur when the co-solvent itself becomes reactive under spe-
cific test conditions. For instance, the highly nucleophilic methoxide ion is formed when
methanol is introduced to basic test media [51]. This can cause the formation of complexes
or react with the test substance, altering its chemical properties entirely [52].
Addition of co-solvents in biodegradability and toxicity testing systems can cause unfore-
seen negative effects, which in turn results in statistically significant variation of test
responses [25]. It is diﬀicult to avoid adverse interactions for all possible combinations of
solvents, test chemicals, and test organisms. The limited understanding of solvent-toxicant
interactions thus suggests a case-by-case approach when in aquatic chemical testing [18].
Consequently, OECD guidelines state that the use of co-solvents is only warranted in
situations where no other methods of test solution preparation are applicable [2, 14, 40].
In conclusion, co-solvents should only be used when testing chemicals that are poorly
soluble in water, highly volatile, hydrolytically unstable, or have a strong tendency to sorb
to surfaces or organic matter and when all other test preparation methods are impractical.
2.4
Alternatives to co-solvents
Alternative solvent-free methods have been developed to introduce diﬀicult to test chemi-
cals to exposure systems and obtain stable exposure concentrations [2].
2.4.1
Passive dosing
Passive dosing, is a partitioning based method that aims to maintain the exposure con-
centration of hydrophobic chemicals within the test media [53]. A polymer (e.g. silicone)
is loaded with the test compound and added to the test medium. A large amount of
hydrophobic chemical can sorb to the polymer so that it acts as a reservoir during the
test [35]. Any losses due to evaporation or sorption, is compensated as the test chemical
continually partitions from the polymer to the aqueous phase to reach equilibrium. Addi-
tionally, it is possible to control the aqueous concentration by varying the test chemical
concentration in the polymer based on corresponding polymer/water partition coeﬀicients.
A study assessed the toxicity of bromochlorophene (BCP) using both passive dosing and
co-solvent setups for three ecotoxicity tests: algal growth inhibition, Daphnia magna im-
mobilization, and fish-embryo toxicity [35]. EC50 values were lower for algae, daphnids,
8
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:17==
and fish embryos in passive dosing systems, while effect concentrations were higher when a
co-solvent was applied. This is because stable concentrations can be obtained when using
passive dosing methods, while sorption and evaporative losses still occur in the presence of
a co-solvent. Additionally, tests performed with passive dosing offered good repeatability,
as well as good precision in the algal and fish embryo tests. Therefore, the authors con-
sider the aquatic toxicity data of BCP in organisms reliable when determined by passive
dosing. Similarly, passive dosing and co-solvent setups for the Microtox® were assessed
using various polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) [36]. The apparent sensitivity was
3.4 to 12.4 times higher for acenaphthene and phenanthrene respectively when applying
passive dosing compared to co-solvent spiking.
2.4.2
Direct addition
The test substance can also be introduced directly to the test medium. However, testing
usually requires small volumes to be added to the system. Evaporative losses during system
preparation therefore make this method unsuitable for highly volatile and sparingly water
soluble chemicals. Additionally, some guidelines do not permit direct spiking of chemicals
[10, 11].
2.4.3
Generator/saturator columns
A generator column can be used to obtain saturated aqueous solutions. A column is filled
with a chemically inert matrix (e.g. glass beads) which is coated with the test chemical.
Water is then pumped through the column and dissolution of the chemical is accelerated
due to the large contact area. Often only a single pass through the column is suﬀicient to
reach saturation concentrations [2].
Although generator columns are suitable for hydrophobic chemicals, they require extensive
effort to operate [54]. Moreover, the concentration within the column can fluctuate when
the column is leached or replenished, leading to unacceptable variations in test concentra-
tions [25].
2.5
Volatilization of chemicals
Since aqueous test systems often contain at least two different phases (i.e. headspace and
aqueous phase), it is important to discuss and understand the volatilization of substances
from the aqueous phase to the headspace.
The concentration of a substance dissolved in the aqueous phase is proportional to its
partial pressure above the liquid. This proportionality is described by Henry’s law:
pi = KH · CW
(2.1)
Where pi [atm] is the partial pressure of the substance in the gaseous phase, Cw [mol·m−3]
is the concentration in the aqueous phase, and KH [atm · m3 · mol−1] is the Henry’s law
constant. Henry’s law expresses the relationship between two concentrations since the
partial pressure can be considered as a concentration via the ideal gas law.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
9
==PAGE:18==
The Henry’s law constant is a parameter that describes a substance’s tendency to escape
from an aqueous solution to the gaseous phase [55]. A chemical’s volatility from aqueous
solution is classified as shown in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Volatility of a chemical from aqueous solution [55]
KH [atm · m3 · mol−1]
Volatility
< 3 · 10−7
Less volatile than water
3 · 10−7 < KH < 10−5
Slow rate of volatilization
10−5 < KH < 10−3
Significant rate of volatilization
>10−3
Volatile from aqueous solution
10
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:19==
3
Materials and methods
3.1
Oxygen mass balance
An aquatic test system is considered to have two phases (not considering a water-sediment
test), i.e. the headspace and aqueous phase. To ensure that suﬀicient oxygen is present in
a closed system to degrade any added chemicals, the total oxygen available in the system
should be known as well as the oxygen demand of the chemicals. Hence, calculations were
implemented in Microsoft Excel to simulate the oxygen mass balance. The variables used
for oxygen simulations are given in Table 3.1 (ρO2 = 1.429 mg/ml; XO2 = 0.2095; CO2 is
set as 9.82 mg/l from field measurements).
Table 3.1: Variables used for oxygen simulations in test systems; (∗) = constant
Variable
Meaning
Unit
Osys
Total oxygen available in the system
mg O2
Oh
Oxygen present in the headspace
mg O2
Ow
Oxygen present in the aqueous phase
mg O2
fh
Headspace volume fraction
fw
Aqueous phase volume fraction
Vsys
Total volume of the system
ml
Vh
Volume of headspace in the system
ml
Vw
Volume of aqueous phase in the system
ml
Vsol
Initial volume of the solvent added to the system
ml
Csol
Solvent concentration in the aqueous phase
ml solvent
ml water
ODsol
Total oxygen demand of the solvent
mg O2
ThODsol
(∗)
Theoretical oxygen demand of the solvent
mg O2
mg solvent
ρsol
(∗)
Density of the solvent
mg/ml
ρO2
(∗)
Density of oxygen
mg/ml
XO2
(∗)
Molar oxygen fraction in air
CO2
(∗)
Initial oxygen concentration in the aqueous phase
mg/ml
The total oxygen in the system (Osys) is equal to the oxygen present in the headspace and
aqueous phase:
Osys = Oh + Ow
(3.1)
The oxygen present in the headspace (Oh) and aqueous phase (Ow) can be calculated as:
Oh = Vh · ρO2 · XO2
Ow = Vw · CO2
(3.2)
The headspace (fh) and aqueous (fw) volume fractions are defined and related to the total
volume of the system:
fh + fw = 1
Vh = fh · Vsys
Vw = fw · Vsys
(3.3)
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Combining Equation 3.2, Equation 3.3, and Equation 3.1, the mass of oxygen present in
the system in function of the headspace fraction is expressed in Equation 3.4:
Osys = Oh + Ow = [fh · Vsys · ρO2 · XO2] + [(1 −fh) · Vsys · CO2]
(3.4)
To calculate the oxygen required to oxidize the solvent to its final oxidation products,
its theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD) should be known. For a compound that has the
structural formula CcHhClclNnNanaOoPpSs and molecular weight MW, the theoretical
oxygen demand can be calculated using Equation 3.5 or Equation 3.6 [5].
Without nitrification (anoxic conditions):
ThODNH3 = 16[2c + 1/2(h −cl −3n) + 3s + 5/2p + 1/2na −o]
MW
mg O2
mg solvent
(3.5)
With nitrification (oxic conditions):
ThODNO3 = 16[2c + 1/2(h −cl) + 5/2n + 3s + 5/2p + 1/2na −o]
MW
mg O2
mg solvent
(3.6)
The calculated ThOD of solvents commonly used in toxicity and biodegradation testing
is given in Table A.1 (see Appendix A).
The amount of oxygen required to oxidize the solvent (ODsol) present in the system is
then calculated as:
ODsol = ThODsol · Vsol · ρsol
= ThODsol · Csol · fw · Vsys · ρsol
(3.7)
The percentage of potential oxygen depletion caused by the solvent can be expressed as:
Oxygen depletion [%] = ODsol
Osys
· 100
(3.8)
3.1.1
Example simulation
A vial of 20.0 ml is filled with 5.0 ml river water (fw = 0.25 and fh = 0.75). If solvent is
introduced at the OECD solvent level guideline (0.1 ml/l), only 5.0 · 10−4 ml (= 0.5 µl)
ethanol can be added.
The total oxygen available in the system is calculated using Equation 3.4 (ρO2 = 1.429
mg/ml; XO2 = 0.2095; CO2 = 9.82 mg/l):
Osys = [0.75 · 20.0 ml · 1.429 mg O2
ml
· 0.2095] + [(1 −0.75) · 20.0 ml · 0.00982 mg O2
ml
]
= 4.54 mg O2
The oxygen demand of the solvent is calculated using Equation 3.7 (ThODEtOH = 2.08
and ρEtOH = 789 mg/ml):
ODEtOH = 2.08
mg O2
mg EtOH · 5.0 · 10−4 ml · 789 mg
ml
= 0.82 mg O2
12
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:21==
Potential oxygen depletion caused by ethanol degradation is then calculated using Equa-
tion 3.8:
Oxygen depletion = 0.82 mg O2
4.54 mg O2
· 100
= 18 %
(3.9)
3.2
Oxygen depletion thresholds
Following advice from experts in the field, it was discussed that solvent degradation should
only consume a defined fraction of the total available oxygen. For biodegradation testing, it
was judged that maximal oxygen depletion attributed to the degradation of solvent should
be limited to 50% of the total oxygen present. In toxicity testing on the other hand, more
care should be taken when introducing a solvent that can cause oxygen depletion and
generate hypoxic conditions in the system since test organisms can be very sensitive to
changes in oxygen levels. It was therefore judged that maximal oxygen depletion caused
by solvent alone should be 10% in toxicity test setups. These two thresholds, shown in
Table 3.2, are important as they are referred to in the results of this study.
Table 3.2: Biodegradation and toxicity thresholds
Maximal oxygen depletion
Maximal oxygen depletion
by solvent degradation
by solvent degradation
(Biodegradation threshold)
(Toxicity threshold)
50%
10%
3.3
Planned experiments and surface water sampling
Figure 3.1: Water sampling location
Two experiments were designed
to investigate two separate nega-
tive effects of solvents on test sys-
tems.
The first was an oxygen
depletion
experiment,
whereby
two commonly used solvents (i.e.
ethanol and acetone) would be
introduced at OECD level (0.1
ml/l) into test systems with vary-
ing headspace that contained sur-
face water.
Oxygen concentra-
tions would be measured through-
out the test to determine the oxy-
gen depletion caused by solvent
degradation.
The second exper-
iment would evaluate the dose-
response effect of ethanol concen-
tration on the composition of a mi-
crobial community present in surface water.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
13
==PAGE:22==
Since the selected solvents are classified as readily biodegradable, it was assumed that
any collected surface water sample would contain competent degraders. Organic carbon
content in the water would have to be relatively low on the other hand, as a high carbon
content leads to increased oxygen depletion when it is broken down. Additionally, the
water had to be collected from a nearby site so that samples could be transported to the
laboratory quickly to start tests within 24h of sampling. Running water from a nearby
river was therefore considered a good candidate for sampling.
Surface water was collected from Mølleåen (55°48’13.1”N 12°31’31.2”E) on Monday May
30, 2022 and the water temperature was measured to be 12.6±0.1 °C. Various grab samples
were collected from the river bank using an extended beaker, approximately 30 cm below
the surface (see Figure 3.1). These grab samples were then evenly distributed in six sterile
1 l bottles to obtain six composite samples. Since these composite samples consisted of
the same grab samples, they could be assumed to be identical. The samples were then
transported to the lab in a cooler box to maintain the sampling temperature. The pH,
oxygen content, conductivity, and temperature of all six samples were determined on
arrival and the results are shown in Table C.1 (see Appendix C). After the initial field
measurements, all six samples were sieved using a 125 µm mesh to remove any larger
particles. After sieving, the samples were stored in a 20 °C controlled room until testing.
3.4
Oxygen depletion experiment
Within this section, an oxygen depletion experiment is described where two commonly
used solvents (i.e. ethanol and acetone) were introduced at the OECD level (0.1 ml/l) into
closed vials with varying headspace that contained river water. The oxygen concentration
inside each test vessel was measured over 7 days to determine how much of the initial
oxygen had been depleted and to verify whether the designed headspace fraction was
suﬀicient.
3.4.1
Experimental design
It was hypothesized that the OECD solvent guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml)
could cause oxygen depletion in closed systems if they are designed improperly. As oxygen
is most abundant in the headspace, the headspace fraction was chosen as the changing
variable. Ethanol and acetone were selected as test solvents since they are two of the
most commonly used co-solvents and it allowed for a comparison between two compounds
of different classes. Solvent concentration was set as the OECD guideline concentration
since it assesses a worst-case scenario when solvent is introduced at the maximal permitted
level.
The headspace fraction was varied based on oxygen mass balance simulations, which sug-
gested that approximately 10 to 100% of the oxygen present in the system would be de-
pleted when the headspace fraction is varied between 87.5 and 0% respectively. Table 3.3
shows the experimental design where each system would be performed in triplicates for
data validation.
14
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:23==
Table 3.3: Experimental design for the oxygen depletion experiment
System
Headspace
Ethanol
Simulated O2
ID
fraction
concentration
depletion
[%]
[ml/l]
[%]
E0
0
0.1
100.0
E25
25
0.1
100.0
E50
50
0.1
52.9
E75
75
0.1
18.0
E87.5
87.5
0.1
7.8
System
Headspace
Acetone
Simulated O2
ID
fraction
concentration
depletion
[%]
[ml/l]
[%]
A0
0
0.1
100.0
A25
25
0.1
100.0
A50
50
0.1
56.3
A75
75
0.1
19.2
A87.5
87.5
0.1
8.3
3.4.2
Pilot oxygen depletion experiment
Prior to the final procedure, a pilot oxygen depletion experiment was performed using
only ethanol with an identical experimental design (see Appendix B). However, the test
systems were prepared on a Friday morning and access to the lab was restricted during the
weekend, meaning oxygen concentration data lacked for the first two days (Saturday and
Sunday). This missing data proved to be essential as all oxygen was depleted within two
days in the systems without headspace. Therefore, it was decided to repeat the oxygen
depletion experiment and increase the frequency of measurements on the initial and first
two days.
3.4.3
Procedure
The complete procedure was performed in a temperature controlled room at 20 °C and
systems were prepared within 24h of sampling. A 1% v/v ethanol-water stock solution was
prepared by adding 9.9 ml Milli-Q® water a 20 ml vial and injecting 100 µl absolute ethanol
(VWR Chemicals) under the water surface to minimize evaporative losses. Analogously,
a 1% v/v acetone-water stock solution was prepared.
These stock solutions allow the
addition of small quantities (<5 µl) of solvent while minimizing solvent loss when the
solution is ejected from a pipette.
As test systems, 20 ml vials were used that have high grade Teflon inside the caps to keep
the systems airtight when closed. The exact volume of a test system was determined to
be 20.34±0.15 ml (where the error denotes the standard deviation) by filling three vials
with Milli-Q® water on a scale (considering a density of 0.99823 g/ml at 20 °C) and taking
the average. After labeling the test systems, each vial was fitted with an optical oxygen
sensor dot (PreSens, Germany). The sensor dots are green on one side and black on the
other, where the green side is attached to the vial wall via a silicone glue. Using a Microx
4 portable fiber optic oxygen meter (PreSens, Germany), the sensor dot is excited with
light from an LED and emits fluorescence as response. Depending on the presence and
amount of analyte molecules (i.e. oxygen molecules) in the vessel, the fluorescence varies
and can be translated to the respective concentration. This way, measurements can be
done contactless from the outside and without opening the vials.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
15
==PAGE:24==
The appropriate amount of river water was pipetted into the respective systems and the
correct volume of ethanol-water or acetone-water stock solution was added under the water
surface to obtain the desired solvent concentration (0.1 ml/l) in each system. Table D.1
contains detailed quantities of stock solution and surface water that were added to each
system (see Appendix D). The filled vials were then closed tightly and shaken to reach
oxygen equilibrium rapidly between the aqueous phase and headspace. The oxygen con-
centration was then measured using the Microx 4 optic oxygen meter to determine the
initial 100% saturation concentration inside each vial. After the initial oxygen measure-
ments, all systems were placed on a roller mixer (20 RPM) to prevent biofilm formation
and maintain chemical equilibrium between the headspace and aqueous phase. All vials
were incubated for 7 days at 20 °C and oxygen concentrations were measured at set time
intervals. Since the pilot experiment showed that ethanol was degraded rapidly, it was
decided to increase the measuring frequency on the first three days. Therefore, oxygen
was measured four times on the initial day, three times during the next two days, and
once a day around noon thereafter. Figure 3.2 shows the vials with varying headspace
containing the optical oxygen sensor (black-green dot) and the final test setup.
(a) 20 ml test systems with varying headspace fraction
(b) Test setup
Figure 3.2: Oxygen depletion experiment test systems and setup
16
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Microbial composition experiment
Within this section, the dose response effect of ethanol concentration on the composition
of a microbial community was investigated. Ethanol was introduced at varying concentra-
tions to bottles with a fixed headspace containing river water and the exposure systems
were incubated for 7 days. After the incubation time, the microbial DNA would be ana-
lyzed by an external lab and compared to control systems (without the addition of ethanol)
to assess the effect of the solvent.
3.5.1
Experimental design
Since oxygen depletion should not occur, all test systems were designed to have a fixed
headspace volume that ensured suﬀicient oxygen was present for the duration of the exper-
iment. Four concentrations were chosen and arranged in a geometric series, with a spacing
factor 3 considering the OECD solvent guideline (0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml) as a baseline.
Control systems were included in the design as a reference to determine any changes in
microbial community without the presence of solvent. Additionally, open systems were
included containing solvent at the OECD guideline concentration to allow for comparison
between an open and closed system.
Table 3.4 shows the experimental design for the
microbial composition experiment where each experiment was performed in triplicates.
Table 3.4: Experimental design for the microbial composition experiment
System
Headspace
Ethanol
Simulated O2
No.
fraction
concentration
depletion
[%]
[ml/l]
[%]
Closed 1
85
0.30
28.8
Closed 2
85
0.10
9.6
Closed 3
85
0.03
3.2
Closed 4
85
0.01
1.1
Control
85
0.00
0.0
Open 1
85
0.10
N.a.
3.5.2
Procedure
The complete procedure was performed in a temperature controlled room at 20 °C and
systems were prepared within 24h of sampling. To determine the initial microbial com-
munity’s composition of the river water, three 100 ml river water samples were vacuum
filtrated on three separate Microsart® e.motion Cellulose Nitrate Sterile Membrane Filters
(Sartorius, Germany) having a pore size of 0.2 µm. These filters were then stored in the
freezer.
As microbial DNA analysis requires at least 100 ml of sample, 1 l test systems were used
that have high grade Teflon lined inside the caps to keep the systems airtight when closed.
A headspace fraction of 85% was deemed large enough to ensure suﬀicient oxygen would
be present throughout the test duration. Therefore, 150 ml river water was introduced
in each bottle and the correct volume of absolute ethanol was injected under the water
surface to obtain the desired solvent concentration in each system. The bottles that needed
to be closed were then closed tightly and shaken to reach equilibrium rapidly between the
headspace and aqueous phase. For the three systems that were designed to be open, the
caps were fitted loosely on the three bottles to allow oxygen exchange with the environment
while also preventing major evaporative losses. Aluminum foil was then wrapped around
each test system to avoid light interference. All bottles were then placed on a shaker (80
RPM) to maintain oxygen equilibrium between the headspace and aqueous phase and to
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
17
==PAGE:26==
ensure an even solvent distribution. The test systems and setup are shown in Figure 3.3.
All systems were incubated for 7 days at 20 °C after which the bottles’ contents were
vacuum filtrated on separate sterile membrane filters. These filters were then stored in
the freezer (along with the three initial DNA filters) until they were sent to an external
lab for analysis.
(a) 1 l test systems
(b) Test setup
Figure 3.3: Microbial composition experiment test systems and setup
18
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:27==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Oxygen mass balance
The current section aims to dimension test systems properly by ensuring suﬀicient headspace
and hereby limit oxygen depletion attributed to solvent degradation. Expressions from
section 3.1 are used to set up the oxygen mass balance and simulate oxygen depletion.
4.1.1
Effect of headspace fraction on oxygen depletion
The volume of solvent introduced into the system is a variable controlled by the designer
of the test. OECD guidelines state that solvent concentrations of 0.1 ml/l, or 0.1 mg/ml
(whichever is lowest) should not be exceeded. It is therefore of interest to design a system
with suﬀiciently large headspace to ensure plentiful oxygen when solvent concentration is
maximal.
When calculating the mass balance, the volume of added solvent (Vsol) can be related to
the aqueous phase volume (Vw) considering the solvent is introduced at OECD guideline
level (0.1 ml/l):
Vsol = 0.0001 ml solvent
ml water · Vw
(4.1)
The oxygen demand of the solvent can then be determined by combining Equation 3.7
and Equation 4.1:
ODsol = ThODsol · 0.0001Vw · ρsol
= ThODsol · 0.0001(1 −fh)Vsys · ρsol
(4.2)
Combining Equation 3.4, Equation 3.8, and Equation 4.2 oxygen depletion can be ex-
pressed as a function of the headspace fraction of the system (fh):
Oxygen depletion [%] =
ThODsol · 0.0001(1 −fh)Vsys · ρsol
[fh · Vsys · ρO2 · XO2] + [(1 −fh) · Vsys · CO2] · 100
(4.3)
Equation 4.3 expresses the simulated oxygen depletion caused solely by the solvent when
introduced at OECD guideline level (0.1 ml/l) in function of the system’s headspace frac-
tion. For some commonly used solvents in a 20 ml closed system, the relation is plotted
in Figure 4.1. Since oxygen is more abundant in the headspace, reducing the headspace
fraction (i.e. increasing the water fraction) leads to a decrease of available oxygen. Addi-
tionally, a larger aqueous phase means more solvent can be introduced according to the
OECD guideline, further increasing the oxygen demand.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Simulated oxygen depletion caused by various solvents introduced at OECD
guideline level (0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml) in a 20 ml closed system
Figure 4.1 shows that the headspace fraction is a critical variable when designing a closed
system with suﬀicient oxygen. Any system designed with a headspace of less than 30%
could potentially turn anoxic when solvent is at maximal concentration. Solvent selection
is another important factor to consider due to differences in ThOD. Methanol has the
lowest ThOD (considering nitrification), thus requiring less oxygen to degrade per unit,
while acetonitrile has the highest (see Appendix A). On the other hand, the difference
between oxygen depletion caused by acetone and ethanol is not as apparent.
4.1.2
Closed system without headspace; solvent at guideline
concentration
While co-solvent guidelines set by OECD (0.1 ml/l or 0.1 mg/ml) are mainly intended for
open systems, solvent losses are minimized in closed systems. It was therefore hypothesized
that the upper solvent limit would cause issues when applied in closed systems. As oxygen
is more abundant int the headspace, a closed system without headspace where solvent is
introduced at the guideline level can be considered an absolute worst-case scenario in
regards to oxygen depletion.
Considering a system without headspace (fh = 0), the oxygen available in the system
(Equation 3.4) is equal to the oxygen present in the aqueous phase:
Osys = Ow = 1 · Vsys · CO2
(4.4)
By transforming Equation 4.4, the amount of oxygen present per system volume is equal
to the initial oxygen concentration of the aqueous phase (CO2):
Osys
Vsys
= CO2
(4.5)
If solvent is introduced to a system without headspace at the OECD guideline level (0.1
ml/l), Equation 4.2 expresses the oxygen demand of the solvent as:
ODsol = ThODsol · 0.0001 · Vw · ρsol
= ThODsol · 0.0001 · Vsys · ρsol
(4.6)
20
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:29==
By transforming Equation 4.6, the oxygen demand of a solvent per system volume is:
ODsol
Vsys
= ThODsol · 0.0001 · ρsol
(4.7)
In Figure 4.2 the oxygen demand of various solvents per system volume are compared to the
oxygen concentration available. Here, the oxygen available in the system was considered
to be the oxygen concentration (9.82 mg/l) measured during the field measurements (see
Appendix C). The figure indicates that there will always be insuﬀicient oxygen present in
a closed system without headspace when any solvent is introduced at the OECD solvent
limit. In fact, the oxygen concentration in the water would have to be 13 to 25 times
higher to contain enough oxygen for the degradation of the corresponding solvent.
Figure 4.2: Oxygen demand of solvents introduced at OECD guideline level (0.1 ml/l) to
a closed system without headspace
4.1.3
Closed system without headspace; variable solvent concentration
If a system without headspace is desired, the solvent concentration should therefore be
lowered to prevent oxygen depletion.
The maximal amount of oxygen required to oxidize a solvent present in a system is deter-
mined using Equation 3.7:
ODsol = ThODsol · (1 −fh) · Vsys · ρsol · Csol
To calculate the oxygen available in a system without headspace (fh = 0), Equation 3.4
becomes:
Osys = Oh + Ow = 0 + [(1) · Vsys · CO2]
Oxygen depletion (Equation 3.8) in a system without headspace can then be expressed as
a function of the solvent concentration (Csol):
Oxygen depletion = ThODsol · Vsys · ρsol
Vsys · CO2
· Csol · 100 [%]
(4.8)
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
21
==PAGE:30==
Though oxygen depletion can’t exceed 100%, Equation 4.8 has the form of a linear expres-
sion (y = mx) and is plotted in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Simulated oxygen depletion caused by various solvents with various concen-
tration in a 20 ml system without headspace
Figure 4.3 shows that in a 20 ml system without headspace, solvent concentration must
be below 1 µl/l approximately to ensure that the 10% oxygen depletion threshold is not
exceeded (see Table 3.2). Similarly, 2 to 4 µl/l solvent can cause 50% oxygen depletion
in a worst-case scenario. These considerably small concentrations make it impractical to
prepare suﬀiciently dilute stock concentrations and require small volumes to be added to
the test media, which increases risk of evaporative losses. It is therefore suggested that
either headspace must be present, or that the total test volume be significantly larger so
that it becomes feasible to add the designated amount of solvent, though the latter option
is impractical.
4.1.4
Closed system with headspace; solvent at guideline concentration
If solvent is introduced at the maximum allowed level (0.1 mg/ml or 0.1 ml/l), it is more
practical to design a system with headspace. Considering the discussed threshold values
(see Table 3.2), Table 4.1 and Figure 4.1 show that at least 40 to 65% headspace would
be needed to ensure that only 50% of the oxygen is depleted by solvent degradation when
it is introduced at the guideline level. Similarly, a system requires at least 80 to 90%
headspace if only 10% of the available oxygen would depleted by solvent degradation.
Table 4.1: Simulated minimal headspace fraction to ensure less than 10 and 50% oxygen
depletion in a 20 ml system with solvent at maximum OECD level
Solvent
Min. headspace
Min. headspace
fraction to ensure
fraction to ensure
<10% O2 depletion
<50% O2 depletion
[%]
[%]
Methanol
79.7
43.2
Ethanol
84.5
51.6
Acetone
85.2
52.9
DMSO
86.0
54.5
Acetonitrile
89.1
61.6
22
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Oxygen depletion experiment
Two commonly used solvents (i.e. ethanol and acetone) were introduced at the OECD
guideline level (0.1 ml/l) to closed vials containing river water and a varying headspace.
The oxygen concentration inside each test vessel was measured over 7 days to determine
how much of the initial oxygen had been depleted and to verify whether the headspace
fraction was suﬀiciently large. Hereby, the 50 and 10% oxygen depletion thresholds are
considered as mentioned in Table 3.2.
The measured oxygen concentrations over time in systems containing ethanol are given in
Table D.2 and visualized in Figure D.1 (see Appendix D). Similarly, the oxygen concen-
trations over time in systems containing acetone are shown in Table D.4 and Figure D.2.
Since each system was agitated continuously on the roller mixer, the aqueous phase is
considered to be in chemical equilibrium with the headspace. Likewise, the oxygen sensor
is in equilibrium with both phases.
The first measurement on day 0 can therefore be
considered as the initial saturation concentration of each system. The experimental oxygen
depletion in the systems after an elapsed time t was then calculated as:
Oxygen depletion [%] = (C0 −Ct)
C0
· 100
(4.9)
Where C0 is the initial measured saturation concentration and Ct is the oxygen concen-
tration measured after the corresponding time t. It should be noted that some measured
values were higher than the initial saturation concentration, meaning oxygen depletion
calculated using Equation 4.9 would result in a negative value. Any negative values for
oxygen depletion are illogical and were therefore set to zero during data treatment. Addi-
tionally, the measured oxygen concentration was higher on the first measurement of day
1 than on the last measurements of day 0 in most systems that were designed with a
headspace. Though the systems are not perfectly airtight, it is unlikely that the oxygen
concentration increase was caused by oxygen exchange with the environment. Instead the
sensor likely needed more time to reach oxygen equilibrium between the headspace and
aqueous phase.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2.1
Oxygen depletion caused by ethanol degradation
The experimental oxygen depletion over time in the systems containing ethanol is given
in Table D.3 (see Appendix D) and plotted in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Experimental oxygen depletion in systems with varying headspace fraction
containing ethanol at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l); Error bars denote the
standard deviation
Figure 4.4 shows that all systems without headspace turned anoxic within one day, in-
dicating rapid degradation of the ethanol. A larger fraction of the available oxygen is
consumed when headspace fraction is decreased, which is conform with what the oxygen
mass balance simulations suggested. Vials designed with only 25% headspace exceeded
the 50% oxygen depletion threshold, while vials with 50 and 75% headspace exceeded the
10% threshold. Additionally, the variability of oxygen concentration measurements was
high in vials containing only 25% headspace and increased throughout the test.
Considering the oxygen depletion thresholds (Table 3.2), closed biodegradation tests can
be performed with at least 50% headspace while closed toxicity test systems require at
least 87.5% headspace when introducing ethanol at the OECD guideline level.
In Figure 4.5 the final experimental and simulated oxygen depletion is plotted against
the headspace fraction of the systems containing ethanol. It shows that the oxygen mass
balance simulations overestimates the oxygen depletion caused by ethanol degradation in
systems having 25, 50 and 75% headspace. This is reasonable as the oxygen mass balance
can be considered a conservative scenario that assumes all solvent is degraded. While
experimental results could suggest that not all ethanol was degraded, Figure 4.4 shows
that oxygen depletion plateaus. It is therefore not likely any ethanol remained in the
systems, but instead microorganisms assimilated organic carbon from the ethanol to form
new biomass. Assimilation does not require the same amount of oxygen as mineralization,
which explains why experimental oxygen depletion was lower.
24
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:33==
It should be noted that that the oxygen depletion calculated via mass balance in systems
having 87.5% headspace was close to the actual measured oxygen depletion.
This is
possibly because these systems contained the smallest volume of solvent, which allowed it
to be rapidly mineralized with negligible formation of new biomass.
Figure 4.5: Experimental and simulated final oxygen depletion in systems with varying
headspace fraction containing ethanol at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l) Error
bars denote the standard deviation
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
25
==PAGE:34==
4.2.2
Oxygen depletion caused by acetone degradation
The experimental oxygen depletion over time in the systems containing acetone is given
in Table D.5 (see Appendix D) and visualized in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Experimental oxygen depletion in systems with varying headspace fraction
containing acetone at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l); Error bars denote the
standard deviation
Similar to the systems containing ethanol, Figure 4.6 shows that a decreased headspace
fraction leads to higher oxygen depletion. Oxygen concentrations only started to decrease
after the fourth day in systems with headspace. This suggests that the bacteria needed
time to adapt to the presence of the acetone before degradation started. After the mi-
croorganisms had adapted to the presence of acetone, all oxygen was depleted in systems
without headspace on the fourth day. It should be noted that the variability of results
was larger in systems with 25 and 0% headspace.
Considering the oxygen depletion threshold values, only the systems designed with 0%
headspace surpassed the 50% oxygen depletion threshold when acetone is used as solvent
at the OECD level. Therefore, closed biodegradation tests using acetone can be designed
to have as little as 25% headspace. Closed toxicity testing on the other hand requires
at least 75% headspace to not exceed the 10% depletion threshold when considering the
worst-case scenario where acetone is introduced at the OECD guideline concentration.
In Figure 4.7 the final experimental and simulated oxygen depletion are plotted against the
headspace fraction of the systems containing acetone. Similar to the systems containing
ethanol, the oxygen mass balance simulations overestimate oxygen consumption attributed
to acetone degradation in systems heaving headspace. The oxygen mass balance is a worst-
case scenario if all solvent present in the system would be mineralized. However, not all
acetone was mineralized but instead the organic carbon was assimilated into new biomass,
which requires less oxygen. Additionally, acetone’s Henry’s law constant (KH) of 3.5·10−5
atm·m3·mol−1, means it has significant rate of volatilization from an aqueous solution (see
26
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:35==
Table 2.3). A large fraction of acetone therefore partitioned to the headspace, reducing the
nominal exposure concentration in the aqueous phase. Although partitioning between the
headspace and aqueous phase is rapid, it is likely that not all acetone was degraded and
some remained in the headspace due to the delayed biodegradation. This could mean the
test duration of 7 days was insuﬀicient and oxygen depletion would likely further increase
if the test were prolonged.
Figure 4.7: Experimental and simulated final oxygen depletion in systems with varying
headspace fraction containing acetone at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l); Error
bars denote the standard deviation
Comparing oxygen consumption caused by the degradation both solvents, oxygen depletion
was lower in systems with headspace containing acetone compared to their counterparts
containing ethanol. The opposite was expected since acetone’s theoretical oxygen demand
is higher than ethanol’s (see Appendix A). However, degradation of acetone was delayed
as the microorganisms needed time to adapt, likely resulting in a fraction of acetone
remaining in the headspace after 7 days. Oxygen depletion caused by acetone degradation
would likely further increase if the test were prolonged. Additionally, it is possible that
some acetone volatilized during system preparation before the systems were closed off.
Results suggested on the other hand that ethanol was completely degraded.
It is important to note that there is a large variability between microbial composition of
water samples, depending on their source, location, and time of collection. Microorganisms
present in the water samples collected in this study needed to adapt to the presence of
acetone. A water sample containing a richer, more dense population of microorganisms
on the other hand could have degraded acetone instantaneously.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2.3
Experimental oxygen depletion vs. oxygen mass balance
The simulated total oxygen depletion (from the oxygen mass balance) in all ethanol and
acetone containing systems is plotted against their experimentally determined oxygen
depletion in Figure 4.8. The adequacy of oxygen mass balance simulations is indicated
by the coeﬀicient of determination (R2). If a model perfectly predicts a test’s outcome,
R2 would be 1 and all data points would lie on the identity function (y = x) where
experimental results are identical to the simulated outcomes.
Figure 4.8: Predicted vs. experimental oxygen depletion
The R2 value was determined to be 0.68, suggesting a relatively good fit, which is unex-
pected at first glance. However, this is because there were six systems (i.e. the ethanol
and acetone vials without headspace) that reached 100% oxygen depletion as predicted by
the oxygen mass balance. Therefore, there are six data points that lie on the identity func-
tion, improving the fit and value of R2. While the oxygen mass balance predicts depletion
relatively accurately for systems having a large headspace fraction (75 and 87.5%), it over-
estimates the oxygen depletion in systems having a smaller headspace. This is expected as
the oxygen mass balance is a worst-case scenario that assumes all solvent is mineralized,
but it can be seen as a conservative approach to ensure oxygen supply in a system.
28
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Microbial composition experiment
The dose response effect of ethanol concentration on the composition of a microbial com-
munity would be investigated. Ethanol was introduced at varying concentrations (0.01
to 0.3 ml/l) to 1 l bottles containing river water and 85% headspace to ensure suﬀicient
oxygen would be present. The exposure systems were incubated for 7 days and thereafter
sent to an external lab to analyze any changes in microbial DNA caused by the ethanol.
Unfortunately, sample analysis was not performed in time. Therefore, no conclusion could
be made regarding the dose-response effect of ethanol on a microbial community’s compo-
sition.
Though nothing can be said of changes to the microbial composition, visual observations
suggested that even the lowest tested ethanol concentrations stimulated the growth of
microorganisms. This is illustrated by Figure 4.9, which shows DNA filters after the fil-
tration of samples designed with a varying ethanol concentration. In general, the time
spent filtering a sample was longer for samples increased ethanol concentrations. Addition-
ally, more microbial biomass was deposited on filters where samples with higher ethanol
concentration were run through.
(a) Control sample (0 ml/l)
(b) 0.01 ml/l
(c) 0.03 ml/l
(d) 0.1 ml/l
Figure 4.9: Microbial DNA filters after samples containing different ethanol concentrations
were filtrated
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Conclusion
The addition of co-solvents can lead to adverse effects in test systems, and their use in
closed test setups is more precarious since evaporative losses are limited. Oxygen depletion
attributed to the degradation of a co-solvent is a major negative effect that can occur in
closed systems. In consultation with experts in the field, it was discussed that solvent
degradation should only consume a defined fraction of the total available oxygen. For
biodegradation testing, it was judged that maximal oxygen depletion attributed to the
degradation of solvent should be limited to 50% of the total oxygen present. In toxicity
testing on the other hand, maximal oxygen depletion caused by solvent alone should not
exceed 10%.
In an attempt to ensure suﬀicient oxygen would be present in a closed system, an oxygen
mass balance was calculated. This mass balance compared the total oxygen available inside
a closed system to the total oxygen demand required to degrade any added solvent. The
headspace fraction was determined to be one of the most important factor that ensures
a suﬀicient oxygen supply inside a vessel. Considering the worst-case scenario where any
solvent is introduced at the OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l), the mass balance
indicated that all oxygen would be depleted in a system designed with less than 30%
headspace should all solvent be degraded.
Depending on the solvent, a system would
require at least 40-65% headspace, so that the 50% biodegradation threshold would not
be exceeded. Similarly, toxicity tests require at least 80-90% headspace if only 10% of the
oxygen present were to be depleted by solvent degradation.
If a system without headspace is desired, solvent concentrations would have to be con-
siderably lower than 0.1 ml/l to avoid the onset of anoxic conditions. According to the
mass balance, solvent concentration would have to be below 1 µl/l to not exceed the 10%
toxicity test threshold and 2-4 µl/l considering the 50% biodegradation test thresholds. A
20 ml closed test system without headspace containing solvent at 4 µl/l for example, would
require 0.08 µl of solvent. These considerably small concentrations make it impractical
to prepare suﬀiciently dilute stock concentrations and require small volumes to be added
to the test media, which increases risk of evaporative losses. The oxygen mass balance
served as a worst-case scenario that assumes all of the added solvent is mineralized by
microorganisms but hereby emphasized the importance of the headspace fraction when
using co-solvents in closed test setups.
To verify whether systems could be dimensioned properly by ensuring a suﬀiciently large
headspace fraction, an oxygen depletion experiment was performed by introducing ethanol
and acetone separately to vials at the OECD guideline level (0.1 ml/l) and varying the
headspace. Oxygen measurements in the ethanol test systems suggested closed biodegra-
dation tests should have at least 50% headspace to not exceed the 10% depletion threshold
when ethanol is introduced at maximal concentration, while closed toxicity test systems
require at least 87.5% headspace considering the 10% threshold. Closed biodegradation
tests using acetone as co-solvent on the other hand can be designed to have as little as
25% headspace while not exceeding the 50% depletion threshold. Closed toxicity testing
with acetone spiking requires at least 75% headspace considering the 10% threshold.
Oxygen concentrations inside the acetone containing systems suggested that the microor-
ganisms needed time to adapt to the presence of the solvent before it could be degraded.
Acetone’s significant rate of volatilization means a large fraction of acetone partitioned to
30
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:39==
the headspace. Although partitioning between the headspace and aqueous phase is rapid,
it is likely that not all acetone not all acetone was degraded within 7 days due to the
delayed biodegradation. It is expected that oxygen depletion would further increase if the
test were prolonged.
Oxygen depletion values calculated via the mass balance were higher than the experimen-
tally determined oxygen depletion in the systems designed with a headspace. This was
however anticipated as the mass balance assumes all solvent is mineralized and serves as
a conservative approach when ensuring the oxygen demand of any added chemicals is met.
This is because not all solvent was mineralized, but instead organic carbon was assimilated
to form new biomass, which requires less oxygen.
While a general conclusion can’t be made for all commonly used solvents, it was shown
that all oxygen was depleted when ethanol and acetone were introduced at the OECD
level to systems without headspace.
Experimental oxygen depletion will vary case-by-
case, depending on the test substance, solvent, test medium, test concentrations, and
type of test. However, high levels of oxygen depletion were measured in systems designed
with 25% headspace within 7 days when solvent was introduced at the OECD guideline
concentration.
Moreover, conservative mass balance simulations indicate that systems
can turn anaerobic when a solvent is introduced at the OECD level and less than 30%
headspace is present. It is therefore suggested to include a minimal requirement of 30%
headspace in testing guidelines when operating any closed test-setup at maximal solvent
concentration.
A dose response experiment was designed and conducted to investigate the effect of ethanol
concentration on the composition of a microbial community. Ethanol was introduced at
varying concentrations (0.01 to 0.3 ml/l) to 1 l bottles containing river water and 85%
headspace to ensure suﬀicient oxygen would be present. After an incubation time of 7
days, the samples were filtered and the filters were sent to an external lab to analyze any
changes in microbial composition compared to the control samples (without the addition
of ethanol). Unfortunately, sample analysis was not performed in time and no conclusion
can be made regarding the dose-response effect of ethanol on a microbial community’s
composition. Visual observations suggested however that even the lowest tested ethanol
concentration (0.01 ml/l) stimulated microbial growth.
5.1
Follow-up research
Although the microbial composition lab analysis was not performed in time, the lowest
tested ethanol concentration (0.01 ml/l) visually appeared to stimulate microbial growth.
It would therefore be interesting to investigate whether any solvent introduced under the
OECD guideline level (0.1 ml/l) can cause a shift in microbial composition. This could
lead to stricter OECD guidelines regarding the use of solvents in biodegradation testing as
they currently don’t require microbial community characterisation (e.g. cell density and
presence or absence of competent degraders).
Co-solvents can be toxic to test organisms or interact with a test chemical. Solvent toxicity
is expected to higher be in closed test setups since the solvent can’t evaporate. Future work
could therefore focus on ecotoxicity testing of commonly used solvents in closed systems
and verify whether EC50 values (i.e. the test substance concentration that produces 50%
of the maximal response) are lower in closed compared to open test setups.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1] European Chemicals Agency, “Understanding REACH,” 2022.
[2] OECD, “OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals,” 2022.
[3] P. H. Howard and S. Banerjee, “Interpreting results from biodegradability tests of
chemicals in water and soil,” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 551–562, 1984.
[4] OECD, Test No. 203: Fish, Acute Toxicity Test. OECD Guidelines for the Testing
of Chemicals, Section 2, OECD, jun 2019.
[5] OECD, “Test No. 301: Ready Biodegradability,” jul 1992.
[6] OECD, “Guidance Document on Aqueous-Phase Aquatic Toxicity Testing of Diﬀicult
Test Chemicals,” 2018.
[7] K. Tanneberger, A. Rico-Rico, N. I. Kramer, F. J. Busser, J. L. Hermens, and
K. Schirmer, “Effects of solvents and dosing procedure on chemical toxicity in
cell-based in vitro assays,” Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 4775–4781, 2010.
[8] C. B. Hughes, D. M. Brown, L. Camenzuli, A. D. Redman, J. S. Arey, D. Vione,
N. Wang, and E. Vaiopoulou, “Can a chemical be both readily biodegradable AND
very persistent (vP)? Weight-of-evidence determination demonstrates that phenan-
threne is not persistent in the environment,” Environmental Sciences Europe, vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2020.
[9] P. Shrestha, B. Meisterjahn, M. Klein, P. Mayer, H. Birch, C. B. Hughes, and D. Hen-
necke, “Biodegradation of Volatile Chemicals in Soil: Separating Volatilization and
Degradation in an Improved Test Setup (OECD 307),” Environmental Science and
Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 20–28, 2019.
[10] OECD, “Test No. 308: Aerobic and Anaerobic Transformation in Aquatic Sediment
System,” OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, no. April, p. 19, 2002.
[11] P. Shrestha, B. Meisterjahn, C. B. Hughes, P. Mayer, H. Birch, and D. Hennecke,
“Biodegradation testing of volatile hydrophobic chemicals in water-sediment systems
– Experimental developments and challenges,” Chemosphere, vol. 238, p. 124516, 2020.
[12] D. Sijm, M. Rikken, E. Rorije, T. Traas, M. Mclachlan, and W. Peijnenburg, “Trans-
port, Accumulation and Transformation Processes,” in Risk Assessment of Chemicals,
pp. 73–158, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2007.
[13] P. Mayer, N. Nyholm, E. M. Verbruggen, J. L. Hermens, and J. Tolls, “Algal Growth
Inhibition Test in Filled, Closed Bottles for Volatile and Sorptive Materials,” Envi-
ronmental Toxicology and Chemistry, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 2551, 2000.
[14] G. S. Weyman, H. Rufli, L. Weltje, E. R. Salinas, and M. Hamitou, “Aquatic toxicity
tests with substances that are poorly soluble in water and consequences for environ-
mental risk assessment,” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, vol. 31, no. 7,
pp. 1662–1669, 2012.
32
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:41==
[15] OECD, “Test No 309: Aerobic Mineralisation in Surface Water - Simulation Biodegra-
dation Test,” OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 3, OECD Pub-
lishing, Paris, no. April, pp. 1–21, 2004.
[16] G. W. Stratton, “The influence of solvent type on solvent-pesticide interactions in
bioassays,” Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 651–658, 1985.
[17] M. J. Mac and J. G. Seelye, “Potential influence of acetone in aquatic bioassays testing
the dynamics and effects of PCBs,” Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and
Toxicology, vol. 27-27, pp. 359–367, jul 1981.
[18] M. C. Calleja and G. Persoone, “The Influence of Solvents on the Acute Toxicity of
Some Lipophilic Chemicals to Aquatic Invertebrates,” Chemosphere, vol. 26, no. l,
pp. 2007–2022, 2007.
[19] K. K. Sjøholm, A. Dechesne, D. Lyon, D. M. Saunders, H. Birch, and P. Mayer, “Link-
ing biodegradation kinetics, microbial composition and test temperature-Testing 40
petroleum hydrocarbons using inocula collected in winter and summer,” Environmen-
tal Science: Processes and Impacts, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 152–160, 2022.
[20] J. J. Modrzyński, J. H. Christensen, and K. K. Brandt, “Evaluation of dimethyl sul-
foxide (DMSO) as a co-solvent for toxicity testing of hydrophobic organic compounds,”
Ecotoxicology, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1136–1141, 2019.
[21] OECD, OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 3. OECD Guidelines
for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 3, OECD, jun 2022.
[22] B. Halling-Sørensen, N. Nyholm, and A. Baun, “Algal toxicity tests with volatile and
hazardous compounds in air-tight test flasks with CO2 enriched headspace,” Chemo-
sphere, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1513–1526, 1996.
[23] B. T. Johnson, “Microtox® acute toxicity test,” Small-Scale Freshwater Toxicity In-
vestigations: Volume 1 - Toxicity Test Methods, vol. 1, pp. 69–105, 2005.
[24] EPA CompTox Chemicals Dashboard, “Acetone properties,” 2022.
[25] J. Green and J. R. Wheeler, “The use of carrier solvents in regulatory aquatic toxicol-
ogy testing: Practical, statistical and regulatory considerations,” Aquatic Toxicology,
vol. 144-145, pp. 242–249, 2013.
[26] T. H. Hutchinson, N. Shillabeer, M. J. Winter, and D. B. Pickford, “Acute and chronic
effects of carrier solvents in aquatic organisms: A critical review,” Aquatic Toxicology,
vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 69–92, 2006.
[27] L. Chromcová, S. Štěpánová, L. Plhalová, E. Prášková, and Z. Svobodová, “Effect of
four selected carrier solvents on embryonal stages of Danio rerio,” Neuroendocrinology
Letters, vol. 33, no. SUPPL. 3, pp. 60–65, 2012.
[28] H. C. Kwon and J. H. Kwon, “Measuring aqueous solubility in the presence of small
cosolvent volume fractions by passive dosing,” Environmental Science and Technology,
vol. 46, no. 22, pp. 12550–12556, 2012.
[29] C. L. Yap, S. Gan, and H. K. Ng, “Evaluation of solubility of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in ethyl lactate/water versus ethanol/water mixtures for contaminated
soil remediation applications,” Journal of Environmental Sciences (China), vol. 24,
no. 6, pp. 1064–1075, 2012.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
33
==PAGE:42==
[30] C. Bandow and L. Weltje, “Development of an embryo toxicity test with the pond
snail Lymnaea stagnalis using the model substance tributyltin and common solvents,”
Science of the Total Environment, vol. 435-436, pp. 90–95, 2012.
[31] J. L. Parrott and B. R. Blunt, “Life-cycle exposure of fathead minnows (Pimephales
promelas) to an ethinylestradiol concentration below 1 ng/L reduces egg fertilization
success and demasculinizes males,” Environmental Toxicology, vol. 20, pp. 131–141,
apr 2005.
[32] M. T. Møller, H. Birch, K. K. Sjøholm, R. Hammershøj, K. Jenner, and P. Mayer,
“Biodegradation of an essential oil UVCB - Whole substance testing and constituent
specific analytics yield biodegradation kinetics of mixture constituents,” Chemosphere,
vol. 278, p. 130409, 2021.
[33] D. R. Orvos, D. J. Versteeg, J. Inauen, M. Capdevielle, A. Rothenstein, and V. Cun-
ningham, “Aquatic toxicity of triclosan,” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry,
vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1338–1349, 2002.
[34] C. U. Johnston, L. N. Clothier, D. M. Quesnel, L. M. Gieg, G. Chua, P. M. Hermann,
and W. C. Wildering, “Embryonic exposure to model naphthenic acids delays growth
and hatching in the pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis,” Chemosphere, vol. 168, pp. 1578–
1588, 2017.
[35] F. Stibany, F. Ewald, I. Miller, H. Hollert, and A. Schäffer, “Improving the reliability
of aquatic toxicity testing of hydrophobic chemicals via equilibrium passive dosing
– A multiple trophic level case study on bromochlorophene,” Science of the Total
Environment, vol. 584-585, pp. 96–104, 2017.
[36] K. E. Smith, Y. Jeong, and J. Kim, “Passive dosing versus solvent spiking for con-
trolling and maintaining hydrophobic organic compound exposure in the Microtox®
assay,” Chemosphere, vol. 139, pp. 174–180, 2015.
[37] P. J. Shubat, S. H. Poirier, M. L. Knuth, and L. T. Brooke, “Acute toxicity of tetra-
chloroethylene and tetrachloroethylene with dimethylformamide to rainbow trout
(Salmo gairdneri),” Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, vol. 28,
pp. 7–10, jan 1982.
[38] K. Satsuma, H. Nakamura, K. Sato, and Y. Kato, “A Negative Effect of Co-solvent
on Atrazine Biodegradation in Experimental River Microcosms,” Microbes and Envi-
ronments, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 185–189, 2001.
[39] P. Y. Robidoux, C. Svendsen, J. Caumartin, J. Hawari, G. Ampleman, S. Thiboutot,
J. M. Weeks, and G. I. Sunahara, “Chronic toxicity of energetic compounds in soil
determined using the earthworm (Eisenia andrei) reproduction test,” Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 1764–1773, 2000.
[40] ECETOC, “Monograph No . 26 Aquatic Toxicity Testing of Sparingly Soluble Volatile
and Unstable Substances,” 1996.
[41] D. Mutavdžić Pavlović, L. Ćurković, D. Blažek, and J. Župan, “The sorption of
sulfamethazine on soil samples: Isotherms and error analysis,” Science of The Total
Environment, vol. 497-498, pp. 543–552, nov 2014.
[42] P. Gerike, “The Biodegradability Testing of Poorly Water Soluble Compounds,”
Chemosphere, vol. 13, no. I, pp. 169–190, 1984.
34
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:43==
[43] A. F. Hernández, T. Parrón, A. M. Tsatsakis, M. Requena, R. Alarcón, and O. López-
Guarnido, “Toxic effects of pesticide mixtures at a molecular level: Their relevance
to human health,” Toxicology, vol. 307, pp. 136–145, 2013.
[44] M. M. David, S. Cecillon, B. M. Warne, E. Prestat, J. K. Jansson, and T. M. Vogel,
“Microbial ecology of chlorinated solvent biodegradation,” Environmental Microbiol-
ogy, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 4835–4850, 2015.
[45] A. Barberán, S. T. Bates, E. O. Casamayor, and N. Fierer, “Using network analysis to
explore co-occurrence patterns in soil microbial communities,” ISME Journal, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 343–351, 2012.
[46] A. Ott, T. J. Martin, G. F. Whale, J. R. Snape, B. Rowles, M. Galay-Burgos, and R. J.
Davenport, “Improving the biodegradability in seawater test (OECD 306),” Science
of the Total Environment, vol. 666, pp. 399–404, 2019.
[47] T. Wadhwani, K. Desai, D. Patel, D. Lawani, P. Bahaley, P. Joshi, and V. Kothari,
“Effect of various solvents on bacterial growth in context of determining MIC of various
antimicrobials,” The Internet Journal of Microbiology, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2008.
[48] A. Kowalczyk, T. J. Martin, O. R. Price, J. R. Snape, R. A. van Egmond, C. J.
Finnegan, H. Schäfer, R. J. Davenport, and G. D. Bending, “Refinement of biodegra-
dation tests methodologies and the proposed utility of new microbial ecology tech-
niques,” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, vol. 111, pp. 9–22, 2015.
[49] R. Vaquer-Sunyer and C. M. Duarte, “Thresholds of hypoxia for marine biodiversity,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 105, no. 40, pp. 15452–15457, 2008.
[50] J. M. Rousch and M. R. Sommerfeld, “Liquid-Gas Partitioning of the Gasoline Oxy-
genate Methyl tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE) Under Laboratory Conditions and Its Effect
on Growth of Selected Algae,” Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxi-
cology, vol. 34, pp. 6–11, jan 1998.
[51] B. T. Grayson, “Hydrolytic stability of chemicals—a comparison of EPA and OECD
protocols and suggestions for a combined universal method,” Pesticide Science, vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 277–286, 1986.
[52] J. E. Shaw, D. C. Kunerth, and S. B. Swanson, “Nucleophilic aromatic substitution
reactions of unactivated aryl chlorides with methoxide ion in hexamethylphospho-
ramide,” The Journal of Organic Chemistry, vol. 41, pp. 732–733, feb 1976.
[53] K. E. Smith, N. Dom, R. Blust, and P. Mayer, “Controlling and maintaining expo-
sure of hydrophobic organic compounds in aquatic toxicity tests by passive dosing,”
Aquatic Toxicology, vol. 98, pp. 15–24, jun 2010.
[54] J. De Bruijn, F. Busser, W. Seinen, and J. Hermens, “Determination of octanol/wa-
ter partition coeﬀicients for hydrophobic organic chemicals with the “slow-stirring”
method,” Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, vol. 8, pp. 499–512, jun 1989.
[55] A. Baun, N. Nyholm, and K. O. Kusk, “Environmental Risk Assessment of Chemicals,”
2017.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:45==
A
Theoretical oxygen demand of
solvents
For a chemical that has the structural formula CcHhClclNnNanaOoPpSs and molecular
weight (MW), the theoretical oxygen demand can be calculated using:
Without nitrification (often anoxic conditions):
ThODNH3 = 16[2c + 1/2(h −cl −3n) + 3s + 5/2p + 1/2na −o]
MW
mg O2
mg solvent
With nitrification (often oxic conditions):
ThODNO3 = 16[2c + 1/2(h −cl) + 5/2n + 3s + 5/2p + 1/2na −o]
MW
mg O2
mg solvent
Table A.1:
Theoretical oxygen demand of commonly used solvents in toxicity and
biodegradability testing
Solvent
MW
ThODNH3
ThODNO3
[g/mol]
[mg O2/mg solvent]
[mg O2/mg solvent]
Ethanol
46.07
2.08
2.08
Methanol
32.04
1.50
1.50
Acetone
58.08
2.20
2.20
Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)
78.13
1.84
1.84
Dimethylformamide
(DMF)
73.09
1.53
2.41
Triethylene glycol
150.17
1.60
1.60
Acetonitrile
41.05
1.56
3.12
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
37
==PAGE:46==
B
Pilot oxygen depletion experiment
Surface water was collected from Mølleåen (55°48’10.1”N 12°31’49.4”E) on Thursday May
5, 2022 and the water temperature was measured to be 13.1±0.1 °C. Various grab samples
were collected from the river bank using an extended beaker, approximately 30 cm below
the surface (see Figure B.1). These grab samples were then evenly distributed in six sterile
1 l bottles to obtain six composite samples. Since these composite samples are composed
of the same grab samples, they can be assumed to be identical. The samples were then
transported to the lab in a cooler box to maintain the sampling temperature. All six
samples were sieved using a 125 µm mesh to remove any large particles and then stored
in a 20 °C controlled room until testing.
Figure B.1: Initial sampling location
Five systems were designed and performed in triplicates where the headspace fraction
varied (from 0 to 87.5%) and ethanol was introduced at the OECD guideline value (0.1
ml/L), as shown in Table B.1. The appropriate amount of river water was pipetted into
the respective vials and the correct volume of water-ethanol stock solution was added
under the water surface to obtain the desired solvent concentration (0.1 ml/l). Oxygen
concentration in each vial was then measured using a Microx 4 portable fiber optic oxygen
meter (PreSens, Germany) to determine the initial 100% saturation concentration inside
each vial.
After the initial oxygen measurements, all systems were placed on a roller
mixer (20 RPM) to prevent biofilm formation and maintain chemical equilibrium between
the headspace and aqueous phase.
All vials were incubated for 7 days at 20 °C and
oxygen concentration was measured each day around noon. However, the test systems
were prepared Friday morning and access to the lab was restricted during the weekend,
meaning data is lacking for the first two days (Saturday and Sunday).
38
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:47==
Table B.1: Experimental procedure of the pilot oxygen depletion experiment (volume
corrected)
System
Headspace
Aqueous
1% v/v Ethanol
River water
ID
fraction
phase volume
stock added
added
[%]
[ml]
[µl]
[ml]
E0
0
20.34
203.4
20.14
E25
25
15.26
152.6
15.10
E50
50
10.17
101.7
10.07
E75
75
5.09
50.9
5.03
E87.5
87.5
2.54
25.4
2.52
The recorded results are given in Table B.2 and missing data proved to be essential as
oxygen was depleted rapidly in the systems without headspace. Therefore, it was decided
to repeat the oxygen depletion experiment and increase the frequency of measurements
on the first two days.
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
39
==PAGE:48==
Table B.2: Pilot experimental daily oxygen concentrations [mg/l] (N.m. = no measure-
ment)
System
Headspace
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
ID
fraction [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
87.5-1
87.5
12.13
N.m.
N.m.
9.37
9.05
8.97
8.76
8.78
87.5-2
12.87
N.m.
N.m.
9.07
9.03
9.01
8.90
8.81
87.5-3
12.75
N.m.
N.m.
9.40
9.04
9.04
8.94
8.77
Average
12.58
9.28
9.04
9.01
8.87
8.79
Standard deviation
0.40
0.18
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.02
System
Headspace
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
ID
fraction [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
75-1
75
12.29
N.m.
N.m.
8.72
8.77
8.83
8.68
8.55
75-2
12.43
N.m.
N.m.
8.70
8.82
8.76
8.51
8.62
75-3
12.17
N.m.
N.m.
8.75
9.02
8.72
8.60
8.63
Average
12.30
8.72
8.87
8.77
8.60
8.60
Standard deviation
0.13
0.03
0.13
0.06
0.09
0.04
System
Headspace
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
ID
fraction [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
50-1
50
12.19
N.m.
N.m.
8.27
8.34
8.05
7.97
8.01
50-2
12.16
N.m.
N.m.
8.23
8.36
8.34
8.01
8.17
50-3
12.17
N.m.
N.m.
7.91
8.34
8.05
7.95
7.85
Average
12.11
8.14
8.35
8.15
7.98
8.01
Standard deviation
0.12
0.20
0.01
0.17
0.03
0.16
System
Headspace
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
ID
fraction [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
25-1
25
12.39
N.m.
N.m.
6.81
6.65
6.27
6.01
5.74
25-2
11.75
N.m.
N.m.
7.17
6.75
6.69
6.22
6.30
25-3
12.20
N.m.
N.m.
7.23
7.07
6.55
6.39
6.14
Average
12.11
7.07
6.82
6.50
6.21
6.06
Standard deviation
0.12
0.20
0.22
0.21
0.19
0.29
System
Headspace
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
Day
ID
fraction [%]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0-1
0
12.10
N.m.
N.m.
0.17
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0-2
12.25
N.m.
N.m.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0-3
12.09
N.m.
N.m.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Average
12.15
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Standard deviation
0.09
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
40
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:49==
C
Field sample measurements
Table C.1: Field sample measurements
Sample
pH
Oxygen content
Conductivity
Temperature
No.
[mg/l]
[µS/cm]
[°C]
1
7.682
9.84
678
12.5
2
7.725
9.83
680
12.6
3
7.685
9.79
680
12.5
4
7.690
9.85
679
12.4
5
7.702
9.77
681
12.7
6
7.794
9.85
681
12.6
Average
7.745
9.82
680
12.6
Standard deviation
0.030
0.03
1
0.1
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
41
==PAGE:50==
D
Oxygen depletion experiment
Table D.1: Experimental procedure of the oxygen depletion experiment (volume corrected)
System
Headspace
Aqueous
1% v/v Ethanol
River water
ID
fraction
phase volume
stock added
added
[%]
[ml]
[µl]
[ml]
E0-1
0
20.34
203.4
20.14
E0-2
E0-3
E25-1
25
15.26
152.6
15.10
E25-2
E25-3
E50-1
50
10.17
101.7
10.07
E50-2
E50-3
E75-1
75
5.09
50.9
5.03
E75-2
E75-3
E87.5-1
87.5
2.54
25.4
2.52
E87.5-2
E87.5-3
System
Headspace
Aqueous
1% v/v Acetone
River water
ID
fraction
phase volume
stock added
added
[%]
[ml]
[µl]
[ml]
A0-1
0
20.34
203.4
20.14
A0-2
A0-3
A25-1
25
15.26
152.6
15.10
A25-2
A25-3
A50-1
50
10.17
101.7
10.07
A50-2
A50-3
A75-1
75
5.09
50.9
5.03
A75-2
A75-3
A87.5-1
87.5
2.54
25.4
2.52
A87.5-2
A87.5-3
42
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:51==
Table D.2: Ethanol systems: Measured oxygen concentration [mg/l] over time
Sample
Headspace
Oxygen concentration [mg/l] after elapsed time [hh:mm]
ID
fraction
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
[%]
00:00
00:30
01:30
03:30
20:00
24:00
28:00
44:00
48:00
52:00
72:00
96:00
120:00
144:00
168:00
E87.5-1
87.5
9.21
9.13
8.85
8.80
9.16
9.05
9.23
8.66
8.70
8.56
8.57
8.47
8.48
8.36
8.32
E87.5-2
9.10
9.03
8.84
8.70
9.10
8.98
9.01
8.84
8.72
8.52
8.52
8.69
8.50
8.33
8.32
E87.5-3
8.80
8.84
8.78
8.68
9.03
8.91
9.07
8.71
8.63
8.50
8.41
8.44
8.44
8.21
8.25
Average
9.04
9.00
8.82
8.73
9.10
8.98
9.10
8.74
8.68
8.53
8.50
8.53
8.47
8.30
8.30
Standard deviation
0.21
0.15
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.11
0.09
0.05
0.03
0.08
0.14
0.03
0.08
0.04
E75-1
75
9.07
9.05
8.91
8.85
8.80
8.75
8.92
8.48
8.41
8.32
8.23
8.12
8.01
7.92
7.93
E75-2
9.03
9.03
8.78
8.69
8.68
8.68
8.60
8.47
8.30
8.16
8.04
7.96
8.00
7.74
7.75
E75-3
8.74
8.73
8.66
8.57
8.62
8.64
8.58
8.34
8.30
8.22
8.10
7.98
7.92
7.81
7.81
Average
8.95
8.94
8.78
8.70
8.70
8.69
8.70
8.43
8.34
8.23
8.12
8.02
7.98
7.82
7.83
Standard deviation
0.18
0.18
0.13
0.14
0.09
0.06
0.19
0.08
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.05
0.09
0.09
E50-1
50
9.21
9.12
8.92
8.81
8.55
8.40
8.27
7.58
7.39
7.36
7.02
6.72
6.60
6.43
6.40
E50-2
9.19
9.07
8.82
8.65
8.66
8.37
8.25
7.56
7.48
7.43
7.14
6.96
6.69
6.55
6.57
E50-3
8.73
8.73
8.67
8.64
8.43
8.31
8.14
7.61
7.38
7.40
7.05
6.80
6.58
6.40
6.35
Average
9.04
8.97
8.80
8.70
8.55
8.36
8.22
7.58
7.42
7.40
7.07
6.83
6.62
6.46
6.44
Standard deviation
0.27
0.21
0.13
0.10
0.12
0.05
0.07
0.03
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.12
0.06
0.08
0.12
E25-1
25
9.11
9.14
8.99
8.89
7.54
7.01
6.53
4.90
4.67
4.49
4.01
2.93
2.48
2.17
2.07
E25-2
9.15
9.16
9.02
8.87
8.07
7.45
7.03
5.78
5.52
5.39
4.77
4.32
3.89
3.55
3.54
E25-3
9.09
8.91
8.97
8.86
8.16
7.61
7.29
6.03
5.62
5.57
4.94
4.57
4.36
4.26
4.29
Average
9.12
9.07
8.99
8.87
7.92
7.36
6.95
5.57
5.27
5.15
4.57
3.94
3.58
3.33
3.30
Standard deviation
0.03
0.14
0.03
0.02
0.34
0.31
0.39
0.59
0.52
0.58
0.50
0.88
0.98
1.06
1.13
E0-1
0
8.20
8.25
8.06
7.74
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
E0-2
8.54
8.51
8.51
8.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
E0-3
8.26
8.23
8.12
7.86
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Average
8.33
8.33
8.23
7.97
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Standard deviation
0.18
0.16
0.24
0.31
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure D.1: Measured oxygen concentration in systems with varying headspace fraction
containing ethanol at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l)
44
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:53==
Table D.3: Ethanol systems: Calculated oxygen depletion [%] over time
Sample
Headspace
Oxygen depletion [%] after elapsed time [hh:mm]
ID
fraction
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
[%]
00:00
00:30
01:30
03:30
20:00
24:00
28:00
44:00
48:00
52:00
72:00
96:00
120:00
144:00
168:00
E87.5-1
87.5
0.0
0.9
3.9
4.5
0.5
1.7
0.0
6.0
5.5
7.1
6.9
8.0
7.9
9.2
9.7
E87.5-2
0.0
0.8
2.9
4.4
0.0
1.3
1.0
2.9
4.2
6.4
6.4
4.5
6.6
8.5
8.6
E87.5-3
0.0
0.0
0.2
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.9
3.4
4.4
4.1
4.1
6.7
6.3
Average
0.0
0.5
2.3
3.4
0.2
1.0
0.3
3.3
3.9
5.6
5.9
5.5
6.2
8.1
8.2
Standard deviation
0.0
0.5
1.9
1.8
0.3
0.9
0.6
2.5
1.8
1.9
1.3
2.2
1.9
1.3
1.7
E75-1
75
0.0
0.2
1.8
2.4
3.0
3.4
1.7
6.5
7.3
8.3
9.3
10.5
11.7
12.7
12.6
E75-2
0.0
0.0
2.8
3.8
3.9
3.9
4.8
6.2
8.1
9.6
11.0
11.8
11.4
14.3
14.2
E75-3
0.0
0.1
0.9
1.9
1.4
1.1
1.8
4.6
5.0
5.9
7.3
8.7
9.4
10.6
10.6
Average
0.0
0.1
1.8
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.7
5.8
6.8
8.0
9.2
10.3
10.8
12.5
12.5
Standard deviation
0.0
0.1
0.9
0.9
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.0
1.6
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.3
1.8
1.8
E50-1
50
0.0
1.0
3.1
4.3
7.2
8.8
10.2
17.7
19.8
20.1
23.8
27.0
28.3
30.2
30.5
E50-2
0.0
1.3
4.0
5.9
5.8
8.9
10.2
17.7
18.6
19.2
22.3
24.3
27.2
28.7
28.5
E50-3
0.0
0.0
0.7
1.0
3.4
4.8
6.8
12.8
15.5
15.2
19.2
22.1
24.6
26.7
27.3
Average
0.0
0.8
2.6
3.7
5.5
7.5
9.1
16.1
17.9
18.2
21.8
24.5
26.7
28.5
28.8
Standard deviation
0.0
0.7
1.7
2.5
1.9
2.3
2.0
2.8
2.2
2.6
2.3
2.5
1.9
1.8
1.6
E25-1
25
0.0
0.0
1.3
2.4
17.2
23.1
28.3
46.2
48.7
50.7
56.0
67.8
72.8
76.2
77.3
E25-2
0.0
0.0
1.4
3.1
11.8
18.6
23.2
36.8
39.7
41.1
47.9
52.8
57.5
61.2
61.3
E25-3
0.0
2.0
1.3
2.5
10.2
16.3
19.8
33.7
38.2
38.7
45.7
49.7
52.0
53.1
52.8
Average
0.0
0.7
1.4
2.7
13.1
19.3
23.8
38.9
42.2
43.5
49.8
56.8
60.8
63.5
63.8
Standard deviation
0.0
1.1
0.1
0.3
3.7
3.4
4.3
6.5
5.7
6.3
5.4
9.7
10.8
11.7
12.4
E0-1
0
0.0
0.0
1.7
5.6
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
E0-2
0.0
0.4
0.4
2.6
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
E0-3
0.0
0.4
1.7
4.8
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Average
0.0
0.2
1.3
4.3
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Standard deviation
0.0
0.2
0.8
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Table D.4: Acetone systems: Measured oxygen concentration [mg/l] over time
Sample
Headspace
Oxygen concentration [mg/l] after elapsed time [hh:mm]
ID
fraction
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
[%]
00:00
00:30
01:30
03:30
20:00
24:00
28:00
44:00
48:00
52:00
72:00
96:00
120:00
144:00
168:00
A87.5-1
87.5
9.06
8.86
8.79
8.64
8.75
8.82
9.03
8.82
8.74
8.85
8.72
8.79
8.69
8.60
8.57
A87.5-2
8.88
8.74
8.61
8.53
8.63
8.72
8.83
8.70
8.51
8.52
8.69
8.65
8.65
8.35
8.35
A87.5-3
8.81
8.98
8.80
8.65
8.80
8.74
9.09
8.83
8.78
8.67
8.77
8.72
8.65
8.52
8.55
Average
8.92
8.86
8.73
8.61
8.73
8.76
8.98
8.78
8.68
8.68
8.73
8.72
8.66
8.49
8.49
Standard deviation
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.07
0.09
0.05
0.14
0.07
0.15
0.17
0.04
0.07
0.02
0.13
0.12
A75-1
75
8.91
8.91
8.75
8.55
8.78
8.69
8.73
8.74
8.64
8.65
8.57
8.39
8.28
8.13
8.13
A75-2
8.90
8.90
8.93
8.75
8.75
8.91
8.91
8.79
8.71
8.66
8.75
8.55
8.41
8.41
8.36
A75-3
9.04
8.95
8.84
8.75
8.75
8.93
8.91
8.76
8.71
8.65
8.60
8.34
8.08
8.08
8.16
Average
8.95
8.92
8.84
8.68
8.76
8.84
8.85
8.76
8.69
8.65
8.64
8.43
8.26
8.21
8.22
Standard deviation
0.08
0.03
0.09
0.12
0.02
0.13
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.10
0.11
0.17
0.18
0.13
A50-1
50
9.10
8.96
8.84
8.76
8.84
8.76
8.85
8.76
8.77
8.71
8.69
8.53
7.99
7.86
7.78
A50-2
9.15
8.98
8.89
8.83
8.76
8.82
8.98
8.82
8.60
8.75
8.65
8.41
7.93
7.83
7.75
A50-3
8.97
9.03
8.85
8.74
8.75
9.71
8.72
8.70
8.58
8.59
8.56
8.28
7.76
7.52
7.53
Average
9.07
8.99
8.86
8.78
8.78
9.10
8.85
8.76
8.65
8.68
8.63
8.41
7.89
7.74
7.69
Standard deviation
0.09
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.05
0.53
0.13
0.06
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.13
0.12
0.19
0.14
A25-1
25
9.10
9.05
9.04
8.87
8.83
8.84
8.71
8.70
8.75
8.62
8.46
8.03
6.95
6.60
6.20
A25-2
8.91
8.90
8.88
8.87
8.88
8.73
8.88
8.80
8.67
8.75
8.49
8.10
7.23
6.96
6.96
A25-3
9.03
8.91
8.92
8.83
8.85
8.85
8.84
8.75
8.70
8.73
8.60
6.85
5.58
5.26
5.26
Average
9.01
8.95
8.95
8.86
8.85
8.81
8.81
8.75
8.71
8.70
8.52
7.66
6.59
6.27
6.14
Standard deviation
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.07
0.70
0.88
0.90
0.85
A0-1
0
8.22
8.12
8.07
7.89
7.26
7.20
7.23
6.79
6.70
6.65
5.08
0.04
0.05
0.00
0.00
A0-2
7.99
8.08
7.99
7.92
7.23
7.21
7.23
6.83
6.84
6.88
5.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
A0-3
7.84
7.84
7.67
7.52
6.92
6.55
6.34
5.83
5.68
5.64
4.33
0.18
0.02
0.01
0.01
Average
8.02
8.01
7.91
7.78
7.14
6.99
6.93
6.48
6.41
6.39
5.06
0.07
0.02
0.00
0.00
Standard deviation
0.19
0.15
0.21
0.22
0.19
0.38
0.51
0.57
0.63
0.66
0.73
0.09
0.03
0.01
0.01
46
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:55==
Figure D.2: Measured oxygen concentration in systems with varying headspace fraction
containing acetone at OECD guideline concentration (0.1 ml/l)
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Table D.5: Acetone systems: Calculated oxygen depletion [%] over time
Sample
Headspace
Oxygen depletion [%] after elapsed time [hh:mm]
ID
fraction
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
[%]
00:00
00:30
01:30
03:30
20:00
24:00
28:00
44:00
48:00
52:00
72:00
96:00
120:00
144:00
168:00
A87.5-1
87.5
0.0
2.2
3.0
4.6
3.4
2.6
0.3
2.6
3.5
2.3
3.8
3.0
4.1
5.1
5.4
A87.5-2
0.0
1.6
3.0
3.9
2.8
1.8
0.6
2.0
4.2
4.1
2.1
2.6
2.6
6.0
6.0
A87.5-3
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.8
0.1
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.3
1.6
0.5
1.0
1.8
3.3
3.0
Average
0.0
1.3
2.0
3.5
2.1
1.7
0.3
1.6
2.7
2.7
2.1
2.2
2.8
4.8
4.8
Standard deviation
0.0
1.1
1.7
1.5
1.8
0.9
0.3
1.4
2.1
1.3
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
A75-1
75
0.0
0.0
1.8
4.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
1.9
3.0
2.9
3.8
5.8
7.1
8.8
8.8
A75-2
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7
1.7
0.0
0.0
1.2
2.1
2.7
1.7
3.9
5.5
5.5
6.1
A75-3
0.0
1.0
2.2
3.2
3.2
1.2
1.4
3.1
3.7
4.3
4.9
7.7
10.6
10.6
9.7
Average
0.0
0.3
1.3
3.0
2.1
1.2
1.2
2.1
2.9
3.3
3.5
5.8
7.7
8.3
8.2
Standard deviation
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.2
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.9
1.6
1.9
2.6
2.6
1.9
A50-1
50
0.0
1.5
2.9
3.7
2.9
3.7
2.7
3.7
3.6
4.3
4.5
6.3
12.2
13.6
14.5
A50-2
0.0
1.9
2.8
3.5
4.3
3.6
1.9
3.6
6.0
4.4
5.5
8.1
13.3
14.4
15.3
A50-3
0.0
0.0
1.3
2.6
2.5
0.00
2.8
3.0
4.3
4.2
4.6
7.7
13.5
16.2
16.1
Average
0.0
1.1
2.3
3.3
3.2
2.4
2.5
3.5
4.7
4.3
4.8
7.3
13.0
14.7
15.3
Standard deviation
0.0
1.0
0.9
0.6
0.9
2.1
0.5
0.4
1.2
0.1
0.5
1.0
0.7
1.3
0.8
A25-1
25
0.0
0.5
0.7
2.5
3.0
2.9
4.3
4.4
3.8
5.3
7.0
11.8
23.6
27.5
31.9
A25-2
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.3
2.0
0.3
1.2
2.7
1.8
4.7
9.1
18.9
21.9
21.9
A25-3
0.0
1.3
1.2
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.1
3.1
3.7
3.3
4.8
24.1
38.2
41.7
41.7
Average
0.0
0.7
0.7
1.7
1.8
2.3
2.2
2.9
3.4
3.5
5.5
15.0
26.9
30.4
31.8
Standard deviation
0.0
0.6
0.4
1.1
1.3
0.5
2.0
1.6
0.6
1.7
1.3
8.0
10.1
10.2
9.9
A0-1
0
0.00
1.2
1.8
4.0
11.7
12.4
12.0
17.4
18.5
19.1
38.2
99.5
99.4
100.0
100.0
A0-2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
9.5
9.8
9.5
14.5
14.4
13.9
27.7
100
100.0
100.0
100.0
A0-3
0.0
0.0
2.2
4.1
11.7
16.5
19.1
25.6
27.6
28.1
44.8
97.7
99.7
99.9
99.9
Average
0.0
0.4
1.3
3.0
11.0
12.9
13.6
19.2
20.1
20.4
36.9
99.1
99.7
100.0
100.0
Standard deviation
0.0
0.7
1.2
1.8
1.3
3.4
5.0
5.8
6.7
7.2
8.6
1.2
0.3
0.1
0.1
48
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
==PAGE:57==
Avoiding negative effects when using co-solvents in closed biodegradation and toxicity test systems
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.env.dtu.dk
