==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Study of the interaction between
THz light and skin tissue
Lorenza Pia Foglia
DTU, Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Author
Lorenza Pia Foglia (s161896)
Supervisors
Simon Lehnskov Lange (slla@fotonik.dtu.dk)
Miriam Galbiati (mirgal@dtu.dk)
Oscar Garcia Garcia (ogaga@fotonik.dtu.dk)
Bjørn Hübschmann Mølvig (bhymo@fotonik.dtu.dk)
Lars René Lindvold (lali@dtu.dk)
Project period: 31.01.2022 - 30.06.2022
ECTS points: 30
Education: Master’s of Science (MSc)
Class: Public
Edition: 1.
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Building 343, Ørsteds Plads
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
e-mail: info@fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Skin is the largest and most accessible organ in the human body. It is an open window
over the overall health of patients, manifesting clues of both systemic and abnormal
aspects of their organism. The accessibility of skin makes it extremely attractive for
non-invasive sensing of various analytes.
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that currently affects 537 million adults worldwide.
Standard self-monitoring of blood glucose involves invasive practices such as skin-pricking
for blood extraction. While microneedle-based devices for continuous glucose monitor-
ing (CGM) have revolutionised the field, disruption of the skin barrier still represents
a deterrent for many diabetic patients. Non-invasive optical techniques are therefore
expected to lead the next technological paradigm shift within the CGM field.
The objective of this study is to establish a reliable experimental platform to be used to
investigate the interaction of terahertz (THz) light with human skin. This consists of
in vitro skin models representing all the essential features of human skin that interact
with THz light. THz photon energies cover the energy range of hydrogen bonds forming
between water molecules with each other and with proteins and carbohydrates. This
feature can be leveraged to sense analytes in the skin matrix via THz radiation.
Three different systems are tested in this study via a THz reflection system. First, the
data analysis framework is validated on liquid glucose solutions. Next, high water con-
tent gelatin hydrogels are prepared to simulate the skin’s collagen mesh and interlying
interstitial fluid. Finally, gelatin hydrogel sheets are used to probe the penetration depth
of a THz beam in an in vitro skin model.
The results suggest that a THz beam can penetrate around 140 µm into a 96% water
hydrogel and around 160 µm into a 92% water hydrogel. Furthermore, thermally cross-
linked gelatin hydrogels are deemed unsuitable for THz characterisation of their water
content. For future work, chemically cross-linked gelatin hydrogels are recommended
instead, as they will also be more thermally and mechanically stable. This will allow
further engineering of the skin models, increasing their complexity to involve more bi-
ological elements. This will in turn enable a more comprehensive characterisation of
human skin in the THz regime.
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
Huden er det største og mest tilgængelige organ i menneskekroppen. Den er et åbent
vindue til at se patienternes generelle sundhed, idet den viser spor af både systemiske og
unormale aspekter af deres organisme. Hudens tilgængelighed gør den yderst attraktiv
til ikke-invasiv måling af forskellige analytter.
Diabetes mellitus er en kronisk sygdom, som i øjeblikket rammer 537 millioner vok-
sne på verdensplan. Standard selvkontrol af blodglukose indebærer invasive metoder
som f.eks. hudprikning til blodudtagning. Selv om mikronålsbaserede anordninger til
kontinuerlig glukoseovervågning (CGM for continuous glucose monitoring) har revolu-
tioneret området, udgør brud af hudbarrieren stadig en afskrækkende faktor for mange
diabetespatienter. Ikke-invasive optiske teknikker forventes derfor at føre an i det næste
teknologiske paradigmeskift inden for CGM-området.
Formålet med dette studium er at etablere en pålidelig eksperimentel platform til un-
dersøgelse af interaktionen mellem terahertz-lys (THz-lys) og menneskelig hud. Denne
platform består af in vitro hudmodeller, der repræsenterer alle de væsentlige træk ved
den menneskelige hud, som interagerer med THz-lys. THz-fotonenergierne dækker ener-
giområdet for hydrogenbindinger, der dannes mellem vandmolekyler indbyrdes og med
proteiner og kulhydrater. Denne egenskab kan udnyttes til at registrere analytter i hud-
matricen via THz-stråling.
I denne undersøgelse afprøves tre forskellige systemer via et THz-refleksionssystem. Først
valideres dataanalyserammen på glukoseopløsninger. Dernæst fremstilles gelatinehydro-
geler med et højt vandindhold for at simulere hudens kollagennet og den mellemliggende
interstitielle væske. Endelig anvendes gelatinehydrogelplader til at undersøge indtrængn-
ingsdybden af en THz-stråle i en in vitro hudmodel.
Resultaterne tyder på, at en THz-stråle kan trænge omkring 140 µm ind i en hydro-
gel med 96% vand og omkring 160 µm ind i en hydrogel med 92% vand. Endvidere
anses termisk tværbundne gelatinehydrogeler for uegnede til THz-karakterisering af
deres vandindhold.
For fremtidigt arbejde anbefales det i stedet at anvende kemisk
tværbundne gelatinehydrogeler, da de også vil være mere termisk og mekanisk stabile.
Dette vil gøre det muligt at videreudvikle hudmodellerne og øge deres kompleksitet, så
der kan indgå flere biologiske elementer. Dette vil igen muliggøre en mere omfattende
karakterisering af menneskehud i THz-regimet.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was written at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering, and focuses on a systematic study of the interaction of THz light and different
systems simulating skin, in order to characterise the interaciton of THz and skin tissue.
This work constitutes the final requirement for the completion of my M.Sc.Eng. in
Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and was
conducted from the 31st of January to the 30th of June 2022.
This thesis consists of my report on this work and the relative experimental results.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The last six months have been some of the most intense of my university time, yet all
the learning and the surrounding human experiences have made them memorable.
I would like to start by thanking my main supervisors: Simon Jappe Lange, Miriam Gal-
biati, Bjørn Hübschmann Mølvig and Oscar Garcia Garcia, for your trust, your positive
attitude and encouragement and for being inspiring teachers. I am looking forward to
doing more amazing science with you. Next, a huge thank you to my secondary super-
visor Lars René Lindvold for recommending me for this project, for teaching me all the
biophotonics I know and for your kind words when I doubted myself. I would also like
to thank Henrik Bo Larsen and Thorsten Bæk for your great help and inputs, even if I
was not one of your students.
I would like to thank professor Peter Uhd Jepsen for making time for me and my many
questions about THz-TDS during this project, I am looking forward to asking even more!
A huge thank you to all the people from the Terahertz group for your moral support
and inputs, especially during the last couple of weeks, and the (un)necessary ice-cream
breaks. I am looking forward to starting this new adventure in your company!
I would like now to thank my mum, for the unjustified positive attitude every single day,
you’re my ray of sunshine. To my brother for always making me laugh when I need it
the most and for always believing in me. To my dad for being so caring and so patient.
To my entire family for always keeping the gate open and the green light on for me to
be able to come home. To my best friend Ilaria, for many many years of unconditional
understanding and care. To my lovely Ilenia, Camilla, Terry, Fede, Martina, Giulia and
Tonina, for always giving me a place where I can feel that I belong.
To my family at the International Student Services for teaching me how to be unapologet-
ically real and for giving me the opportunity to do more for the international community
at DTU, and for distracting me from the thesis when I needed it the most.
To my many friends at DTU, especially to my SensUs family, for the support during
challenging times, for the cool science learned together and for the beautiful memories.
To Arsh, for being the best mate during this master’s and this thesis, for the discussions
about biosensors and about life, for being silly with me and for always picking up the
phone. To Silas, for the many beautiful conversations about anything, for your moral
support, python support and constant encouragement. And for everything else.
Finally, to my grandmothers, two strong and independent women from the south. Thank
your for teaching me the value of hard-work, patience and kindness. You’re with me
every step of the way.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
List of Tables
vii
List of Figures
viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
THz Time-Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Skin Tissue: Composition, Optical Properties and Modelling . . . . . . .
10
3
State-of-the-Art
14
4
Materials and methods
19
4.1
THz-TDS reflection setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Data analysis framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Experimental methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
36
5.1
Glucose solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Hydrogel sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Discussion
47
7
Conclusion
52
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
Bibliography
53
Appendix A
58
Appendix B
75
Appendix C
79
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
4.1
Glucose concentrations (C) with absolute and percent-wise errors (δC)
. . .
29
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
Sketch of a photoconductive switch for generation of ultrashort THz pulses.
Taken from [13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Schematic illustration of the geometry for transmission and reflection spec-
troscopy. ˜E0(ω) is the incident electric field, while ˜E(0)
T (ω), ˜E(0)
R (ω) and ˜E(1)
R (ω)
are the directly transmitted, the first and the second reflection fields, respec-
tively. Taken from [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Schematic illustration of the geometry reflection with an incidence angle ϕ.
The system is here illustrated sideways. The incident, reflected and transmit-
ted fields are only shown for p-polarised light. ˜E0 is the incident electric field in
p-polarisation, while ˜Eref and ˜Esample are the first and second reflected fields,
respectively. These are employed as reference and sample measurements, re-
spectively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Schematic illustration of the anatomy of the skin. Taken from [20] . . . . . .
11
4.1
Schematic illustration of the reflection THz-TDS setup. Purging tube and
retaining bricks for the silicon wafer are not shown for clarity
. . . . . . . .
20
4.2
THz-TDS setup (left) where a tube for nitrogen purging is inserted in the
designated opening. The silicon wafer is kept in place via retaining bricks (in
blue), due to the nitrogen over-pressure coming from underneath. Focusing
lens (right) in which the holes drilled for the purging are visible. Notice that
the holes drilled in the collimating lens are visible from underneath. See Fig.4.1
for the placement of the lenses in the lens tubes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Sketch of air-silicon-air measurement (left), resulting time trace (right) . . .
22
4.4
Example of time windowing of air measurement using a Tukey window. The
complete time trace (blue) is filtered via two filters separately, the reference
(red) and sample (purple) filters. The resulting reference (orange) and sample
(green) signals are shown. Time traces are here displayed after normalisation
of the signals and they are shifted for illustrative purposes . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Example of amplitudes of spectra for the reference and sample pulses for an
air measurement. The noise floor is indicated by the dotted line . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Schematic illustration of the geometry reflection with an incidence angle ϕ1.
The system is here illustrated as seen through the cross-section. The incident,
reflected and transmitted fields are only shown for p-polarised light. ˜E0 is the
incident electric field in p-polarisation, while ˜Eref and ˜Esample are the reference
and sample fields, respectively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
ix
4.7
Amplitude Acal(ω) (top) and phase ∆cal(ω) of the calibration factor.
The
dark purple line is the calibration factor as computed after averaging over 50
recordings, the faded lines represent the propagated standard deviations
. .
27
4.8
Molds fabricated for producing gelatin hydrogel sheets and box for humidity
control during gelation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.9
Hydrogel sheets fabrication procedure steps. A clean mold (a) is filled with
gelatin solution (b) with a pipette. A microscope slide is applied on top of
the mold (c) and slid horizontally along the length of the mold. The excess
solution left is wiped off and the hydrogel is ready for gelation (d) . . . . . .
32
4.10 Samples placed on silicon wafer: water droplet (left) and hydrogel (right) . .
32
4.11 Sketch of the hydrogel mold placed on the silicon wafer as seen through the
cross-section. The incoming field ˜E0 is first reflected off the bottom surface
of the silicon wafer ˜Eref and then at the top interface with the air/hydrogel
sheet ˜Esample. The metallic backing in the mold causes multiple reflections in
the cell. Angles and lengths are enhanced for clarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.12 Example of reference (orange) and sample (green) pulses from a THz measure-
ment of an empty mold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1
Real part of complex refractive index for MilliQ and glucose solutions of dif-
ferent concentrations. The dark purple line shows the mean of the real part
of the refractive index. The faded lines show the confidence intervals given by
evaluation of the standard deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Relative standard deviation σrel = σn/n, where σn is the absolute standard
deviation and n is the parameter value, here shown for the real part of the
complex refractive index for three glucose solutions and MilliQ (left). On the
right the same data in the 0.5-1.5 THz range. The dotted line is drawn at
0.025 for reference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Frequency dependent absorption coeﬀicients of MilliQ and 2%, 4% and 8%
gelatin hydrogels (HG2P, HG4P and HG8P respectively). Linear fits for the
absorption coeﬀicients in the considered frequency range are shown
. . . . .
38
5.4
Time traces showing THz beam reflections at the interfaces created by hydro-
gel sheet molds of different depths. The naming of the molds indicates the
number of scotch tape layers applied to the metal plates in order to create the
liquid cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Hydrogel molds depths computed from experimental THz data (top) and from
caliper measurements (bottom) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6
Time traces from 1L and 2L molds placed on the silicon wafer with and without
a weight on top . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.7
Time traces from THz measurements on empty molds (left) and molds with
hydrogel sheets (right). The molds are named according to the number of
scotch tape layers stacked in order to create the liquid cell. The time traces
are only shown for up to 150 ps for clarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.8
Time traces from experiments on the 1L mold, the hydrogel sheet made in a
separate 1L mold and MilliQ water, here shown up to 150 ps for clarity . . .
44
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
5.9
Estimated thickness of HG sheet made in the 1L mold as a function of the
frequency dependent refractive index (dark blue line). The faded lines indicate
the confidence interval given by one standard deviation. The dotted line is
drawn at 50 µm, the expected thickness of this HG sheet . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.10 Time traces from experiments on the vibratome cut hydrogel sheets cut from
the 4% and 8% hydrogels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.11 Estimated thicknesses of the vibratome cut 150 µm HG4P sheet (top) and
HG8P sheet (bottom). The dark blue line indicates the mean thickness values,
while the. faded lines indicate the confidence interval given by one standard
deviation. The dotted lines are drawn at 150 µm for reference . . . . . . . .
46
1
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of MilliQ .
58
2
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.5 mg/mL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.6 mg/mL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.8 mg/mL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.2 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.4 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.6 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.8 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
10
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
2 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
11
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
3.5 mg/mL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
xi
12
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
5 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
13
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
10 mg/mL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
14
Relative standard deviations of real part of complex refractive index, absorp-
tion coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function for
MilliQ water and glucose solutions of concentrations 0.5-10 mg/mL (2.8-55.5
mmol/L) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
15
Relative standard deviations of real part of complex refractive index, absorp-
tion coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function for
MilliQ water and glucose solutions of concentrations 0.5-10 mg/mL (2.8-55.5
mmol/L) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
16
Real part of complex refractive index for MilliQ and three different glucose
concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
17
Absorption coeﬀicient for MilliQ and three different glucose concentrations .
73
18
Real part of dielectric function for MilliQ and three different glucose concen-
trations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
19
Imaginary part of dielectric function for MilliQ and three different glucose
concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
20
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coef-
ficient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of MilliQ
water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
21
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of HG2P .
76
22
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of HG4P .
77
23
From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of HG8P .
78
24
Hydrogel sheet mold placed facing down on the silicon wafer for THz measure-
ments, without (left) and with (right) a weight placed to ensure adhesion . .
79
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Skin is the largest and most accessible organ in the human body, with an average area
of 2 m2 and weight of 4 kg[1]. Our skin’s main role is to provide protection against
external threats and regulation of internal conditions for the human body. On the other
hand, the skin represents an open window over the overall health of a human being.
Systemic conditions such as body temperature, blood pressure and oxygenation as well
as molecular-level information[2] can be characterised via investigation through the skin.
The easy accessibility of the integumentary system (i.e. the skin and its appendages)
is what makes it the most interesting interface for minimally invasive and non-invasive
biosensing.
Investigating the skin for biosensing purposes without disrupting the tissue and its mi-
croenvironment is a very important challenge that affects many characteristics of the
envisioned biosensing platform. Among these we highlight the possibility to maximise
sensitivity and specificity as well as portability and lifetime for long-term applications.
Non-invasive sensing technologies represent the gateway to easier, safer and less painful
monitoring in particular for patients affected by chronic illness, and constitute therefore
a very important technological and social challenge.
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease distinguished by abnormal levels of glucose in
the blood. Glucose is a simple sugar and the most important source of energy for all
organisms. Insulin is the hormone that controls glucose levels in the blood and it is
secreted in the pancreas. There are two main types of diabetes, type 1 is caused by an
insuﬀicient presence of insulin due to a malfunction in the pancreas, type 2 is caused
by an inappropriate response of body cells to insulin[3]. According to the World Health
Organization[4], the expected range for normal fasting blood glucose concentration is 3.9-
5.6 mmol/L (70-100 mg/dL). Diabetes is diagnosed if fasting blood glucose is 7 mmol/L
(126 mg/dL) or higher in two separate tests, this condition is called hyperglycemia, while
hypoglycemia is the condition in which an individual is found to have low fasting blood
glucose (below 3.9 mmol/L or 70 mg/dL).
Global data collected for the International Diabetes Federation[5] show that an esti-
mated 537 million adults (10.5% of the world’s adult population) are currently living
with diabetes. This number is predicted to rise to 783 million (12.2% of the world’s adult
population) by 2045[5]. The total health expenditure due to diabetes was estimated to
be around 966 billion USD in 2021 and is expected to rise to 1,054 billion USD by 2045[5].
These figures leave no doubt that diabetes significantly affects modern society from a
socio-economic and healthcare eﬀiciency perspective.
As diabetes cannot be cured permanently, patients have to learn to manage it through
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
two main channels: blood glucose monitoring and medication. Diabetic patients are
generally recommended self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG), however there is no
clear consensus regarding the recommended daily sampling frequency, which can vary
between four and ten times per day[6]. In addition, a considerable portion of diabetic
patients have been found to not adhere to their SMBG regimen[6].
There are two main reasons why SMBG does not contribute to an effective diabetes
management. First, in SMBG blood glucose is evaluated at specific points in time and
does not give a complete picture of the blood glucose dynamics throughout the day. A
more frequent measurement framework would otherwise provide valuable information
for the optimisation of the patient’s insulin therapy, as well as it could help prevent
acute metabolic deterioration by giving signals relative to hypo- and hyperglycemia[7].
Secondly, the most common point-of-care (POC) device for SMBG is the electrochemical
glucometer, which requires a drop of blood to be extracted via finger-pricking. Despite
these being highly optimised devices, they carry the disadvantage of the sample extrac-
tion being extremely uncomfortable for patients. Finger-pricking can be painful and
cause infection, lancing devices and electrode cartridges can be expensive and the accu-
racy of the device can deteriorate over time[3].
Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is therefore needed to fill the gap left by discrete
and sporadic measurements for self-monitoring, although it is imperative that it also
tackles the challenges imposed by the invasiveness of the sample extraction. Usually,
CGM devices allow for measurements every 5 minutes[8]. This sampling frequency pro-
vides insight into glucose level trends and their correlation to daily activities, sleep and
stress levels, also allowing patients to intervene with medication whenever glucose levels
fluctuations alerts are emitted[8]. Minimally-invasive CGM devices such as microneedle
patches are proof of technological advancement in this direction. The working principle
of these devices is based on glucose measurements done in the interstitial fluid (ISF) of
the skin or in the subcutis. The sensing platform is either implanted on the surface of
the skin, or the ISF is extracted via e.g. microdialysis[7]. This principle is based on the
fact that the exchange of glucose molecules between blood and the ISF happens at a
rate which allows to correlate the glucose level detected in the subcutis to that present
in blood with a lag time varying between a few seconds and 15 minutes. One of the main
drawbacks of such glucose sensors is that they still require to break the skin barrier to
access the ISF, therefore carrying the risk of local infection or inflammatory response to
the microneedle material. This affects the duration of the sensor application and may
still represent a deterrent for many patients.
Non-invasive CGM technologies have achieved the best quality measurements through
optical detection[3]. The main techniques suggested are near-infrared (NIR), mid-infrared
(MIR) and Raman spectroscopy. These techniques employ wavelengths between 750-
2500 nm for NIR and 2500-10000 nm for MIR, while Raman uses from visible to MIR.
The choice of wavelength range relies on the absorption of specific chemical bonds in the
glucose molecule, which results into absorption spectra with distinct and glucose-specific
peaks for NIR and MIR. For the case of Raman spectroscopy, this results into Raman
shift spectra due to specific rotational or vibrational modes of molecules in the probed
==PAGE:17==
1 Introduction
3
body fluids. The main drawback in these techniques is the confounding effect of other
analytes with optical properties similar to those of glucose due to similar molecular struc-
ture. However, several of these systems have made it to the market, although mainly
for adjunctive use or for monitoring trends rather than absolute measurements[9].
Object of recent investigations and of the present study is the potential of THz tech-
nologies for CGM purposes. The THz region of the electromagnetic spectrum lies in the
technological gap between electronics and photonics for both generation and detection
techniques. The exploration of the THz gap and its potential applications has for a
long time been halted by the diﬀiculty to provide suitable sources and detectors[10]. In
the last couple of decades, on the other hand, we have witnessed a rapid increase in the
technological development of THz which resulted into insightful research within a wealth
of fields of application. Hydrated biological matter such as skin tissue has been shown
to have interesting interactions with THz frequencies and these are the main focus of
the work reported herein.
The main feature of the interactions between THz frequencies and biological matter is
that weak bonds between water molecules resonate in the THz region. THz frequencies
are therefore extremely water sensitive, which can be argued to be limiting when think-
ing of penetration depth into biological samples. However, the water sensitivity of THz
can be leveraged to investigate shallow systems with high water content such as the
upper layers of skin tissues. As we will learn extensively in the following sections, the
interstitial fluid present in between skin cells can be thought of as a vessel of transport of
nutrients from the capillary endothelium (i.e. the inner lining of capillaries) to the cells
themselves[11]. ISF is the targeted body fluid for some currently existing transdermal
CGM devices and it offers the same advantages to a non-invasive technique such as one
based on THz spectroscopy.
While transdermal microneedles can be functionalised with glucose-recognising biomolecules
for specific detection[12], spectroscopic techniques result into the gathering of a general
response of the biological system to the incoming radiation. The challenge lies in mak-
ing sense of the sample signal via the engineering of an analysis framework capable of
discerning the response due to the analyte from the matrix, e.g. the skin tissue.
In order to do so, the matrix response has to be characterised and the underlying physical
mechanisms have to be described in order to discern external and internal confounding
factors.
The objective of this thesis has been to conduct an initial experimental study on the
interaction of THz light with models of skin tissue. A strong emphasis has been placed
on the tissue properties that mainly interact with a THz beam, the skin models investi-
gated in this study are therefore thin solid systems with high water content. The aim
is to iteratively improve and increase the complexity of said systems in order to predict
the response obtained through in vivo measurements in more detail, still keeping a high
level of control on the test system.
The ultimate goal is to build a reliable platform for controlled in vitro tests that will be
as representative as possible of a skin tissue sample as seen through THz eyes. This will
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
be the starting point for establishing a suitable signal processing framework that will
take into account the matrix response and allow sensitive and specific glucose measure-
ments in the epidermal interstitial fluid.
The remaining of this thesis report includes a detailed description of the theoretical
background for the experimental THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) setup, the
data analysis framework and the sample systems fabrication in chapter 2. An account
of the current state-of-the-art concerning glucose measurements as well as tissue charac-
terisation with THz-TDS is given in chapter 3. A descriptive run down of the materials
and methods for sample fabrication and data analysis and the relative experimental re-
sults can be found in chapter 4 and chapter 5, respectively. The obtained results are
discussed in chapter 6 and the main conclusions are summarised in chapter 7.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical Background
In this section we will go through the fundamentals of THz-TDS recalling THz generation
and detection as well as data analysis for complex refractive index retrieval. We will then
explore the anatomy and the optical properties of skin tissue in order to lay the basis
for the skin tissue models that we will build and characterise in the following chapters.
2.1
THz Time-Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS)
The terahertz (THz) region of the electromagnetic spectrum comprises frequencies rang-
ing from 0.3 to 10 THz, loosely corresponding to photon energies between 1 and 100
meV[13]. This places the THz window between microwaves (starting from below 0.3
THz or 1 mm wavelengths) and infrared (ranging from 10 to around 400 THz)[10]. THz
frequencies can therefore be used to probe energetic transitions in the meV range in
systems with characteristic lifetimes in the picosecond range[13]. Relevant examples are
intermolecular interactions between molecular units either bound via weak hydrogen
bonds or weakly interacting via e.g. Van der Waals forces[14].
As announced in the introduction, the THz frequency window was until a few decades
ago referred to as the last unexplored range of frequencies within the electromagnetic
spectrum. This stemmed mainly from the lack of sources and detectors suitable for the
THz range. However, the development of the femtosecond laser in the 1980s opened up
for the opportunity to further develop THz technology[13]. THz radiation could now be
produced by impinging ultra-short optical pulses onto photoconductive dipole antennas,
which is the current common method of THz generation, a technique first described in
1989 by Grischkowsky et al.[15].
For context, a brief description of a photoconductive antenna for generation of ultra-
broadband electromagnetic transients with THz frequencies is given in the following.
The geometry of a photoconductive switch is shown in Fig.2.1. A substrate is covered
by a photoconductive layer, usually a semiconducting material. Two metallic electrodes
are placed on top of the semiconductor in such a way that a photoconductive gap is
left open between them. A bias voltage is applied to the photoconductive gap via the
electrodes while femtosecond laser pulses are impinged on the gap. High energy photons
from the laser pulses excite electrons across the bandgap and into the conduction band
of the semiconductor. Once in the conduction band, the charges are accelerated by the
bias field and they eventually recombine according to the recombination time that char-
acterises the semiconductor. The fundamental principle is that the frequency content
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.1: Sketch of a photoconductive switch for generation of ultrashort THz pulses.
Taken from [13].
of the radiated field is related to the temporal dynamics of the transient current that
generated the field. More specifically, the generated field will be proportional to the
first derivative of the current density impinging on the semiconductor. Consequently,
a current transient evolving on the timescale of a few hundred femtoseconds to a few
picoseconds will generate a field with frequencies in the THz range[13].
The produced THz radiation is commonly coupled into the substrate via a THz dipole
antenna structure and then collected into a collimated (slightly diverging) beam by the
substrate lens, as shown in Fig.2.1.
Detection of THz pulses generated in a photoconductive antenna can be done by sam-
pling in a photoconductive antenna identical to the emitting THz structure. Usually,
part of the femtosecond laser pulse train is split off from the main beam and it is used
to excite the detector, which is not biased via an external circuit. The THz pulses that
have been through or reflected off the surface of a sample, arrive to the photoconductive
gap of the detector at the same time as the gating pulse train. The photocurrent in
the detector is then a convolution of the detected THz field and the transient photo-
conductivity induced by the gating pulse train. If the photoconductive dynamics of the
semiconductor in the detector is much faster than the duration of the THz field, the
detected current is directly proportional to the incoming THz field strength. By delay-
ing the gating femtosecond pulse train with respect to the THz field, the latter can be
sampled by the detector.
THz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) is a powerful method for retrieval of intrin-
sic parameters of the investigated samples, e.g. real index of refraction and absorption
coeﬀicient and thereby real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function[16]. Parameter
retrieval is usually performed via analysis in the frequency domain. THz-TDS can be
==PAGE:21==
2.1 THz Time-Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS)
7
performed both in transmission and in reflection. Figure 2.2 depicts the simplest geom-
etry for transmission mode or normal incidence reflection mode THz-TDS. Here ˜E0(ω)
is the complex Fourier spectrum of the incident electric field, while ˜E(0)
T (ω), ˜E(0)
R (ω) and
˜E(1)
R (ω) are the complex Fourier spectra of the directly transmitted, the first and the
second reflection fields, respectively. Notice that for each one-way trip through the sam-
ple of thickness d, the incoming field acquires a 2δ phase where δ = nωd/c, where n is
the refractive index and c is the speed of light in vacuum. The phase δ can be complex-
valued for the case of absorptive samples, as they will have a complex refractive index.
The system shown in Fig.2.2 can essentially be thought of as a three layer system first
Figure 2.2: Schematic illustration of the geometry for transmission and reflection spec-
troscopy.
˜E0(ω) is the incident electric field, while ˜E(0)
T (ω), ˜E(0)
R (ω) and
˜E(1)
R (ω) are the directly transmitted, the first and the second reflection
fields, respectively. Taken from [17].
transmitted and reflected signals can therefore be given as
˜E0
R(ω) = ˜r12 ˜E0(ω)
(2.1)
˜E0
T(ω) = ˜t12˜t23e−αd/2einωd/c ˜E0(ω)
(2.2)
˜E1
R(ω) = ˜t12˜r23˜t21e−αdei2nωd/c ˜E0(ω)
(2.3)
where ˜rmp, ˜tmp are the complex Fresnel field transmission and reflection coeﬀicients at
the interfaces between media m and p.
The complex index of refraction ˜n = n(ω)+iκ(ω) can be retrieved from both transmission
and reflection measurements.
The extinction coeﬀicient κ(ω) = α(ω)c/2ω allows to
isolate the absorption coeﬀicient α(ω). One example of such retrieval can be given for
the simplest transmission geometry. First, a reference measurement Eref(t) is recorded
where the sample is removed from the beam path. Then a sample measurement Esample(t)
is taken, where the sample is placed in the beam path. The Fourier spectra can then be
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Theoretical Background
compared as follows
˜Esample(ω)
˜Eref(ω)
= T(ω)eiϕ(ω) = ˜t12˜t23e−αd/2ei(n−1)ωd/c
(2.4)
From here the real index of refraction n and the absorption coeﬀicient α can be isolated
by reverting the equation.
The transmission geometry is the easiest to implement and the most commonly encoun-
tered in THz-TDS studies[16]. However, as water shows high absorption in the THz
range[18], reflection geometries are preferred for biological samples. The experimental
setup developed for this study leverages the advantages of reflection THz-TDS for sam-
ples with high water content. In the following, the case of THz-TDS in reflection mode
with an incidence angle will therefore be treated in more detail.
As previously mentioned for transmission mode, a reference measurement is required for
parameter retrieval. For the case of reflection geometries, this can be achieved in two
different ways. One can decide to place a known reflector such as a metallic mirror in
place of the sample and to take this as reference measurement. The sample measure-
ments is then taken by replacing the mirror with the sample itself. One drawback of
this solution is that alignment can be intricate and compensation may have to be coded
in the data analysis algorithm[16].
The most common alternative is to place a window in close contact with the sample.
The window is made of a thick known dielectric, such as high purity silicon. An example
of such geometry is shown in Fig.2.3. If we draw a vertical axis through the middle
of the sketch in Fig.2.3, we have a three layer system composed of air-silicon-sample.
Here we assume that the refractive index of the sample, schematically depicted as a
liquid droplet on top of the silicon wafer, is unknown and complex valued. The silicon
window has thickness dSi and real-valued refractive index nSi. In the analysis conducted
in this study, the refractive index of silicon is taken to be 3.4175, after the very precise
measurements conducted by Dai et al.[19].
As illustrated in Fig.2.3, the incoming THz field E0 impinges on the bottom surface of
the silicon window with an angle ϕ1. At this interface, part of the field is reflected off
the surface with the same angle as the incident angle. This first reflection is indicated as
Eref and it is used as reference pulse, as it will be the same under the same experimental
conditions, regardless of the sample under investigation. Part of the incoming field is
then transmitted through the air-silicon interface with a refraction angle ϕ2 with respect
to the normal, which can be calculated via Snell’s law. The refracted beam travels then
through the silicon wafer until it encounters the interface between the silicon wafer and
the sample. At this interface the beam is once again both reflected and refracted. The
reflected part will then travel back through the silicon wafer until it reaches the silicon-
air interface. The beam will then once again split, part will be reflected (not shown in
Fig.2.3) and part will be transmitted. The transmitted portion of the beam will have
collected information about the sample at the silicon-sample interface and it is therefore
taken as the sample measurement Esample.
At each interface the signal is both reflected and transmitted according to the reflection
and transmission coeﬀicients defined by the Fresnel coeﬀicients.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 THz Time-Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS)
9
n1 = nair = 1
n2 = nSi
n3
 dSi
φ1
φ2
 dAir
E0
Eref
Esample
~
~
~
~
Figure 2.3: Schematic illustration of the geometry reflection with an incidence angle
ϕ. The system is here illustrated sideways. The incident, reflected and
transmitted fields are only shown for p-polarised light. ˜E0 is the incident
electric field in p-polarisation, while ˜Eref and ˜Esample are the first and
second reflected fields, respectively. These are employed as reference and
sample measurements, respectively.
One important thing to notice is that the Fresnel coeﬀicients are dependent on the po-
larisation of the incoming light. In this study, the light was fixed to be p-polarised for
all experiments. P-polarised light is here defined as light for which the electric field
oscillates along the axis parallel to the plane of incidence. Notice that the plane of
incidence is defined as the plane perpendicular to the interface between the two media.
The light beam sketched in Fig.2.3 is p-polarised as indicated by the incoming electric
field direction. In the following, the expressions will be derived for p-polarised light only.
A detailed account for the case in which the polarisation of light may be defined as a
linear combination of both s- and p-polarised light can be found in [16].
The reflection and transmission coeﬀicients at the air-silicon, silicon-sample and silicon-
air interfaces can therefore be written as
r12 = n2 cos (ϕ1) −n1 cos (ϕ2)
n2 cos (ϕ1) + n1 cos (ϕ2)
(2.5)
t12 =
2n1 cos (ϕ1)
n2 cos (ϕ1) + n1 cos (ϕ2)
(2.6)
˜r23 = ˜n3 cos (ϕ2) −n2 cos (ϕ3)
˜n3 cos (ϕ2) + n2 cos (ϕ3)
(2.7)
t21 =
2n2 cos (ϕ2)
n1 cos (ϕ2) + n2 cos (ϕ1)
(2.8)
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Theoretical Background
where n1, n2, ˜n3, ϕ1 and ϕ2 are defined as shown in Fig.2.3. Notice that ˜n3 is assumed
to be complex valued for absorptive samples. In addition, the angle ϕ3 (not shown in
Fig.2.3) is the refraction angle at the silicon-sample interface. This angle is not known
and cannot be computed unless the refractive index of the sample is known.
This issue can be bypassed by rewriting the reflection and transmission coeﬀicients as a
function of the incident angle only, which also improves the quality of the predictions,
since it is a tunable parameter in the setup. By means of trigonometric identities, the
reflection and transmission coeﬀicients can therefore be rewritten as[16]
r12 =
−n2
2 cos (ϕ1) +
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1)
n2
2 cos (ϕ1) +
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1)
(2.9)
t12 =
2 cos (ϕ1)
n2 cos (ϕ1) +
√
1 −sin2 (ϕ1)/n2
2
(2.10)
˜r23 =
−˜n2
3
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1) + n2
2
√
n2
3 −sin2 (ϕ1)
˜n2
3
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1) + n2
2
√
n2
3 −sin2 (ϕ1)
(2.11)
t21 =
2n2
√
1 −sin2 (ϕ2)/n2
2
n2 cos (ϕ1) +
√
1 −sin2 (ϕ2)/n2
2
(2.12)
Notice that in the equations above the refractive index of the first medium n1 = nAir
has been set to its known value of 1.
The main goal is once again to characterise the complex refractive index of the sample
˜n3 in the THz range. This means, that because r12, t12 and t21 are known, then ˜r23 can
be found by comparing the spectra of the sample and reference measurement pulses, just
as for the transmission case (see eq.2.4).
The main elements of the theoretical background for the data analysis performed in this
study have been presented in this section. In Section 4.2 the data analysis framework
is presented in detail.
2.2
Skin Tissue: Composition, Optical
Properties and Modelling
The skin is a very complex organ, the largest and most accessible organ in our body,
which offers a great potential for well-being monitoring of individuals, as well as disease
monitoring and diagnosis[2]. Our skin’s main role is to protect the body from external
biological, chemical and physical threats, to help regulate body temperature and prevent
water loss, as well as providing the environment for sensory tools with which we probe
the surrounding environment.
An illustration of the main components of skin tissue is given in Fig.2.4.
The skin comprises three main interconnected layers: The epidermis, the dermis and
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Skin Tissue: Composition, Optical Properties and Modelling
11
Figure 2.4: Schematic illustration of the anatomy of the skin. Taken from [20].
the hypodermis, from outermost to innermost respectively. The epidermis is the non-
vascularised outermost layer of skin. The morphological structure of the epidermis is a
multilayer flat squamous epithelium. About 95% of the cells making up the epidermis
are keratinocytes, cells that enable the production of keratin, a filamentous protein that
provides structural integrity and protection to the integumentary system[21].
The epidermis is a continuously renewing system which undergoes a process of specific
cell differentiation called keratinisation[22]. This is the process by which epithelial cells
produce and become filled with keratin, until they die and become anucleate cells called
corneocytes. Corneocytes are the building units of the outermost layer of the epider-
mis, namely the stratum corneum (SC). Based on the keratinocytes’ morphology and
position, the epidermis can be subdivided into several layers which go from the stratum
basale at the interface with the dermis to the SC at the interface with the environment.
This subdivision depends on the morphology and arrangement of the keratinocytes. The
process of renewal and differentiation causes the cells to gradually be lifted into the over-
lying layers until they finally desquamate from the skin surface[22].
The thickness of the three main layers of the skin depends on internal as well as external
factors. Body site is one of the main influencing factors, as an example the thickness
of the epidermis ranges from less than 0.5 mm on the eyelid to 1.5 mm on palms and
soles[22]. Body site was in fact found to be correlated with 45% of the variation of
the SC thickness in patients and with 39% of the variation of the thickness of cellular
epidermis. Other factors such as age, gender, pigmentation, skin type, blood content
and smoking habit have been found to be correlated to the thickness of one or more of
the layers of the skin[23].
The average thicknesses for the outermost skin layers were found to be: 10-20µm for the
SC, 30-100µm for the epidermis and 900-1500µm for the dermis[24].
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Theoretical Background
As light enters a tissue and interacts with its components it may be absorbed, transmit-
ted or scattered. The nature of the interaction is decided by the wavelength of incident
light, the tissue structure and the tissue optical properties such as refractive index and
absorption and scattering coeﬀicients[24]. When light is absorbed, the energy is con-
verted in energetic transitions between vibrational, rotational and electronic states. In
this case a match between photon energy and bond energy is needed for absorption to
take place. Absorption of THz light in skin tissue is mainly due to tissue water, as THz
frequencies are highly absorbed by intermolecular bonds between water molecules.
Light scattering can be of two kinds, elastic and inelastic. Elastic scattering is generally
more dominant and it is defined by the energy of scattered light being equal to the
energy of incident light.
Elastic scattering includes Rayleigh and Lorenz-Mie scattering. The former occurs when
the size of the scatterer is much smaller than the wavelength of the incident light. Mie
scattering, on the other hand is observed when the size of the scattering particles is com-
parable to the wavelength of the incident light. The THz range comprises wavelengths
between 30-3000µm. Most components of the epidermis have sizes below 100µm, apart
from basal cells and squamous epithelial cells which are found in the deepest regions of
the epidermis. This means mainly that Rayleigh scattering is dominant in the scatter-
ing interaction of THz light with skin tissue[22]. Therefore conventionally, skin tissue
is treated as an isotropic homogeneous medium within the THz range[25].
As previously mentioned, the skin offers access to a wealth of biochemical information
about a patient, mainly via three important biofluids, namely sweat, interstitial fluid
(ISF) and blood.
ISF surrounds cells, blood and lymphatic vessels.
It constitutes 45% of the volume
fraction of human skin on average and 15-25% of body weight[26]. However, studies
have shown that the content of ISF in the epidermis is considerably lower than in the
dermis, as the volume percentage of ISF in epidermis has been found to be as low as
15-35%[27]. ISF is a very rich matrix comprising serum and cellular material, hormones
and various solutes. ISF transports signalling molecules in between cells, as well as nu-
trients and waste products between blood capillaries and cells[11]. Interestingly, fluid
transport from the vascular to the interstitial compartment is driven by hydrostatic and
protein-induced osmotic pressure, which is what makes it possible to have transport of
larger proteins in the extracellular matrix[2]. On the other hand, glucose is transported
from the capillary endothelium to the ISF by simple diffusion driven by a concentration
gradient, without the need for an active transporter. Different factors affect the glucose
values in the interstitium: First, blood flow to the area, which affects the amount of glu-
cose delivered. Secondly, the diffusion rate of glucose from plasma to ISF and the rate
of uptake of glucose by the tissue cells will also influence the amount of glucose present
in the interstitium. These factors are then influenced by e.g. insulin and capillary per-
meability. The time it takes for glucose to travel from the capillary endothelium to the
ISF is then essential to characterise the lag time between plasma and ISF glucose level
changes. Therefore, being able to characterise the origin of any change in the glucose
diffusion rate is highly relevant.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Skin Tissue: Composition, Optical Properties and Modelling
13
The potential of application of THz within the biomedical field calls for a deep under-
standing of the fundamental THz-human tissue interactions. 3D in vitro skin models are
currently gaining momentum for their relevance when it comes to skin disease modelling,
pre-clinical studies, such as drug testing, and personalised medicine development[28].
These models are engineered in such a way that important biochemical and morpholog-
ical features of skin tissue are reproduced in a controlled manner.
3D in vitro skin models represent therefore a powerful and versatile test system for
controlled studies of the nature of the interactions of THz light with the biochemical
components of skin[29]. They can be divided into two main categories: scaffold-free and
scaffold-based. Scaffold-free in vitro tissue models are defined as non-adherent cell ag-
gregates formed via the self-assembly of one or more cell types[28]. Scaffold-based skin
models are skin cell cultures, where cells grow on either hydrogel-based or polymeric
fiber-based supports[28]. Hydrogels are 3D networks in which natural or synthetic hy-
drophilic polymer chains are allowed to cross-link. Upon cross-linking, hydrogels swell
and can incorporate large amounts of water. One very common approach to fabricating
a scaffold for a human skin tissue model is using collagen. Collagen proteins are what
gives human skin its structure, and they are produced by cells called fibroblasts, which
are located in the epidermis. 3D in vitro skin models utilise in particular collagen type
I, which makes up around 80-90% of the collagen content in human skin[30].
However, very similar functionalities can be achieved with other base materials. Because
of the advancements in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering, many solutions
have been found to the problem of modelling skin that simplify procedures while still
achieving the desired tissue properties. To this end, gelatin has been largely explored as
a replacement for collagen in creating scaffolds for skin tissue models[31].
Gelatin is a product of partial hydrolysis of collagen. Gelatin has a number of advan-
tages that make it very popular within a number of fields including tissue engineering
and drug delivery. Unlike collagen, gelatin is water-soluble under neutral conditions, it
is easily commercially available and much cheaper than collagen. It is non-toxic, non-
carcinogenic and therefore very biocompatible[32].
Gelatin has the very useful property of being thermo-responsive, meaning that it under-
goes a reversible solution-gel transition when it is cooled down below its critical solution
temperature of 25-35°C[31]. This allows a very straightforward way of preparing gelatin
hydrogels. However, gelatin does come with some disadvantages, namely its poor me-
chanical and thermal stability as well as relatively short degradation times[32]. Some of
these effects can be counteracted by chemically or physically cross-linking the peptides
when making gelatin hydrogels.
In this study, gelatin hydrogels have been used as very simple skin tissue models, mainly
replicating two fundamental features of skin tissue: (i) 3D network of peptide chains mak-
ing up a hydrophilic mesh structure and (ii) a water content, with both bound and free
water molecules for THz probing.
The hydrogel preparation procedures followed in this study are presented in detail in
Section 4.3.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3
State-of-the-Art
The goal of this chapter is to give the reader an overview of the current state-of-the-art
of THz applications within the biomedical field. Particular emphasis is put on THz
imaging and spectroscopy of biological tissues.
THz light offers a plethora of biomedical applications ranging from in vitro biosensing to
in vivo imaging and tissue differentiation[33]. The potential of THz radiation is based on
four core elements[18]: (i) the photon energy range covered by THz frequencies matches
the range of energies of biomolecular motions such as vibration, rotation and libration,
as well as intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonds and Van der Waals in-
teractions. (ii) Water, a polar molecule and one of the most abundant molecules in
biological matter, exhibits strong absorption in the THz range in the form of two promi-
nent bands, a translational and a rotational one[34]. This sensitivity to water content
makes it possible to use THz to characterise and differentiate biological systems based on
their hydration state. (iii) THz spectroscopy makes it possible to achieve a remarkable
time resolution down to picoseconds or subpicoseconds, which in turn makes it possible
to resolve collective vibrational modes of biomolecules. (iv) Owing to its low photon
energies, THz light does not cause ionization damage, which is paramount for in vivo
diagnostics.
When it comes to in vitro applications, THz spectroscopy has shown vast potential for
the detection of various biomolecules. One example is given by the low-frequency molec-
ular motions originating from the hydrogen bonds between complementary base pairs in
nucleic acids. These are directly dependent on the base composition and the conforma-
tional state of the nucleic acids. This connection has allowed to use THz to differentiate
hybridised from denatured DNA[35], as well as characterise spectral differences due to
single-base changes in DNA molecules and therefore detect the presence of DNA muta-
tions[36]. Furthermore, THz radiation has been employed for the monitoring of protein
hydration and protein-ligand binding[18], as well as detection and discrimination of car-
bohydrates such as glucose[37].
Finally, THz radiation has shown potential for living cell detection. The current gold
standards for cell detection are techniques such as flow cytometry and fluorescence molec-
ular tomography[38]. These methods rely mainly on labelling procedures through e.g.
fluorophores or nuclides, which can affect living cells’ biological activity and can there-
fore interfere with cell viability tests[38]. THz spectroscopy bypasses these issues by
providing a label-free and non-invasive alternative for cell detection. THz spectroscopy
can for example be used, leveraging its water content sensitivity, to differentiate and
characterise the activity of cancerous cells. Tumor cells are indeed known to contain
==PAGE:29==
3 State-of-the-Art
15
exceeding free water versus bound water, when compared to healthy cells[38, 39]. THz-
ATR (attenuated total reflection) spectroscopy has been shown to allow real-time in-situ
investigation of cytoplasm leakage from living cells for cell permeability studies, without
the need for staining or labelling steps[40].
As previously mentioned, the water sensitivity of THz is due to two main bands, of
which the one centered at 5.6 THz is the one due to hydrogen bonding stretches [41].
Intermolecular hydrogen bonds in liquid water are much weaker than intramolecular
covalent bonds, resulting in longer bond lengths covering modes in the THz regime.
Currently, the relaxation processes in water are mainly understood based on the analogy
of a single water molecule in a rattling motion in a cage of surrounding molecules[41].
Water is a polar molecule. When an electric field is applied to a polar liquid, the molec-
ular dipole moments will align with the field causing a macroscopic polarization of the
liquid. When the field is removed, said polarisation will relax due to the thermal fluc-
tuations in the liquid[42]. Two relaxation processes are used to model the macroscopic
polarisation of liquid water as two oscillators using Debye theory[42]. The two relaxation
processes are, respectively, a slow relaxation with a characteristic time of τD > 2 ps and
a fast relaxation with characteristic times of τ2 > 50 fs. The Debye model describes
the frequency dependence of the complex dielectric permittivity. The relaxation times
as well as the limiting values for the dielectric permittivity at high and low frequencies
are evaluated by fitting the model to the experimental data. These parameters are then
used to differentiate water dynamics in different systems[43]. Water dynamics in the
picosecond range can therefore be resolved and characterised. THz provides therefore
an important tool for the investigation of the hydration state of solutes. The idea is that
water dynamics is slowed down (e.g. longer Debye relaxation times) by the presence of
a certain weakly bond molecule. This principle can for example be employed to detect
the presence of glucose.
This theoretical understanding builds on a simple hydration model, where the biomolecule
in question is surrounded by concentric hydration shells[44]. The innermost shell is a
monolayer of water molecules directly bound to the hydrophilic part of the biomolecule.
The water molecules in this shell have much slower relaxation times. The next shells
comprise water molecule that are first only weakly perturbed by the presence of the
biomolecule, whose influence descreases progressively as we move outwards until the sur-
rounding water molecules are considered free[44]. The break and formation of hydrogen
bonds in these shells can be resolved with THz spectroscopy.
A direct application of this theoretical modelling is the use of THz to characterise the
composition of blood. Blood analysis aimed at characterising the concentration of red
blood cells (RBCs) in blood is commonly used to identify cases of anemia, blood cancer
or dengue fever. The gold standards for blood analysis are chemical or physical labo-
ratory procedures that are invasive and expensive, both in terms of time and resources.
Optical techniques are therefore particularly interesting at the moment in this field, as
they provide solutions to the invasiveness and the processing time[45]. Using THz spec-
troscopy to characterise the hematocrit (concentration of RBCs in blood) of a patient
==PAGE:30==
16
3 State-of-the-Art
relies on measuring the water content of the main elements in the blood matrix.
The goal is to establish a relationship between the dielectric properties of blood and the
RBCs content. This requires, though, a solid calibration of the response of e.g. the THz
absorption coeﬀicient of a sample to a variation of the concentration of RBCs. Several
studies[45, 46, 47] have achieved this via a systematic approach to pre-treating the blood
sample in order to separate blood components and characterise their dielectric properties
individually. This allows then a better understanding of the various contributions to the
response of whole blood with varying RBC concentration. It should be mentioned that
in these studies, both the refractive index and the absorption coeﬀicient are monitored
in order to increase the accuracy of the analyte predictions in post-processing. THz spec-
troscopy allows to retrieve both parameters simultaneously during one measurement, as
the technique provides information about the amplitude and the phase as well.
Another point worth mentioning is that the refractive indices and absorption coeﬀicients
of a system such as blood are seen to vary monotonically across the frequency range con-
sidered. This feature limits the specificity of predictions based on THz spectroscopy.
Therefore, a THz-based detection technology has to rely on a very accurate calibration,
or it has to be engineered in conjunction with another spectroscopic technology which
can provide the desired specificity.
All of this means essentially that blood is a very complex matrix when it comes to
optical analyte detection. The sensing of solutes such as glucose can be made possible
by leveraging the water sensitivity of THz. Detectable variations of the dielectric prop-
erties of blood correlated with the glucose concentration have been found in rats with
alloxan induced diabetes versus healthy rats[47]. These can be explained in terms of the
hydration model introduced earlier, in which the dynamics of glucose bound water can
be differentiated from that of free bulk water molecules[48]. Interestingly, significant
differences have also been found in lyophilised plasma pellets, where the influence of
water has been limited from the offset in order to enhance the response of other com-
ponents, among them glucose[49]. In real biological systems, glucose interacts not only
with water but also with proteins to which it binds, such as insulin. This has been
found to be reflected in the absorption coeﬀicients, which were not simply observed to
decrease with an increasing glucose concentration, as suggested by the hydration model
introduced earlier[49]. A detailed understanding of the matrix, its components and their
interactions is therefore essential to build a reliable framework for data analysis and pre-
dictions.
Tissue characterisation and differentiation is a large field of application for THz spec-
troscopy and imaging. This is mainly due to the fact that various biological tissues, and
even more specifically various skin tissues, are differentiated by their water content[50].
THz spectroscopy has indeed been shown to be a powerful tool for non-invasive early
diagnostics of pigmentary skin nevi[51]. On the other hand, efforts have been made
to investigate intrinsic differences between different tissues, which are independent of
the water content. This has been devised via tissue sample preparation methods such
as paraﬀin embedding, freezing and formalin fixing[52] aimed at preserving the sample
composition and structure while limiting the presence of tissue water. Intrinsic differ-
==PAGE:31==
3 State-of-the-Art
17
ences have been for cancerous tissues[52] and for brain tissue biopsies from Alzheimer’s
patients[53].
THz imaging has been largely implemented for both in vitro and in vivo tissue character-
isation. THz imaging allows to complement the intrinsic properties of the sample with
its morphological features, which has been argued to make THz imaging more attractive
for clinical application than THz spectroscopy alone[18]. THz imaging has shown poten-
tial for highly sensitive diagnosis of early-stage skin cancer[54], as well as for long-term
monitoring of blood and corneal tissue[55, 56, 57].
Because of the high absorption of water in the THz range, one direct application for
THz in a clinical setting is for investigation of epidermal tissue, which has shown great
potential for skin burn assessment[38]. Nonetheless, the potential for integration of THz
instrumentation in endoscopic systems opens the way for a series of other clinical appli-
cations. The attractiveness of THz for in vivo diagnostics of e.g. neoplasms is then only
increased by the absence of radiation hazards when compared to conventional techniques
such as X-rays or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
THz spectroscopy data from skin tissue is often analysed and understood via the Debye
model[25, 58]. This is possible because in the THz regime, skin tissue can be treated
as a homogeneous and isotropic medium, as the major structural components of skin
are much smaller than the THz wavelength range. This allows to directly compare the
dynamics of water in skin with bulk water. The main advantage of a frequency-domain
analysis is that it does not depend on the THz geometry, therefore transmission and
reflection data are comparable. While time-domain analysis carries the disadvantage
of being geometry dependent, it has also been proven to provide extra information for
tissue differentiation[59].
THz spectroscopy and imaging represent promising tools for the characterisation and dif-
ferentiation of biological tissues and ultimately for in vivo diagnostics. It is clear, though,
that implementation in a clinical setting requires the optimisation of several elements
including instrumentation, calibration and modelling of the data. The interpretation
of the obtained data is then based on a detailed understanding of the internal factors
that affect the matrix (e.g. skin tissue) and the analyte (e.g. glucose) to be detected.
However, when dealing with biological systems it is paramount to consider the way the
measurement process can affect the collected data. Studies[60, 61] have shown that in
vivo THz measurements on skin are affected both by the pressure with which the body
part in question is applied to the THz reflection window and by the resulting occlusion
of the pores in the epidermis. Both factors influence the water gradient across the epi-
dermis and the overlying stratum corneum, thereby affecting the diffusion of water and
other solutes from the deeper to the outermost layers of the skin.
These effects have a significant impact on the dielectric properties of the epidermis and
should therefore be characterised and accounted for in the development of an in vivo
THz spectroscopy device for diagnostics or monitoring.
THz spectroscopy and imaging offer a wide range of advantages for applications in the
field of diagnostics and monitoring. In order to succeed in circumventing the current
challenges in this field, the THz response of a biological system has to be mapped and
==PAGE:32==
18
3 State-of-the-Art
understood in detail before moving on to analyte detection.
The different information obtained from frequency- and time-domain analysis should be
used in conjunction to develop predictive models that can be accurate and specific to
the analyte in question. Internal and external influencing factors should be described
and accounted for in the analysis.
This kind of strategy should be implemented step-wise and with a high degree of control
of the biological system to be analysed. This calls therefore for the engineering of a
suitable experimental platform, such as a tissue model, that can correctly represent the
features that will respond to THz light, under controlled conditions.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and methods
In this chapter, the main components of the experimental framework are presented. The
chapter starts with a detailed description of the THz-TDS reflection setup assembled for
this study. Following is a run down of the main features of the data analysis framework,
which is essential for the correct understanding of the experimental results. Finally, an
account of the sample preparation procedures is given in order to give the reader an
overview of the different systems investigated in this study.
4.1
THz-TDS reflection setup
As motivated in the previous sections, the investigation conducted in this study is carried
out via a THz-TDS reflection setup, schematically illustrated in Fig.4.1.
The time-domain THz platform in use for this study is the Toptica TeraFlash Pro[62].
In this THz platform, the time delay between the THz beam and the gating on the
receiving antenna is implemented using a precise mechanical delay stage. As shown in
Fig.4.1, the THz emitting antenna is connected to a lens tube containing two lenses. All
lenses in this setup are aspheric lenses made of topas[63] (trade name for cyclic olefin
co-polymer). As the THz beam coming out of the antenna is slightly diverging, it is
first sent through a collimating lens, which is placed approximately 27 mm from the
focal point of the antenna. Next, a focusing lens is placed a distance of around 30 mm
from the collimating lens. As a collimated beam will eventually start diverging, it is
important that the distance from the collimating to the focusing lens is in range with
the distance within which we can count on the beam still being collimated. This is
optimised experimentally.
As can be seen in Fig.4.1, the lens tube is inserted into a metallic purging chamber. The
chamber is solid apart from two cylindrical holes for the lens tubes which connect at
the top. The top surface of the chamber has then a circular hole with an inset for the
placement of a circular silicon wafer of 2 mm thickness. The focal length of the focusing
lens is 10 cm and the beam is focused at the top surface of the silicon wafer.
Once the beam is reflected off the silicon wafer, it diverges slightly. As it travels down
towards the second lens tube, the beam encounters a collimating lens first and then a
focusing lens which focuses the beam into the receiving antenna.
Because of the high absorption of water and water vapour in the THz range, the metallic
holder and the lens tubes were purged with nitrogen gas to eliminate any traces of water
vapour. The nitrogen gas used is considered to be of high purity with minimal traces of
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Materials and methods
Emitting antenna
Receiving antenna
Collimating lenses
Focusing lenses
Silicon wafer
Purging chamber
Focal length: 10 cm
Figure 4.1: Schematic illustration of the reflection THz-TDS setup. Purging tube and
retaining bricks for the silicon wafer are not shown for clarity.
contaminants. The nitrogen supply is attached to the designated opening in the metallic
chamber as seen in Fig.4.2 (left). In order to purge the space between the lenses in the
lens tubes, holes were drilled in the periphery of the lenses, outside of the spot on lens
that the beam hits. The nitrogen pressure is adjusted to be the same (0.6 bar) for every
experiment and the system is left to stabilise for 20 minutes at the beginning of each
experimental session. It is important to notice that the metallic holder is not sealed
perfectly, but the over-pressure coming from the nitrogen supply is considered suﬀicient
to prevent air from re-entering the holder during the experiment.
4.2
Data analysis framework
The goal of this section is to walk the reader through the data analysis framework that
the experimental results obtained from tests on solutions and hydrogels were processed
with. The purpose of this analysis is to go from the collected time traces to obtaining
sample parameters such as complex refractive index and dielectric function.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Data analysis framework
21
Figure 4.2: THz-TDS setup (left) where a tube for nitrogen purging is inserted in the
designated opening. The silicon wafer is kept in place via retaining bricks
(in blue), due to the nitrogen over-pressure coming from underneath. Fo-
cusing lens (right) in which the holes drilled for the purging are visible.
Notice that the holes drilled in the collimating lens are visible from under-
neath. See Fig.4.1 for the placement of the lenses in the lens tubes.
4.2.1
Data acquisition
The Toptica TeraFlash Pro system is equipped with a software for operation and data
acquisition, which allows to change the delay range for the time trace collection. The
delay range is set to 200 ps in order to to collect multiple pulses coming from internal
reflections within the silicon wafer, and it is kept fixed for all experimental tests.
The data acquisition framework is kept fixed for all experiments and it is defined as
follows:
• Each measurement consists in collecting 50 independent time traces of the signal
• Each recorded time trace is the average of 10 time traces
• Each sample is measured once, unless otherwise stated
• One air measurement (no sample on top of the silicon wafer) is taken for calibration
• One MilliQ water measurement is taken for comparison and/or negative control
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Materials and methods
A single time trace looks like the one showed in Fig.4.3 (right). This is recorded for
an air measurement. The different reflections at the interfaces are highlighted in the
corresponding colours as in the sketch showing the beam travelling through the silicon
wafer. The first pulse (orange) represents the reflection at the air-silicon interface, that
is from the bottom surface of the silicon wafer. The second pulse (green) comes from the
reflection from the silicon-air interface. This time the beam has travelled twice through
the silicon wafer. The third reflection comes when the beam has travelled two round-
trips through the silicon wafer. This means that by locating the pulses and calculating
n1 = nair = 1
n2 = nSi
n3 = nAir = 1
 dSi
φ1
φ2
E0
Eref
Esample
~
~
~
Third
reflection
25
50
75
100
125
150
Time [ps]
100
50
0
50
100
150
THz signal [arb. u.]
First reflection
Second reflection
Third reflection
Figure 4.3: Sketch of air-silicon-air measurement (left), resulting time trace (right).
the temporal distance between two consecutive ones, we are able to accurately know
the thickness of the silicon wafer, provided that the silicon refractive index is known as
accurately, as follows
dSi =
c
2nSi
tp2p cos (ϕ2),
(4.1)
where nSi = 3.4177 is the refractive index of silicon, tp2p is the time-of-flight of the
beam within the silicon, computed as the peak-to-peak time between the peaks of the
reference and sample pulses, and ϕ2 is the angle of refraction wrt. the normal of the
beam inside the silicon wafer. This method’s accuracy is limited by the resolution in the
time domain. Via this technique, the thickness of the silicon wafer was measured to be
dSi = 2.06 mm.
The time trace keeps many of the same features regardless of the sample being analysed.
The same number of pulses is seen, as long as the number of interfaces is not changed.
The first pulse is observed to stay the same for all kinds of samples, as it comes from
the reflection at the bottom surface of the silicon wafer, and it is therefore only system
dependent. For this reason, the first pulse is taken as the reference pulse. The second
pulse contains information collected interacting with the sample once. Its amplitude
decreases, as soon as a more absorptive medium is present on top of the silicon wafer.
The second pulse is therefore in the following referred to as the sample pulse.
As each reflection arriving after the sample pulse will have interacted with the sample
more and more times, ideally one would gather a lot of information from analysing these
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Data analysis framework
23
extra pulses. In practice, however, the signal to noise ratio for these extra sample pulses
was found to be rather low for absorptive media. Therefore, only the information from
the first and second pulses is used for analysis in this study.
In general, sample composition characterisation happens via frequency-domain analysis.
However, other parts of the analysis are conducted in the time-domain. In the following,
the frequency-domain analysis framework is presented.
4.2.2
From time domain to frequency domain
As 50 time traces are collected in each measurement, the frequency space analysis is
performed on each individual time trace in order to retrieve statistics on the data.
First of all, the reference and sample pulses are extracted by means of Tukey windowing.
An example of this operation being performed on an air measurement can be seen in
Fig.4.4. The time traces have here been plotted after normalisation and shifting for
illustrative purposes, this is however not part of the data analysis framework.
A Tukey window has values between 0 and 1 and if multiplied by the time signal, it
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Time [ps]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
THz signals and filters [arb. u.]
Tukey filter - ref
Tukey filter - sample
Air time trace
Ref pulse
Sample pulse
Figure 4.4: Example of time windowing of air measurement using a Tukey window.
The complete time trace (blue) is filtered via two filters separately, the
reference (red) and sample (purple) filters. The resulting reference (orange)
and sample (green) signals are shown. Time traces are here displayed after
normalisation of the signals and they are shifted for illustrative purposes.
selects the desired region of the time trace. Tukey windowing allows to adjust the length
of the filter in the time domain and the fraction of the window inside the cosine tapered
region. The total length of the window is set to be equal to the the time it takes for the
beam to travel a round-trip through a high purity silicon wafer of thickness 2.06 mm.
The argument of the cosine is set to 0.3. These settings are chosen such that the filters
do not allow too abrupt cutting of the signals at the extremities of the windows, while
preserving the important features of the pulses and of the immediately following region
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Materials and methods
of the time signal, which may contain information relative to the sample.
The time signals are not simply cut to extract the reference and sample pulses in order
to preserve the same length, which also guarantees a higher resolution in the frequency
domain.
Once the reference and sample pulses have been extracted from the original time trace,
they are Fourier transformed. The resulting amplitude spectra are mirror images for
negative and positive frequencies centered around 0. The same information in contained
in both halves, so by convention we only keep the FFT complex spectra defined for
positive frequencies.
An example of the amplitudes of the resulting FFT spectra for the reference and sample
pulses for an air measurement are shown in Fig.4.5. Spectral information is retrieved
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Frequency [THz]
10
3
10
2
10
1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
Amplitude of FFT spectra [arb.u.]
Reference
Sample
Noise floor
Figure 4.5: Example of amplitudes of spectra for the reference and sample pulses for
an air measurement. The noise floor is indicated by the dotted line.
for the frequency range of 0-10 THz. However, we can see that for frequencies above 5
THz, the signal to noise ratio decreases considerably. Analysing the frequency spectra
allows us to locate the most relevant frequency intervals for further analysis, namely
those frequencies where the signal is well above the noise floor.
The obtained frequency spectra are complex valued and both the real and imaginary
parts contain information that is relevant for sample characterisation, as it is further
discussed in the following sections.
4.2.3
Calibration
Because the dielectric properties of the silicon window are known, the air measurement
can be used to perform a specific calibration and phase correction aimed at reducing
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Data analysis framework
25
two effects resulting from the geometry of the reflection setup.
The sketch of our geometry previously seen in section 2.1 is here reproposed to support
the arguments made in the following.
When looking at Fig.4.6, two important features of the sample signal can be noticed.
First of all, the sample field is spatially displaced with respect to the reference field. The
coupling into the detector antenna is therefore different for the sample pulse compared
to the reference pulse, which ultimately affects the sample pulse shape. Secondly, while
it is important to have a thick dielectric window, which allows good separation of the
reference and sample pulses, the sample pulse will have acquired an extra phase during
the round-trip within the silicon wafer. These two effects can be treated separately when
n1 = nair = 1
n2 = nSi
n3
 dSi
φ1
φ2
 dAir
E0
Eref
Esample
~
~
~
~
Figure 4.6: Schematic illustration of the geometry reflection with an incidence angle
ϕ1. The system is here illustrated as seen through the cross-section. The
incident, reflected and transmitted fields are only shown for p-polarised
light.
˜E0 is the incident electric field in p-polarisation, while ˜Eref and
˜Esample are the reference and sample fields, respectively.
the sample and reference spectra are compared for parameter retrieval.
The extra acquired phase from propagation within the silicon medium can be accounted
for in a more formal manner, since it is fully related to known parameters. When the
sample field exits the silicon wafer, it will have travelled a certain distance within the
wafer, while the reference field will only have travelled a distance dAir in air. The optical
path difference OP is therefore given as
OP = 2n2dSi
cos (ϕ2) −nAirdAir
(4.2)
By means of trigonometry and Snell’s law, we can compute dAir to be
dAir =
2dSi
cos (ϕ2) sin (ϕ2) sin (ϕ1) =
2dSi
n1 cos (ϕ2) sin2 (ϕ2).
(4.3)
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Materials and methods
We can therefore rewrite the expression for the optical path length to be
OP = 2n2dSi
cos (ϕ2) −nAirdAir = 2n2dSi
cos (ϕ2)
(
1 −sin2 (ϕ2)
)
(4.4)
The phase difference is then defined as δ = 2πOP/λ = ωOP/c, where λ is the wave-
length, ω = 2πf is the angular frequency and c is the speed of light in vacuum.
The spatial displacement can be compensated for by imposing an additional frequency
dependent calibration factor with amplitude Acal(ω) and phase ∆cal(ω), which is com-
puted directly from the experimental data[16].
When comparing the sample and reference complex spectra, we can now write their ratio
as
˜Esample(ω)
˜Eref(ω)
= t12˜r23t21
r12
Acal(ω) exp (i∆cal(ω)) exp (iωOP/c).
(4.5)
As mentioned in section 4.2.1, one air measurement is taken at the beginning of each
experimental section for calibration. Because the refractive index of air is known, eq.4.5
can be used to isolate the complex calibration factor, as follows
Acal(ω) exp (i∆cal(ω)) =
˜EAir(ω)
˜Eref(ω)
r12
t12r23,Airt21
exp (−iωOP/c).
(4.6)
Once this is known, it can be used to calibrate the measurements from all other samples.
An example of calibration factor (frequency-dependent amplitude and phase) is shown
in Fig.4.7. As can be seen, the amplitude of the calibration factor fluctuates around
unity, while the phase increases, although not significantly. The calibration factor has
been seen to fluctuate slightly in between experimental sessions, which could be due
to minor misalignments in the setup. This is why the system is calibrated upon every
experimental session.
4.2.4
Parameters retrieval
Once the system has been calibrated, one can start measuring samples that are not air
and retrieve material parameters starting from the complex refractive index.
For each measurement, after time windowing and Fourier transformation, the sample
pulse is compared to the corresponding reference pulse according to eq.4.5. Now, the
calibration factor and the extra acquired phase on the right-hand side are known. On
the left-hand side, the spectra come from the experimental data. A response factor ˜H
is defined as
˜H = t12˜r23t21
r12
=
˜Esample(ω)
˜Eref(ω)
exp (−iωOP/c)
Acal(ω) exp (i∆cal(ω)).
(4.7)
From this, the complex reflection coeﬀicient ˜r23 can be computed
˜r23 =
r12
t21t21
˜H.
(4.8)
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Sample preparation
27
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Acal(
) [arb.u.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
1
0
1
cal(
) [radians]
Figure 4.7: Amplitude Acal(ω) (top) and phase ∆cal(ω) of the calibration factor. The
dark purple line is the calibration factor as computed after averaging over
50 recordings, the faded lines represent the propagated standard devia-
tions.
Now, as previously seen in section 2.1 the complex reflection coeﬀicient ˜r23 for p-
polarised incoming light can be expressed as a function of the incident angle
˜r23 =
−˜n2
3
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1) + n2
2
√
n2
3 −sin2 (ϕ1)
˜n2
3
√
n2
2 −sin2 (ϕ1) + n2
2
√
n2
3 −sin2 (ϕ1)
.
(4.9)
The goal is to isolate ˜n3, taken that n2 and ϕ1 are known. Equation 4.9 does not have an
analytical solution that can be written in closed form and is therefore solved numerically
via a root finder for complex valued expressions.
The complex refractive index is defined as ˜n = n+iκ, where n is the real refractive index
and κ is the extinction coeﬀicient. The extinction coeﬀicient can be reformulated into
the absorption coeﬀicient α via α = 4πκ/λ. Finally the complex dielectric function can
be obtained from the complex refractive index via ˜ε = ˜n2 = (n + iκ)2.
4.3
Sample preparation
As justified in section 2.2, three systems are investigated in this study: Glucose liquid
solutions, gelatin hydrogels and gelatin hydrogel sheets. The preparation procedures are
presented in this section.
==PAGE:42==
28
4 Materials and methods
Glucose solutions are made by dissolving D-Glucose (Powder form, >99.5%, MW
180.16 g/mol purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, product number: NIST917C) in MilliQ
water. Solutions of different concentrations are obtained by first making a highly con-
centrated stock solution and then diluting this with MilliQ down to the desired concen-
tration. This practice is preferred when making solutions of low concentration, as it
reduces the uncertainty in the final concentration. By not weighing the glucose powder
and instead only adding a specific amount of MilliQ to a stock solution, there is only
one operation being performed, thereby only one source of error.
The stock solution made for our experimental sessions has a concentration of 100 mg/mL.
Concentrations in the range 0.5-5 mg/mL (2.8-27.8 mmol/L) are produced for testing
the data analysis framework. This range extends well above the normal range for fasting
blood glucose of 3.9-5.6 mmol/L, however, the goal of this experiment is to characterise
different glucose concentration through THz. The chosen concentrations are: 10, 5, 3.5,
2, 1.8, 1.6, 1.4, 1.2, 1, 0.8, 0.6 and 0.5 mg/mL, corresponding to 55.5, 27.8, 19.4, 11.1,
10.0, 8.9, 7.8, 6.7, 5.6, 4.4, 3.3 and 2.8 mmol/L. Because of the wide range of concentra-
tions, solutions are produced via dilution of the stock solution (100 mg/mL) down to a
concentration of 1.2 mg/mL. Solutions with a concentration of 1 and below are obtained
by diluting the 10 mg/mL solution.
When preparing solutions for characterisation, it is very important to be able to assess
the accuracy with which each concentration can be achieved. This is not always straight-
forward as it depends on how the solutions are prepared. In the following, an account
of the uncertainty assessment in the preparation of the previously mentioned solutions
is given.
First, the systematic sources of error are identified. Assuming that the scale on which
the glucose powder is weighed is well-calibrated, the error coming from it is given by its
resolution, that is 0.1 mg. Next, MilliQ water volumes are measured in two different
ways, via a graduated cylinder for large volumes and a 10-1000 µL pipette for smaller
volumes. The uncertainty on graduated cylinders (provided that they are used correctly)
is 0.5 mL on the 100 mL one. Provided that the pipette used is well-calibrated, the un-
certainty on the measured volumes is given by the smallest increment possible in the
pipette, that is 10 µL.
The stock solution is made by dissolving 20.0003 ± 0.0001 g glucose powder into 200
mL MilliQ water measured by filling a 100 ± 0.5 mL graduated cylinder twice. The
uncertainty on the obtained concentration is therefore given by error propagation
C = m
V =
20.0003 ± 0.0001 g
100 ± 0.5 mL + 100 ± 0.5 mL = 20.0003 ± 0.0001 g
200 ± 1 mL
δC =
(δm
|m| + δV
|V |
)
· |C| = 0.5005 mg/mL.
The obtained stock concentration can therefore be written as 100 ± 0.5 mg/mL.
Dilution is governed by the equation CstartVstart = CendVend, where Cstart and Vstart
are the concentration and volume of the original solution and Cend and Vend are the
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Sample preparation
29
concentration and volume of the desired solution. Error propagation dictates therefore
δCend =
(δCstart
|Cstart| + δVstart
|Vstart| + δVend
|Vend|
)
· |Cend|
(4.10)
δCstart is the error on the stock solution concentration, which can be computed as shown
above. δVstart and δVend are given by δVsol = p · δVtool where δVtool is the uncertainty
from the volume measuring tool and p the number of measuring operations.
For example, the 10 mg/mL solution is obtained by diluting the stock solution 1:10.
This is done by pipetting 1 mL of stock solution and 9 mL of MilliQ for a total of 10
pipetting operations. The uncertainty on the obtained concentration is therefore
δCend =
(δCstart
|Cstart| + δVstart
|Vstart| + δVend
|Vend|
)
· |Cend|
=
( 0.5 mg/mL
|100 mg/mL| + 0.01 mL
|1 mL| + 10 · 0.01 mL
|10 mL|
)
· |10 mg/mL|
= 0.25 mg/mL
The same operation is performed on all of the concentrations and the obtained error
values are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Glucose concentrations (C) with absolute and percent-wise errors (δC).
C
0.5
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
3.5
5
10
(mg/mL)
δC
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.16
0.18
0.25
(mg/mL)
C
2.8
3.3
4.4
5.6
6.7
7.8
8.9
10
11.1
19.4
27.8
55.5
(mmol/L)
δC
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.9
1
1.4
(mg/mL)
δC
6%
5%
5%
4%
10%
8.6%
8.1%
7.2%
6.5%
4.6%
3.6%
2.5%
Notice how the percentage error increases from the 10 mg/mL to the 1.2 mg/mL,
where it reaches a considerable 10%. The percentage error then drops at the 1 mg/mL
to a more reasonable 4%. As previously mentioned, the solutions with concentrations
10-1.2 mg/mL are made by dilution of the stock solution (100 mg/mL), while solutions
with concentrations between 1-0.5 mg/mL are made by diluting the 10 mg/mL solution.
This is a clear example of how diluting a very concentrated solution into a low concen-
tration one leads to a higher error. In practice, one would always want to adopt a ladder
system of dilution, meaning that each concentration is obtained by diluting the one right
above in the ladder of concentration values.
Gelatin hydrogels are obtained by dissolving gelatin powder ( gelatin from porcine
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Materials and methods
skin, gel strength 300, Type A from Sigma Aldrich) into MilliQ. As mentioned in sec-
tion 2.2, gelatin hydrogels are thermo-responsive, meaning that they have a sol-gel
transition temperature of around 35-37°C. This property is leveraged for a very simple
cross-linking procedure. First, gelatin powder is weighed for the desired concentration
to be achieved, then a 40 mL glass beaker is filled with MilliQ and placed on a magnetic
stirrer, the speed is set to 500 rpm and the gelatin powder is added during the stirring.
The solution is left to stir at room temperature for half an hour. Next, the hot plate
temperature is set to 100° and the stirrer speed is lowered to 300 rpm. The temperature
of the mixture is thereby raised gradually and monitored via an independent immersion
thermometer. Once the temperature of the solution has reached above 40°C, the mix-
ture is removed from the hot plate. An ice-cube tray was used to let the hydrogel gelate
into cubes. Gelation happens gradually as the hydrogel cools down, it is therefore left to
cool down to room temperature into the molds first and then placed at 4°C for storage.
Three different hydrogels are investigated in this study, namely 2%, 4% and 8% gelatin
hydrogels named HG2P, HG4P and HG8P respectively.
In order to characterise the penetration depth of a THz beam into a skin model such as
a hydrogel, gelatin hydrogel sheets are fabricated with thicknesses in the range of a few
tens to a couple of hundreds microns.
Hydrogel sheets can be obtained in different ways. Depending on the type of hydrogel,
very thin sheets can be made by e.g. cutting a hydrogel into slices with a vibratome.
A vibratome is an instrument used to cut thin slices of samples such as tissue via a
vibrating blade. During the cutting procedure, hyrogels (or tissue samples) are kept
in a water bath. Gelatin hydrogels are however water-soluble, which makes vibratome
cutting challenging. Nonetheless, this was attempted in the course of this study and a
few hydrogel sheets were successfully cut in thicknesses of 100, 150 and 200 µm. How-
ever, the challenges met during vibratome cutting of hydrogels called for an alternative
solution to be found.
Hydrogel sheets were made by fabricating molds by stacking layers of scotch tape on
top of thin metal plates, in order to create a frame for a very shallow liquid cell. The
thickness of the stack of scotch tape creates the depth of the liquid cell. This is very
similar to creating liquid cells on microscope slides by using gene frames[64], which is
often done for microscopy. Gene frames were not an option for a penetration depth
experiment with THz, as they are approximately 250 µm thick.
Figure 4.8 shows the setup for making hydrogel sheets in the chemistry laboratory. A
total of ten different samples of molds are created with tape stacks ranging from one to
ten layers. Two repetitions are created for each mold. Figure 4.8 shows two repetitions
for the molds with one and two layers of tape respectively, and a single repetition for
the remaining thicknesses, for a total of 12 molds.
Because the assessment of the actual depth of the liquid cell created is not straightfor-
ward, the different samples are named according to the number of layers of scotch tape
applied in order to create the cell. The structure of the sample name is XL −Y , where
X can be between 1 and 10 and refers to the number of layers of scotch tape stacked and
Y is the number of the series made, while L just stands for the word layers. Three series
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Experimental methods
31
Figure 4.8: Molds fabricated for producing gelatin hydrogel sheets and box for humid-
ity control during gelation.
of molds were made. Series number 2 is used to characterise the molds and therefore
not used to make hydrogel sheets. In the results chapter, molds are referred to as XL
(e.g. 1L, 2L,..) as the series number was only used to manage experimental practices.
Figure 4.9 illustrates the fabrication procedure for hydrogel sheets. Once an empty mold
is ready (Fig.4.9 (a)), it is filled with gelatin solution by pipetting an appropriate amount
onto the cell (Fig.4.9 (b)). A microscope slide is then applied on top of the mold and
horizontally slid along the length of the mold in order to flatten out the hydrogel layer
and squeeze out the excess hydrogel (Fig.4.9 (c)). The resulting system is a mold with
an even layer of hydrogel in the cell (Fig.4.9 (d)), ready for gelation.
The filled molds are placed in a box (shown in Fig.4.8), where a wet paper towel is
placed on the bottom. The lid (not shown in the picture) is then sealed with parafilm.
In this way a very simple humidity chamber is created. A dry paper towel is attached
to the lid of the box on the inside, such that any condensation is absorbed and does not
drip onto the molds. The humidity box is then placed at 4°C for gelation and storage.
4.4
Experimental methods
The scope of this section is to give the reader insight into the experimental methods
adopted for the THz experiments conducted in this study. Some of the decisions made
for sample preparation and characterisation are in fact closely linked to the challenges
and limitations posed by the experimental practices.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Materials and methods
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Metal plate
Tape frame
Gelatin solution
Microscope slide
Hydrogel sheet
Figure 4.9: Hydrogel sheets fabrication procedure steps. A clean mold (a) is filled with
gelatin solution (b) with a pipette. A microscope slide is applied on top
of the mold (c) and slid horizontally along the length of the mold. The
excess solution left is wiped off and the hydrogel is ready for gelation (d).
As previously mentioned, a silicon wafer is used as window for the THz beam to travel
through before encountering the sample. At the beginning of each experimental session,
the silicon wafer is washed with 96% ethanol and dried with a nitrogen gun, in order to
remove possible residues of samples or dust particles. This procedure is also performed
whenever the sample on the wafer is changed.
THz measurements on liquids are performed by adding a droplet of 0.2 mL on the silicon
wafer trying to center it in the middle of the wafer, where the THz beam is focused.
As
Figure 4.10: Samples placed on silicon wafer: water droplet (left) and hydrogel (right).
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Experimental methods
33
mentioned in section 4.3, gelatin solutions are let to gelate in ice trays compartments.
The resulting hydrogel samples are therefore shaped as ice-cubes. Initially, the cubes
were cut into slabs to be placed on top of the silicon wafer.
One of the challenges
encountered when conducting THz experiments on hydrogel samples is adhesion between
the sample and the silicon wafer surface, which is hydrophobic. It was observed that
small air bubbles would form at the interface between the hydrogel slab and the surface
of the wafer, which impacts the signal significantly. In order to avoid this scenario one
should ensure that the hydrogel sample has a very flat surface at the interface with the
wafer. In addition, applying a small pressure to the hydrogel can help to remove the
air bubbles formed upon application of the sample. However, a continuous pressure can
affect the hydrogel, which is not very mechanically stable. Therefore, when analyzing a
hydrogel sample, the whole cube is placed on the silicon wafer, as the bottom surface is
smoother than what would be achieved by cutting with a scalpel and the weight of the
hydrogel cube applies an even pressure for air bubbles not to form. Figure 4.10 shows
examples of a liquid and a hydrogel sample placed on the silicon wafer for experiments.
n1 = nair = 1
n2 = nSi
 dSi
φ1
E0
Eref
~
~
Esample
~
 dcell
Mold
Silicon wafer
Cell
Metallic surface
φ2
φ3
n3 
nSi 
φ2
Figure 4.11: Sketch of the hydrogel mold placed on the silicon wafer as seen through
the cross-section. The incoming field ˜E0 is first reflected off the bottom
surface of the silicon wafer ˜Eref and then at the top interface with the
air/hydrogel sheet ˜Esample. The metallic backing in the mold causes mul-
tiple reflections in the cell. Angles and lengths are enhanced for clarity.
When tested on the THz setup, hydrogel sheets are not removed from the molds in
which they are made. The reason for this is twofold. First of all, gelatin hydrogel sheets
lack the mechanical stability to be successfully removed from the molds without compro-
mising their shape and structural integrity. Secondly, the hydrogel sheets are fabricated
on top of a metallic substrate which is meant to aid in measuring the penetration depth
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Materials and methods
of a THz beam into a hydrogel sheet. During THz experiments, the molds containing
the hydrogel sheets are placed facing down on top of the silicon window, the hydrogel
sheet interfacing the silicon surface. An example of this geometry is seen in Fig.4.11.
The incoming field ˜E0 is first reflected off the bottom surface of the silicon wafer, which
20
40
60
80
100
Time [ps]
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized amplitude [arb.u.]
Figure 4.12: Example of reference (orange) and sample (green) pulses from a THz
measurement of an empty mold.
results into the reference pulse ˜Eref. The transmitted field is then reflected at the top
interface with the air/hydrogel sheet, resulting into the sample pulse ˜Esample. The field
transmitted into the cell is then reflected by the metallic backing, resulting into multiple
reflections inside the cell, which decay in amplitude depending on the optical properties
of the medium in the cell.
For the case of air, which absorbs THz light less than water, several reflections can be
resolved in the time trace, as can be seen in Fig.4.12.
Here we see the reference (orange) and sample (green) pulses from a THz measurement
performed on an empty HG sheet mold, the medium between the silicon wafer and the
mold’s metallic backing is therefore air and the multiple reflections are clearly resolved.
From the sample pulse train we can identify the reflection at the silicon-air interface,
namely the first negative peak. The following positive peaks come from the multiple
reflections in cell. This means that the time difference between each consecutive peak
corresponds to the time it takes for the THz beam to do a round-trip within the cell,
as indicated in Fig.4.11. Knowing the optical properties of the medium in the cell, the
depth of the cell dcell can be retrieved directly from the data, as follows.
First, each peak identifying a reflection in the cell is located temporally. The time sep-
aration between two consecutive peaks is computed for each pair of consecutive peaks
and this is then averaged in order to have a better estimate.
The distance s travelled by the beam during a round-trip through the cell is given by
s = c
n3
· tp2p,
(4.11)
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Experimental methods
35
where c is the speed of light in vacuum, n3 is the refractive index of the medium in the
cell and tp2p is the time separation computed between consecutive reflections in the cell.
The depth of the cell dcell can therefore be computed via
dcell = s
2 · cos (ϕ3),
(4.12)
where ϕ3 is the angle of refraction at the interface between the silicon wafer and the
medium within the cell.
The angle ϕ3 can be computed via Snell’s law, if the real
refractive index of the medium within the cell is known. This is trivial for the case of
air, however, for hydrogel sheets it requires a characterisation of the real refractive index
of a hydrogel of the same concentration, which can be found in section 5.2.
This allows us to experimentally characterise the empty molds, as well as the thickness
of hydrogel sheets, which in turn can be used to say more about the penetration depth
of a THz beam within a hydrogel medium, as presented in section 5.3.2.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5
Results
The goal of this chapter is to present the main results obtained from the experimental
sessions. Brief descriptions of further data analysis are introduced, as results are com-
pared and hypotheses are tested. The chapter is sectioned into three parts: Results from
glucose solutions, hydrogel characterisation and hydrogel sheets tests.
5.1
Glucose solutions
Glucose solutions are prepared as described in section 4.3 and tested as outlined in
section 4.4. Figure 5.1 shows the real part of the complex refractive index retrieved
Figure 5.1: Real part of complex refractive index for MilliQ and glucose solutions of
different concentrations. The dark purple line shows the mean of the real
part of the refractive index. The faded lines show the confidence intervals
given by evaluation of the standard deviation.
for the case of MilliQ water and for three different glucose concentrations. Notice that
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Glucose solutions
37
tests and parameters retrieval were performed for twelve different glucose concentrations,
namely 10, 5, 3.5, 2, 1.8, 1.6, 1.4, 1.2, 1, 0.8, 0.6, and 0.5 mg/mL corresponding to
55.5, 27.8, 19.4, 11.1, 10.0, 8.9, 7.8, 6.7, 5.6, 4.4, 3.3 and 2.8 mmol/L. The entire
collection of retrieved material parameters including real part of complex refractive index,
absorption coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function for
each solution can be found in Appendix A. Here the reader will also find four plots,
each of them showing a comparison of one of the parameters for MilliQ and three glucose
concentrations. No glucose concentration-dependent trend is clearly emerging from these
comparisons, therefore a different analysis is needed, as commented in the discussion.
As the analysis is performed individually on each of the 50 measurements taker per
solution, it is possible to retrieve statistics on the material parameters extracted.
As can be noticed from Fig.5.1, as well as the data reported in Appendix A, the
Figure 5.2: Relative standard deviation σrel = σn/n, where σn is the absolute standard
deviation and n is the parameter value, here shown for the real part of the
complex refractive index for three glucose solutions and MilliQ (left). On
the right the same data in the 0.5-1.5 THz range. The dotted line is drawn
at 0.025 for reference.
standard deviation on the material parameters gradually increases for frequencies above
2 THz, while it can be unstable below 0.2 THz. Notice from Apprendix A that this
trend is consistent across all glucose concentrations and for all four parameters, which
is expected, as they all come from the same complex refractive index.
Figure 5.2 shows the relative standard deviation σrel = σn/n computed from the real
refractive index data for each glucose solution and for MilliQ. The same data computed
for absorption coeﬀicients and real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function can
be found in Appendix A. Figure 5.2 clearly shows that there is a consistent frequency
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Results
range of higher signal stability for the material parameters computed. Between 0.5 and
1.5 THz the relative standard deviation on the mean refractive index is found to be
below 2.5% for all solutions investigated. Assuming that the effective refractive index is
normally distributed around the mean, there is therefore a 95% chance that the actual
value for the refractive index lies within two standard deviations on each side of the
mean. In practice this means that there is a 95% chance that the actual refractive index
is within ± 5% of the computed mean refractive index. Based on this evaluation, the
parameter retrieval analysis can be considered stable against random fluctuations.
Ideally, this information can be leveraged when further analysing the data for sample
differentiation, as for the case of different glucose concentrations or water content.
5.2
Hydrogels
In order to explore the potential of hydrogels as skin mimicking models at THz frequen-
cies, a characterisation of the three different gelatin concentrations, namely 2% (HG2P),
4% (HG4P) and 8% (HG8P) is performed. This is carried out via the same analysis
and parameter retrieval framework as for the glucose solutions. Ideally, an increasing
concentration of gelatin corresponds to a decreasing water content, which can be probed
with THz frequencies.
As for the case of glucose concentrations, a full report of the retrieved real refractive
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Absorption coefficient [cm
1]
MilliQ fit: slope = 158.33± 1.33 cm
1/THz,
y-axis crossing = 87.74± 1.61 cm
1
HG2P fit: slope = 190.90± 2.86 cm
1/THz,
y-axis crossing = 50.56± 3.47 cm
1
HG4P fit: slope = 185.01± 1.42 cm
1/THz,
y-axis crossing = 70.66± 1.72 cm
1
HG8P fit: slope = 194.51± 1.96 cm
1/THz,
y-axis crossing = 67.44± 2.38 cm
1
MilliQ
HG2P
HG4P
HG8P
Figure 5.3: Frequency dependent absorption coeﬀicients of MilliQ and 2%, 4% and 8%
gelatin hydrogels (HG2P, HG4P and HG8P respectively). Linear fits for
the absorption coeﬀicients in the considered frequency range are shown.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Hydrogel sheets
39
index, absorption coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric func-
tion for all three hydrogels can be found in Appendix B.
The absorption coeﬀicients retrieved for all three hydrogels and MilliQ are shown in
Fig.5.3. The data is fitted to a straight line in order to assess whether a specific water
content dependent trend can be observed. Absorption coeﬀicients are expected to be
highest for MilliQ water and to decrease for hydrogels with increasing gelatin concentra-
tion. This trend is however not found in the data shown in Fig.5.3, which in turn shows
that the highest absorption is found in HG8P, which has the lowest water content.
The data shown in Fig.5.3 can therefore not be used to differentiate the hydrogels in
terms of water content. Consequently, the decision regarding which hydrogel to adopt
for further analysis is made based on convenience with respect to experimental practices.
The viscosity of the gelatin solutions from which the hydrogels are made increases sig-
nificantly with the increasing gelatin concentrations tested in this study. The following
hydrogel sheets fabrication can be significantly impacted in quality by a viscous and
rapidly gelating solution, as observed for the case of HG8P. On the other hand, because
of its very high water content, HG2P is found to have very poor thermal stability due
to rapid water evaporation. This effect is even more present in a system such as a hy-
drogel sheet with high surface to volume ratio and it is found to make THz experiments
challenging and unreliable.
In conclusion, most of the following results are obtained from tests performed on the 4%
hydrogel HG4P, which is found to give the best trade-off between viscosity and thermal
stability.
5.3
Hydrogel sheets
In order to assess the penetration depth of a THz beam into a hydrogel sample, hydrogel
sheets are fabricated in different thicknesses on metallic backing. As described in section
4.4, a THz beam that can successfully propagate through the entire thickness of a
hydrogel sheet will be reflected by the backing. This will be visible in the time trace
collected for that sample as a pulse or series of pulses after the main reflection at the
silicon-sample interface.
5.3.1
Characterisation of molds
As introduced in section 4.3, ten molds of increasing depth are fabricated by stacking
layers of tape to create a frame for a liquid cell in the center of the metal plate. The
tape thickness is initially measured with a digital caliper to be 50 ± 5µm, where the
uncertainty is given by the resolution of the caliper. We expect therefore the liquid cells
in the molds to have increasing depths given by 50µm times the number of stacked tape
layers. The liquid cells’ depths are measured in two different ways: First with THz by
placing the empty molds facing the silicon wafer as explained in section 4.4 and then
with a digital caliper for comparison.
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Results
When characterising the empty molds with THz, a small weight consisting of an alu-
minium block is placed on top of the mold. This is done in order to ensure that the
mold is correctly adhering to the silicon wafer, considered that the over-pressure of ni-
trogen in the purging chamber causes a small flow of nitrogen to pass through around
the rim of the circular hole into which the silicon wafer is placed. This could indeed
cause a small extra air gap to form between the mold and the silicon wafer.
Figure 5.4 shows the time traces obtained from the THz characterisation of the empty
molds, where the amplitude of the signals has been normalised. As previously defined,
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
Normalized amplitude [arb.u.]
Air
1L mold
2L mold
3L mold
4L mold
5L mold
6L mold
7L mold
8L mold
9L mold
10L mold
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
50
100
150
200
Time [ps]
0
1
Figure 5.4: Time traces showing THz beam reflections at the interfaces created by hy-
drogel sheet molds of different depths. The naming of the molds indicates
the number of scotch tape layers applied to the metal plates in order to
create the liquid cell.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Hydrogel sheets
41
the naming of the molds is given with respect to the number of tape layers. Notice how
the temporal spacing between consecutive reflections in the cell progressively increases
with increasing depth of the cell dcell. The cell depth can therefore be computed as
described in section 4.4.
The obtained values are plotted in Fig.5.5 together with the caliper measurements. From
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth of liquid cell (THz) [ m]
Linear fit: slope= 48.9±  1.8 m/L, y-axis crossing= 45.8± 10.9 m
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of tape layers
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth of liquid cell (caliper) [ m]
Linear fit: slope= 50.1±  2.4 m/L, y-axis crossing= -1.1± 14.9 m
Figure 5.5: Hydrogel molds depths computed from experimental THz data (top) and
from caliper measurements (bottom).
the linear fits two things can be noticed: First, a slope of around 50µm is resolved, which
matches what was expected. Next, the caliper measurements correctly suggest that the
cell depth dcell goes to zero when no tape is present on the backing, as indicated by
the linear fit passing through zero. The THz data, on the other hand, shows a bias of
45.8 ± 10.9µm.
A separate set of measurements taken on the two thinnest molds, namely 1L and 2L,
shows a significant difference between the reflections within the cell taken with and with-
out a weight placed on the metallic backing. This is shown in Fig.5.6.
As only two data points were collected, a linear regression of the obtained cell depths
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Results
has no statistical relevance. However, if performed it suggests a larger bias for the mea-
surements taken without the weight on the metallic backing compared to the ones taken
with the weight.
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
Normalized amplitude [arb.u.]
Air
1L mold
1L mold w/ weight
2L mold
2L mold w/ weight
0
1
0
50
100
150
Time [ps]
1
0
1
Figure 5.6: Time traces from 1L and 2L molds placed on the silicon wafer with and
without a weight on top.
5.3.2
Hydrogel sheets experiments
Once the molds are characterised while empty, hydrogel sheets are prepared in the molds,
as introduced in section 4.3. The resulting hydrogel sheets are then characterised on
the THz system. The obtained time traces are shown in Fig.5.7 and can be compared
to the time trace given by a MilliQ water droplet, which is the scenario in which the
thickness of the sample largely exceeds the potential penetration depth of a THz beam.
A few observations can be made when comparing the time traces for the empty molds and
the ones containing hydrogel sheets. First of all, as expected, the reflection at the silicon-
sample interface is higher if the mold is empty, that is when silicon is interfacing air,
instead of a hydrogel. The first dip in the second pulse comes from the phase inverting
reflection at this interface, and its amplitude depends directly on the refractive index
of the sample in contact with silicon. The reflection coeﬀicient of an interface between
silicon and air is indeed almost double as large as the reflection coeﬀicient at a silicon-
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Hydrogel sheets
43
hydrogel interface. When looking at the time traces on the right-hand side of Fig.5.7,
we see that for some of the samples, namely 4L, 6L and 10L, the amplitude of the back
reflection at the silicon-hydrogel interface is higher than expected when compared to the
reference pulse. This may indicate that the THz beam is encountering a thin layer of air
before meeting the hydrogel after traveling through the silicon wafer. This could either
be due to poor adhesion of the hydrogel and the silicon wafer surface, or the hydrogel
sheet may be thinner than the cell depth in the mold.
Secondly, the only time trace that shows a second reflection, possibly coming from the
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
Normalized amplitude of THz signal through molds [arb.u.]  
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
50
100
150
Time [ps]
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
Normalized amplitude of THz signal through HG sheets [arb.u.]    
Air
MilliQ
1L
2L
3L
4L
5L
6L
7L
8L
9L
10L
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
50
100
150
Time [ps]
0
1
Figure 5.7: Time traces from THz measurements on empty molds (left) and molds with
hydrogel sheets (right). The molds are named according to the number of
scotch tape layers stacked in order to create the liquid cell. The time traces
are only shown for up to 150 ps for clarity.
hydrogel sheet-metal plate interface is the one for the 1L mold. A better representation
is shown in Fig.5.8, where the time traces for a 1L empty mold, the hydrogel sheet made
in the 1L mold and MilliQ water are compared.
The 1L hydrogel sheet time trace clearly shows a second reflection peak, which is
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Results
1
0
1
1L mold
0
1
Normalized amplitude of THz signal [arb.u.]
1L HG sheet
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [ps]
0
1
MilliQ
Figure 5.8: Time traces from experiments on the 1L mold, the hydrogel sheet made in
a separate 1L mold and MilliQ water, here shown up to 150 ps for clarity.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
60
80
100
120
140
Thickness of HG sheet [ m]
Figure 5.9: Estimated thickness of HG sheet made in the 1L mold as a function of
the frequency dependent refractive index (dark blue line). The faded lines
indicate the confidence interval given by one standard deviation.
The
dotted line is drawn at 50 µm, the expected thickness of this HG sheet.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Hydrogel sheets
45
not present in the MilliQ water time trace. The temporal separation of this second
reflection peak from the main reflection peak in the sample pulse can now be used to
retrieve the thickness of the hydrogel layer in the 1L mold. As the refractive index of
HG4P is frequency dependent, a layer thickness can be computed for each frequency
according to the method given in section 4.4. Now, the thickness of the hydrogel layer
is not itself frequency dependent, however the individual frequency components of the
THz beam will penetrate the hydrogel differently. Nonetheless, we can conclude from
the values seen in Fig.5.9 that the thickness of the measured layer between the silicon
wafer and the metal backing of the 1L mold is lying in the 115-145 µm range. This value
is however, well above the expected 50 µm given by the single tape layer.
As mentioned in section 4.3, another way to obtain hydrogel sheet samples is by directly
cutting the hydrogel blocks into sheets. This can be done via a vibratome. This solution
was tested during the course of this study, and as previously mentioned, it has shown its
limitations. Nonetheless, a few hydrogel sheet samples were collected and tested. Two
sheets with thicknesses of 100 and 150 µm were obtained from a HG4P block, while a
150 µm and a 200 µm sheet were obtained from a HG8P block. Each sheet was placed
as flat as possible on top of a metal plate such as the ones used to fabricate hydrogel
sheet molds and tested on the THz system in the same way as for the so far mentioned
sheets. Figure 5.10 shows the collected time traces for each sample and for MilliQ.
Particularly interesting are the time traces collected for the 150 µm sheets from the
0
1
MilliQ
0
1
100 m HG4P sheet
0
1
Normalized amplitude of THz signal [arb.u.]
150 m HG4P sheet
0
1
150 m HG8P sheet
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [ps]
0
1
200 m HG8P sheet
Figure 5.10: Time traces from experiments on the vibratome cut hydrogel sheets cut
from the 4% and 8% hydrogels.
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Results
HG4P and the HG8P. In the 100 µm it is indeed too hard to distinguish a first and
second reflection in the sample pulse, while the 200 µm time trace does not show any
clear second reflection peak.
Retrieving the thickness of the hydrogel sheets for the 150 µm samples as a function
of the frequency dependent refractive index yields the results shown in Fig.5.11. The
dotted lines are drawn at 150 µm to indicate the expected thickness of the sheets. The
measured thicknesses are seen to diverge from the expected value, although while still
being in the correct range. In particular, for the case of the HG4P sheet, the measured
thickness is lower than expected, being around 100-135 µm. On the other hand, the
opposite can be said for the HG8P sheet, as the frequency dependent values are around
135-175 µm.
100
120
140
Thickness [ m]
150 m HG4P sheet
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Frequency [THz]
140
160
180
Thickness [ m]
150 m HG8P sheet
Figure 5.11: Estimated thicknesses of the vibratome cut 150 µm HG4P sheet (top) and
HG8P sheet (bottom). The dark blue line indicates the mean thickness
values, while the. faded lines indicate the confidence interval given by one
standard deviation. The dotted lines are drawn at 150 µm for reference.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The goal of this chapter is to reflect on the results presented and discuss possible sources
of error and confounders, as well as options for improving experimental practices and
data interpretation.
The goal of this study, as it was announced in the introduction of this report, is to build
a reliable platform for controlled in vitro tests that is as representative as possible of the
skin tissue properties in the THz range. In order to develop a system of this kind, two
of the most important elements to focus on are variable control during sample prepa-
ration and independent characterisation of the sample. The accuracy and usefulness of
measurements and predictions build upon whether we can achieve a high level of control
of our test systems. This ultimately affects our data interpretation and ability to make
predictions.
The first system analysed in this study are glucose solutions in MilliQ water. This
is a fairly simple system with very few parameters to control. The obtained dielectric
parameters (real refractive index and absorption coeﬀicient) show good agreement with
the data found in the literature[16, 41].
Furthermore, the dielectric parameters found are shown to be stable within a specific
range of frequencies, namely 0.2-2 THz, which is narrower than what the amplitude of
our Fourier spectra show. The signal to noise ratio observed in the Fourier spectra of
reference and sample signals (one example is Fig.4.5) was found to still be relatively high
between 2-4 THz. It is clear, therefore, that an appropriate analysis of the uncertainty
related to our data processing is necessary in order to assess the quality of our results
and in order to test hypotheses.
The next step in the data analysis of different glucose solutions would be to engineer the
right system for differentiation of different concentrations. This can be done either via a
fit to the Debye model or via statistical approaches such as principal component analysis
(PCA) or gradient boosting. Statistical approaches are in general more sensitive, while
fitting to the Debye model can be less useful when trying to find trends across small
variations of the glucose concentration. On the other hand, fitting to physical models
allows to test our understanding for the actual mechanisms being triggered in the system
during the experiment. This knowledge can then be used to improve our in vitro models
by engineering features that we can expect to resonate in the THz range.
The second test system presented in this study are gelatin hydrogels. These were char-
acterised via the retrieval of their real refractive index, absorption coeﬀicient and com-
plex dielectric permittivity. Three hydrogels of different gelatin concentrations, namely
==PAGE:62==
48
6 Discussion
HG2P, HG4P and HG8P (2, 4 and 8% respectively) were prepared with the purpose
of differentiating them by their water content, which decreases with increasing gelatin
content. However, as seen in Fig.5.3, the differences found via the linear fit could not
be ascribed to water content, as HG8P having the lowest water percentage was found to
have the highest absorption coeﬀicients in the 0.2-2 THz range. This could be explained
by two different hypotheses. First of all, we may not be able to resolve water percentage
differences of only a few percent points and therefore the results simply tell us, that
the hydrogels are virtually the same in this context. This is somewhat challenged by
the fact that studies[50, 37] have been able to characterise skin tissues from different
body parts based on differences in their absorption coeﬀicients. It has to be mentioned,
though, that the water content in human epidermis is on average much lower than the
hydrogel tested in this study, which may influence the ability to resolve small differences
in water content. In addition, Fig.5.3 does show that there is a detectable difference
between HG2P and HG8P. However, this difference does not match our expectations, if
we assume that THz is only probing the hydrogen bonds between water molecules or the
hydrogen bonds between water molecules and the hydrophilic groups in the hydrogel.
This leads us to the second hypothesis: Besides probing the water-water and water-
protein hydrogen bonds, we may also be probing the protein-protein hydrogen bonds in
the hydrogel mesh. Gelatin is very convenient when it comes to its preparation proce-
dure, because it is thermo-responsive. This also means that gelatin molecules actually
cross-link by creating hydrogen bonds between the aminoacids in the polypeptide chains.
Essentially this means that while we are expecting to only probe bonds including at least
one water molecule, we may also be probing the ones between gelatin molecules, which
could be used to explain why we find that the absorption coeﬀicients for HG8P are
higher than for HG2P.
In order to test this second hypothesis it would help to know the bond energies in the
different kinds of hydrogen bonds. This has been the object of several studies [65, 66, 67]
and it transpires that energy values are heavily dependent on intermolecular configura-
tions. Nonetheless, hydrogen bonds normally have energies within 40-1700 meV, which
covers more than half of the photon energy range of THz radiation. There is therefore
a high chance that our THz experiments on gelatin hydrogels may be probing different
kinds of hydrogen bonds, and not only the ones involving water molecules.
This issue can be circumvented in two ways, either by characterising the intermolecular
interactions between gelatin molecules chains or by choosing to cross-link the gelatin
hydrogels via chemical cross-linking[32].
This procedure consists in adding chemical
cross-linking agents which react with amino or carboxyl groups of amino acids and are
either incorporated into the bonds or simply activate said groups to react with each other
via covalent bonds. This also allows to obtain hydrogels that are more mechanically and
thermally stable, which would have multiple advantages for the experimental practices
conducted in this study.
The third and last system analysed in this study are hydrogel sheets. The goal was
to create very thin (50-500 µm) sheets of hydrogel to test the penetration depth of our
THz beam into such systems. Ultimately, we would like to know how far into the skin
==PAGE:63==
6 Discussion
49
we can probe with a THz beam.
Two different techniques were tested to create hydrogel sheets. First hydrogels were
made in 2x2x2 cm blocks. Then some of them were cut into sheets via a vibratome
and placed on metal plates. Otherwise hydrogel sheets were directly fabricated in molds
made on metal plates. The two techniques have each their advantages and limitations.
For what regards the vibratome cutting, it has shown to be a challenging procedure for
two main reasons. First of all, gelatin hydrogels are water soluble and the sample is
usually placed in a water bath during cutting with a vibratome. This may have compro-
mised the sample. Secondly, the procedure is challenging for samples that are not very
opaque. In. fact, once a sheet is cut by the blade of the vibratome, it falls into the water
bath and it is usually collected with a brush and placed on the chosen substrate. This
makes the whole procedure time consuming and prone to error. If, for instance, sheets
of different thicknesses are cut in the same session, and the water bath is not changed
when the thickness is changed, sheets left in the water bath may end up being collected
and classified with the wrong thickness. On the other hand, vibratome cutting ensures
sheets with smooth surfaces and reproducible thickness values.
Preparing hydrogel sheets in molds such a the ones presented in this study has a few
drawbacks as well.
Controlling the thickness of the sheets can be a challenge, both
before, during and after gelation. First of all, we assume that once the microscope slide
is slid across the mold containing the gelatin solution, as shown in Fig.4.9, the layer of
gelatin solution is both smooth and of the same thickness as the depth of the cell in the
mold. However, there could be variations due to the viscosity of the gelatin solution in-
terfering with the smoothing process, as well as not being able to get rid of all the excess
solution from the mold. Hydrogel sheets may therefore turn out to be thicker than the
depth of the cell in the mold. Furthermore, the gelation process is affected by tempera-
ture and humidity changes, which can cause the sheets to dry out and shrink during the
process, even when steps are taken to preserve a humid environment in the gelation box,
as described previously. This adds an extra uncertainty on the thickness of the obtained
sheets and therefore on the conclusions that can be drawn from the THz measurements.
Nonetheless, this fabrication technique is more convenient than vibratome cutting, and
could be improved to limit the influence of the previously mentioned sources of error.
Both techniques can cause the hydrogel sheets to be compromised in the process, as we
have seen, but both can also be improved to match our requirements and create more
stable and reproducible test systems. Moving on to more thermally and mechanically
stable types of hydrogels may also allow us to continue using the vibratome to cut hy-
drogel blocks into sheets without facing the same experimental challenges.
When looking at the experimental thickness values obtained for hydrogel sheets made
via both techniques, we notice that in any case we are not able to recover the expected
sheet thickness, based on the refractive indices obtained via hydrogel characterisation.
For what regards the hydrogel sheets made in the molds, this could be either due to the
sheet actually being thicker that the depth of the cell, or it could be due to an air gap
being formed between the silicon wafer and the hydrogel sheet.
For what regards the hydrogel sheets cut with the vibratome we see that one of them (the
==PAGE:64==
50
6 Discussion
150 µm made from HG4P) seems to have shrunk, as we obtain thickness values below
the expected 150 µm. The shrinkage is ascribable to water evaporation which may have
happened in the time between the cutting and when the THz measurements have taken
place. The other sheet, namely the 150 µm made from HG8P instead appears thicker
than expected. The only way a hydrogel sheet can increase its volume is by incorporat-
ing more water if placed in contact with a water reservoir of some kind. While this has
not occurred on purpose, we cannot exclude that some condensation droplet present in
the humidity box may have made its way to the hydrogel sheet during storage causing it
to swell. On the other hand, when this sheet was cut and placed on a metal plate it was
classified as a 150 µm thick sample, but it was also flagged. This is because the sheet
looked thicker than the other 150 µm and because the thickness setting in the vibratome
had just been changed from 200 µm to 150 µm without changing the water bath. There
is a chance, therefore, that this sample may have been a 200 µm thick sheet instead of
a 150 µm. In this case the data shown in Fig.5.11 for the HG8P can be interpreted as
this originally being a 200 µm sheet which has shrunk due to water evaporation just as
for the case of the HG4P sheet.
This clearly showcases the experimental challenges linked to this technique and how they
affect how we can interpret the data. In either case, the results illustrated in Fig.5.11
and Fig.5.9 seem to indicate that the THz beam can penetrate a 4% gelatin hydrogel
sheet of thickness above 140 µm, while it can penetrate an 8% hydrogel sheet of thick-
ness above 160 µm.
These systems have a much higher water content when compared to the most superficial
layers of human skin, which means that we cannot simply translate these penetration
depths to real-life cases. These experiments have nonetheless given us the opportunity
to develop a framework for characterisation of penetration depths into in vitro systems.
These systems can be further engineered to resemble the optical properties of skin in a
more comprehensive way. This can be by developing protocols to selectively adjust the
water content of our hydrogel sheets by allowing water evaporation and shrinkage under
controlled conditions. We can therefore envision a multilayered system comprising sev-
eral layers of hydrogel sheets with varying water content, which can be used to simulate
the water content gradient present in the outermost layers of skin.
Arguably, some of the most influencing confounders discussed in this section stem from
an insuﬀicient control of temperature and humidity conditions during the production of
our samples. Not only, but temperature changes taking place within the samples dur-
ing experimental sessions should be monitored, as the dielectric properties of water are
known to be temperature dependent[68]. In addition, a characterisation of the influence
that pressure can have on a system such as a hydrogel sheet, when it is pressed down
via a metal substrate during THz measurements, is lacking. The control of these three
parameters is of paramount importance when dealing with biological systems and should
therefore be systematically introduced into the experimental practice in the future de-
velopments of this study.
Furthermore, the issue with THz independent sample characterisation compromising
the samples should be addressed. This could for instance be implemented by always
==PAGE:65==
6 Discussion
51
producing two identical batches of samples, both fabricated and stored under the same
conditions. One batch could be dedicated to characterisation via e.g. an optical micro-
scope or other tools for the assessment of structural parameters or hydration state, while
the second batch could be dedicated to THz characterisation.
Finally, the question of improving adhesion between the silicon wafer and biological sam-
ples should be addressed. This has shown to be a challenge when characterising both
hydrogels and hydrogel sheets, as the silicon wafer is hydrophobic. Ethanol cleaning
was seen to improve the wettability of the wafer, which is likely due to a water residue
(from the 96% ethanol-water solution) being left on the surface after ethanol evaporation.
However, other kinds of treatments can be envisioned, such as oxygen plasma treatment
of the wafer surface.
Future research on this topic should therefore involve a comprehensive work of optimi-
sation of sample preparation practices and control based on the insights gained during
this study. This will allow to produce the most reliable platform and to collect good
quality and reproducible THz data that can be interpreted unambiguously and used for
further development.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The original aim of this research project was to conduct an initial study on the interac-
tion between terahertz (THz) light and skin tissue. Early on in the process it became
clear that in order to be able to achieve this, a significant amount of interest and work
had to be dedicated to engineering the correct test systems for in vitro investigations.
It has therefore become a core part of this study to create in vitro skin models that
correctly represent the features of human skin tissue that interact with THz light.
This, together with elaborating a comprehensive data analysis framework, will result
into a reliable experimental platform in its most basic version. Ultimately, characteris-
ing the interaction between THz light and the outermost layers of skin will allow us to
investigate the potential of THz for a possible non-invasive glucose detection technology.
A THz reflection setup was used to investigate the samples and the data analysis frame-
work was defined based on its geometry. The data is processed both in frequency- and
time-domain, depending on the kind of information to be retrieved. The samples’ com-
position is characterised via data processing in frequency-space. This characterisation
includes four parameters related to its dielectric properties, namely the real refractive
index, the absorption coeﬀicient and the complex dielectric permittivity. Three different
kinds of samples were investigated, namely liquid samples in the form of MilliQ water
and MilliQ-glucose solutions, gelatin hydrogels and gelatin hydrogel sheets.
The data analysis framework was validated on the data from liquid samples, which also
allowed us to identify the frequency range where the dielectric properties of the sample
can be estimated with the highest confidence.
Gelatin hydrogels with high water content (92-98%) were characterised with THz. The
results indicate that both water-water, water-protein and protein-protein intermolecu-
lar interactions may be probed by the THz frequencies. Thermally cross-linked gelatin
hydrogels are therefore deemed not suitable for water content probing with THz.
Gelatin hydrogel sheets of thickness on the order of a few hundreds of microns were
produced in order to probe the penetration depth of a THz beam into a high water
content medium simulating skin. The obtained results suggest that penetration depths
of around 160 µm can be achieved in the considered media.
In the future developments of this work, particular attention should be directed to the
optimisation of sample preparation protocols as well as an expansion of the data process-
ing framework to include models for differentiation and prediction based on dielectric
properties. The complexity of the biological systems chosen for analysis should be in-
creased including the elements in the skin matrix that interact with THz light.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Ammar Ahmad Tarar, Umair Mohammad, and Soumya K Srivastava. “Wearable
skin sensors and their challenges: A review of Transdermal, Optical, and Mechan-
ical Sensors.” In: Biosensors 10.6 (2020), p. 56.
[2]
Muamer Dervisevic et al. “Skin in the diagnostics game: Wearable biosensor nano-
and microsystems for medical diagnostics.” In: Nano Today 30 (2020), p. 100828.
[3]
Bushra Alsunaidi et al. “A review of non-invasive optical systems for continuous
blood glucose monitoring.” In: Sensors 21.20 (2021), p. 6820.
[4]
Leanne Riley. Mean Fasting Blood Glucose. url: https://www.who.int/data/
gho/indicator-metadata-registry/imr-details/2380. (accessed: 12.06.2022).
[5]
10th Edition Committee IDF Diabetes Atlas. International Diabetes Federation,
10th Diabetes Atlas (2021). url: https://diabetesatlas.org/atlas/tenth-
edition/. (accessed: 12.06.2022).
[6]
Olesya Didyuk et al. “Continuous glucose monitoring devices: past, present, and
future focus on the history and evolution of technological innovation.” In: Journal
of diabetes science and technology 15.3 (2021), pp. 676–683.
[7]
T Koschinsky and L Heinemann. “Sensors for glucose monitoring: technical and
clinical aspects.” In: Diabetes/metabolism research and reviews 17.2 (2001), pp. 113–
123.
[8]
Vienica D Funtanilla, Tina Caliendo, and Olga Hilas. “Continuous glucose moni-
toring: a review of available systems.” In: Pharmacy and Therapeutics 44.9 (2019),
p. 550.
[9]
Nihaal Reddy, Neha Verma, and Kathleen Dungan. “Monitoring technologies-
continuous glucose monitoring, mobile technology, biomarkers of glycemic control.”
In: Endotext [Internet] (2020).
[10]
FF Sizov. “Brief history of THz and IR technologies.” In: Semiconductor physics,
quantum electronics & optoelectronics 22,№1 (2019), pp. 67–79.
[11]
Eda Cengiz and William V Tamborlane. “A tale of two compartments: interstitial
versus blood glucose monitoring.” In: Diabetes technology & therapeutics 11.S1
(2009), S–11.
[12]
Lucy Johnston et al. “Advances in biosensors for continuous glucose monitoring
towards wearables.” In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (2021).
==PAGE:68==
54
Bibliography
[13]
P Uhd Jepsen, David G Cooke, and Martin Koch. “Terahertz spectroscopy and
imaging–Modern techniques and applications.” In: Laser & Photonics Reviews 5.1
(2011), pp. 124–166.
[14]
Markus Walther et al. “Chemical sensing and imaging with pulsed terahertz radi-
ation.” In: Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry 397.3 (2010), pp. 1009–1017.
[15]
Martin Van Exter, Ch Fattinger, and D Grischkowsky. “Terahertz time-domain
spectroscopy of water vapor.” In: Optics letters 14.20 (1989), pp. 1128–1130.
[16]
Peter Uhd Jepsen, Uffe Møller, and Hannes Merbold. “Investigation of aqueous
alcohol and sugar solutions with reflection terahertz time-domain spectroscopy.”
In: Optics Express 15.22 (2007), pp. 14717–14737.
[17]
Peter Uhd Jepsen. Nano 2: Nanoscale conductivity - Optical Measurements with
Terahertz Radiation - Lecture Notes. Aug. 2021.
[18]
Xiang Yang et al. “Biomedical applications of terahertz spectroscopy and imaging.”
In: ().
[19]
Jianming Dai et al. “Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy characterization of the
far-infrared absorption and index of refraction of high-resistivity, float-zone sili-
con.” In: JOSA B 21.7 (2004), pp. 1379–1386.
[20]
Maryam Rahmati et al. “Designing multigradient biomaterials for skin regenera-
tion.” In: Materials Today Advances 5 (2020), p. 100051.
[21]
Lucian Fodor, Yehuda Ullmann, and Monica Elman. Aesthetic applications of in-
tense pulsed light. Springer, 2011.
[22]
Angelina I Nikitkina et al. “Terahertz radiation and the skin: a review.” In: Journal
of Biomedical Optics 26.4 (2021), p. 043005.
[23]
Jane Sandby-Moller, Thomas Poulsen, and Hans Christian Wulf. “Epidermal thick-
ness at different body sites: relationship to age, gender, pigmentation, blood con-
tent, skin type and smoking habits.” In: Acta Dermato Venereologica 83.6 (2003),
pp. 410–413.
[24]
Maryamsadat Shokrekhodaei and Stella Quinones. “Review of non-invasive glucose
sensing techniques: optical, electrical and breath acetone.” In: Sensors 20.5 (2020),
p. 1251.
[25]
KI Zaytsev et al. “The progress and perspectives of terahertz technology for diag-
nosis of neoplasms: a review.” In: Journal of Optics 22.1 (2019), p. 013001.
[26]
Pradnya P Samant et al. “Sampling interstitial fluid from human skin using a
microneedle patch.” In: Science translational medicine 12.571 (2020), eaaw0285.
[27]
Willemijn Groenendaal et al. Quantifying the composition of human skin for glu-
cose sensor development. 2010.
[28]
Matthew J Randall et al. “Advances in the Biofabrication of 3D Skin in vitro:
Healthy and Pathological Models.” In: Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnol-
ogy 6 (2018), p. 154.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
55
[29]
Xomalin G Peralta et al. “Terahertz spectroscopy of human skin tissue models with
different melanin content.” In: Biomedical optics express 10.6 (2019), pp. 2942–
2955.
[30]
Freia F Schmidt, Sophia Nowakowski, and Petra J Kluger. “Improvement of a
three-layered in vitro skin model for topical application of irritating substances.”
In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8 (2020), p. 388.
[31]
Mari Carmen Echave et al. “Recent advances in gelatin-based therapeutics.” In:
Expert opinion on biological therapy 19.8 (2019), pp. 773–779.
[32]
Joanna Skopinska-Wisniewska, Marta Tuszynska, and Ewa Olewnik-Kruszkowska.
“Comparative study of gelatin hydrogels modified by various cross-linking agents.”
In: Materials 14.2 (2021), p. 396.
[33]
Joo-Hiuk Son, Seung Jae Oh, and Hwayeong Cheon. “Potential clinical applica-
tions of terahertz radiation.” In: Journal of Applied Physics 125.19 (2019), p. 190901.
[34]
Fabio Novelli, Biswajit Guchhait, and Martina Havenith. “Towards intense THz
spectroscopy on water: Characterization of optical rectification by GaP, OH1, and
DSTMS at OPA wavelengths.” In: Materials 13.6 (2020), p. 1311.
[35]
M Brucherseifer et al. “Label-free probing of the binding state of DNA by time-
domain terahertz sensing.” In: Applied Physics Letters 77.24 (2000), pp. 4049–4051.
[36]
Mingjie Tang et al. “Terahertz spectroscopy of oligonucleotides in aqueous solu-
tions.” In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 20.9 (2015), p. 095009.
[37]
Dong-Kyu Lee et al. “Highly sensitive and selective sugar detection by terahertz
nano-antennas.” In: Scientific reports 5.1 (2015), pp. 1–7.
[38]
Liu Yu et al. “The medical application of terahertz technology in non-invasive
detection of cells and tissues: opportunities and challenges.” In: RSC advances
9.17 (2019), pp. 9354–9363.
[39]
Martin Chaplin. “Do we underestimate the importance of water in cell biology?”
In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 7.11 (2006), pp. 861–866.
[40]
Marianne Grognot and Guilhem Gallot. “Quantitative measurement of permeabi-
lization of living cells by terahertz attenuated total reflection.” In: Applied Physics
Letters 107.10 (2015), p. 103702.
[41]
E Pickwell and VP Wallace. “Biomedical applications of terahertz technology.” In:
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 39.17 (2006), R301.
[42]
Cecilie Ro/nne et al. “Investigation of the temperature dependence of dielectric
relaxation in liquid water by THz reflection spectroscopy and molecular dynamics
simulation.” In: The Journal of chemical physics 107.14 (1997), pp. 5319–5331.
[43]
Emma Pickwell et al. “In vivo study of human skin using pulsed terahertz radia-
tion.” In: Physics in Medicine & Biology 49.9 (2004), p. 1595.
[44]
Keiichiro Shiraga et al. “Evaluation of the hydration state of saccharides using
terahertz time-domain attenuated total reflection spectroscopy.” In: Food chemistry
140.1-2 (2013), pp. 315–320.
==PAGE:70==
56
Bibliography
[45]
Kiyoung Jeong et al. “Characterization of blood using terahertz waves.” In: Journal
of biomedical optics 18.10 (2013), p. 107008.
[46]
Caroline B Reid et al. “Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy of human blood.” In:
IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 17.4 (2013), pp. 774–778.
[47]
OP Cherkasova et al. “Analysis of blood plasma at terahertz frequencies.” In:
Optics and Spectroscopy 120.1 (2016), pp. 50–57.
[48]
Olga Cherkasova, Maxim Nazarov, and Alexander Shkurinov. “Noninvasive blood
glucose monitoring in the terahertz frequency range.” In: Optical and Quantum
Electronics 48.3 (2016), p. 217.
[49]
Anastasia A Lykina et al. “Terahertz spectroscopy of diabetic and non-diabetic hu-
man blood plasma pellets.” In: Journal of Biomedical Optics 26.4 (2021), p. 043006.
[50]
Ibtissam Echchgadda et al. “Using a portable terahertz spectrometer to measure
the optical properties of in vivo human skin.” In: Journal of Biomedical Optics
18.12 (2013), p. 120503.
[51]
KI Zaitsev et al. “Terahertz spectroscopy of pigmentary skin nevi in vivo.” In:
Optics and Spectroscopy 119.3 (2015), pp. 404–410.
[52]
Faustino Wahaia et al. “Study of paraﬀin-embedded colon cancer tissue using
terahertz spectroscopy.” In: Journal of Molecular Structure 1079 (2015), pp. 448–
453.
[53]
Kun Meng et al. “Terahertz pulsed spectroscopy of paraﬀin-embedded brain glioma.”
In: Journal of biomedical optics 19.7 (2014), p. 077001.
[54]
Michael Ney and Ibrahim Abdulhalim. “Ultrahigh polarimetric image contrast
enhancement for skin cancer diagnosis using InN plasmonic nanoparticles in the
terahertz range.” In: Journal of biomedical optics 20.12 (2015), p. 125007.
[55]
Tzu-Fang Tseng et al. “Near-field sub-THz transmission-type image system for
vessel imaging in-vivo.” In: Optics Express 23.19 (2015), pp. 25058–25071.
[56]
Andrew Chen et al. “Investigation of water diffusion dynamics in corneal phan-
toms using terahertz time-domain spectroscopy.” In: Biomedical optics express 11.3
(2020), pp. 1284–1297.
[57]
David B Bennett et al. “Terahertz sensing in corneal tissues.” In: Journal of biomed-
ical optics 16.5 (2011), p. 057003.
[58]
E Pickwell et al. “Simulation of terahertz pulse propagation in biological systems.”
In: Applied Physics Letters 84.12 (2004), pp. 2190–2192.
[59]
Emma Pickwell et al. “Simulating the response of terahertz radiation to basal cell
carcinoma using ex vivo spectroscopy measurements.” In: Journal of Biomedical
Optics 10.6 (2005), p. 064021.
[60]
Jiarui Wang et al. “THz in vivo measurements: the effects of pressure on skin
reflectivity.” In: Biomedical optics express 9.12 (2018), pp. 6467–6476.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
57
[61]
Qiushuo Sun et al. “In vivo estimation of water diffusivity in occluded human skin
using terahertz reflection spectroscopy.” In: Journal of biophotonics 12.2 (2019),
e201800145.
[62]
TOPTICA Photonics AG. TeraFlash Pro. url: https://www.toptica.com/
products/terahertz-systems/time-domain/teraflash-pro. (accessed: 15.06.2022).
[63]
TOPAS Advanced Polymers. TOPAS COC. url: https://topas.com/medical-
grade-material. (accessed: 29.06.2022).
[64]
ThermoFisher Scientific. Gene Frame. url: https://www.thermofisher.com/
order/catalog/product/AB0577. (accessed: 29.06.2022).
[65]
Suehiro Iwata. “Analysis of hydrogen bond energies and hydrogen bonded networks
in water clusters (H 2 O) 20 and (H 2 O) 25 using the charge-transfer and dispersion
terms.” In: Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 16.23 (2014), pp. 11310–11317.
[66]
Hiromichi Hoshina et al. “Terahertz spectroscopy for characterization of hydro-
gen bonding and cross-linked structure dynamics in polyurethane.” In: Journal of
Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves 41.3 (2020), pp. 265–275.
[67]
Katharina Wendler et al. “Estimating the hydrogen bond energy.” In: The Journal
of Physical Chemistry A 114.35 (2010), pp. 9529–9536.
[68]
Jun Zhou et al. “Temperature dependent optical and dielectric properties of liq-
uid water studied by terahertz time-domain spectroscopy.” In: AIP Advances 9.3
(2019), p. 035346.
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 1: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of MilliQ.
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
59
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 2: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.5 mg/mL.
==PAGE:74==
60
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 3: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.6 mg/mL.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
61
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 4: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
0.8 mg/mL.
==PAGE:76==
62
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 5: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1 mg/mL.
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
63
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 6: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.2 mg/mL.
==PAGE:78==
64
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 7: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.4 mg/mL.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
65
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 8: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.6 mg/mL.
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 9: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀi-
cient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of Glucose
1.8 mg/mL.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
67
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 10: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
Glucose 2 mg/mL.
==PAGE:82==
68
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 11: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL.
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A
69
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 12: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
Glucose 5 mg/mL.
==PAGE:84==
70
Appendix A
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
250
500
750
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 13: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
Glucose 10 mg/mL.
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A
71
0.0
0.2
MilliQ
0.0
0.2
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Relative std of real part of refractive index [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.2
Glucose 5 mg/mL
1
2
3
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.2
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
MilliQ
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Relative std of absorption coefficient [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 5 mg/mL
1
2
3
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.5
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
MilliQ
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Relative std of imag part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 5 mg/mL
1
2
3
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.5
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
MilliQ
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Relative std of imag part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.5
Glucose 5 mg/mL
1
2
3
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.5
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 14: Relative standard deviations of real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀicient and real and imagi-
nary parts of complex dielectric function for MilliQ water and glucose solutions of concentrations 0.5-10 mg/mL
(2.8-55.5 mmol/L).
==PAGE:86==
72
Appendix A
0.0
0.1
MilliQ
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Relative std of real part of refractive index [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 5 mg/mL
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.1
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
MilliQ
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Relative std of absorption coefficient [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 5 mg/mL
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.1
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
MilliQ
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Relative std of imag part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 5 mg/mL
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.1
Glucose 10 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
MilliQ
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 0.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Relative std of imag part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
Glucose 1.4 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.6 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 1.8 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 2 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 3.5 mg/mL
0.0
0.1
Glucose 5 mg/mL
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency [THz]
0.0
0.1
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 15: Relative standard deviations of real part of complex refractive index, absorption coeﬀicient and real and imagi-
nary parts of complex dielectric function for MilliQ water and glucose solutions of concentrations 0.5-10 mg/mL
(2.8-55.5 mmol/L).
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
73
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
Real part of complex refractive index [arb.u.]
MilliQ
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
Glucose 2 mg/mL
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 16: Real part of complex refractive index for MilliQ and three different glucose
concentrations.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Absorption coefficient [cm
1]
MilliQ
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
Glucose 2 mg/mL
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 17: Absorption coeﬀicient for MilliQ and three different glucose concentrations.
==PAGE:88==
74
Appendix A
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Real part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
MilliQ
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
Glucose 2 mg/mL
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 18: Real part of dielectric function for MilliQ and three different glucose con-
centrations.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Imag part of dielectric function [arb.u.]
MilliQ
Glucose 0.5 mg/mL
Glucose 2 mg/mL
Glucose 10 mg/mL
Figure 19: Imaginary part of dielectric function for MilliQ and three different glucose
concentrations.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
200
400
600
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 20: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
MilliQ water.
==PAGE:90==
76
Appendix B
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
200
400
600
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 21: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
HG2P.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
77
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
200
400
600
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 22: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
HG4P.
==PAGE:92==
78
Appendix B
2.0
2.5
Real RI [arb.u.]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
200
400
600
Abs. coefficient [cm
1]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Frequency [THz]
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Intensity [arb. u.]
Real dielectric function
Imag dielectric function
Figure 23: From top to bottom: Real part of complex refractive index, absorption
coeﬀicient and real and imaginary parts of complex dielectric function of
HG8P.
==PAGE:93==
Appendix C
Figure 24: Hydrogel sheet mold placed facing down on the silicon wafer for THz mea-
surements, without (left) and with (right) a weight placed to ensure adhe-
sion.
==PAGE:94==
