==PAGE:1==
Moto Blockly
A Visual Programming Language for Playware
Master Thesis
DTU Elektro
Center for Playware
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Moto Blockly
A Visual Programming Language for Playware
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Mads Kristian Rosendal Højberg Bau­Madsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Center for Playware, Elektrovej, Building 326, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.playware.elektro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Center for Playware, Department
of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Mads Kristian Rosendal Højberg Bau­Madsen ­ s161797
Signature
Date
ii
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This paper investigates how a visual programming language that motivates physical ac­
tivity through the interaction with Playware can be built. As a result, MotoBlockly, a visual
programming platform for creating, sharing and playing games on modular interactive tiles
was created. MotoBlockly consists of two distinct visual programming languages. The
advanced language, which closely imitates the syntax of an ordinary text­based program­
ming language. The rule­based language, inspired by traditional games, which allows
users to create a set of rules that define their game. Both languages were tested through­
out development, and while the advanced language was found to be very expressive, it
was also deemed too difficult for most users. The rule­based language enabled users to
create complex games using high level abstractions within minutes. However, the depth
of the language was found to be closely tied to the amount of abstractions, and the creativ­
ity of the developer creating them. The paper proposes a combined solution of the two,
where the expressiveness of the advanced language is used to build abstractions that
can be used in the rule­based language. This enables scaffolding, where users start with
the mastering the rule­based language. As they begin to feel limited, they can explore
how to build their own abstractions, thus creating a path of progression towards learning
computer programming.
Moto Blockly
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgement
A big thank you to Henrik Hautop Lund for his supervision of the project, as well as for
providing a full set of the MOTO Tiles and a tablet.
iv
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Visual Programming Langauges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Social Playware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Methodology
5
3.1
Development Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Problem Formulation
7
4.1
Problem Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Solution & Choices of Technology
9
5.1
MOTO Tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
How to Build a VPL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.3
Usability and User Experience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
Program Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
6
Moto Blockly: Design
13
6.1
Overall Framework Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6.2
Game­Sharing & Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
6.3
User Interface & Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
7
Moto Blockly: Implementation
26
7.1
Initial Version: Advanced
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.2
A Rule­Based Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7.3
Pure Visual Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.4
Game­Sharing & Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8
User Guide
52
8.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8.2
Example Videos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8.3
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8.4
Moto Blockly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
9
User Testing
62
9.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
9.2
Preliminary Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
9.3
Proposal of larger scale testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
10 Conclusion & Future Work
65
Bibliography
67
Moto Blockly
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
There is a seemingly ever increasing demand of employees who know how to program
computers. Danish NGO ”It­Branchen”, reported in November 2021, that almost 90% of
danish companies would like to hire more It­employees[1]. The demand is not expected to
decrease anytime soon either. As society and everything in it becomes more digitalized,
the need for people who are able to maintain old systems and develop new ones are ex­
pected to increase. In fact, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the amount
of software developer(and similar) jobs in the U.S. will increase by 22% between 2020
and 2030[2]. Programming is not a subject that has been traditionally taught in schools,
but more and more initiatives, such as Scratch [3] and MakeCode/Micro:bit[4][5] have
started to appear. These projects make programming much more accessible to children,
and help expose them to concepts of computer science and engineering early on in their
lives. Scratch allows its users to program games, animations, stories and more. While
Micro:bit is focused on programming a micro controller. Both of these projects use a vi­
sual programming language, where users are able to drag blocks together, almost like
they are putting together a puzzle. Several companies, such as Shape Robotics have
even developed customizable robots, that students can put together and program them­
selves[6].
This project attempts to re­create the success of these projects by introducing Moto Blockly,
a visual programming language/platform for the MOTO Tiles[7]. The MOTO Tiles are mod­
ular interactive tiles. The tiles have been used for rehabilitation of elderly, finding that they
seem to almost forget their physical limitations when playing games on the tiles[8]. This
is at the center of Playware. Enabling people of all ages to engage in play, while seeing
significant side effects, such as increased balance and cognitive function. Moto Blockly
is focused on allowing its users to create their own custom games for these tiles, by giv­
ing them creative freedom in the form of a visual programming language. A key concept
within the field of playware is the Playware ABC[9].
A: Anybody, Anywhere, Anytime
B: Building Bodies and Brains
C: Construct, Combine, Create
MotoBlock thus tries to enhance the usability of the MOTO Tiles, by enabling anybody to
program the brains of the tiles, allowing them to create their own games and playful expe­
riences. An introduction video showcasing some of the functionalities of Moto Blockly and
the creation of a simple game can be seen by clicking here https://youtu.be/PKPYJy_KDh0.
This report describes the development process of Moto Blockly, including the challenges
and findings along the way. In chapter 2, related work in the fields of visual program­
ming languages and social playware is presented and discussed. Chapter 3 presents
the agile methodology used during development and argues why it was used. In chap­
ter 4 some of the problem areas that the project has explored are described and finally a
main research question, with accompanying secondary questions is presented. Chapter 5
describes the intended solutions, and explains why certain technological decisions were
made with regards to choice of Playware and framework for developing the visual pro­
gramming language. This is followed by a preliminary design in chapter 6, including how
Moto Blockly
1
==PAGE:10==
the overall framework should be implemented. Chapter 7 describes parts of the imple­
mentation and goes into a few detailed examples, showcasing how Moto Blockly works.
In order to improve accessibility, a complete user guide was made, this is presented in
chapter 8. Chapter 9 presents the results of preliminary user testing which took place
during the development, and describes plans for how future, more concrete tests could
be done. Finally, a conclusion and presentation of future work is given in chapter 9.
2
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
End user programming (EUP) is the concept of allowing the end users, regardless if they
are software developers or not, to create programs that fit their specific needs [10]. There
are several ways of enabling EUP, for instance, Domain Specific Languages[11] (DSL)
and Visual Programming Languages(VPL’s)[12]. The first section in this chapter looks
into VPL’s and their varying use cases. This is followed by a section describing existing
forms of social Playware.
2.1
Visual Programming Langauges
VPL’s are in many cases DSL’s, but there are some attempts at making a general pur­
pose VPL[13]. VPL’s can be further split into different types. Some VPL’s are based
on flow diagrams[14], some are imperative[15] and others are declarative[16]. VPL’s are
being and have been used for several different things, such as robot manipulator program­
ming[14], education[15][17], and even interactive graphics programming[18]. In terms of
education, languages such as ScratchJr[19] target children aged 5­7, and while it is not
perfect[20], it has been shown to promote problem­solving skills, as well as teach some
basic programming concepts[21]. Not all programming concepts are straight forward to
teach. Sequences and conditionals have been found easier than loops, which is one of the
more challenging concepts to effectively teach using VPL’s [22]. Similarly, children who
used Scratch in middle school were found to have an easier time learning ”real” program­
ming languages such as Java or C#, at later stages in their education[23]. At university
level, VPL’s have been found to improve students understanding of basic programming
concepts as well. Especially students with low to medium belief in their own abilities to
learn programming, saw great benefits from using a VPL[17]. The VPL’s created for edu­
cational purposes seem to mainly be either completely digital, or involve a robot of some
kind[22][15][14], however one of the more popular devices, the BBC micro:bit [4], is a
microcontroller. Creating a playful experience is at the center of these languages, there
does not seem to be any which require the users to be physically involved in the experi­
ence they create. One study tried to introduce ”physical programming” to children aged
4­6 years. This was done by allowing them to program various elements in a room using
a ”magic wand”, which allowed them to tell stories. The study saw good results[24][25],
perhaps indicating that being able to physically interact with creations have its merits.
Furthermore there is a well established positive connection between physical activity and
cognitive function [26], meaning that this should perhaps be explored more in the field of
VPL’s.
2.2
Social Playware
Similarly to physical activity, creating social experiences are also a powerful tool to en­
courage learning. Particularly, playful and social experiences have been found to benefit
children, and even adults[27][28]. Several of the aforementioned languages have built
in support for sharing creations online. Another language, Kodu, which was originally
released on the Xbox 360 in 2009, stated that it was one of the things they wanted to in­
clude the most, following the initial release[29]. Game­sharing has since then been imple­
mented, and Kodu has been released on PC. More than 10 years later, it still sees several
games being shared per hour[30], highlighting the importance and effect of including this.
One of the benefits of doing so, is the fact that it allows other users to download and mod­
ify existing games. This can provide a significantly easier entrance point[29]. Scratch has
Moto Blockly
3
==PAGE:12==
also seen how the online community motivates an iterative process of creating, playing,
sharing and reflecting[31].
4
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:13==
3
Methodology
This chapter describes the iterative methodology used in the project. The iterative ap­
proach is critical, as the product itself is very user­centered, meaning that a good user
experience is important in order to get accurate results. The chapter also describes some
of the negatives that can follow as a result of the iterative approach.
3.1
Development Methodology
This section describes the methodologies used to develop Moto Blockly, how they were
used and why. Additionally it also describes some of the potential risks that arise from the
methodologies used.
3.1.1
Agile & The Playware Methodology
When the project began initially, the desired direction was not set in stone. This means
that more traditional engineering methods, such as the Waterfall model[32], were not ap­
plicable. The idea of Moto Blockly was to initially create a proof of concept, in order to
verify if it could have any value. The first prototype, while suffering from many issues,
ended up showing that the concept should be explored further. In general, this was the
case throughout the project. The agile methodology proved to be a better fit for this kind
of project. Three of the principles stated in the Agile Manifesto fit the goals of this project
especially well, namely[33]:
1. Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery
of valuable software.
2. Welcome changing requirements, even late in development.
3. Deliver working software frequently
All of these principles match the ideal working process and methodology of the project, and
in development of Playware in general. The Playware methodology is centered around an
iterative process, where the desired research is constantly evaluated in the real world[34].
The process can be depicted as a cycle, seen in figure 3.1.
Moto Blockly
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: An Iterative Research/Development Cycle
The entry point of the cycle, is the idea state in this case. The idea could be a hypothesis,
i.e. in the case of this project, physically interacting with self­programmable playware
can aid in teaching programming concepts. Following the idea, a design of a proposed
solution, or method of testing the hypothesis is created. This leads to the development
of a prototype, which is to be tested by relevant stakeholders (In this case potential users
of self­programmable playware). After a test has been conducted, some reflection is
needed. This will likely lead to new issues/possibilities being discovered. For instance, it
may be found that while there is some merit in self­programmable playware, the prototype
that was developed made it too difficult, or it was not fun enough. This may lead to new
ideas and thus the cycle can continue. This idea of rapid prototyping is paramount in the
development of Playware[34], but also fits well with the principles of Agile. While often
seen in the perspective of a business, it is still applicable to certain research questions.
By continuously focusing on the testability of an idea, it is possible to deliver working
solutions, that may provide immediate positives for the intended users. Additionally it
helps highlight any issues, which can be further iterated on. Furthermore, in the case of
this project, which is exploratory in nature, rapid prototypes can help to quickly confirm
whether certain directions should be further pursued.
3.1.2
Risks
A major risk when following a methodology like the one proposed is the degradation of
software quality due to the quick prototyping. Issues with maintainability can arise when
development is confined to relatively short, but concentrated periods, while the end goal is
either not known or not actively considered. Furthermore, since the project is exploratory,
the direction it might take is relatively unknown. This means that it is critical to ensure that
the software keeps being somewhat extendable and maintainable, since time­to­prototype
will otherwise increase as the project progresses. Another thing to consider is that since
the project is very user­centered, it is important to ensure a bug­free, stable experience
for the users when they are testing. If the product has bugs or bad user experience, it
might directly affect the results of the research conducted, since evaluations will then likely
focus on those issues, instead of focusing on the actual subject of interest.
6
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:15==
4
Problem Formulation
This chapter describes the problem which the project attempts to solve. The first section
highlights the problem areas that need to be tackled, in order for the visual programming
language to be successful. The last section presents a primary research question, as well
as additional questions that need to be answered, in order to ensure that the problem is
solvable.
4.1
Problem Areas
This section describes three of the main issues that need to be considered, in order for
the intended visual programming language to be developed.
4.1.1
Lack of physical play
As was discovered in chapter 2, it seems that no visual programming languages allow
for creations which directly motivate physical play. Physical activity was found to improve
cognitive function[26], so it should be determined whether this can help engage children in
learning programming concepts. Languages that allow the users to program robots could
possibly have some sort of physical interaction, but it is not directly encouraged. This is
something that the proposed visual programming language should focus on encouraging.
4.1.2
Ensuring fun
Playware is centered around the user being in a state of play. If the user is playing, this will
likely be their primary focus, meaning that any side effects can be considered collateral.
When they are engaged in play, significant collateral effects may occur[35], which can be
beneficial in many ways. For instance, elderly may improve their balance. Studies show
that they tend to almost forget any physical limitations they might have, when they are in
this state of play[8]. So while the goal of the playful activity might be to improve health
or cognitive abilities, the users simply engage in it because they find it enjoyable. Many
of the popular VPL’s discussed in chapter 2 were focused on creating a similarly playful
experience as well. If their success is to be replicated, efforts must be made in ensuring
the fun­factor of the proposed VPL. Furthermore, it is also a necessity to ensure that any
user can have fun. Learning programming concepts are perhaps not for everyone, but the
core experience should focus on creating fun playful experiences. If a user is having fun,
but sees that their peers are not, this may cause them to stop. This is especially important
for young children, who, in their own mind, won’t be interacting with the VPL in order to
learn, but rather to have fun. Older children and adults are perhaps more likely to use the
VPL to learn.
4.1.3
Easy to use, hard to master
In order for the VPL to be useful, it must be easily accessible for almost any user. It
should be easy and quick to start using the language, and the initial creations should
still feel meaningful and interesting. However, in order to keep the user interested for
longer periods of time, there must also be some depth, which allows for creativity and
experimentation to flourish. The language should motivate and allow for quick iterations,
so that users are able to instantly see the effects of their program.
4.2
Research Questions
This section presents the primary and secondary research questions. Based on what was
learned and discussed in the previous section and in chapter 2, it was determined that
Moto Blockly
7
==PAGE:16==
even though physical activity can improve learning, it has not been tested in combination
with a VPL. It is expected that by combining the inherent fun and playful experiences from
playware, with the ease of use of a VPL, the result will be an engaging learning experience
for the user.
This leads to the primary research question:
How can self­programmable playware be used to create physical, social & playful
experiences, which teach programming concepts?
In order to answer the primary question, the following secondary questions must be an­
swered:
• How can an easy­to­use, hard­to­master visual programming language for
playware be developed?
• How can physical activity be encouraged in such a language?
• How can the experience be tailored so that it is fun for everyone?
8
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:17==
5
Solution & Choices of Technology
This chapter aims to describe the possible solutions for each of the problems described in
the previous chapter. Furthermore, in the case of the VPL, different methods/frameworks
for creating one such language are discussed and weighed against each other. Finally,
a concrete program specification based on the discussions in each of the sections is
presented.
5.1
MOTO Tiles
In order to motivate the physical activity, which was mentioned in section 4.1.1, the VPL
will be paired with a playware. MOTO Tiles are modular interactive tiles. The tiles can be
paired wirelessly with a tablet, which can control their behavior in several ways. The tiles
are able to turn on their LEDS in different colours and to register when they are stepped
on.
Figure 5.1: Moto tiles[7]
Despite being relatively simple in nature, the tiles are in use in several public institutions,
such as elderly homes and hospitals, where they are used to rehabilitate elderly with great
success[7][8]. Other types of Playware could have been selected for this project as well,
but due to previous experience with the MOTO Tiles, as well as availability, they were
selected.
5.2
How to Build a VPL
This section presents, and argues for all the preliminary requirements of the proposed
VPL. Then several existing frameworks for building VPL’s are compared, and finally a
Moto Blockly
9
==PAGE:18==
choice of which one to use is made.
5.2.1
Requirements
In order to be able to compare existing languages/frameworks and how they could be
used/extended to support the functionalities that are required for the MOTO Tiles, said
functionalities must be defined.
In addition to being user friendly, which is expected to be one of the primary purposes of
visual programming languages, it must be possible to support several custom constructs
and possibly limit existing ones, if they are deemed unnecessary or too complicated. The
custom constructs primarily include enabling calls to the existing API, but could also be
built­in abstractions that make the programming easier. Furthermore, it must be possible
to integrate the language into an Android app, as this is how the user is expected to
program their games. One of the most critical functionalities is the ability to support event­
driven programming in some form. Play using MOTO Tiles is centered around stepping on
them. Therefore it should be possible for the user to easily program different behavior on
these ”step events”. Events that trigger based on time passing should also be considered.
In summary, the following must be possible in order for the language/framework to be
used:
1. The language/framework should be easy to learn, understand and use for almost
any age
2. The language/framework should either support programming ”events” (such as click
detection, step detection etc), or it should be possible to extend it so that it does.
3. In addition to this, it should be possible to create custom constructs/blocks, that
allows the user to use the existing Moto Tile API.
4. And finally, it must be possible to easily integrate the language into an Android ap­
plication.
With these requirements listed, it is now possible to compare different languages.
5.2.2
Scratch
Scratch is perhaps the most well known visual programming language. It was released
to the public in 2007[36], and has since then grown into the largest coding community
for children in the world[3]. It has been developed by the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at
MIT Media Labs. The original version of Scratch originally had a core audience of children
aged 8 to 16, but since then a new version of Scratch called ScratchJr has been released.
ScratchJr targets an even younger segment of 5 to 7 years old.
Adherence To Requirements
Looking at the popularity and success of Scratch, it is safe to say that it is indeed user
friendly. One of the bigger issues people have with programming is the syntax[36]. Scratch
enforces correct syntax by representing their blocks in different shapes, that can only be
combined with certain other shapes. Scratch already supports several ”events” out of the
box, such as ”When button pressed do” blocks, meaning that it is definitely possible to
create such blocks. However, developing such extensions is not very well documented.
Scratch is open source, so it is possible to fork the repository and extend it as needed.
Unfortunately, there is not a publicly available Android library, so integrating Scratch into
an Android application could prove troublesome.
5.2.3
MakeCode
The MakeCode platform is developed by Microsoft. It provides users with a block based
programming approach which enables to users to program several different types of robot­
10
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:19==
s/micro controllers, arcade games and even modifications to Minecraft. MakeCode also
allows the user to program using JavaScript or Python in some scenarios, in addition to
the block language. [5]
Adherence To Requirements
MakeCode is similar to Scratch in it’s user friendliness, and they target roughly the same
age groups, using the same type of language. MakeCode does seem more targeted
towards programming physical devices, whereas Scratch is more focused on purely soft­
ware. However, both languages are capable of both. Similar to Scratch, MakeCode
already has support for several types of events. Even better in the context of this project,
MakeCode has full documentation on how to develop new types of blocks[37]. However,
same as Scratch, there is no obvious way of integrating MakeCode into an Android ap­
plication. It is possible to do so however. For instance, the Cue robot has a MakeCode
editor integrated in its Android app[38].
5.2.4
Blockly
Blockly is not actually a visual programming language, but should be considered a tool
that can be used to create them instead [39]. The latest version of Scratch was created
using Blockly[40] and MakeCode was also made from Blockly[41]. Blockly provides sev­
eral constructs out of the box, and is able to generate code in several languages based
on the blocks, including JavaScript, Dart and even JSON. Blockly essentially does all the
groundwork that is the same for all visual programming languages, like dragging/drop­
ping, syntax constraints etc. As seen in Scratch and MakeCode, Blockly also supports
event driven programming. Furthermore, there exists an official Android library, which
can be used to integrate a Blockly based language into an Android app. An alternative to
using Blockly is doing everything from the ground up. This would ensure that the result­
ing language does exactly what is required, however, the workload would be way larger.
Ultimately Blockly provides enough freedom that the same is possible, so from this point
it will be considered the framework of choice.
5.3
Usability and User Experience
This section describes features that should be included in order to improve usability and
user experience, based on some of the work discussed in chapter 2.
5.3.1
Online capabilities
As was described in chapter 2, both Scratch and Kodu has seen success from adding
online capabilities in the form of game­sharing to their platforms. A variant of this should
also be included in this project, as it not only provides a better social experience, but also
allows users to start off by simply copying other games and making small edits. One of
the common ways of learning programming is to make small edits to existing programs
and seeing the difference. This is a tool which can be enabled by including game­sharing.
Another online functionality that should be considered is a form of leaderboards. Pro­
grams made for the MOTO Tiles will be limited to different types of games wherein play­
ers gain scores based on their performance. The inclusion of leaderboards may lead to
increased motivation and competitiveness amongst users[42], which in turn could lead to
an improved learning experience. All publicly shared games should have a leaderboard
attached to them, however, some users may prefer private invite­only leaderboards, so
this should be added as well.
5.3.2
Easy­to­Use, Hard­to­Master
The importance of making sure the language is easily accessible by all users was men­
tioned in section 4.1.3. In summary, it is important to ensure that the language has enough
Moto Blockly
11
==PAGE:20==
depth that users have to opportunity to be creative and to experiment, but it should also be
simple enough that they can start creating very quickly. Scratch has a huge amount of dif­
ferent programming blocks, which allows users to create complex applications. However,
there are also several tutorials, which help beginners get started[43]. Including tutorials
is one way to ease the entry point to an otherwise complex language. Scratch also allows
users to ”remix” existing programs, meaning that users are able to make edits to complex
programs that others have created. As mentioned previously, this is another commonly
used tool when teaching programming, which also makes for an easier starting point.
Another way to ease the learning process is to introduce the concept of scaffolding. A
previous study found that utilizing a scaffolding­based courseware when teaching Scratch
to students had a significant effect on their problem solving skills[44]. Scaffolding can be
applied in different ways. As was mentioned earlier, one way could be to create tutorials
that cover different parts of the programming language. For instance, there could be one
tutorial covering the concept of sequential execution, and another covering the concept
of conditional execution. Scaffolding could also be directly applied to the language itself,
meaning that the same language could be represented in different abstraction levels. An
example of this is Ozobot[45], a Blockly based language which features several levels.
The easiest level provides a purely visual set of programming blocks, while higher levels
look more like an ordinary text based programming language. ScratchJr[19] similarly
provides a visual language with high level abstractions, while Scratch is much more text
based.
5.4
Program Specification
To summarise, in other to explore the problems presented in chapter 4, a programming
learning platform and VPL known from this point onward as Moto Blockly, will be devel­
oped. Moto Blockly provides a programming language designed for creating games on the
MOTO Tiles, a modular interactive playware, which motivates physical activity and play.
Several frameworks were considered as bases for Moto Blockly, but ultimately Blockly,
a Google framework for creating VPL’s, was chosen. Both Scratch and MakeCode are
based on Blockly, and while MakeCode does offer a way to create custom blocks us­
ing it’s own framework, no documentation of how to include it in an Android application
was found. Blockly’s general documentation was deemed to be of higher quality, and
it also provides an (albeit slightly outdated) Android implementation example, making it
the best choice. In terms of online capabilities, previous research suggests that including
game­sharing has seen success for other VPL’s. Furthermore, including a competitive
element in the form of leaderboards may lead to increased user engagement. Finally,
several types of scaffolding were described. From these discussions, the following pro­
gram specification is derived:
Moto Blockly is an Android based application, which provides a VPL made with Blockly,
that can be used to create games for the MOTO Tiles. In order to help with engagement,
Moto Blockly will allow users to share their games online, and to create and participate
in remote challenges with leaderboards. Moto Blockly will furthermore experiment with
several types of scaffolding, including tutorials and difficulty levels, in hopes that users
will find it easy to learn, while still having the feeling that they are free to be creative.
12
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:21==
6
Moto Blockly: Design
This chapter provides a technical design for the Moto Blockly application. First a de­
sign describing the overall design of the Blockly implementation is given, describing how
Blockly will be integrated into the Android application. Following this, a description of how
the online functionalities will be implemented is given. Finally, sketches of the proposed
user interface is given, as well as some thoughts on how a good user experience can be
ensured.
6.1
Overall Framework Design
This section describes the intended process of building a Blockly based language and
integrating it into an Android application. The general concepts and API’s of Blockly are
described and examples of how to define custom blocks are given. Then, based on the
integration method, a general system architecture is defined, detailing the entire system
and how going from a Blockly program to a MOTO Tile game will happen.
6.1.1
Integrating Blockly
Blockly provides a JavaScript framework, which can be used to create VPL’s. Blockly
ships with a number of default blocks, some of which are useful for Moto Blockly. Below
is an example of a web browser Blockly program, which opens a pop­up saying ”Hello
World!” three times.
Figure 6.1: Simple ”Hello World” Blockly program
There generally exists two types of blocks in Blockly. Statement blocks and value blocks.
A statement block, such as the ”repeat while” block seen in figure 6.1. Statement blocks
can be chained with other statement blocks, and usually take value blocks, such as num­
bers or conditions as arguments. Furthermore it also provides a simple type checking
system, which can help ensure that the program is syntactically and semantically cor­
rect. Another large benefit of using Blockly is that animations and block ”snapping” is
Moto Blockly
13
==PAGE:22==
already taken care of, meaning that this does not have to be of concern. A Blockly lan­
guage consists of a toolbox and a workspace. The toolbox is seen on the left in figure
6.1, where different blocks are placed in their relevant categories. Blocks can be dragged
from the toolbox into the workspace, where they can be snapped together to form a pro­
gram. Thus, in order to make a version for the MOTO Tiles, it is necessary to define a
number of blocks and categorise them in a toolbox. Blockly provides several methods of
defining these custom blocks. Blocks can be defined using an online tool, which is based
on Blockly itself[46]. The tool can generate JavaScript code for defining the block in a
Blockly application.
Figure 6.2: Defintion of a number value block, which defaults to 5
When the generated JavaScript code is executed, this block will be accessible by the
Blockly runtime. When a block is made accessible, it can be added to a toolbox. Thus, in
order to create a Blockly language the following steps should be taken:
1. Define a set of custom blocks
2. Define a toolbox, possibly consisting of standard and custom blocks
Following these steps, it will be possible to compose Blockly programs, but it is still nec­
essary to integrate the editor itself into an Android application. Google does not provide a
native Android implementation of Blockly anymore, but instead suggests to use the web
version[47].
Since Blockly is purely JavaScript, and therefore executable by a web browser, it can be
embedded into an Android application using a WebView[48]. Doing this will allow the user
to interact with Blockly, as if it was a native application. Furthermore, the WebView will
enable the JavaScript code it is running to interact with the native Android code, as well
as provide a method for interaction in the other direction. Essentially, Moto Blockly will
be running two applications at once, a web application and a native Android application.
In the next subsection, it is described how to go from a Blockly workspace, to a working
game for the Moto Tiles.
14
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:23==
6.1.2
System Architecture
There are at least two ways to go from Blockly code to MOTO Tiles games that should be
considered. Blockly makes it possible to define code generation for each type of Block, for
any target language. Alternatively, it also has an API for serializing an entire workspace
into .JSON format. When interacting with the MOTO Tiles through an Android application,
a Java based library is used. Thus there needs to be a way to go from Blockly code, to
Java code, which uses the provided API. Using the code generation, it would be possible
to generate compatible Java code, which could be compiled and executed. Alternatively,
the Android application could parse the Blockly workspace in .JSON format into a custom
data structure, which could be interpreted and played. There are pros and cons to both
of these methods. Compiling the Blockly code into Java code during runtime is more
complex, but provides all of the benefits of a compiled program (type checking, semantic
error checking etc.). Running the code using an interpreter is less complex to develop,
but opens up for many possible runtime issues that could have otherwise been eliminated
by a compiler. In this project, it is deemed more important to be able to create working
prototypes quickly, so the interpreted model is chosen. Another benefit of using serialized
workspaces, is that this allows for a very simplified game­sharing model, which will be
described in the next section.
The following diagram shows the general system architecture of Moto Blockly, and specif­
ically the process of going from Blockly to MOTO Tile games.
Figure 6.3: Simplified Proposal of Moto Blockly Architecture.
The diagram in figure 6.3, showcases the relationship between the different components
when going from Blockly to a MOTO Tile game. Start from the point of the WebView,
internally, predefined custom toolboxes will be loaded into the Blockly runtime/core. These
toolboxes may contain custom blocks. In order to define custom blocks, functionality from
Blockly Core is used, but it may also be relevant to communicate with the Moto Library.
Among other things, the library can be used to determine how many tiles are currently
Moto Blockly
15
==PAGE:24==
connected. This could be used to create a block which allows the user the set the color of
a specific tile, by selecting the tile from a dropdown or similar. This way, it is possible to
enrich the Blockly editor with custom blocks that adapt based on the users choices, such
as number of connected tiles. As mentioned previously, it was decided to interpret these
Blockly programs, instead of compiling them. This means that the BlocklyParser interacts
with the BlocklyCore, through the WebView. Mainly by calling the serialization function
and thus receiving a serialized workspace. The workspace can then be parsed into a
GameConfiguration, which is used to create a MotoGame. The MotoGame contains the
interpreter. Due to the event­driven type of games that can be played on the MOTO Tiles,
the GameRunner(interpreter) will mostly sit in a ”waiting” state, until an event happens.
Events are registered by listening to the Moto Library and to the API, both of which can
send various types of events. Based on the GameConfiguration, the GameRunner will
then be able to decide what should happen. The GameRunner uses an API to send
commands to the Moto Library, which in turn is able to control the MOTO Tiles.
6.2
Game­Sharing & Challenges
In this section, the data model support to the implementation of game­sharing and chal­
lenges is described. Furthermore, a discussion regarding whether to store such data on
a locally hosted server versus a cloud host is presented.
The data model can be defined quite simply, and is seen in figure 6.4 below:
Figure 6.4: UML Data Model Supporting Game­Sharing and Challenges
No more than three entities is needed to support the wanted behavior. The model should
16
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:25==
be extended as necessary, but this is enough for an initial prototype. A game entity con­
tains the JsonString called game. This is where the entire Blockly workspace is saved.
This makes it easy to parse and run other user’s games, as long as the Android applica­
tion version is the same as the creator’s. Furthermore, all games are saved online in the
initial version, even the ones that are not publicly shared. Sharing a game in this data
model can be done simply by flipping a boolean. Because of this, the application requires
an internet connection to save games. Games can still be made and played without one,
but all work is lost if the app is closed. Games have a one­to­many relationship with both
high scores and private challenges. When a Game is made public, players can register
their high scores on a public leader board for that game. A high score simply consists
of a score, a user id and a game id. Since high scores may also be used for private
challenges, a high score has two optional fields, namely private and private challenge id.
This means that it is possible to hide high scores recorded on private challenges, from
the public leaderboards and vice versa. A private challenge consists of a game id, an id
of the challenge creator, a name, a key, and a list of players who have joined. In order to
join a challenge, a user must enter a key, which corresponds to the challenge they wish
to join. As a default, private challenges should remain hidden, and keys should be shared
outside of the app.
There are two options for how the game­sharing and challenge system can be supported.
In case complex logic is needed in the backend, it might make sense to develop a stan­
dalone application for this. However, for the initial prototype, quick development is pre­
ferred, as was mentioned in chapter 3. This makes using a simple cloud storage solution,
such as Google Firebase[49], more advantageous. A lot of time would likely be spent
setting up infrastructure if a standalone application is developed, which is not of concern
in this project.
6.3
User Interface & Experience
This section provides some sketches of what Moto Blockly will look like. One of the primary
goals of the design is to allow users to work within the Playware methodology themselves,
following the Playware ABC[9]. By providing the users with an easy to use programming
language and the MOTO Tiles, they are able to construct their own physical playing field,
which they can program to behave how they want, enabling them to create. Another is
to create a simplistic and intuitive experience, so that anyone can quickly feel confident
when using the app. A main focus for the VPL is to be accessible, so the user interface
that contains it should be so as well.
6.3.1
Design Mockups
This section contains a collection of mockups of all the possible screens that can be shown
in the application. These mockups serve as the design guideline for the implementation.
Moto Blockly
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 6.5: Moto Blockly Home Sketch: The home screen is primarily used for navigation
to other screens, but is also where the user will pair their tablet to their MOTO Tiles.
18
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6.6: The Moto Blockly Editor: Perhaps the most important screen of the application.
The main feature of this screen is of course the editor. However, in order to enable rapid
prototyping for the user, they are able to play their games directly from the editor screen.
A previous version had a separate screen for playing saved games, but user evaluations
showed that to be an annoyance, rather than a benefit, so it was combined. Pressing the
cogwheels will open the side panel, shown in in figure 6.7 below
Moto Blockly
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.7: The Moto Blockly Editor Settings Side Panel: The side panel is used select
saved games for editing, create new saves, and to delete old ones. Furthermore, as a re­
sult of user tests discussed in the next chapter, chapter 7, additional language types were
added. Users are therefore also able to switch between different types of the language.
20
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:29==
Figure 6.8: My Games Sketch: Shows all games currently stored by the user, and whether
they are made public or not. The user can switch to see all public games, by all users, by
pressing ”All Games”. Depending on whether their game is public or not, they user can
press a button to make it public or private.
Moto Blockly
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 6.9: All Public Games Sketch: Shows all games that are currently made public,
by all users. The user can press ”Save Copy”, in order to save a copy of another users
game to their device.
22
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:31==
Figure 6.10: Public Challenges Sketch: Shows all public challenges that are currently
active. Pressing the play button will take the user the the leader board of the game they
pressed it on, seen in figure 6.12. And same as in the Game­Sharing screens, the user
can press ”Private Challenges” to navigate to that screen.
Moto Blockly
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.11: Private Challenges Sketch: Works the same as in the public challenges
screen. However, by default this screen will not show any games. The user must press
either ”Join” or ”Create”, in order to join or create a private challenge. When a challenge
has been joined/created, it will show here.
24
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.12: Leader Board Sketch: Shows all recorded high scores for a specific game.
Pressing ”Play Game”, will start the game on the users tablet and MOTO Tiles.
Moto Blockly
25
==PAGE:34==
7
Moto Blockly: Implementation
This chapter describes the implementation process of the Moto Blockly VPL, as well as
the online capabilities. Due to frequent user tests and lessons learned from those, there
exists two distinct versions of the VPL. Furthermore, a purely visual prototype similar to
ScratchJr[19] has been developed. Details of the technical implementations are given,
including descriptions of some of the more challenging block types and programming
concepts that are covered, as well descriptions and reflections of some of the user tests
that were conducted during development. All code is public on Github:
https://github.com/Matziieee/MotoBlocklyIntegration
7.1
Initial Version: Advanced
This section describes the technical implementation of the initial version of the VPL. This
version is much more closely related to an ”ordinary” text­based programming language,
but provides some high level abstractions to ease the use. Firstly, the technical details of
the parser, and general design of the language is explained, then some example programs
are given. Following this, a description of the practice mode prototype is given. Due
to the relatively high complexity of the VPL, the practice mode was intended to ease
the entry point for the users, by providing several difficulty levels of the language, with
accompanying exercises. Finally the evolution of the language, which came as a result
of preliminary users tests, is explained.
7.1.1
Language Design
As was mentioned before, the advanced VPL looks very much like an ordinary text­based
programming language. The original intent of this language, was to more or less create a
one­to­one mapping to the existing MOTO Tile Java API. This would allow users to more
easily transition from the visual language to programming in Java. Therefore, a num­
ber of general purpose programming language concepts, such as sequential execution,
conditionals, loops, functions and asynchronous events are supported in the advanced
language. In figure 7.1, a simple program created with Moto Blockly is shown. Running
this program will simply count to five, and then say ”Game has ended”.
26
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:35==
Figure 7.1: A simple program containing a loop and some speech
Every program created in the advanced language contains a configuration block (the
brown block). This is the root block, which contains information of how many players the
game is intended for and the type of game. Furthermore the block contains the ”On Game
Start/End” statement inputs. These provide entry and exit points for the program. On the
left side, the toolbox containing all possible blocks is shown. All of these are explained in
the user guide in chapter 8. The most important part of Moto Blockly is of course providing
a way to program the MOTO Tiles. Several ways of doing this were experimented with.
Figure 7.2 shows the initial method for programming tile press behavior. The user was
able to define an ”On Tile Pressed” block, which would hold several statements. In this
example, the logic states that if the id of the pressed tile (incoming event) is not equal to
−1, then the tile should be turned blue. Since tiles are given ids from 1 and upwards, any
tile pressed will turn blue.
Figure 7.2: Event based handling of tile presses
This approach was abandoned in favor of a more declarative model, an explanation why
is given in section 7.1.4. In figure 7.3 this declarative method is shown. The code here
causes the same behavior as the above. The logic is contained in a function block and
consists of a for­loop, which increments i from 1 to 5. On each iteration, the behavior of
presses on the i’th tile is declared.
Moto Blockly
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 7.3: Declarative handling of tile presses
This change primarily enabled the users to program tile behavior separately from each
other, but came with it’s own disadvantages, due to the way variables work in Blockly.
All variables in Blockly are intentionally made global as languages made with Blockly
are intended to be for beginners, who should not have to consider scopes[50]. One of
the problems with this is explained in section 7.1.2. In addition to supporting declaration
of variables, Moto Blockly also supports functions that take no arguments and return no
values. The advanced language is not considered feature­complete, as development was
focused on another language variant, due to the results from preliminary user­testing,
described in section 7.1.4.
7.1.2
Parser & Execution
As was described in section 6.1.2, the primary function of the parser is to turn a Blockly
workspace into a data structure which can be interpreted as a game for the MOTO Tiles.
The advanced level of Moto Blockly consists of three distinct types of blocks.
• Outer blocks. Root level blocks, such as event handlers and the game configuration
block. In the current version of the advanced language, only the configuration block
is active. Variables are also stored as a type of root level blocks.
• Executable blocks. Blocks such as if statements, function calls, loops and api calls.
• Value blocks. These are primarily used as input for executable blocks. Can be
blocks such as numbers and strings.
The following figure, figure 7.4 shows a class diagram of the different block types in Moto
Blockly’s advanced language.
28
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:37==
Figure 7.4: Block type class diagram
Every type of block included in Moto Blockly is parsed into one of these types. Every block
inherits from the AbstractBlock, which contains the parseFromJson() method. Every block
must implement this, as it is used to turn transform their JSON representation into a Java
object. Because of this, each block contains its own logic for how it should be parsed,
meaning that the actual parser simply needs to ensure that the correct JSON is passed to
the correct block classes. The ExecutableBlock is another type of abstract block, which
also only contains a single method, namely execute(). When a block is executed, it is
given access to the current state of the game, as well as an API used for interacting with
MOTO Tiles, controlling timers etc. For instance, in figure7.2, the ”Set Color” block needs
to access the value of the variable i (which is kept in the game state), in order to turn that
specific tile on. The last type of abstract blocks is the generic value block. The ”T” can be
any value type, but is currently only numbers and strings. In Moto Blockly, colors and tiles
are both represented as integers internally. Since these values need to be comparable, all
value blocks must implement a compare() method. Values are only comparable to other
values of the same type, and as of now, only equals and not equals are supported. The
final block is the ConfigurationBlock, which simply contains general information about the
game, such number of players, but also the two ExecutableBlock arrays, used for the
onGameStart and onGameEnd events. In the current version of Moto Blockly, all blocks,
except for the configuration block, are either ExecutableBlocks or ValueBlocks.
Parsing example
As mentioned, the job of the parser is to ensure that the correct JSON is passed to the
correct blocks. In figure 7.5, a function which sets the color of all connected tiles is de­
clared.
Moto Blockly
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 7.5: A simple function which sets the color of all tiles to random colours
When this function is serialized, the following (simplified), JSON is produced:
1
{
2
"name": "set tiles to random colors",
3
"statements": [
4
{
5
"VAR": "some_id"
6
"inputs": {
7
"BY": { Number Block },
8
"FROM": { Number Block },
9
"TO": { Number Block },
10
"DO": [
11
{
12
"inputs" : {
13
"tile": { Get Variable Block},
14
"color": { Random Color Block}
15
},
16
"type": "set_tile_color"
17
}
18
]
19
},
20
"type" : "for_loop"
21
}
22
],
23
"type": "function"
24
}
Listing 7.1: Simplified JSON representation of function shown in figure 7.5
As can be seen in code snippet 7.1, the blocks are nested within each other. Not shown
in this code snippet is that the workspace furthermore contains a declaration of the vari­
able called ”i”. The outer block, with type function, contains a name and list of ordered
statements. In this case there is only one statement, namely the for loop. The loop block
declares what variable it is incrementing, where it starts, where it ends and by how much
it is incrementing on each iteration. It also contains an array of ordered statements, same
as the function block. Code snippet 7.2 shows a pseudo implementation for parsing a
function block, or any block containing statements.
1
def parseFromJson(json):
2
self.name = json.get("name")
3
var parser = ExecutableParser()
4
self.statements = parser.parseStatements(json.get("statements"))
Listing 7.2: Pseudo code for parsing a FunctionBlock
30
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:39==
The function block does not need to know the specific type of statements it contains, so is
simply passes the statements JSON array to a dedicated parser. Code snippet 7.3 shows
a pseudo implementation of the parseStatements() method.
1
def parseStatements(jsonArray):
2
var statements = []
3
for obj in jsonArray:
4
if obj.get("type") is "set_tile_color"
5
statements.push(SetTileColorBlock(obj))
6
elif #obj is another block
7
..
8
return statements
Listing 7.3: Pseudo code for orchestrating the parsing of a statement input array
This means that in order to implement new types of executable blocks, a condition must
simply be added in the relevant parser, which instantiates the new block type. Instantiat­
ing a block will cause it to parse itself based on the received JSON. Parsing executable
blocks that use value blocks is slightly more complex in some cases, but follows the same
structure. For instance, when parsing the for­loop, several numbers need to be parsed in
order for the loop to be executable. These numbers can come from many different types
of blocks, such as random number blocks and variable blocks. The for­loop block only
cares about receiving a number, so in that case a NumberParser can be used.
When all root level blocks have been parsed, these are used to create a BlocklyGameDefin­
tion. A BlocklyGameDefintion contains references to the configuration block, all defined
functions and all variables that have been defined. Furthermore, it also contains holds a
BlocklyGameState, which tracks current events and all values of variables, at any point
in execution. These are used by the BlocklyGame, in order to execute games.
Execution example
A MOTO Tile game can be divided into three separate phases. The first phase is triggered
as soon as the game starts. Recall that a game configuration block contains an input for
an On Start event. Blocks that are placed here are executed as soon as the game is
run. When a game begins, it also starts listening for events. Events can come from two
sources. Users may program timers which, when finished, can execute blocks. Users
may also declare behavior for when tiles are stepped on. Listening for these events is
the middle phase. The final phase of a game happens when the game ends, where
blocks in the On End input of the game configuration are executed. Recall the function
shown in figure 7.3. If it is assumed that this function is called when the game starts.
Recall from the class diagram shown in figure 7.4, that all ExecutableBlocks must have
an implementation of execute(). When executing a function call, the execution() method
of a FunctionCallBlock is called. Implementation of this method is given in code snippet
7.4.
1
#When a function call block is parsed , a unique id of the function that it
calls is saved on the block object.'
2
def execute(state, api):
3
state.getFunction(id).execute(state,api)
Listing 7.4: Pseudo implementation of a function call block
The GameState contains a reference to all function blocks, so by querying the state for
a specific id, the called block can be retrieved. Calling the execute method on this block
then executes the statement inside of it. The execution of a for loop block is a bit more
complex and is shown in code snippet 7.5.
Moto Blockly
31
==PAGE:40==
1
def execute(state, api):
2
#Fetch values
3
byVal = self.by.getValue(state, api)
4
toVal = self.to.getValue(state, api)
5
# i = from, save i to state
6
i = self.from.getValue(state, api)
7
state.saveVariable(self.variableId , i)
8
while i <= to:
9
for block in self.statements:
10
block.execute(state, api)
11
i += byVal
12
state.saveVariable(self.variableId , i)
Listing 7.5: Pseudo implementation of a for loop execution
Recall that a for loop parses all its arguments as ValueBlocks. These blocks are not
guaranteed to have a value on compile time, as they may be random, or even variable.
Therefore, the first step of a for loop is to fetch the values of these blocks, based on the
current state of the game. When executing a for loop, a variable is created to track the
current value of ”i”. Following this setup, the statements contained in the loop block can
finally be executed. The state of ”i” is updated after each iteration. After execution, the
behavior of the tiles have now been defined, meaning that the program is now essentially
idle, until a tile is stepped on. However, as mentioned earlier, all variables in Moto Blockly
are global, meaning that the state of the game only contains the latest values of variables.
The tile press behavior however, may possibly rely on the values of variables at the time
when it was declared, meaning that the current state can not be used. In order to solve
this, tile press declarations save a snapshot of the state, which is used when/if they are
executed. The final step is to actually handle the tile press, which in this case, happens
in the execute() method of a SetTileColorBlock, shown in code snipppet 7.6.
1
def execute(state, api):
2
tileVal = tile.getValue(state, api)
3
colorVal = color.getValue(state, api)
4
api.setTileColor(tileVal , colorVal)
Listing 7.6: Setting the color of a tile
As can be seen from the simplicity of the code snippets shown so far, adding new blocks
and programming their logic is quite easy due to the architecture of the system. The next
section showcases a few example games made with Moto Blockly.
7.1.3
Example Games
This section showcases two example games created in the advanced version of Moto
Blockly and describes how they work.
The Race game, shown in figure 7.6, is a one player game. The player has to score as
many points as possible within 30 seconds. When the game begins, a random tile will
turn red. When the player steps on this tile, they gain one point. Furthermore, as soon as
the red tile is stepped on, a new tile (can be the same one) will turn on, and the old one
turns off. Thus, the players score is dependant on their speed and the layout of their tiles.
The Odd Ones game, shown in figure 7.7, is a two player game. The game works in a
similar fashion to Race, however, it is played by two players. One player is blue, the other
is green. When the game starts, all tiles, except for two, will turn red. Of the remaining
two, one turns blue and one turns green. The players must step on their own tile before
32
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:41==
the other player. When one of the two tiles is stepped on, the player who’s tile was stepped
on gains a point, and two new tiles with turn special.
Moto Blockly
33
==PAGE:42==
Race
Figure 7.6: The Race Game
34
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:43==
Odd ones out
Figure 7.7: The 2­player odd ones game
Moto Blockly
35
==PAGE:44==
7.1.4
User tests & Sub Conclusion
As was mentioned in chapter 3, an important part of this project has been to continuously
conduct small user tests, in order to determine the correct direction of the project. The
advanced language was the first version which was developed, and therefore helped
shape the entire project. This section describes some of the user tests, and how they
helped shape the project. Furthermore, the practice mode, an attempt at making the
entry point easier, is described.
At the start of the project, it was not yet determined who would be the target audience
for Moto Blockly, except that they would be beginners. Some of the earlier testing was
conducted with 18­year old high school students as well as some volunteer university
students. The university students had prior programming experience, and were able to
create simple games, largely by themselves within 10­20 minutes of using the language.
One of the key observations made here, was that a lot of code was being duplicated
when creating the games. Even across different types of games, virtually the same code
blocks were needed for some default behavior. Furthermore, many of the API blocks used
to interact with tiles were created as separate blocks. This meant that a large amount of
blocks were available, which at first glance is good, because it means that a lot of different
games can be made. However, users frequently had trouble finding the blocks they were
looking for. An attempt to combat this, was to try to combine API blocks into single blocks,
that would adapt based on a dropdown. One such block is the Tile block, seen in figure
7.3, which replaced the event driven blocks shown in figure 7.2. Furthermore the users
requested more adaptive blocks. For instance, when using the Player block, seen in the
Race game in figure7.6, it is currently possible to input any number. This block should
be made adaptive, such that it can only select numbers within the range defined in the
configuration block. Another issue which was highlighted, was that the university students
had a harder time understanding how to use recursion. Both of the games shown in the
example section, make use of recursive calls to continuously progress. Recursion is not
likely to be something that younger people will have an easier time with, so some sort
of abstraction is needed here. The declarative way of defining tile behavior was tested
on a younger audience, namely the 18 year old’s and generally saw success. However,
seeing as they had no programming experience, it took a substantially larger amount of
time to get them to understand how to use the language. With supervision, they were
able to create simple games, but without it, they were unable to do so, quickly causing
frustration and boredom. This spawned the idea of a learning/practice module, wherein
subsets of the language could be used to create small exercises, that would help teach
the language, as well as several programming concepts in isolation. In total, 6 different
concepts were identified:
1. Sequential Execution
2. Variables
3. Conditionals
4. Loops
5. Functions
6. Async/Event Handling
For each of these, a subset of the advanced language was defined. Furthermore, 12
exercises spanning these levels were created. Most exercises involved modifying existing
code and attempting to think about certain behavior and why it happens. For instance,
36
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:45==
in figure 7.8, the first exercise regarding conditionals is shown. Prior to this exercise, the
users have learned about sequential execution, as well as how to declare variables and
change their values.
Figure 7.8: Conditionals: Exercise 1
Opening the side panel reveals the exercise objectives. They read:
1. Run the game, explain what happens
2. Try changing the variable to 2. What happens now?
3. Try changing ”=” to ”̸=”. What happens now?
Some exercises required more coding from the user than this one, but they were generally
kept short. When running through the exercises with two users (aged 18), the users were
able to solve most exercises relatively easily. Generally, they would receive one or two
exercises where very little had to be done, and then one slightly larger one, where they
had to add blocks, and not just modify existing ones. This worked fine, however, the
users had difficulty understanding concepts such as loops and recursion, similar to what
was found in another study[17]. Another observation was the users remained sitting for
the majority of the exercises. This could have been foreseen, since programming tile
behavior was not enabled until they reached the last level. Ultimately this defeats much
of the purpose of having the tiles in the first place, so further development is required, if
this exercise based learning is to be pursued.
In general, the advanced language was determined to be too difficult for most users.
The initial tests showed that users were happy and motivated as long as they were able
to quickly and constantly see progress, but were unhappy and bored when stuck. This
highlighted the importance of ensuring that users of all levels are able to continuously have
victories, when interacting with Moto Blockly. Furthermore, when asking proficient users,
their main interest was in learning the programming concepts and interacting with the
MOTO Tiles was not necessarily something they needed. Users who were not interested
in programming concepts seemed disinterested altogether. Based on this, the hypothesis
is that the games might be too simplistic for older users, who require much more intricate
games to keep them interested. For younger users, it might be way too difficult to use
this language, meaning that they won’t be able to create games they might otherwise
find engaging. The most obvious way to improve on this, is to create a version of the
Moto Blockly
37
==PAGE:46==
language which is more high level, less focused on programming and more focused on
creating fun games and experiences. The next section presents the Rule­Based version
of Moto Blockly, which attempts to do just that.
7.2
A Rule­Based Approach
This section present the rule­based version of Moto Blockly. The language takes inspi­
ration from traditional games, where a set of rules define how the game is played. The
language is similar to the one created for the Thymio II Robot[16]. As mentioned earlier,
MOTO Tile games are largely event driven, so users should be able to define rules for
each type of event. For instance, a user might want a rule that states:
When a red tile is stepped on, Then player 1 gains one point.
The language remains text­based, requiring its users to be able to read. The section
describe the general design of the language, presents some technical details, example
games and finally the results of some of the preliminary user tests.
7.2.1
Language Design
As mentioned, this version of the language attempts to remove many if not all of the
conventional programming concepts from the earlier version, and is instead way more
focused on allowing the users easily create intricate games. The language consists of
three distinct types of blocks:
• Rule Blocks: Blocks that contain a set of rules. Every game contains at least one
rule block, but optional rule blocks, that can be made active as a game progresses
are also available.
• When Blocks: First half of a rule. Allows the user to select a specific event, that
they wish to create a rule for.
• Then Blocks: Second half of a rule. Then blocks are attached on to When blocks,
and consists of several types of predefined actions, such as turning tiles on/off,
activating sub rule blocks etc.
Figure 7.9 shows a very simple start program consisting of a single rule. Similar to the
configuration block used in the previous section, section 7.1, it allows the user to specify
a number of players and for how long the game should run. As can be seen, the When
defines for what event the rule should trigger, in this case when the game starts. When
blocks can be edited to contain an arbitrary amount of then blocks, but users may also
create multiple when blocks targeting the same event. The game in 7.9 simply turns all
tiles red and plays a sound when the game starts. The toolbox shows a number of different
types of block categories, for a full overview and description of all of them, see the user
guide in chapter 8.
38
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:47==
Figure 7.9: A simple start rule
The language allows users to very quickly get started, but also abstracts away most of
the programming concepts. However, the following two concepts can still be taught using
this language:
• Sequential Execution
• Conditional Execution
Sequential Execution
When computers run programs, they run a set of instructions in sequential order. The
same concept is applied in programming languages, where code executes line by line,
from top to bottom. In the advanced language, this was also the case, however it might
be difficult to see why its the case here. Consider the program shown in figure 7.10. What
color will the tiles turn when the game starts? The tiles will turn blue, seemingly ignoring
that the user specified for them to turn red. Then statements are executed top to bottom,
with no delays between them.
Figure 7.10: A example of sequential execution in the rule­based language
Moto Blockly
39
==PAGE:48==
Conditional Execution
As was mentioned above, this version of the language supports the addition of optional
sub rule blocks. In figure 7.11, a game using and activating such a block is shown.
Figure 7.11: A example of conditional execution in the rule­based language
The default rule block specifies a single rule, that when a red tile is pressed, the Optional
Rule should be made active. A sub rule block can either replace the existing set of rules,
or it can add more rules. In this case, it adds an additional rule which triggers immediately.
Users may also deactivate sub rules. Sub rule blocks allows the users to create games
that adapt, based on the events that happen, i.e. enabling conditional execution.
7.2.2
Parser & Execution
This section describes how a rule­based Moto Blockly game is parsed and executed.
The parsing of rule­based games works almost exactly the same as for advanced games,
described in section 7.1.2. Due to the simplicity and high level abstraction of the available
blocks, parsing them is actually easier. Figure 7.12 shows the class diagram of blocks
types in the rule­based language.
40
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:49==
Figure 7.12: Class diagrams of block types in the rule­based language
When compared to the diagram in figure 7.4, there are a few small differences. Since
all blocks have their input as predefined fields, it is no longer necessary to worry about
receiving external output. Thus, a WhenBlock only needs to know what ThenBlocks it
has, as well as what type of event it is listening for. Code snippet 7.7 shows a pseudo
implementation of the parser responsible for parsing rule­based games.
1
def parseRuleGame(json):
2
gameConfig;
3
subConfigs = []
4
#json contains an array of all root level blocks
5
for rootBlock in json.get("blocks"):
6
if rootBlock.type is "gameConfig":
7
gameConfig = GameConfiguration(rootBlock)
8
else:
9
subConfigs.append(SubConfiguration(rootBlock)
10
return RuleGameDefinition(gameconfig , subConfigs)
Listing 7.7: Parsing a rule­based game
Parsing When and Then blocks are done in the same way as when parsing statements
in the advanced language, shown in figure 7.3. Game execution is handled in largely the
same way as well. However, due to blocks being so high level, most execution logic is
contained in the API layer, as opposed to in the specific block objects. Consider the game
shown in figure 7.13.
Moto Blockly
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.13: Example Game
When the game begins, all tiles turn on in random colors. Furthermore, when an X sec­
onds have passed event is listened for, a timer is automatically started for the entire
duration of the game. Then, whenever the specified amount of seconds have passed, an
event will trigger, causing the rule to execute. In the case of this game, the tiles will turn on
in random colours, meaning that they constantly change. Furthermore, a rule concerning
steps on tiles that are red is also defined. Whenever the player steps on a red tile, they
get a point and the colors change again. The Game Runner manages all these events,
and is responsible for determining which rules should be triggered when. The API is re­
sponsible in part for executing actions, such as setting the tiles to specific colours, but it
may also produce events. Consider if a new event type called all tiles are <color> was
added. This would trigger whenever all tiles have turned into the specified color. Instead
of having the Game Runner continuously check what colors all of the tiles are, the API
can check every time it sets a color. Figure 7.14 presents a chart showing a simplified
version of the execution process.
42
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:51==
Figure 7.14: Chart showing simplified execution process of a rule­based game
When the game begins, a RuleGameDefinition is passed to the Game Runner. As men­
tioned, Game Runner immediately checks to see if any rules require timers, and if they do,
timers are started. Furthermore, rules that listen for the game start event are triggered.
From this point on wards, the Game Runner can receive events from three sources.
Timers, the MOTO Tiles and its own API layer. Whenever an event is received, that Game
Runner evaluates it, to determine whether it should trigger any of the defined rules. While
timer events almost always lead to actions being executed, events from the MOTO Tiles
and the API layer do not. For instance, the MOTO Tiles send an event every time a tile
is stepped on, however, in the case of the game shown in figure 7.13, only steps on red
tiles should trigger a rule. In addition to the blocks showcased so far, some actions can
be blocking. This means that for the duration of their execution, they prevent many other
rules from being run. In figure 7.15, one such action is shown.
Figure 7.15: An example of a blocking action
Moto Blockly
43
==PAGE:52==
This game defines a random sequence of length 6. A sequence simply consists of tile
identifiers. The same tile can be represented multiple times in a sequence. Furthermore,
each element in the sequence contains a randomized color that it is paired with. Then
follows the blocking action, Play Sequence, which lights up the tiles in order, according to
the randomly defined sequence. Tiles are turned on for one second at a time, with a delay
of half a second in­between, meaning that events are blocked for 8.5 seconds. During this
period, all steps on the MOTO Tiles and timer­based events are ignored. Furthermore,
the API Layer is disabled from generating events.
7.2.3
Example Games
This section showcases two examples of games made in the rule­based Moto Blockly. In
figure 7.16, the Race game is shown. This game is almost the same as the Race game
described in section 7.1.3, however, there are a couple of additions. First off, instead of
only one tile turning on, all tiles turn on, with one being red, and the remaining turning blue.
Relevant sounds have also been added to the game. There are three rules concerning
tile presses. Pressing a red tile awards the player with a point, pressing a blue tile deducts
a point from the player and finally, no matter what color tile is pressed, the colors will be
shuffled. This game is also a nice example of how one event (a tile press), may trigger
multiple rules.
The second game is quite a bit larger, and is therefore shown in several separate images.
The game is called Simon Says, as it tries to emulate the classic game. The start config­
uration, see figure 7.17, defines three straight forward rules. When the game begins, the
p1 sub rule is made active. The two rules add simple sounds to the game. The p1 sub
rule can be seen in figure 7.19. This rule is quite advanced, but essentially, it waits for
player one to step on five tiles. Following these five steps, the newly typed sequence is
repeated. When the sequence has played, the tiles turn blue, indicating that player two
must repeat the sequence. Point scoring is enabled/disabled, by enabling the countpoints
sub rule, which is shown in 7.18. The Wait for sequence then block, is a blocking action,
similar to the Play Sequence block. If player two inputs the correct sequence, the game
activates the p2 sub rule, shown in in figure 7.20. If they input the wrong sequence, the
end sub rule, shown in figure 7.18, is made active instead. This rule will instantly stop the
game. The p2 sub rule is almost identical to the p1, except that some of the colors are
different. When p2 is activated, player two gets to input a pattern that player one has to
repeat. The game lasts for 120 seconds, or until a mistake is made.
44
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:53==
Race
Figure 7.16: A variation of the Race game, shown in the advanced language in figure 7.6
Moto Blockly
45
==PAGE:54==
Simon Says
Figure 7.17: The start configuration of the Simon Says game
Figure 7.18: ”Helper” sub rules, used in the Simon Says game
46
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:55==
Figure 7.19: Sub Rule 2 of the Simon Says game.
Moto Blockly
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 7.20: Sub Rule 2 of the Simon Says game.
7.2.4
User tests & Sub Conclusion
From the examples shown in section 7.1.3 and section 7.2.3 it is clear to see that users are
able to make vastly more complex time, with much fewer and simpler blocks. The rule­
based language is intended for a younger audience ( 8­12 years old), however, it was
48
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:57==
unfortunately not possible to conduct tests on players in this age group. Nonetheless,
tests were conducted with two users aged 18, several users aged 20­25 and one user
aged 79. The tests were all rather short, spanning between 10­20 minutes. In the first
iteration of the rule­based language, there were very few blocks, this meant that the users
had a very easy time building games, since there weren’t many options. However, the
lack of blocks had a clear impact on the fun they had, since they were not given enough
options to be creative. In general, the rule­based approach to making games felt very nat­
ural to all test subjects. After a very short introduction to the concepts, they were quickly
able to create their first game, with minimal supervision. One of the primary pieces of
advice they were given, was to run their game as often as possible as they were creating
it. This allowed them to mimic the methodology used in this project, and allowed them
to understand how each block affected their game. One of the key focuses when devel­
oping the language, was to make sure that all games would always run. So that, even if
users made games that were contradictory, they would still run. One of the observations
made when testing the advanced version, was that when players experienced bugs, com­
pilation errors or weird behavior, their feedback was mostly related to this. While finding
bugs is valuable, it is not the goal of user tests. The primary objective is to improve the
language itself, but if users are unable to interact with it without experiencing bugs, no
useful feedback will be given.
7.3
Pure Visual Prototype
So far, both of the languages presented have been text­based in one form or another. As
was discussed in chapter 2, ScratchJr has seen good results, and is purely visual[19][20].
A prototype was therefore developed for Moto Blockly, which can be an indication of
whether it is possible to reach even younger children. The language is generally con­
structed in the same way as the as the rule­based version, taking in specific rules. In
figure 7.21, a game using all of the available block types is shown. The green arrow,
indicates that the blocks attached to it, will execute when the game begins. The multi
colored MOTO Tile, causes all connected tiles to turn on in random colors. The game
then waits for one second, before reaching the repeater block. The repeater block simply
re­executes the sequence it is contained in. Meaning that when the game starts, tiles will
turn on with random colors every second, until the game ends. Then, the press rules are
defined. Pressing a tile of any color, plays a random animal sound. Pressing a red tile
deducts a point, and pressing a green awards a point. The language has not yet been
tested by users, to it remains to be seen whether they are able to use it or not.
Moto Blockly
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.21: An example program made in the beginner version of Moto Blockly
7.4
Game­Sharing & Challenges
As was mentioned in section 6.2, for a first prototype, relying on a cloud solution such as
Google Firebase is preferred. Moto Blockly uses Firestore, a NoSQL/Key­Value database
to store games, high scores and challenges. Firestore was chosen primarily due to being
extremely easy to integrate into an Android application, but any similar service could be
used. All methods used to interact with Firestore are defined in a single class which
implements an interface, shown in figure 7.22.
In Java, interfaces can be used to abstract away the implementation of certain classes and
methods. When using this service, the caller is not interested in knowing how it works, it
just cares about the result. By using an interface like this one for interacting with Firestore,
we remain relatively platform agnostic. So, that if for some reason it was decided to switch
to another service, the amount of code maintenance needed would be minimal. It would
be enough to implement the interface shown in figure 7.22. For instance, in order to
enable an offline mode, a service could implement this interface, but handle everything
using local storage instead of Firestore. The effects of including this game­sharing service
has not been evaluated for Moto Blockly yet, but as mentioned earlier, Kodu saw benefits
in doing so[30], so the same might be true for Moto Blockly.
50
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.22: The GameManagerService Interface
Moto Blockly
51
==PAGE:60==
8
User Guide
This chapter presents the user guide created for Moto Blockly. The user guide was created
in order to serve as a reference, as well as an easy way to get started. The user guide
is intended to be used for larger scale tests. Since the advanced language is not in a
finished state, it is not included in the guide.
8.1
Introduction
This document contains a manual for using the Moto Blockly demo application. Moto
Blockly allows users to programmatically create their own games for the MOTO Tiles. This
is done using the Moto Blockly language, which is a block­based programming language.
8.1.1
Audience
The reader of this guide is expected to be in possession of a set of MOTO Tiles and an
Android tablet with the Moto Blockly app. The app works with any number of tiles, but at
least four is recommended for the best experience. No prior programming experience is
required.
8.2
Example Videos
Several videos have been recorded, showcasing the features of Moto Blockly(items are
hyperlinks):
• Getting Started ­ Creating your first game
• Online Functionalities
• Example game #1: Race
• Example game #2: Memory Game
8.3
User Interface
This section contains an explanation of the user interface of the demo app and all its
functionalities.
8.3.1
Home Page
The homepage is primarily used for navigation to other pages, but is also necessary for
establishing a connection to your MOTO Tiles. Press the ”Pairing Button” to start pairing,
followed by stepping on the tiles that you wish to connect to. While your device is in pairing
mode, the tiles which are currently paired and connected will show a red spinning motion.
Press ”Stop Pairing” to stop pairing. After your tiles have been successfully paired and
connected, you can navigate the three different pages using the remaining buttons. The
following subsections describes each of these. The homepage is seen in figure 8.1.
52
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:61==
Figure 8.1: The Home Screen
8.3.2
Create Games
The Create Games screen contains the Moto Blockly Game Editor, which can be used to
modify or create games, using either the Rule Based or the Advanced language version.
For a description of each of the languages and their blocks, see section 8.4. The left
side of the screen contains block categories. Pressing any of these categories will open
another pane, where you can see all blocks in said category. In order to use a block,
you may either simply tap it, or drag it onto your workspace. Pressing ”Play Game” will
attempt to compile and start your game. New block changes won’t register until you press
”Play Game” again. The Play button is made visible after pressing ”Stop game”, or simply
by waiting for your game to end. Pressing the cogwheel in the top right opens the Side
bar, which is described below. The create games screen is shown in figure 8.2.
Moto Blockly
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 8.2: The Create Games Workspace Screen
Workspace functionalities
Apart from creating games by combining different blocks, the workspace has a few other
functionalities. In the bottom right, three buttons and a bin are located. Dragging a block
to the bin will remove it from your workspace. The top button will attempt to ”center” the
workspace to contain all your blocks. The plus and minus are used to zoom in/out on the
workspace.
Side bar
Opening the Side bar allows you to Save games, Delete games and to create new games
(empty workspaces). The select game dropdown contains all your currently saved games.
Selected a game there will discard any unsaved changes to your workspace, so be careful.
You may also switch from the Rule Based language to the Advanced language and vice
versa. When saving a game, remember to input a Name for your game. If you wish to
make a copy of an existing game, this can be achieved by selected a game, changing its
54
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:63==
name, and then pressing save. The sidebar is seen in figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3: The Side Panel in the Create Games Screen
8.3.3
Game Collection
The Game Collection screen has two separate tabs. The first and default tab is ”My
Games”. This tab contains a list of all that are currently stored on your tablet. It shows
the name of the game, an ID of the creator, as well whether it is published. If a game is
published, it will be visible to all users of the app. The second tab contains ALL games
that are currently published by all users. The game collection screen is shown in figure
8.4
Figure 8.4: My Games, in the Game Collection Screen
Publishing/Unpublishing games
In order to change the visibility of a game, make sure you are on the ”My Games” tab and
press any of the games shown in the list. You can navigate the tabs by pressing on them.
Moto Blockly
55
==PAGE:64==
Pressing a game will present you with a pop­up, which allows you to either make a game
private, or make it public, depending on its current visibility status.
Saving other creators games
In order to save a game made by another user, make sure you are on the ”All Games”
tab and press the game you wish to download to your own device. Pressing the game
will present you with a pop­up, where you can press ”Save Game” to save. The game will
then be accessible to edit in the Create Games editor, as well as in the My Games tab.
8.3.4
Challenges
The Challenges screen contains two tabs, one for public challenges and one for private
challenges. A public challenge is automatically created for any game that has been made
public. You can navigate between the tabs by pressing on them. Both tabs show a list
of all the current challenges in the given category. There won’t be any challenges in the
private challenges in the private challenges tab until you either create or join one. The
public challenges screen is shown in figure 8.5. The private screen is seen in figure 8.6
Figure 8.5: Public Challenges
Figure 8.6: Private Challenges
Creating a private challenge
Navigate to the private challenges tab and press the ”Create New” button. A pop­up will
appear. In order for other players to join, they must know your Challenge Key. When
you press the button, a key is automatically generated for you, but you may input your
own as well. The dropdown allows you to select which game you wish to create a private
challenge for. This dropdown consists of all public games. Press create to finalise creating
the challenge.
Joining a private challenge
Navigate to the private challenges tab and press the ”Join Challenge” button. This will
prompt you to enter the key for a challenge. Enter a correct key (case sensitive) and
press OK. If your key is correct, the challenge you have just joined will appear in your list
of games under private challenges.
56
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:65==
Playing a challenge
In order to play a challenge (public or private), you must click on a challenge in the shown
list. Clicking the challenge will take you to a leader board screen where all scores regis­
tered on that game is shown. Pressing the green start arrow, will take you to the Attempt
Challenge screen. Here, you may press the start button to start the game. Your score is
also visible here. After playing a game, you may choose to publish your score, try again,
or simply go back to the previous screen. The leader board screen is seen in figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7: An example of a leader board
8.4
Moto Blockly
This sections contains a description of every single block that can be used, in the Moto
Blockly rule­based language. Blocks are categorized into relevant sections.
8.4.1
Configuration & Sub Rules
The configuration block, and the sub rule block are seen in 8.8. The configuration block,
called Moto Game, must be included in every game, and is automatically added to new
workspaces. The blocks allows users to define a number of players and a total duration
of the game in seconds. Furthermore it allows users to define rules. Only When blocks
may be placed inside the Rules input. The Sub Rule block is similar to the configuration
block, since both allow for rules to be defined inside them. However rules placed in a sub
rule are inactive as default. Sub rule blocks can optionally replace all existing rules.
Figure 8.8: The configuration­ and sub rule blocks
8.4.2
When
Figure 8.9 shows all possible When blocks. There currently exists 8 different types of
events that can be listened for. Any type of Then block can be attached to a When block.
Furthermore, by pressing the cogwheel on a When block, users may add and remove
input fields for Then blocks.
• Game Starts: Triggers when the game begins.
• Game Ends: Triggers when the game ends.
Moto Blockly
57
==PAGE:66==
• X seconds have passed: Triggers in intervals, according to the value the user
inputs.
• Pair pressed: Triggers when a specific pair is pressed. A pair consists of two tiles,
and can be defined using different Pair Action blocks.
• Sub Rule is made active: Triggers when a specific sub rule is made active. A sub
rule can be made active by several types of Then blocks.
• A tile is pressed: Triggers when ANY tile is pressed.
• A <Color> tile is pressed: Triggers when a tile of the specific color is pressed.
• All tiles are off: Triggers when all tiles are turned off. When a game starts, all tiles
are off as default. The rule does not trigger at this point.
Figure 8.9: All variations of the When block
8.4.3
Then ­ Score Actions
Figure 8.10 shows the two variants of the score action. The blocks can be used to incre­
ment and decrement the chosen players score by one. The block automatically generates
the player dropdown, based on the amount of players defined in the configuration block.
Figure 8.10: The Score Action block
8.4.4
Then ­ Sequence Actions
Figure 8.11 shows the variants of the sequence action block. A sequence/pattern, is a
sequence of tiles, where the same tile can be repeated.
58
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:67==
• Register Sequence: Starts waiting for the player, to press a sequence of the given
length. When registered, the sequence can be accessed via the defined name.
• Define Random Sequence: Defines a random sequence of the defined length. The
sequence can be accessed via the defined name.
• Wait for Sequence: Starts waiting for a player to press a specific sequence. The
On Correct and On Incorrect allows the user to define sub rules, that trigger in case
of one of these events. This is a semi­blocking action, meaning that actions placed
in the same When block, but below this block, won’t execute until this block finished.
The block finishes when all presses are correctly registered, or as soon as one wrong
press is registered.
• Play Sequence: Starts replaying a given sequence on the MOTO Tiles. This is a
blocking action, meaning that no other actions may trigger during the replay.
Figure 8.11: The Sequence Action block
8.4.5
Then ­ Tile Actions
Figure 8.12 shows all actions that can be performed on tiles.
• Turn Tiles <Color>: Turns all tiles on with the specified color.
• Turn Tiles <Color> Except <Tile>: Turns all tiles on with a specific color, except
for a defined tile. The tile dropdown is populated with the id’s of all tiles currently
connected.
• Turn Random Tile <Color>: Turns a random tile on with the specified color.
• Turn Random Tile <Color> And Rest <Color>: Turns a random tile on with the
specified color and turns the rest of the tiles the other specified color.
• Turn <Tile> <Color>: Turns a single tile on with the specified color. The tile selector
dropdown is populated with the id’s of all tiles currently connected.
Moto Blockly
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 8.12: The Tile Action block
8.4.6
Then ­ Pair Actions
Figure 8.13 shows all variants of the Pair Action block. A pair consists of two tiles. As a
rule of thumb, when a pair is generated, it will always try to pair two tiles that have not yet
been paired.
• Define Random Pair: Defines a random pair of two tiles and assigns it to the spec­
ified name.
• Turn <Pair> <Color>: Turns on the specified pair, in the specified color.
• Turn <Pair> Off: Turns a pair off. Optionally sets the pair to idle, meaning that
presses on any tile included in that pair will not be registered.
• Clear All Pairs: Removes all pairs from the game. Since pairs persist until the end
of a game, this should be used to clear pairs when/if events on old pairs should no
longer be listened for.
Figure 8.13: The Pair Action block
60
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:69==
8.4.7
Then ­ Sub Rule Actions
Figure 8.14 shows the two variants of the Sub Rule action. Sub rules can either be made
active, or inactive. The sub rule dropdown is automatically populated with any defined
sub rules on the workspace.
Figure 8.14: The Sub Rule Action block
8.4.8
Then ­ Other Actions
Figure 8.15 shows variants of the Other Action block. It has four types for playing sound,
and one for stopping the game.
Figure 8.15: The Other Action block
Moto Blockly
61
==PAGE:70==
9
User Testing
This chapter summarises the user tests described in chapter 7 and presents the general
methodology that was used when conducting the tests. Furthermore, since no large scale
tests have been conducted, proposal of how such a test could be constructed is given.
9.1
Methodology
All user tests that were conducted throughout the project were done so relatively infor­
mally. All user tests followed the same simple steps, regardless of the version of the
language that was tested.
1. Give the user a quick overview of how game creation works (dragging blocks from
the toolbox, showing different categories etc).
2. Open an existing game, explain how it works overall, and then explain what each
block is doing.
3. Play the game (either author or test subject), not necessarily for the full duration.
4. Make a small edit to the game, for instance, changing what colors tile are set to etc.
5. Hand the tablet to the test subject, and present them with another pre­made game.
6. Walk through the game with the subject, explaining what it does and having them
press play to verify.
7. Ask them to make a small edit
8. Start from a blank workspace, and give a suggestion of a game they could make.
At this point, try not to supervise them as much. Ask them to try and run their game
as often as possible.
9. Let them work on making games for a little while.
In general, the tests spanned between 10­20 minutes in length, and not all tests covered
all 9 steps. The purpose of the tests in general was to verify how quickly a user was able
to learn to use the language independently. The majority of time was usually spent with
the users holding the tablet. No efforts were made to figure out if the languages actually
improved the subjects understanding of programming concepts. The tests were purely
focused on ensuring that the user experience was good.
9.2
Preliminary Results
This section gives a quick summary of the results presented in section 7.1.4 and section
7.2.4.
9.2.1
Advanced Language
When testing the advanced language, a few observations were made.
• The language was too complex for users with little or no programming experience
• The time spent creating games was too long
• Users had to make a lot of duplicate code
• A large amount of blocks and poorly named categories caused confusion
62
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:71==
In terms of the language being too complex, this was with regards to being able to have
users create games independently. For users with little or no experience with program­
ming, they had to spend a while learning and placing blocks before their first ”victory”.
Users with more experience were able to achieve this victory quicker, but also had to
spend quite a large amount of time sitting down and programming, before they could play
their game. Another related observation was that the users who were the most engaged,
were more engaged in the act of programming, and less so in the act of actually playing
their games. The hypothesis is that younger users would enjoy playing the relatively sim­
ple games more than older users. A general observation when creating games for test
purposes, was that a large amount of the same code had to be written no matter what type
of game was created. This led to the introduction of more high level blocks. The final ob­
servation was that users frequently had difficulties finding the exact block they wanted to
use. Ultimately, the tests showed that it took too long to create games and that language
was too difficult for beginners.
9.2.2
Rule­Based
When testing the rule­based language, the following observations were made:
• Users were able to understand and create games very quickly
• The amount of available blocks was critical to ensure that users had fun
• Being able to iterate quickly was beneficial
The rule­based language might have the opposite issue of the advanced language. The
user tests found that users were able to create games without supervision after very short
introductions. The fact that they were able to always press play and see the effects of their
rules, meant that their understanding as they were creating games increased. Only two
real negatives were found during testing. The first being that the amount of blocks was
had a large impact on the users perception of what was possible. Due to a low amount
of blocks in the beginning, users quickly grew bored, as the potential games they could
make were limited. Furthermore, the fact that the language might be too easy, can mean
that users do not necessarily learn programming concepts when they are creating games.
It remains to be seen if this is the case, but it is indeed a risk. In chapter 10 a proposal of
future work that could be done to circumvent this is described.
9.3
Proposal of larger scale testing
As of now, no tests have been conducted that can confirm or deny whether Moto Blockly
can have a positive impact on teaching programming concepts. The advanced language
is similar enough to existing languages(and text based programming in general), that it’s
effects can assumed based on previous research. Furthermore, it is also not possible to
definitively confirm whether the inclusion of a physical and interactive playware has an
effect.
The target audience for Moto Blockly has been narrowed down to younger children who
are able to read. While the visual prototype could target even younger children, it still
needs more development before its ready to be tested. Two proposals of possible tests
are given, with the aim of confirming or rejecting the hypothesises that have been pre­
sented.
9.3.1
Testing: Scaffolded Learning via The Rule­Based Language
In order to test whether the rule­based language has a positive effect on learning pro­
gramming concepts or not, a user test should be designed. The test should consist of at
Moto Blockly
63
==PAGE:72==
least two separate groups of children. The first group will be start by using the rule­based
version of Moto Blockly, while the other group will be taught in text­based VPL, such as
Scratch. After the first group have tried and gotten confident with the rule­based language,
they too will move over to Scratch(or similar). Then, the two groups should be compared,
in terms of how able they were to learn the difficult VPL. If the rule­based language has a
significant effect, it should be visible, when that group starts learning Scratch. Preferably,
the advanced version of Moto Blockly should be used, but, it is not as fully developed as
Scratch is, so at this state it would be more beneficial to use another language. Given
more development, it would be a better choice, since the children would most likely al­
ready be aware of the domain specific additions in the language(turning tiles on in different
colors etc.). Ideally, this would enable them to focus their learning on the remaining parts
of the language, i.e. the various programming concepts.
The rule­based language is perhaps not limited to just teaching concrete programming
concepts. Exercises where children have to create specific games that fulfil some sort of
requirements could be made. Solving these exercises would undoubtedly help improve
their problem solving abilities, and the benefits of this would not necessarily be limited to
just being able to learn how to code.
9.3.2
Testing: The Effect of Physical Playware
Testing the effects of physical playware might unfortunately also require further develop­
ment of the advanced language. While testing the rule­based language will show whether
the experience of programming playware is fun, it has not yet been determined whether it
is beneficial for learning programming concepts. Thus, this should be established before
the rule­based may be used in a test like this. Furthermore, most of the existing lan­
guages look more like conventional programming languages, and as such, the advanced
Moto Blockly would be more comparable to those. The test would be rather simple, a
group of children would test a number of different languages, one which is Moto Blockly.
The benefits of VPL’s are well established, as was described in chapter 2. The test should
therefore be focus on two things; How much fun are the children having when using the
different VPL’s and how many different concepts are they able to grasp within the lan­
guage. By comparing Moto Blockly with languages like Scratch on these parameters,
it should indicate whether introducing playware such as the MOTO Tiles has a positive
impact on their learning.
64
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:73==
10
Conclusion & Future Work
In section 4.2 the following research question was asked;
How can self­programmable playware be used to create physical, social & playful
experiences, which teach programming concepts?
In order to answer this question, it was determined that the following secondary questions
needed to be answered first:
• How can an easy­to­use, hard­to­master visual programming language for
playware be developed?
• How can physical activity be encouraged in such a language?
• How can the experience be tailored so that it is fun for everyone?
To answer these questions Moto Blockly was designed and implemented. Moto Blockly
consists of two distinct visual programming languages, built using Blockly. An agile and
user­centered approach was taken during development. The first variant, the advanced
version of Moto Blockly, looks much like an ordinary programming language, albeit block­
based. While the language was definitely hard­to­master, it proved too difficult for most
users to enjoy without them putting considerable effort into learning it first. Attempts were
made to ease the point of entry by introducing a practice module, which contained ex­
ercises that slowly introduced users to different concepts. This saw some success, but
had the side effect that users were spending more time learning than playing. A central
concept in Playware is to ensure that users are in a state of play. While being in this
state of play, they may then benefit from side effects, such as increased cognitive func­
tion and balance. When interacting with the advanced language, the element of play was
a side effect. This lead to the development of the rule­based version of Moto Blockly.
This version is distinctly different from ordinary VPL’s, such as the advanced language
or Scratch. But it was implemented using the same basic architecture as the advanced
language, showcasing the strength of the framework.
The rule­based version of Moto Blockly focuses on creating playful experiences first, by
reducing the time spent creating games significantly. The preliminary user­tests found
the language easy to use. Due to game creation being so quick and users being encour­
aged to iterate quickly, they are very frequently interacting with the MOTO Tiles, thereby
promoting physical activity. Furthermore, the inherent strength of the Playware is that
the users are having fun when interacting with it. The hypothesis is that this is further
improved as a result of them being able to create their own games, and not just play pre­
made ones. There are at least two issues with the rule­based language. The first being,
that due to the very high level of abstraction a lot of different blocks need to be developed
to ensure that users are able to be creative. The advanced language can in theory allow
the user to create anything they want, assuming that it is developed a bit more. Whereas
the rule­based language is in some way limited by the creativity and ability of the person
creating the language. The second issue is more within the context of this project. The
purpose of the project was to use playware to teach programming concepts, but the sim­
plicity of the rule­based language potentially means that users are not actually learning
that much. Suggestions for how to test if this is the case, were made in chapter 9.3.
Moto Blockly
65
==PAGE:74==
Both of these issues can however be circumvented with more work. The following is a
proposal of what could be done, in order to improve Moto Blockly greatly. Firstly, sum­
marising the strengths and weaknesses of the two proposed languages it is seen that:
• An advanced language theoretically allows the user to create any game they want.
However, tests showed that for most users, it was too difficult and not rewarding
enough.
• A rule­based language makes creating games incredibly easy, but users are in­
herently limited by the amount of blocks, and thereby limited by the creativity and
ability of the developer and not themselves. Furthermore, whether the rule­based
language provides any significant benefits for users learning programming remains
to be seen.
In this project, both languages were designed to do the same thing, create games for
the MOTO Tiles. The rule­based version was clearly superior in doing so, however it has
an inherent lack of depth. The advanced language provides the users with much more
freedom and expressivity, but is too complex for a majority of users. The proposal of future
work, relates to combining the two such that:
• The advanced language is re­designed. It’s intended use is no longer to create
games. It should instead be used to create custom blocks for the rule­based lan­
guage.
• All standard blocks in the rule­based language should be created from the advanced
language. Doing so would allow any user to use these blocks as templates.
• The existing framework for sharing games is extended, such that individual custom
blocks may now be shared.
This would combine the two, which in theory solves the problems of both. The rule­based
language will no longer be limited by the developer. There will also be a much more well
defined scaffolded learning experience. Users will be able to simply use existing blocks,
or blocks made by other users in the beginning. But as they grow more confident, they
will be able to explore creating their own blocks using the advanced language. The same
principle could likely be applied to other types of playware.
In conclusion the rule­based version of Moto Blockly makes it possible to create playful,
optionally social and physical experiences, for the MOTO Tiles. However, it is not fully
known whether it teaches programming concepts. The online features have proven to
foster social communities for other similar platforms, so it should be the same for Moto
Blockly. The advanced language provides the expressivity required for users to be cre­
ative and teaches real programming, but it is too difficult for beginners. Finally it can be
concluded that the rule­based and advanced languages must be combined. The rule­
based language is used to create games and the advanced language is used to create
custom blocks for the rule­based language to use. The hypothesis is that this would create
a platform where self­programmable playware could indeed be used to teach program­
ming, whilst creating physical, social and playful experiences.
66
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
90% af virksomhederne efterspørger flere it­folk. https : / / itb . dk / maerkesager /
fremtidens-kompetencer/90-af-virksomhederne-efterspoerger-flere-it-folk/. Accessed:
2022­06­23.
[2]
Software Developers, Quality Assurance Analysts, and Testers. https://www.bls.
gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/software-developers.htm. Accessed:
2022­06­23.
[3]
About Scratch. https://scratch.mit.edu/about. Accessed: 2022­01­12.
[4]
Albrecht Schmidt. “Increasing Computer Literacy with the BBC micro:bit”. In: IEEE
Pervasive Computing 15.2 (2016), pp. 5–7. DOI: 10.1109/MPRV.2016.23.
[5]
MakeCode Get Started. https://www.microsoft.com/da-dk/makecode/get-started?
activetab=pivot1:primaryr4. Accessed: 2022­01­12.
[6]
Shape Robotics. https://www.shaperobotics.com/. Accessed: 2022­06­23.
[7]
Moto. Moto Tiles. 2022. URL: https://www.moto-tiles.com/ (visited on 06/17/2022).
[8]
Henrik Hautop Lund. “Play for the Elderly ­ Effect Studies of Playful Technology”.
In: Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population. Design for Everyday Life. Ed.
by Jia Zhou and Gavriel Salvendy. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015,
pp. 500–511. ISBN: 978­3­319­20913­5.
[9]
Henrik Lund. “Playware ABC: Engineering Play for Everybody”. In: Journal of Robotics,
Networking and Artificial Life 3 (Feb. 2017), p. 283. DOI: 10.2991/jrnal.2017.3.4.15.
[10]
Henry Lieberman et al. “End­User Development: An Emerging Paradigm”. In: End
User Development. Ed. by Henry Lieberman, Fabio Paternò, and Volker Wulf. Dor­
drecht: Springer Netherlands, 2006, pp. 1–8. ISBN: 978­1­4020­5386­3. DOI: 10.
1007/1-4020-5386-X_1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-5386-X_1.
[11]
Marjan Mernik, Jan Heering, and Anthony Sloane. “When and How to Develop
Domain­Specific Languages”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 37 (Dec. 2005), pp. 316–.
DOI: 10.1145/1118890.1118892.
[12]
Margaret M Burnett and David W McIntyre. “Visual programming”. In: COMPUTER­
LOS ALAMITOS­ 28 (1995), pp. 14–14.
[13]
Mahmoud Fayed et al. “PWCT: a novel general­purpose visual programming lan­
guage in support of pervasive application development”. In: CCF Transactions on
Pervasive Computing and Interaction 2 (Aug. 2020). DOI: 10.1007/s42486- 020-
00038-y.
[14]
Sonya Alexandrova, Zachary Tatlock, and Maya Cakmak. “RoboFlow: A flow­based
visual programming language for mobile manipulation tasks”. In: 2015 IEEE Inter­
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2015, pp. 5537–5544.
DOI: 10.1109/ICRA.2015.7139973.
[15]
John Maloney et al. “The Scratch Programming Language and Environment”. In:
ACM Trans. Comput. Educ. 10.4 (Nov. 2010). DOI: 10.1145/1868358.1868363. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1868358.1868363.
[16]
Jiwon Shin, Roland Siegwart, and Stéphane Magnenat. “Visual Programming Lan­
guage for Thymio II Robot”. en. In: Conference on Interaction Design and Children
(IDC’14); Conference Location: Aarhus, Denmark; Conference Date: June 17­20,
2014. Zürich: ETH Zürich, 2014. DOI: 10.3929/ethz-a-010144554.
[17]
Chun­Yen Tsai. “Improving students’ understanding of basic programming concepts
through visual programming language: The role of self­efficacy”. In: Computers in
Human Behavior 95 (2019), pp. 224–232. ISSN: 0747­5632. DOI: https://doi.org/
Moto Blockly
67
==PAGE:76==
10.1016/j.chb.2018.11.038. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0747563218305739.
[18]
Paul E. Haeberli. “ConMan: A Visual Programming Language for Interactive Graph­
ics”. In: SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph. 22.4 (June 1988), pp. 103–111. ISSN: 0097­
8930. DOI: 10.1145/378456.378494. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/378456.378494.
[19]
Louise P. Flannery et al. “Designing ScratchJr: Support for Early Childhood Learn­
ing through Computer Programming”. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Con­
ference on Interaction Design and Children. IDC ’13. New York, New York, USA: As­
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2013, pp. 1–10. ISBN: 9781450319188. DOI:
10.1145/2485760.2485785. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2485760.2485785.
[20]
Papadakis Stamatios. “Can Preschoolers Learn Computational Thinking and Cod­
ing Skills with ScratchJr? A Systematic Literature Review”. In: International Journal
of Educational Reform 0.0 (0), p. 10567879221076077. DOI: 10.1177/10567879221076077.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/10567879221076077.
[21]
Stamatios Papadakis, Michail Kalogiannakis, and Nicholas Zaranis. “Developing
fundamental programming concepts and computational thinking with ScratchJr in
preschool education: a case study”. In: International Journal of Mobile Learning
and Organisation 10.3 (2016), pp. 187–202.
[22]
Tancicleide Carina Simões Gomes, Taciana Pontual Falcão, and Patrícia Cabral
de Azevedo Restelli Tedesco. “Exploring an approach based on digital games for
teaching programming concepts to young children”. In: International Journal of Child­
Computer Interaction 16 (2018), pp. 77–84. ISSN: 2212­8689. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijcci.2017.12.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2212868917300338.
[23]
Michal Armoni, Orni Meerbaum­Salant, and Mordechai Ben­Ari. “From Scratch to
“Real” Programming”. In: ACM Trans. Comput. Educ. 14.4 (Feb. 2015). DOI: 10.
1145/2677087. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2677087.
[24]
Jaime Montemayor. “Physical Programming: Software You Can Touch”. In: CHI ’01
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’01. Seat­
tle, Washington: Association for Computing Machinery, 2001, pp. 81–82. ISBN:
1581133405. DOI: 10.1145/634067.634118. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/634067.
634118.
[25]
Jaime Montemayor et al. “Physical programming: Designing tools for children to
create physical interactive environments”. In: vol. 4. Jan. 2002, pp. 299–306. DOI:
10.1145/503376.503430.
[26]
Benjamin Sibley and Jennifer Etnier. “The Relationship between Physical Activity
and Cognition in Children: A Meta­Analysis”. In: Pediatric Exercise Science 15 (Aug.
2003), pp. 243–256. DOI: 10.1515/ijsl.2000.143.183.
[27]
Louis Rice. “Playful Learning”. In: Journal for Education in the Built Environment 4.2
(2009), pp. 94–108. DOI: 10.11120/jebe.2009.04020094. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
11120/jebe.2009.04020094. URL: https://doi.org/10.11120/jebe.2009.04020094.
[28]
Elena Bodrova and Deborah J Leong. “The importance of being playful”. In: Edu­
cational Leadership 60.7 (2003), pp. 50–53.
[29]
Matthew Maclaurin. “The Design of Kodu: A Tiny Visual Programming Language
for Children on the Xbox 360”. In: vol. 46. Jan. 2011, pp. 241–246. DOI: 10.1145/
1926385.1926413.
[30]
Kodu. Kodu latest worlds. 2022. URL: https : / / www . kodugamelab . com / worlds/
(visited on 06/10/2022).
[31]
Karen Brennan and Mitchel Resnick. “Imagining, Creating, Playing, Sharing, Re­
flecting: How Online Community Supports Young People as Designers of Interac­
68
Moto Blockly
==PAGE:77==
tive Media”. In: Emerging Technologies for the Classroom: A Learning Sciences
Perspective. Ed. by Chrystalla Mouza and Nancy Lavigne. New York, NY: Springer
New York, 2013, pp. 253–268. ISBN: 978­1­4614­4696­5. DOI: 10.1007/978- 1-
4614-4696-5_17. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4696-5_17.
[32]
Winston W Royce. “Managing the development of large software systems: concepts
and techniques”. In: Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Software
Engineering. 1987, pp. 328–338.
[33]
Martin Fowler, Jim Highsmith, et al. “The agile manifesto”. In: Software development
9.8 (2001), pp. 28–35.
[34]
Henrik Hautop Lund. “Playware Research­Methodological Considerations.” In: J.
Robotics Netw. Artif. Life 1.1 (2014), pp. 22–26.
[35]
Henrik Hautop Lund and Jari Due Jessen. “Effects of short­term training of community­
dwelling elderly with modular interactive tiles”. In: GAMES FOR HEALTH: Research,
Development, and Clinical Applications 3.5 (2014), pp. 277–283.
[36]
Mitchel Resnick et al. “Scratch: Programming for All”. In: Commun. ACM 52.11 (Nov.
2009), pp. 60–67. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/1592761.1592779. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1592761.1592779.
[37]
MakeCode Defining Blocks. https : / / makecode . com / defining - blocks. Accessed:
2022­01­12.
[38]
Cue Robot. https://www.makewonder.com/robots/cue/. Accessed: 2022­01­12.
[39]
Erik Pasternak, Rachel Fenichel, and Andrew N. Marshall. “Tips for creating a block
language with blockly”. In: 2017 IEEE Blocks and Beyond Workshop (B B). 2017,
pp. 21–24. DOI: 10.1109/BLOCKS.2017.8120404.
[40]
Scratch 3.0’s new programming blocks, built on Blockly. https://developers.googleblog.
com/2019/01/scratch-30s-new-programming-blocks.html. Accessed: 2022­01­12.
[41]
Blockly Website. https://developers.google.com/blockly. Accessed: 2022­01­12.
[42]
Shurui Bai et al. “From top to bottom: How positions on different types of leaderboard
may affect fully online student learning performance, intrinsic motivation, and course
engagement”. In: Computers & Education 173 (2021), p. 104297.
[43]
Scratch Tutorials. https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/editor/?tutorial=getStarted.
Accessed: 2022­06­18.
[44]
Dongsoo Nam, Yungsik Kim, and Taewook Lee. “The effects of scaffolding­based
courseware for the Scratch programming learning on student problem solving skill”.
In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computers in Education.
Vol. 723. Asia­Pacific Society for Computers in Education Putrajaya, Malaysia. 2010,
p. 727.
[45]
Ozo Blockly. https://ozoblockly.com/editor?lang=en&robot=evo&mode=2. Ac­
cessed: 2022­06­18.
[46]
Blockly Developer Tools. https://blockly-demo.appspot.com/static/demos/blockfactory/
index.html. Accessed: 2022­06­19.
[47]
Blockly Android. https://github.com/google/blockly-android. Accessed: 2022­06­19.
[48]
Android WebView. https://developer.android.com/reference/android/webkit/WebView.
Accessed: 2022­06­19.
[49]
Firebase. https://firebase.google.com/. Accessed: 2022­06­19.
[50]
Global Variables. https://developers.google.com/blockly/guides/app-integration/
best-practices#5_global_variables. Accessed: 2022­06­20.
Moto Blockly
69
