==PAGE:1==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to
dynamic loads
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Aksel Ellersgaard Johannessen
Edvard Høsteng Rød
Supervised by
Evangelos Katsanos, Associate Professor DTU
Rune Brincker, Professor DTU
Luigi Caglio, PhD student DTU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of structural dynamics.
Aksel Ellersgaard Johannessen - s202329
Signature
Date
Edvard Høsteng Rød - s202328
Signature
Date
ii
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
30.06.2022
30.06.2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The following thesis focuses on the field of damage detection. The goal is to assess
where a structural damage has occurred on a structure during a dynamic event, i.e. wave
or wind load, and the severity of the damage.
The idea is taken from the principles for detecting malfunctioning sensors. These princi-
ples are applied to detect the damage severity and the location of damage in a structure.
The mode shapes and response signals of the structure are used to estimate the cor-
responding error estimates between estimated and actual response signals. The error
estimates are then analysed to find damages.
The proposed implementation of the damage detection method is based on simulations.
A 2 story 3D steel frame is modeled in the FE (Finite element) software Opensees, with
simulated forces and recorders placed strategically on the structure. The elements of the
structure is modelled as linear, and the damage is applied manually at different locations
by reducing the Young’s modulus in the proximity of the damage location to simulate non-
linearity. Manually applying the damage at different locations on the structure makes it
easier to verify the accuracy of the method, since the location and severity of the damage
is known.
The robustness of the method was tested by introducing some realistic uncertainties to
the numerical models. The issues found with the proposed method are investigated and
potential solutions proposed and discussed.
The main advantage of the method lies in its simplicity. The theory behind is not com-
plicated, making it easier to understand what is going on compared to other damage de-
tection methods, e.g. methods applying Kalman filters or AI aided methods. The steps in
the method will have a lower computational cost compared to other methods for damage
detection due to the same reason.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Aksel Ellersgaard Johannessen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Edvard Høsteng Rød, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creators of this thesis.
We would first like to show our appreciation to our supervisor Evangelos Kastanos. His
dedication to the project has been crucial for the progress, and his expertise in the field
of damage detection has been of great value. The weekly meetings was a great idea, as
they made us work more steadily towards delivering the final work.
Secondly, we would like to thank our supervisor Rune Brincker for his participation in the
project. It was Rune who came up with the main idea of the proposed damage detection
method. Rune’s vast knowledge in the field of signal processing and structural dynamics
was of immense help during the project, and his contributions in our weekly meetings
cannot be overstated.
Finally we would like to thank Luigi Caglio for sharing his knowledge in Opensees and for
answering the general questions that we had. His contribution made our progress in the
project more efficient, and is much appreciated.
iv
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Traditional vibration-based structural damage detection
. . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
AI-aided techniques for vibration-based structural damage detection . . . .
5
3
Theory and tools
7
3.1
Signal processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Newmark time integration - Solving the equation of motion . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Modal Assurance Criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Damage detection method
21
4.1
Step 1 - Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Step 2 - Damage occurrence detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Step 3 - Damage localisation and severity detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Flowchart of damage detection method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Structure and numerical model
25
5.1
Two-story steel frame
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Numerical models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Implementation of damage detection method and results
33
6.1
Dynamic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Extraction of mode shapes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.4
Damage occurrence detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.5
Damage localisation and severity detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.6
Flow chart of implementation of the damage detection method
. . . . . . . 39
6.7
Testing the damage detection method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.8
Results from testing of the damage detection method
. . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.9
Discussion of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Further investigations of results
45
7.1
Damage severity of failed damage localisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Location of damage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.3
Estimated damage severity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusions and further work
49
8.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8.3
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Bibliography
51
A Models
56
A.1 Base code for models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.2 Mass and verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.3 Damping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.4 Dynamic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.5 Changes applied to mother nature model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B Implementation of method
68
B.1 Applied load and response recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
B.2 Estimating damage occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
B.3 Identify placement and severity of damage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
B.4 Testing method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
C Data from simulations
80
C.1 Case 1: No noise, equal models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
C.2 Case 2: Noise, equal models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C.3 Case 3: No noise, different E modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
C.4 Case 4: Noise, different E modulus and mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
vi
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:9==
List of Symbols
β
Parameter in Newmark time integration
γ
Parameter in Newmark time integration
A+
Pseudo inverse of matrix A
AH
Hermitian of matrix A
ADamaged Damaged mode shapes
AUndamaged Undamaged mode shapes
C
Correlation matrix
d
Vector containing the extracted diagonal from V
E
Error estimates where there is damage
Gq(f) Spectral density matrix of the modal coordinates
Gx(ω) Auto spectral density
Gy(f) Spectral density matrix
Gxy(ω) Cross spectral density
q(t)
Modal coordinate
R(τ)
Correlation function matrix
Rx(τ) Auto correlation function
Rxy(τ) Cross correlation function
s
Standard deviation of the vector containing the extracted diagonal
V
Diagonal matrix containing the inner products of E multiplied with themselves
y(t)
Response of the system
Yk
Discrete Fourier transform
θ(ω)
Phase angel of FRF
ε(t)
Error estimate between synthesized and non-synthesized response
ζ
Damping ratio
H(ω) Frequency Response Function
iω
General complex variable
M1
Total mass in first floor
M2
Total mass in roof
Mx
Cumulative modal participation mass in x-direction
My
Cumulative modal participation mass in y-direction
RMx
Cumulative modal participation rotational mass in x-direction
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
vii
==PAGE:10==
RMy
Cumulative modal participation rotational mass in y-direction
RMz
Cumulative modal participation rotational mass in z-direction
sn
Singular values in diagonal matrix S
W(ω) Window function
yf(ω) Filtered signal in frequency domain
λ
Eigenvalues
µ
Mean value
σ
Standard deviation
τ
Time lag
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANSPD Average Normalized Power Spectral Density
CAGR Compund Annual Growth Rate
CF
Correlation Function
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CSD
Cross Spectral Density
EMA
Experimental Modal Analysis
EOM
Equation of Motion
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition
FE
Finite Element
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FRF
Frequency Response Function
GWN Gaussian White Noise
kN
Kilo Newton
MAC
Modal Assurance Criteria
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
PSD
Power Spectral Density
SD
Spectral Density
SDD
Structural Damage Detection
SDOF Single Degree of Freedom
SHM
Structural Health Monitor
std
Standard deviation
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
T
Time period
viii
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The global Structural Health Monitor (SHM) market is expected to increase by 13.5 %
Compund Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) in the period 2021 - 2027.[1] It has therefore
been heavily invested in research in the field through the years.
SHM has become a crucial instrument for analysing existing structures. Most of the in-
frastructure in the wealthy countries was built after WWII, resulting in a large amount
of structures being overused. With SHM it is possible to have a continuous, real time
monitoring of the structures to predict timely maintenance and repairs, resulting in fewer
accidents and damages.[1]
A structure’s level of safety is dependent on its damage state, and it is therefore important
to monitor the structure during its operation, especially if it is located in areas exposed to
different types of dynamic loads, e.g wind, waves and earthquakes. These dynamic loads
will become larger and more frequent in the coming years as global warming is expected
to increase.
The demand for damage detection methods is obvious for the aforementioned safety rea-
sons as well as from an economical perspective. It is the engineer that has to find the
potential damage from the noisy measurements. By using numerical models of the struc-
ture and the measurements, it is possible to automate the process of damage detection,
which would be immensely valuable.
The above-mentioned reasons is the main motivation for this thesis, which hopes to con-
tribute to the advancement of the field of damage detection.
1.2
Objectives
This work focuses on structural damage detection. Structural damage can be described
as changes in a structure’s properties and accordingly its behaviour. These changes
can come from external loads such as wind, waves and earthquakes, or from internal
processes such as corrosion or fatigue.
Several investigations were conducted to estimate the state of a structure exposed to
dynamic loading. With the information from measurements of a few number of sensors,
the proposed damage detection method should be able to detect where a damaged has
occurred on the structure and the severity of that damage.
1.3
Structure of thesis
This thesis is structured to make the developed damage detection method and its steps
easy to understand for the reader.
The first part of the project was used to familiarise with the FE software Opensees. After
gaining the necessary knowledge in Opensees, the theory behind the method together
with the implementation of the method was developed. All the work done in the project is
based on simulations and not real data.
Chapter 1 and chapter 2 are dedicated for introduction and literature review, respectively.
Chapter 3 describes the theory and tools used in the thesis.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
1
==PAGE:12==
In chapter 4 the proposed method for damage detection is presented and explained in a
general way. The concept and objectives of the damage detection method is elaborated.
Chapter 5 describes the structure and the numerical models used for investigations in the
implementation of the damage detection method.
In chapter 6 the implementation of the damage detection method is elaborated, using
the models from chapter 5. As the different steps of the implementation is described,
the results from the corresponding step is also presented. After all the steps and the
corresponding results are presented, they are finally discussed.
In chapter 7 the results from the implementation of the damage detection method is further
investigated and discussed.
Chapter 8 presents the conclusions and further work.
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
In this chapter the literature review is presented. This chapter aims to give an insight into
what structural damage detection is while the in-dept description of the applied theory is
described in chapter 3.
2.1
Traditional vibration-based structural damage detection
The main components of an SDD (structural damage detection) system can be seen in
fig. 2.1. Sensors are strategically placed on the structure of interest. These sensors record
displacements, accelerations and/or velocities. The measurements from the sensors are
then collected in a computer for further processing using a given damage detection algo-
rithm.
Figure 2.1: Main components of SDD systems[2]
Deficient structures can jeopardise people’s safety and potentially lead to huge finan-
cial cost. It is therefore highly sought after across multiple engineering disciplines (e.g.
civil, mechanical and aerospace engineering), to reduce these risks by detecting potential
damages as early as possible.
The vibration-based techniques, which is the focus of this thesis, was developed in the
1970s for the offshore oil and the aerospace industries. The vibration-based methods
can be sub-divided into two different methods: model-based methods and the response-
based methods. The model-based methods relies on creating an FE model that is as
equal to the real structure of interest as possible. The damage location and severity can
then be identified by comparing the ”real” FE model with another model that is updated
with the correlated measured responses of the structure. [3]
The general idea of the response-based methods is to use the modal properties (e.g.
mode shapes, natural frequencies, modal damping, etc.) to detect changes in the struc-
ture. These changes are often related to the mass, stiffness or dampening. Since the
modal parameters are functions of the physical structure, the damages in the physical
properties of the structure will be detectable in the modal properties.[3]
2.1.1
Damage identification levels
The damage identification has in the literature been divided into 4 levels: [3]
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
3
==PAGE:14==
1. Damage occurrence
2. Damage location
3. Severity of damage
4. Remaining service life and decision making
This thesis focuses primarily on damage location and severity, even though the occur-
rence is visible in the data. The remaining service life and decision making is also con-
sidered out of the scope in this work.
2.1.2
Detection of damage occurrence
The most used and effective method for detecting when a damage has occurred is the
aforementioned response-based method. This method can be divided into three different
groups, depending on the response data used: time domain, frequency domain and modal
domain.[3]
Time domain
The measurements are always done in the time domain, making it straightforward to use
the responses as there is no need to perform frequency transformation. A drawback of
the time domain is that the information from the signals can be difficult to interpret.
Frequency domain
Responses from the measurements can be taken from the time domain to the frequency
domain using different signal processing techniques, which relies on the use of Fourier
transformation. This will reduce the amount of data, and the loss of information is com-
pensated by averaging the effects of random noise.[4]
The methods used in the frequency domain is dependent on whether the excitation loads
are known or not. The method in this thesis assumes that the excitation load is unknown,
but the most common method used when knowing both excitation loads and structural
responses is the frequency response function (FRF) method.
The FRF is the ratio between the structure’s response in the frequency domain to an
applied force that is usually a known harmonic force.[3] The FRF can then be used to
estimate modal parameters through curve-fitting methods.
Other methods that only rely on the outputs in the frequency domain is based on auto/cross-
spectral densities. The peak picking method, enhanced technique and frequency domain
decomposition (FDD) are examples of this.
Modal domain
The modal domain methods use the modal properties to estimate the damages. This
makes it easier to interpret the information in comparison with the mathematical features
extracted from the time or frequency domain.[3]
There are 2 different ways to analyse data in the modal domain: the experimental modal
analysis (EMA) and the operational modal analysis (OMA). In EMA, the excitation force
is known, whereas in OMA the excitation force is unknown.
The damage detecting methods using the modal domain are not complicated, as the
modal properties in the undamaged model is compared with the modal properties of the
damaged model to estimate the location of the damage in the structure.
The modal domain provides a set of features that can be used to asses potential damages.
Among these are the changes in natural frequencies and changes in the modal assurance
criteria (MAC).
4
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:15==
The response-based methods that use modal properties for damage detection is not ef-
ficient if the damages are small, as changes in natural frequencies and local changes in
mode shapes are likely to be masked by experimental uncertainties and data reduction.[5]
2.1.3
Damage location and severity
The model-based methods are used to detect the location and the severity of the dam-
ages based on the measured responses. A model of the structure of interest is therefore
necessary to represent the structural properties and the potential damages in the struc-
ture.[3]
Finite element model
FE models are usually used for large or complicated structures. Updating techniques
are typically used in order to get the simulated damaged model as equal to the observed
structure as possible. These techniques can be very complicated, and is therefore out of
the scope of this thesis.
2.2
AI-aided techniques for vibration-based structural
damage detection
The aforementioned vibration techniques are traditional methods for damage detection.
With the rise of computer power in combination with cheaper and better sensors, more
advanced techniques has emerged, e.g. using machine learning and deep learning algo-
rithms. These advanced techniques shows great performance and accuracy.[2]
The information from measured signals on a structure can be divided into non-parametric
(power spectral density (PSD), cross spectral density (CSD)) and parametric methods
(model parameter) in the vibration based SDD techniques.[2]
From measured time series, e.g. accelerations, the non-parametric SDD methods can
detect structural damage by combining them with statistical means, and is thereby able to
extract damage features that is not easily attributed to physical changes in the structure.[2]
The parametric methods performs better than the non-parametric methods as there are
no damage miss-classifications. The procedure is however more detailed and requires
more expertise than the simpler non-parametric methods.[6]
2.2.1
Machine learning for parametric based damage detection
Machine learning algorithms was developed so one does not need to depend on human-
driven methods, as this is often expensive and time consuming. They are however not
100 % accurate, as they depend on a trial and error approach.
The trial and error approach involves finding and refining a suitable model of the structure
of interest, which is often a long and expensive process. It is also a static process, as
it cannot adapt to changes or new occurrences in the system parameters if they are not
included in the model. If such change occurs, the model has to be updated manually. [2]
A majority of machine-learning based methods are about two tasks: feature extraction
and feature classification. This makes the them more generic and advantageous than
non-machine learning based methods in vibration-based structural damage detection in
civil structures.[2]
From the literature it is shown that the data-driven methods out-performs expert-level
human-driven methods for several damage detection problems. They have become quick
and cheap to create.[2]
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
5
==PAGE:16==
Machine learning algorithms learns and improves automatically from experience without
the need of human interaction. This is done by analyzing a sufficient amount of relevant
data.[2]
The most commonly used machine learning approaches to SDD is those that rely on
modal characteristics as classifiers.[2]
The performance of machine learning based SDD methods relies on the extracted fea-
tures and the choices of classifiers. It is therefore crucial that the information from the
measured signals are captured efficiently. It is also important that a convenient classifier
is selected to get accurate and robust damage detection and localisation. [2]
The best choice of feature extraction and classification for one structure is not guaranteed
to be the best selection for another type of structure. The performance would in other
words be lesser if the same features and classifications was used on different structures.
[2]
Most of the studies on machine learning applications for vibration-based damage de-
tection reviewed in this thesis relied on modal characteristics, i.e. natural frequencies,
damping ratios, mode shapes as damage-sensitive features. These features might not
be an optimal option as they are affected by other factors than structural damage such as
changes in moisture and temperature. [2]
The damage detection techniques reviewed for machine learning applications are based
on supervised machine learning algorithms. This requires labeled data for training, i.e.
vibration data from the undamaged structure as well as different damage scenarios. The
data from pre-damage and post damage cases is often not available, making it necessary
to get the data in other ways, e.g. simulating damage in a FE model.[2]
2.2.2
Deep learning
As mentioned earlier, the machine learning methods rely on human-crafted features. As
these signals are often not optimal, they cannot accurately characterise the measured
signals, resulting in unsatisfactory classification performance. Deep learning avoids this
problem as the optimal features are extracted directly from the data/measured signals,
maximising the classification accuracy. [2]
One of the most promising deep learning tools is the convolutional neural network (CNN),
which consists of a network consisting of an input layer, hidden layers and an output
layer. CNNs are reported to become a standard for deep learning tasks as they have
achieved a trailblazing efficiency in most of the engineering applications they have been
used in.[7][8][9]
This efficiency is accomplished by the algorithm’s ability to learn to correlate the features
to the desired output as well as to run the entire feature extraction process. [2]
CNNs have in recent studies [10][11][12] shown promising results in their ability to learn
challenging tasks. They also show great performance based on their ability to detect
and locate damage directly from the acceleration time-histories without the need of data
pre-processing or human-crafted feature extraction.[2]
6
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:17==
3
Theory and tools
In the coming chapter some of theory in the literature described in chapter 2 will be further
elaborated, and the tools used in the work of this thesis presented. Most of the theory in
this chapter is derived from professor Rune Brincker and professor Carlos E. Ventura’s
book ”Introduction to operational modal analysis”.
The theory in this work is well known, and is used as tools in the damage detection method
presented in chapter 4. Hence it was chosen not to give detailed mathematical derivations
on all the applied theory.
3.1
Signal processing
In this section the theory behind the signal processing, i.e. analysis, modification and
synthesis of the signal is presented.
3.1.1
Basic concepts
OMA is a tool often used to identify the modal properties of a structure. The idea of
OMA is to excite a structure with a force that has characteristics equal to white noise.
The white noise has energy distributed over a wide range of frequencies so to cover the
frequency range of the modal characteristics of the structure. The modes of interest are
then adequately excited so that they can be captured by the measurements. [13]
The excitation force does not need to be exactly equal to a white noise. This is because
the expected physical number of modes of a considered system is usually lower than the
estimated number of modes.[13]
Each mode of the structure has its own natural frequency and damping factor, which can
be identified from any point of the structure. Each mode also has a characteristic ”mode
shape”, which represents the spatial distribution of motion over the entire structure. [13]
3.1.2
White noise
White noise is here defined as a random signal having equal intensity at different frequen-
cies, giving it a constant power spectral density.[14]
In this thesis, a Gaussian white noise (GWN) is applied, meaning the white noise is a
stationary and ergodic random process with zero mean. It has the fundamental property
that any two values of GWN are statistically independent regardless of how close they
are in time. This implies that the autocorrelation function (see section 3.1.3) of a GWN
process is zero for non-zero time lags.[15]
3.1.3
Correlation functions
A practical way of dealing with the fact that the force acting on a structure is unknown, is
by using a random modelling approach.
Most random responses have Gaussian characteristics, and the mean values of the mea-
sured signals are not of relevance. The most important information is therefore in the
correlation functions.[13]
When a damage has occurred, there will be a change in the response signal. The cross
correlation function and autocorrelation function are used as a comparative measure be-
tween the peak amplitude of the damaged and undamaged structure to indicate dam-
age.[13]
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
7
==PAGE:18==
Autocorrelation function
In autocorrelation the time series/signal from a sensor is correlated with itself with a given
time lag.
Figure 3.1: Autocorrelation with time lag τ [13]
Rx(τ) = E[x(t −τ)x(t)]
(3.1)
Equation 3.1 shows the autocorrelation function. τ is the time lag, as seen in fig. 3.1.
In autocorrelation the expected value E[x(t −τ)x(t)] is calculated as seen beneath in
eq. (3.2), with µ being the mean value.
E[t] =
∫∞
−∞
tp(t) dt = µ
(3.2)
These equations are valid since the signals registered from a structure is of GWN (p(x) =
1
σ
√
2πe−(x−µ)2
2σ2 ), see fig. 3.2.
8
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Density function for the random variable t [13]
It is then possible to calculate the autocorrelation using time averaging as seen in eq. (3.3)
beneath.
Rx(τ) = 1
T
∫T
0
x(t)x(t + τ) dt
(3.3)
Cross correlation function
Cross correlation is the autocorrelation generalised to two random signals, giving eq. (3.4).
It is calculated in similar ways as the autocorrelation, by using time averaging as seen in
eq. (3.5).[13]
Rxy(τ) = E[x(t)y(t + τ)] = E[x(t −τ)y(t)]
Ryx(τ) = E[y(t)x(t + τ)] = E[y(t −τ)x(t)]
(3.4)
Rxy(τ) = 1
T
∫T
0
x(t)y(t + τ) dt
Ryx(τ) = 1
T
∫T
0
y(t)x(t + τ) dt
(3.5)
Correlation function matrix
There are normally several measurements on a structure, arranged in a response vec-
tor y(t) = [y1(t), y2(t), ..., yN(t)]T , with N being the number of sensors. By combining the
autocorrelations and cross correlations between the different signals, the correlation func-
tion (CF) matrix in eq. (3.6) is created, with diagonal elements being the autocorrelation
functions and the off-diagonal ones being the cross correlation functions.[13]
R(τ) = E[y(t)yT (t + τ)]
(3.6)
The CF matrix can then be calculated using time averaging as
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
9
==PAGE:20==
R(τ) = 1
T
∫T
0
y(t)yT (t + τ) dt
(3.7)
with the correlation matrix C for the time series y(t) vector given as
C = E[y(t)yT (t)] = R(0)
(3.8)
It is then possible to perform an SVD on the CF matrix to evaluate the number of inde-
pendent components.
3.1.4
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)
The SVD for a matrix A can be presented as seen in eq. (3.9).
A = USVH
(3.9)
The goal of SVD is to decompose a matrix into simpler, meaningful parts, particularly by
finding the direction that stretches the unit vectors most. The unit vectors are shown as
U and V in eq. (3.9). U and V are orthonormal1, representing rotations and/or flips of
the coordinate system. S is a diagonal matrix holding the real and non-negative singular
values of A in descending order starting with the highest value in the upper left corner.
VH is a hermitian matrix (transpose and complex conjugate).[13]
3.1.5
Fourier transform
The correlation functions gather information in the time domain. Fourier transform is used
to take the signals/responses from the time domain to the frequency domain, where it is
easier to interpret the data. A mode in the random response signals will be shown as a
peak in the frequency domain.
Discrete Fourier Transform
The discrete version of the Fourier transform is used for practical applications since all real
data is represented by discrete samples.[13] It divides the signal into its sine components.
Yk = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
ynei2πk n
N
(3.10)
The formula for calculating the discrete Fourier transformation is shown in eq. (3.10). Yk
is the energy at a particular frequency k. The equation spins (ei) the signal/response (yn)
around a circle (2π) at that particular frequency k, and averages the points along that
path.[17]
Fast Fourier Transform
Since discrete Fourier transformation deals with finite data, it is possible to implement
numerical algorithms for fast and efficient transformations of the data. These algorithms
are called FFT (Fast Fourier Transform).
1A set of vectors is said to be orthonormal if they are all normal, and each pair of vectors in the set is
orthogonal, meaning their at right angle to each other (their dot product is zero.[16]
10
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:21==
3.1.6
Spectral density
With spectral density it is possible to see how the energy of a signal is distributed with
respect to its frequencies. This is done by taking the Fourier transform of the correlation
functions. We get the auto-spectral density (eq. (3.11)) by taking the Fourier transform of
the autocorrelation function. The auto-spectral density shows the distribution of energy as
a function of frequency, and therefore the spectral density is often also called the power
spectral density (PSD).[13] The area under the curve of the auto-spectral density is the
variance of the signal.
Gx(ω) = 1
2π
∫∞
−∞
Rx(τ)e−iωτ dτ
(3.11)
The cross spectral density is similarly described by taking the Fourier transform of the
cross correlation function, as seen in eq. (3.12). For this case the area under the curve is
equal to the covariance.
Gxy(ω) = 1
2π
∫∞
−∞
Rxy(τ)e−iωτ dτ
(3.12)
3.1.7
Frequency-Domain Decomposition (FDD)
The goal of FDD is to perform an approximate decomposition of a system response into a
set of independent single degree of freedom (SDOF) systems, one for each mode. FDD
is used to decompose the spectral density matrix using SVD. The singular vectors are
interpreted to be estimates of the mode shapes of the measured structure, and the singular
values are the auto-spectral values of the modal coordinates. It gathers all spectral density
functions in a single plot of the singular values of the spectral density matrix.[13]
FDD can be shown by expressing a considered response y(t) in normal modes (a) and
modal coordinates (q)
y(t) = a1q1(t) + a2q2(t) + ... = Aq(t)
(3.13)
with A being the mode shape matrix A = [a1, a2, ...] and q(t) a column vector of modal
coordinates qT (t) = {q1(t), q2(t), ...}. By combining the response y(t) expressed in mode
shapes and modal coordinates with the definition of the CF matrix in eq. (3.6) we get
Ry(τ) = E[y(t)yT (t + τ)]
= AE[q(t)qT (t + τ)AT ]
= ARq(τ)AT
(3.14)
with Rq(τ) being the CF matrix of modal coordinates. The corresponding SD (spectral
density) matrix is obtained by taking the Fourier transform on both sides of the equation,
see eq. (3.15).[13]
Gy(f) = AGq(f)AT
(3.15)
By assuming uncorrelated modal coordinates (off-diagonal elements of the CF matrix
Rq(τ) is zero), then the SD matrix Gq(f) of the modal coordinates is both diagonal and
positive valued, since auto-spectral density functions are always positive valued. The
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
11
==PAGE:22==
Hermitian has to be used instead of the transpose, since the SD matrix is Hermitian and
there may be some complexity present in the mode shapes. Equation (3.15) can then be
written as
Gy(f) = A[g2
n(f)]AH
(3.16)
where g2
n are the auto-spectral densities (diagonal elements) of Gq(f). The decomposition
shown in eq. (3.15) can be performed by taking the SVD of the SD matrix, which for a
complex, Hermitian and positive definite matrix takes the form
Gy(f) = USUH
= U[s2
n]UH
(3.17)
with the singular values s2
n in the diagonal matrix S being the auto-spectral densities of
the modal coordinates, and the columns in U = [u1, u2, ...] being the mode shapes.[13]
3.1.8
Filtering
Filtering in this thesis is referred to as excluding some frequencies from a signal. This
was previously done using analogue filters, but now digital filters are applied.
Bandpass filter
The bandpass filter is a filter that allows certain frequencies within a given range to pass,
and excludes the rest. It is characterised by two cut-off frequencies defining the frequency
band and the slope.
Windowing
A measured signal is often not an integer number of signals. The finiteness of the mea-
sured signal may therefore result in a truncated waveform with different characteristics
from the original continuous-time signal, and the finiteness can introduce sharp transition
changes into the measured signal. These sharp transitions are discontinuities.[18]
The discontinuities are a result of the number of periods in the signal not being an integer,
so the endpoints are also discontinuous. This will be shown as high-frequency compo-
nents in the FFT that are not present in the original signal. These frequencies can be
higher than the Nyquist frequency2, meaning the spectrum of the signal from the FFT is
a tainted version of the original signal spectrums. This stems from the fact that energy at
one frequency leaks into another. This is known as spectral leakage.[18]
The effects of performing FFT can be reduced by introducing windowing. Windowing
consists of multiplying the signal by a finite-length window with an amplitude that varies
smoothly and gradually toward zero at the edges. This makes the endpoints of the wave-
form meet, which results in a continuous waveform without sharp transitions. This tech-
nique is also referred to as applying a window.[18]
2The Nyquist frequency converts a contionous signal into a discrete signal, and is the highest frequency
that can be computed in a given sampling rate in order to be able to reconstruct the signal.[19]
12
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Hanning window
FFT filtering
FFT filters use Fourier transform to analyse the frequency components in the input. Any
digital filter has a frequency response function (FRF) that can be expressed as in eq. (3.18),
with m being the mass, iω the general complex variable and λ the eigenvalues.[13]
H(ω) = H′(s = iω) = 1
m
1
(iω −λ)(iω −λ∗)
(3.18)
The effect of an FRF on a response signal y(t) can be determined by converting the signal
from the time domain to the frequency domain by multiplying the Fourier transform of the
signal (y(t)Y (ω)) with the FRF (H(ω)). This gives eq. (3.19) for the filtered signal yf(t) in
the frequency domain.[13]
Yf(ω) = H(ω)Y (ω)
(3.19)
The FRF can be written in polar form as
H(ω) = |H(ω)eiθ(ω)|
(3.20)
with |H(ω)| being the absolute value and θ(ω) the phase angle. It is then possible to get
the following function for the filtered signal.
yf(t) =
∫∞
−∞
Y (ω)|H(ω)|eiθ(ω)eiωt dω
=
∫∞
−∞
Y (ω)|H(ω)|ei(ωt+θ(ω)) dω
(3.21)
The fact that the phase angle θ(ω) in general is dependent on the frequency ω complicates
the application as FFT is often used for frequency amplification and/or reduction by the
use of the function |H(ω)|. FFT is therefore implemented with the following steps:
• Convert the signal to the frequency domain using Fourier transform.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
13
==PAGE:24==
• Define a window function W(ω) in the frequency domain that is similar to the shape
of the amplification function |H(ω)|.
• Multiply the Fourier transform of the signal by the window.
• Convert the signal back to the time domain.
The advantages of the FFT are that phase distortion disappears, and the user can decide
which window to use in the frequency domain. The user also gets full control over the
filter properties.[13]
Equation 3.22 shows the implementation of FFT.
Yk(f) =
{
Y (f)W(f −fk); f
∈[fk −B/2; fk + B/2]
0; f
/∈[fk −B/2; fk + B/2]
(3.22)
Y (f) is the Fourier transform of the considered signal y(t), while Yk(f) is the filtered signal
in the frequency domain corresponding to the kth bandpass filter with centre frequency
fk and width B. The width of the data should be chosen so that it contains a reasonable
number of modes (three is usually sufficient). W(f) is a window function3.[13]
Modal filtering
Modal filtering is used to obtain the modal coordinates from a measured random response.
It is in the time domain expressed as
y(t) = Aq(t)
(3.23)
with matrix A containing the mode shapes as column vectors and q(t) being a column
vector containing the corresponding modal coordinates4.
The estimated modal coordinates can then be calculated as
ˆq(t) = A+y(t)
(3.24)
under the assumptions that the mode shape matrix is known and the number of DOFs of
the mode shapes is larger than the number of mode shapes in the mode shape matrix A5.
A+ is the pseudo inverse of matrix A.
If more DOFs are included in the creation of the mode shapes and fewer modes are
included in the response signal, more noise will be removed from the estimated modal
coordinate. Bandpass filtering should therefore be considered in order to perform the
modal filtering in smaller frequency bands to remove as much noise as possible.[13]
When the noise from other modes as well as the noise that is always present in measure-
ments has been removed with the modal filtering, the synthesised response that occurs
can be written as shown in eq. (3.25).
ˆy(t) = Aˆq(t)
(3.25)
3The Hanning window is satisfactory in most cases, as it has good frequency resolution and reduced
spectral leakage[18]
4The response of a mode is calculated by multiplying the mode shape, a, with the modal coordinate, q(t).
The mode shape is a constant vector, while the modal coordinate (a number) varies with time.
5Matrix A has more rows than columns
14
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:25==
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
The signal-to-noise ratio is a measure of the distance between the maximum values of
the modal peaks and the minimum singular value. The bottom singular values are usually
related to noise. An acceptable ratio is in the order of 60 dB.[13]
3.1.9
Signal synthesis
Signal synthesis means estimating/creating a signal. The estimation of a signal can be
done in several ways, e.g. by using the response signals from a structure and estimate a
new, synthesised response with the use of modal filtering with its mode shapes of inter-
est.[13]
Error estimate
The synthesised signal can be used to calculate the error estimate. The error estimate is
calculated by taking the difference between the original response y(t) and the synthesised
response ˆy(t).
ε(t) = y(t) −ˆy(t)
(3.26)
This is a commonly accepted method normally used to identify malfunctioning sensors.[13]
This principle can be extended to the case of non-linear responses. One can assume that
the right location of damage is the location that minimizes eq. (3.26), while a damage oc-
currence will be shown as an increase in the error.
3.1.10
Sensor locations
Placing of the sensors is an optimisation problem, and the optimisation function is usually
flat around the optimum. It is therefore not of importance to find the optimal placement,
since a location near the optimum will give marginal improvements. In practice, one would
place the sensors in a ”reasonable” location, so that ”reasonable” measurements can be
attained.[13] This is further elaborated in section 5.3.
A ”reasonable” sensor placement can be calculated by considering the modal decomposi-
tion of a dynamic response as seen in eq. (3.13), where A contains the true mode shapes
and the vector q(t) contains the true modal coordinates. With an estimate ˆA of the mode
shape matrix, the pseudo inverse of ˆA can be used to obtain an estimate of the modal
coordinates as
ˆq(t) = ˆA
+y(t)
= ˆA
+Aq(t)
(3.27)
with the matrix ˆA
+A being a measure of how close the estimated coordinate vector is to
its true value. The closer the product of the matrix is to the identity matrix, the better the
sensor placement is.[13]
3.2
Newmark time integration - Solving the equation of
motion
In this thesis the structure of interest is assumed to be linear, i.e. the displacements are
small to moderate and the material and damping are linear. The equation of motion (EOM)
is therefore given as
M¨x + C˙x + Kx = f(t)
(3.28)
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
15
==PAGE:26==
where M is the mass matrix, C the viscous damping matrix, K the stiffness matrix and f(t)
the load history in vector form. The displacement x and its time derivatives are denoted
by a dot, e.g. ¨x(t) for acceleration and ˙x(t) for velocity. [20]
In order to solve eq. (3.28) it is required that two sets of initial conditions are known:
x(0) = x0,
˙x(0) = ˙x0
When the displacement and the velocity are known, eq. (3.28) can be solved with respect
to the acceleration.
In the Newmark method, new displacement and velocity vectors at time increment tn+1
are calculated as
˙xn+1 = ˙xn + (1 −γ)h¨xn + γh¨xn+1
(3.29)
xn+1 = xn + h˙xn + (1
2 −β)h2¨xn + βh2¨xn+1
(3.30)
where the parameters 0 < γ < 1 and 0 < β <
1
2 determine the degree of forward
weighting, and h = tn+1 −tn is the length of the time interval.[20]
The red parts of eq. (3.29) and eq. (3.30) represent the known values from the initial
conditions, while the blue parts represent the unknown. The acceleration is therefore
necessary to solve the equations.
3.2.1
Correction step
Substituting the velocity and displacement vectors from eq. (3.29) and eq. (3.30) into
eq. (3.28) gives the following formula for the acceleration vector ¨xn+1.[20]
(M + γhC + βh2K)¨xn+1 = fn+1 −C(˙xn + (1 −γ)h¨xn)
−K(xn + h˙xn + (1
2 −β)h2¨xn)
(3.31)
From this equation the acceleration is obtained, and by inserting the acceleration into
eq. (3.29) and eq. (3.30) the displacement and velocity at the next time increment tn+1 is
established.
3.2.2
Newmark algorithm
The Newmark algorithm calculates time steps in the form of a prediction step followed by
a correction step by for-looping the previously mentioned time steps tn and tn+1 in the
prediction step and the correction step.
Prediction step
The equations in the prediction steps are provided with an astrix * to indicate that these
are not the exact representations of velocity and displacement, but represents initial con-
ditions.
The prediction step contains the red terms in the Newmark formulas eq. (3.29) and eq. (3.30)
and ignores the unknown acceleration term. This gives the following equations for the ve-
locity and displacement at time increment tn+1
16
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:27==
˙x∗
n+1 = ˙xn + (1 −γ)h¨xn
(3.32)
x∗
n+1 = xn + h˙xn + (1
2 −β)h2¨xn
(3.33)
Equation 3.31 can be re-written to get the extended mass matrix M∗as
M∗¨xn+1 = fn+1 −C˙x∗
n+1 −Kx∗
n+1
(3.34)
Correction step
From eq. (3.34) we get the acceleration ¨xn+1, which when substituted with ¨xn in eq. (3.32)
and eq. (3.33) gives the corresponding velocity and displacement, with the modified mass
matrix given as
M∗= M + γhC + βh2K
(3.35)
In the correction step, the last term in eq. (3.29) and eq. (3.30) is added to the predicted
velocity and displacement vector as
˙xn+1 = ˙x∗
n+1 + γh¨xn+1
(3.36)
xn+1 = x∗
n+1 + βh2¨xn+1
(3.37)
thereby correcting the predictors and completing the time step.[20]
1) System matrices:
K, C, M
M∗= M + γhC + βh2K
2) Initial conditions:
x0, ˙x0
¨x0 = M−1(f0 −C˙x0 −Kx0)
3) Time increment:
tn+1 = tn + h
4) Prediction step:
˙x∗
n+1 = ˙xn + (1 −γ)h¨xn
x∗
n+1 = xn + h˙xn + ( 1
2 −β)h2¨xn
5) Correction step:
¨xn+1 = M−1
∗(fn+1 −C˙x∗
n+1 −K˙x∗
n+1)
˙xn+1 = ˙x∗
n+1 + γh¨xn+1
xn+1 = x∗
n+1 + βh2¨xn+1
6) Return to 3) or stop.
Table 3.1: Newmark algorithm[20]
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.1 shows the 6 steps of the Newmark algorithm. First the system matrices and the
modified mass matrix is found. In the second step initial conditions is defined providing
values for initial displacement and velocity. The initial acceleration can thereby be found
by solving the EOM for t0 = 0.
Steps 3-6 is usually modeled as a for-loop. In step 3, time is incremented with a time
increment tn+1, where the time increment is given by h. In step 4 the predictors are
determined. They only depend on values at n. In step 5 the algorithm solves for the
new acceleration by the EOM using the modified mass matrix, which is then used in the
correction for the velocity and displacement. Steps 3-5 is then repeated until all desired
time increments are calculated.
3.3
Modal Assurance Criterion
Modal assurance criterion (MAC) is used to compare the modal vectors, i.e. the similar-
ities between two different mode shapes. Identical mode shapes, i.e. all points move in
the same direction, will yield a MAC value of 1 or 100 %. If the mode shapes are very
different, the MAC value is 0. A mode shape compared to itself should in other words be
equal to 1. [21]
The mode shapes is usually produced using a FE model.
3.3.1
MAC equation
The MAC value between two modes is the normalized dot product of the hermitian modal
vector at each common nodes, as shown in eq. (3.38).[13]
MAC(a,b) =
|aHb|2
(aHa)(bHb)
(3.38)
The hermitian vector includes both amplitude and phase. From Equation 3.38 it is evident
that the MAC value is not sensitive to scaling, meaning that the value will not change if all
the values is multiplied with the same number.[21]
3.4
Software
The software used in this thesis is Matlab, professor Rune Brincker’s OMA toolbox, Opensees
(the Open System for Earthquake Engineering Simulation) and Python.
FE-models and dynamic simulations were carried out using the OpenseesPy library in
Python. Rune Brincker’s OMA toolbox was used for initial signal processing in Matlab.
Matlab was also used for the main part of the method.
3.4.1
Matlab
Matlab is a programming and numeric computing platform, created by Mathworks. Matlab
is fast and great for matrix manipulation.
For this thesis Matlab was used to execute some of the tools in Rune Brincker’s OMA
toolbox, as well as some of the computationally heavy parts of the method.
3.4.2
Opensees
Opensees is an open-source project that allows users to create finite element applications
for simulating the response of structural and geotechnical systems subjected to earth-
quakes in a object-oriented software framework. The analysis in Opensees was carried
out with the OpenSeesPy library in Python, with the Spyder environment.
18
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:29==
Since Opensees is a code based software, it is somewhat tedious to create models and
analysis in the software. This has however its advantages. Because of its customisability,
one can run analysis for specific cases with a short computational time.
Commands
Some of the commands used in the investigations were as follows:
• elasticBeamColumn - for modeling the elements
• rigidDiaphragm - for modeling the rigid diaphragms
• mass - for modeling of mass
• rayleigh - for modeling the dampening
• algorithm(’Newmark’) - algorithm for solving the nonlinear equations.
• nodeEigenvector - calculates the mode shapes
3.4.3
Python
Python is an open source, high-level, interpreted, general-purpose programming lan-
guage.
The specific Python version used was conda(Python 3.9.7). Conda is an open-source
package and environment management system that runs on Windows, macOS, and Linux.
A disadvantage with using both Matlab and python is that some of the code has to run in
Matlab from Python.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:31==
4
Damage detection method
In this chapter the steps of the damage detection method will be described. The method
will be described in a general way, i.e. how it could be implemented on a real structure.
The implementation of the method in this project will be presented in chapter 6.
This chapter is divided into three parts:
1. Input to the damage detection method
2. Detection of damage occurrence
3. Detection of damage location and severity
4.1
Step 1 - Input
To execute the method, three things are required:
• Time history data of the structure y(t)
• Undamaged mode shape set AUndamaged
• Damaged mode shape sets ADamaged
4.1.1
Time history data of the structure
The time history data y(t) is recordings from the structure obtained by sensors on the
building that is monitored. This data could be accelerations, displacements or velocities.
4.1.2
Undamaged mode shape set
The mode shape set AUndamaged from a real structure can be found in the responses with
the FDD method, as described in subsection 3.1.7. This requires that the structure has
been monitored over a period of time, where a damage has not occurred on the structure.
4.1.3
Damaged mode shape sets
To create the damaged mode shape sets ADamaged, a model of the monitored structure
needs to be made. This model should be as similar to the real structure as possible.
Damages are then introduced in the model, in places where it is most likely that a damage
has happened.
4.2
Step 2 - Damage occurrence detection
In this step the signal synthesising and error estimation from chapter 3 is utilised.
The goal of this step is to see if and when a damage has occurred in the structure. This
is not something that has been of focus in this project, but it would be a crucial part of a
real world implementation. Furthermore some parts of this step has been implemented
and it is important for the rest of the method.
The error estimate is calculated in the following way:
1. Use previously recorded response data y(t), of the structure of interest and the mode
shape matrix AUndamaged
2. Use modal filtering to get the modal coordinates ˆq(t) from the mode shape matrix
AUndamaged and the filtered responses y(t) as seen in eq. (3.24).
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
21
==PAGE:32==
3. Estimate the synthesized response ˆy(t) using the modal coordinates and the mode
shape matrix AUndamaged as seen in eq. (3.25)
4. Find the error estimate ε(t) between the estimated response ˆy(t) and the recorded
response y(t) as ε(t) = y(t) −ˆy(t).
Figure 4.1 shows what the error estimate ε(t) of a structure experiencing damage for a
short period of time could look like.
Figure 4.1: Increase in error estimate of signal indicating damage occurrence.
Figure 4.1 shows a steady state error estimation with small deviations, until there is an
increase in the error estimate, before it goes back down to the level it was before the
increase. This increase in the error estimate could be an indication of damage in the
structure, and this information is then utilised in step 3 of the method.
4.3
Step 3 - Damage localisation and severity detection
When a damage is found to be present in step 2, the damage detection method proceeds
to this step, with the intent of finding the location and severity of the damage found.
In this step, the damage detection model is created, with the purpose of replicating what
the observed structure’s mode shapes could look like during the damage. Most of the
procedures are similar to the procedures in step 2, with the difference being in the use
of the damaged mode shape sets ADamaged from the damage detection model in the cal-
culations instead of the observed structure’s undamaged mode shape set. The following
procedure was used to find the damage location and severity:
1. Create a damage detection model that is as equal to the observed structure as
possible.
2. Introduce damage in section of the damage detection model.
3. New mode shape set ADamaged,i is extracted from the damage detection model.
4. Use modal filtering to obtain the modal coordinates ˆq(t) as in step 2, this time using
ADamaged,i and filtered responses y(t).
5. Estimate the synthesised response ˆy(t) as in step 2.
22
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:33==
6. Find the error estimate ε(t) between the estimated response ˆy(t) and the recorded
response y(t) as in step 2
Repeat step 1-6 for all possible places and severities of damage.
All the error estimates can then be plotted as seen in fig. 4.2. The mode shape set asso-
ciated with the lowest error estimate at the time of damage is the one that corresponds
best with the signal. Therefore the damage that generated this mode shape set is the
most likely damage to have happened to the structure.
Figure 4.2: Reduction in error estimate of response.
In fig. 4.2 the error estimates for the suspected damages are plotted. Some error esti-
mates increases during the damage, while some decreases.
4.4
Flowchart of damage detection method
Flow chart of the damage detection method can be seen bellow.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
23
==PAGE:34==
Unknown loading
Observed structure
y(t)
Response
Damage detection model, 1
Filtering
Algorithm
Damage location
Damage severity
ADamaged, 1
Damage detection model, N
ADamaged, N
ADamaged
FDD
AUndamaged
Damage occurrance
24
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:35==
5
Structure and numerical model
In this chapter the structure and the numerical models used in the implementation and
investigations of the damage detection method will be described.
5.1
Two-story steel frame
A 2 story steel frame structure with rigid diaphragms was used as basis for the investiga-
tions, as seen in fig. 5.1. The elements, dimensions and support conditions were chosen
as a fine compromise between complexity and simplicity so that the verification of the
damage detection method’s performance would be easier, but also complex enough so
that the damage detection method is applicable to larger and more complex structures.
Figure 5.1: Two-story steel frame
5.1.1
Material
Steel is the material used for the beams and columns. The material properties can be
seen in table 5.1.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
25
==PAGE:36==
Property
Value
Young’s modulus, E
210 GPa
Shear modulus, G
79.3 GPa
Table 5.1: Material properties steel
5.1.2
Sections
The sections used in the models was IPE220 for beams and HEB200 for columns. The
geometric properties was given by manufacturers, and can be seen in table 5.2 and ta-
ble 5.3. As seen in fig. 5.1, the strong axis of the columns is oriented along the x-axis in
fig. 5.3, while the strong axis of the beams are oriented along the z-axis in the same figure
(fig. 5.3).
Property
Value
Area, A
7810 mm2
Torsional moment of inertia, J
495 900 mm4
Second moment of inertia y-axis, Iy
56 960 000 mm4
Second moment of inertia z-axis, Iz
20 030 000 mm4
Table 5.2: Geometrical properties HEB200 column
Property
Value
Area, A
3340 mm2
Torsional moment of inertia, J
89 820 mm4
Second moment of inertia y-axis, Iy
27 270 000 mm4
Second moment of inertia z-axis, Iz
2 049 000 mm4
Table 5.3: Geometrical properties IPE220 beam
Figure 5.2: Dimensions of beam sections (left) and column sections (right) as illustrated
in Autocad
26
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:37==
5.1.3
Joint and support conditions
The base of the columns are fixed, while the joints in the corners of the diaphragms are
tied together within the diaphragms plane as described in section 5.2.1.
5.1.4
Mass
The mass was calculated based on the given elements and a 220 mm hollow core slab
located in the first floor and roof, working as rigid diaphragms. There was also assumed
to be a self weight of installations, ceilings and screed. This was used to calculate the
dead load.
Property
Value
IPE220
30.7 kg/m
HEB200
42.6 kg/m
Hollow core slab 220 mm
312 kg/m
Self weight others (installations, ceilings, screed)
165 kg/m
Table 5.4: Dead loads/masses
The mass of the roof and first floor was then calculated as
Mroof = MslabLxLy + MHEB1602h = 4942.2kg
(5.1)
M1.floor = 2MIPE220Lx+2MIPE220Ly+MslabLxLy+MHEB160Lxh+20 %liveload = 5441.2kg
(5.2)
with Lx being the length in x-direction, Ly being the length in y-direction and h being
the height between floors. The structure was assumed to be a office building, with the
corresponding live load as given in the standards. Full calculations and verification of
masses and cross sections can be seen in appendix A.2.
5.2
Numerical models
Two FE models was used during the investigation of the damage detection method: one
representing the ”real”, observed structure called model A, and another representing the
model that an engineer would create for damage detection, called model B. Model A
and B was created identical, with the opportunity to alter model A to have more realistic
conditions, to see how this would affect the results (see section 5.2.6).
The structure from fig. 5.1 was modeled in the FE software Opensees to create model A
and model B.
The point of creating two numerical models was to obtain the necessary input required for
the proposed damage detection method, i.e. responses and mode shapes. In a realistic
implementation of the method, only one FE model would be necessary as the required
input would be extracted directly from measurements on the observed structure.
Figure 5.3 shows the geometry of the numerical models (model A and B). The follow-
ing spans are used: x-direction = 4 meters, y-direction = 3 meters and z-direction = 3.5
meters.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.3: The numerical models (model A and model B) of the structure. Main nodes in
black, nodes used to define damaged elements in red and master nodes for diaphragms
in blue
The structure is fixed in the support at the base of the columns. The code used to create
model A and B can be seen in appendix A.1.
5.2.1
Modeling of elements and support conditions
In fig. 5.3 the placement of the nodes and elements is shown. The nodes was first created
using the node command, where the coordinates and number of the nodes was inserted in
the command, thereby creating node 1-12, 21-22 and the nodes used to simulate damage,
see section 5.2.5.
The beam and column elements were created using the elasticBeamColumn command,
which input is the boundary nodes of the given element, the material properties from
table 5.1 and the geometric properties from table 5.3 and table 5.2. This command created
elastic elements, since the non-linearities was applied manually.
The command fix was used to create the fixed supports at the base of the columns (node
1-4), with the input being the DOF for each possible direction that the corresponding node
can move.
Orientation of elements
To define the geometric transformations of the beams and columns, the command geom-
Transf was used. This command transforms the elements stiffness and resisting force
from the basic system to the global-coordinate system.[22]
Rigid diaphragms
The floor and roof of the structure was as mentioned assumed to be concrete hollow core
slabs. This implied that they should be modeled as rigid diaphragms, as the bending
28
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:39==
in-plane is negligible.
In Opensees the command rigidDiaphragm is used to model rigid diaphragms. The nodes
surrounding the diaphragms is used as ”slave” nodes to define the contours of the di-
aphragms. The rigid diaphragms with their slave nodes represents infinite in-plane stiff-
ness and moves the diaphragms as a rigid body. There is therefore no axial, shear or
moment within the diaphragms.[23]
Rigid links connects the slave nodes in the diaphragms together. This rigidity is ensured
by slaving the DOFs in the diaphragms plane, ergo the name slave nodes. This means
that the nodes are constrained to move together in the plane of the diaphragm, except
when rotating about the axis of the master nodes.[23]
5.2.2
Masses
The masses Mroof and M1.floor was used as basis when modeling the masses of the
structure in fig. 5.1 in Opensees with the mass command. The mass of the structure was
modeled in the diaphragms, i.e. in the corner nodes (node 5-8 and node 9-12) containing
the mass and the center node of each diaphragm (node 21 and 22) containing the rota-
tional mass, with the use of the mass command. Since the structure is 3 dimensional, the
possible input in the mass command is six, corresponding to the possible DOFs at each
node.
The rotational mass was calculated with the assumption that the axis of rotation was
around the center of each diaphragm, and that the diaphragms was thin rectangular
plates.[24] The corresponding formula is seen in eq. (5.3)
Mrotation = 1
12M(L2
x + L2
y) −4(M
4 (Lx
2
2
+ Ly
2
2
))
(5.3)
with M being the mass of the corresponding diaphragm and Lx, Ly the length of the
diaphragms in x and y-direction, respectively. The section that is being subtracted in
the equation (−4( M
4 ( Lx
2
2 + Ly
2
2))) represents the rotational mass at the corners of the
diaphragms.
The rotational mass was placed in the center nodes of the diaphragms, while the total
mass in the diaphragms was evenly distributed between the corner nodes in the vertical
and horizontal translations by dividing the masses Mroof and M1.floor by 4.
5.2.3
Damping
The damping used in the analysis was Rayleigh damping, with a damping ratio ζ = 0.02 =
2 %. The damping was applied with the rayleigh command, and the parameters used
in the command is associated with the first and third mode. The code can be seen in
appendix A.3.
5.2.4
Dynamic properties
The dynamical properties are taken directly from Opensees, and goes as follows.
Natural frequencies
The following table shows the periods of the three first modes.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
29
==PAGE:40==
Mode
Period, T (s)
1
0.426
2
0.34
3
0.222
Table 5.5: Periods of mode 1-3
Mode shapes
Figure 5.4: Three first mode shapes of structure
The three mode shapes used in the investigations can be seen in fig. 5.4. In the imple-
mentation of the damage detection method presented in this thesis only the three first
modes are utilised. This is because the three first modes usually contains over 90 % of
the modal effective mass, i.e. the amount of the systems mass participating in that mode
in a given excitation direction, as seen in table 5.6.[25]
Mode
Mx
My
RMx
RMy
RMz
1
0 %
90.8891 %
36.1815 %
0 %
0 %
2
86.4402 %
90.8891 %
36.1815 %
43.0703 %
0 %
3
86.4402 %
90.8891 %
36.1815 %
43.0703 %
88.5195 %
Table 5.6: The cumulative modal participation mass ratios for each mode.
In table 5.6 M represents the mass in the corresponding direction while RM represents
the rotational mass in the corresponding direction. The mass in z-direction Mz is not
included as it was 0 %
General data from the modal analysis calculated in Opensees by the command modal-
Properties can be seen in appendix A.4.
30
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:41==
5.2.5
Damage simulation
To simulate the non-linear softening, it was chosen to reduce the Young’s modulus in areas
around the damage. The length of the elements with reduced E modulus was chosen as
4 times the height of the given cross section. Figure 5.3 shows the nodes (in red) above
the base of the columns and around the corners which was used to define the elements
introducing the damage.
5.2.6
Changes to model A for simulation purposes
Model A was altered as mentioned in the introduction of this chapter. This was done in
order to make the testing of the damage detection method more realistic, because the
model an engineer makes (model B) is an approximation of the real structure.
The changes to model A involved changing the E-modulus and mass of the structure.
Change in E-modulus
The E-modulus for each element was taken from a normal Gaussian distribution, with
mean of 210 GPA, and standard deviation of 2 % of the mean. The code of the procedure
can be seen in appendix A.5.1.
Change in mass
Changes in the mass was applied in a similar way as for the changes in the E-modulus,
with the mean being defined as mass M and the standard deviation being 2 %, and the
distribution being normal Gaussian.
For code of the procedure see appendix A.5.2.
5.3
Sensors
The sensors used for recording the responses from the structure were placed in node
7,8,11 and 12. All the sensors recorded displacements in x-direction, with the sensors
in node 7 and 11 recording displacements in the y-direction as well. A summary of the
sensor placement and their corresponding name can be seen in table 5.7
Sensor name
Node
Direction
Sensor 1
7
X
Sensor 2
8
X
Sensor 3
11
X
Sensor 4
12
X
Sensor 5
7
Y
Sensor 6
11
Y
Table 5.7: Sensor name and placement
The choice of sensor placement can be done using an optimisation procedure as de-
scribed in section 3.1.10, but was in the case of this work decided based on reasonable
engineering judgement, meaning in each floor, the same amount of sensors was placed
(three in each floor). This is a setup that can capture both the translational movements/vi-
brations of the structure in addition to the rotations by capturing the differences in the
sensor measurements. Figure 5.5 shows the placement of the sensors on the structure.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.5: Placement of sensors on the structure and the directions of the recordings
5.3.1
Measurements from sensors
In the current study displacement time series were adopted as measurements from the
structure. It is known that displacement time series is not easily measured compared to
accelerations, since the later can be captured by accelerometers. There are however
options for measuring displacements. [26]
One option is to use GPS sensors to measure the exact location of the given sensors at
each specific time. Additionally, a tiltmeter can be used to measure rotations. From the
rotations one can go to displacements e.g. by the use of angular displacement and arc
lengths.[27]
A third option could be to facilitate a transition from accelerations that have been mea-
sured to integrated displacements (with accelerations one can double integrate to reach
displacements). There are plenty of methods from the literature that proposes this.[28]
The problem with double integrations is that the integration creates some leftovers, giving
a less optimal signal. This option is therefore not very reliable.[29]
There are methods that facilitates for good integrations. One could claim that the structure
can be equipped with geophones, which is a special type of sensors that record velocity.
With the recorded velocity only one integration is required to get displacements. This
usually works well.[30]
32
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:43==
6
Implementation of damage detection
method and results
In this chapter the implementation of the damage detection method presented in chapter 4
will be described, before the results are presented and discussed.
6.1
Dynamic analysis
As mentioned in section 5.2, this project does not use real data, and for this reason it
needs to be generated. In this part, the dynamic analysis used to generate the data will
be described.
6.1.1
Placement of loads
For the dynamic analysis of the structure, the model was excited by several white Gaus-
sian noise loading with mean zero and standard deviation 1.The loads were applied as
accelerations at node 5, 6, 9, and 10, with node 5 and 9 experiencing loading in x and
y-direction, while node 6 and 10 only experiencing loads in x-direction.
In fig. 6.1 the location of the loads and sensors are shown.
Figure 6.1: Placement of loads and sensors on the model
6.1.2
Parameters for dynamic analysis
To solve the equation of motion the Newmark integrator with γ = 1
2 and β = 1
4, was used.
The time step used was 0.005 s. The time step was chosen based on experience and
had to be low enough that the periods found with FDD from the signal, matched the ones
obtained with Opensees.
Appendix B.1 shows how the load and recording of the forces was coded in Python.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
33
==PAGE:44==
6.1.3
Introduction of damage
The simulations was run for approximately 850 seconds, or 14 minutes. This corresponds
to 2000 cycles of the first period of the structure. The damage simulation presented in
subsection 5.2.5 was introduced after half the simulation time, and lasted for 120 seconds,
before returning the structure to its original state. It was thereby possible to observe the
responses from the structure, first in an undamaged state, then damaged, before returning
the structure back to the original undamaged state.
In the rest of this chapter the procedure of one damage simulation is shown, to better
visualise the different steps. Damage was introduced in node 4 as described above with
a severity of 60 % reduction of the Young’s modulus.
6.1.4
Output
The recorded displacement time series from the dynamic analysis is the y(t) used later in
the method as described in chapter 4. Figure 6.2 shows the responses from the simulation
presented in subsection 6.1.3.
Figure 6.2: y(t) from the structure
The signal y(t) seen in fig. 6.2 contains 6 time series, one for each sensor. Each time
series contains 171330 data points.
6.1.5
Introduction of noise
The recordings obtained directly from Opensees are unrealistically precise without any
noise. To make the simulations more realistic it was chosen to introduce some noise to
the signal. Figure 6.3 shows the singular values of the FDD after noise was introduced
to the signal. The noise floor is situated approximately 60 dB below the highest peak, as
described in section 3.1.8.
34
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.3: Singular values from FDD, created with fftspec from Rune Brinckers OMA
toolbox
6.2
Extraction of mode shapes
The mode shapes can as discussed earlier be extracted directly from the signal with the
FDD method. This requires a lot of data from the structure, from a long period of time.
This is seen as out of scope for this project, and it was therefore chosen to get the mode
shapes directly from Opensees with the nodeEigenvector command. It was chosen to
only include the three first mode shapes, as these are the most influential for the vibrations
in the structure. The mode shapes was only extracted from the DOF’s with a sensor. This
means that every mode shape set is a 6 × 3 matrix. The undamaged mode shape set
AUndamaged from model A can be seen in table 6.1.
Node, dir
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
7, X
0.000
0.439
-0.389
8, X
0.000
0.439
0.389
11, X
0.000
1.000
-0.817
12, X
0.000
1.000
0.817
7, Y
-0.524
0.000
-0.519
11, Y
-1.000
0.000
-1.089
Table 6.1: AUndamaged
6.3
Filtering
The signal y(t) generated in section 6.1 is filtered with a bandpass filter (from Rune Brinck-
ers OMA toolbox fftfilt1) to only include the three first mode shapes. In Figure 6.4 the
singular values from the FDD is plotted after the signal is filtered to include the three first
modes.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.4: Singular values from bandpass filtered FDD, created with fftspec from Rune
Brinckers OMA toolbox
6.4
Damage occurrence detection
As discussed in chapter 4, the detection of when a damage takes place is not in the scope
of this project. However some parts of this step is used further and it is important that it
works to some extent.
The first steps are as described in section 4.2, with the error estimate ε(t) as the out-
put. The error estimate ε(t) from the damage simulation presented in subsection 6.1.3 is
plotted in fig. 6.5.
Figure 6.5: ε(t) from example damage
ε(t) contains 6 time series, each representing the error estimate of one DOF/sensor. This
information can be a bit chaotic and difficult to interpret. The data therefore had to be
processed further, with the desired output being a combined moving standard deviation
window of all six error estimates. This was achieved in three steps:
36
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:47==
1. Take the moving standard deviation of each of the six error estimates.
2. Combine the error estimates by taking the mean of the variances.
3. Take the square root to get the standard deviation again.
Now the 6 error estimates are down to one moving standard deviation window, and it can
be plotted to see if the introduction of damage influences the error estimate.
The damage presented in subsection 6.1.3 is again used to demonstrate this, as seen in
fig. 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Moving std. of error estimate. Damaged in node 4, 60 % severity
Figure 6.6 is a plot of the moving standard deviation window of the error estimate. It
shows that there are small deviations in the error estimate until approximately 380 s where
the error estimate increases by more than 2.5 times with a peak at roughly 500 s. The
error estimate then drops down again to the original level at 600 s. This could be a good
indication of a damage in the structure.
The implementation of the code can be seen in appendix B.2.
6.5
Damage localisation and severity detection
This step is used to localise where the damage has occurred and the severity of the
damage. This is the only step used in our implementation of the method, since the damage
is simulated.
As mentioned in chapter 4 this step is very similar to the previous step, but instead of just
getting the error estimate from the undamaged mode shape set AUndamaged, several mode
shape sets are generated for different placements and severities of damages ADamaged.
For this project it was chosen to look at all 12 connections (node 1-12 in fig. 5.3) as possible
locations of damage, with damage severities from 10 % to 90 % with 10 % increments. This
resulted in 108 different mode shape sets (12 connections × 9 severities).
The example of damage presented in subsection 6.1.3 is used here as well. In fig. 6.7 the
108 moving Std. window of the error estimates can be seen. These where generated by
using the 108 damaged mode shape sets ADamaged and the response from model A y(t).
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.7: Error estimation for all 108 mode shape sets
Figure 6.7 shows some error estimates going down during the damage, while the majority
goes up. In fig. 6.8 most of the plots are removed to make it easier to see what happens.
Error estimates for node 1-12 are plotted with a damage severity of 60 %.
Figure 6.8: Error estimation for node 1-12 with 60 % damage severity
From fig. 6.8 it is evident that there is one error estimate that is much lower than the rest,
in the time period of the damage. The green line for node 4 is as low in the damaged
part as the undamaged/original line is before the damage. This is the same node as the
damaged was simulated in, and indicates that the method works for this example.
38
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:49==
The identification of the damage location and the severity is done by picking the plot that is
lowest at the time of damage. To identify the lowest plot, each plotted line is multiplied with
itself in the time period where the damage had occurred, returning the inner product. The
line with the lowest inner product is the line that most accurately represents the damage.
It is then possible to go back and see what location and severity was used to create the
plot with the lowest inner product.
This can be seen in eq. (6.1) to eq. (6.4), where E is all 108 error estimates, but only the
part of the error estimates where a damage occurred, i.e. from approximately 480 s to
500 s as seen in fig. 6.7.
V = EET
(6.1)
On the diagonal of the new matrix V are all the inner products of the error estimates
multiplied with themselves. The diagonal can then be extracted to a vector d.
d =


v1
...
vn


(6.2)
To get back to standard deviation the square root is taken of d.
s =
√
d
(6.3)
To find the mode shape sets that corresponds to the lowest error estimate, eq. (6.4) is
used.
arg min
s s
(6.4)
It is then possible to go back to the creation of the damaged mode shape sets and see
which mode shape set corresponds to the value found in eq. (6.4). The code for this can
be seen in appendix B.3.
6.6
Flow chart of implementation of the damage detection
method
A summary of the implementation of the method can be seen in the flow chart below.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
39
==PAGE:50==
White noise loading
Model A
y(t)
Response
Model B, 1
Filtering
Algorithm
Damage location
Damage severity
ADamaged, 1
Model B, N
ADamaged, N
ADamaged
6.7
Testing the damage detection method
In this part, the testing of the method will be described.
6.7.1
Test cases
To test the method both under ideal conditions and under more realistic conditions, it was
chosen to introduce different cases. As presented in chapter 5 there were introduced
some modifications to model A, to make the simulations more realistic, namely changes
to the E-modulus and mass. In subsection 6.1.5 it was also described how noise was
introduced to the response signal to make the signal more realistic. These three changes
where introduced in the simulations giving 4 cases with progressively more realistic mod-
els. The 4 cases can be seen below:
Case 1: No noise, identical models
The first case investigated was with no noise added to the measurements and with iden-
tical models. This was thought to be a good starting point, and a baseline to see how
well the method theoretically could perform. With fewer variables that could influence the
method, the expected results should be ideal.
Case 2: Noise, identical models
In the second case the models are still identical, but noise is introduced in the measure-
ments. This is done to test the methods robustness to noisy signal. This is seen as more
realistic than no added noise.
Case 3: Noise, different E-modulus
The third case introduced different Young’s modulus to each element in model A, in ad-
dition to noise in the measurements. The differences in the Young’s modulus makes the
mode shapes of model A different than the mode shapes of model B. This tests the meth-
ods robustness to imperfections in the modeling.
Case 4: Noise, different E-modulus and mass
The fourth case introduced differences in the masses of model A, in addition to the changes
in Young’s modulus and noise in the signal. These changes makes the mode shapes of
40
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:51==
model A deviate from the mode shapes of model B even further. The goal of this is to test
the methods robustness to even larger imperfections in the modeling.
A summary of the four cases can be found in table 6.2.
Case
Conditions
Case 1
No noise, identical models
Case 2
Noise, identical models
Case 3
Noise, different E-modulus between models
Case 4
Noise, different E-modulus and mass between models
Table 6.2: Cases for testing
6.7.2
Multiple simulations to test the damage detection method
To test the method it was chosen to simulate 100 damages in each node, with a severity
randomly chosen between 94 % and 9 % for each simulation. The severities are chosen to
not make the damages unrealistically high or low. This was done for each case presented
in subsection 6.7.1.
The code can be seen in appendix B.4.
Table 6.3 presents parts of the results from the testing.
Nr.
Actual location
Estimated location
Actual severity
Estimated severity
Correct line
1
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
2
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
3
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
...
...
...
...
...
...
601
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
602
7
7
0.13
0.2
4
603
7
7
0.52
0.5
1
...
...
...
...
...
...
1200
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
Table 6.3: Parts of results from testing of the damage detection method, Case 1
In table 6.3 the columns are showing the following: the simulation nr., the actual location
of damage, where the method estimates location of damage, the actual severity of the
simulated damage, what the method estimates the severity of the damage to be, and
what position from the bottom the correct line is situated. This mean that if the correct
line is lowest (in a plot like the one in fig. 6.7), ”Correct line” would be 1. If the line of the
actual damage is further up i.e. above one other line, it would have ”Correct line” as 2.
This means that the lower the ”Correct number” is, the closer the method is at guessing
the correct damage location and severity.
All the data from the results of the four cases can be seen in appendix C.
6.7.3
Success criterion for damage detection method
In this part the success criterion for the testing shown in section 6.7.2 is presented. The
success of the method is divided into two categories: the methods ability to localise the
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
41
==PAGE:52==
damage in the structure, and the methods ability to estimate the severity of the damage
in the structure.
Damage localisation
The methods ability to estimate correct damage localisation is defined as success when
the ”Actual location” and ”Estimated location” from table 6.3 is equal.
This is simply
summed up and divided by the total number of simulations.
This was done for all 4 cases
Damage severity
To test the methods ability to estimate correct severity, only the simulations where the
method predicted correct location were considered. This means that this parameter is
defined as ”correct severity given correct localisation”. The simulations with a successful
localisation of damage were picked out, before the simulations with ”Correct line” from
table 6.3 with a value of 1 were classified as successful. These simulations were then
summed up and divided by the total number of correct localisation estimates.
This was also done for all 4 cases.
Since the proposed method had 10 % increments in the damage severity in the mode
shape sets, the margin of failure for a successful run was set to ±5 %. To see if the
method is ”close” to guessing the correct severity estimation, the ”correct line” column from
table 6.3 can be looked at. The lower the number, the closer the line is to be estimated
as correct line.
6.8
Results from testing of the damage detection method
In this section the results from testing of the method described in section 6.7 are pre-
sented. The results are divided into two groups; the methods ability to detect the location
of the damage, and its ability to detect the severity of damage given that the method
already found the correct location.
6.8.1
Damage location
In this section the results from the testing of the method’s ability to localise damage is
presented. The procedure and success criterion is described in section 6.7. The results
can be seen in table 6.4.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Success rate
98 %
97 %
92 %
85 %
Table 6.4: The method’s performance to estimate correct damage location
6.8.2
Damage severity
In this section the results from the testing of the methods ability to identify the severity of
a damage, given that the method has successfully localised the damage, is presented.
The procedure and success criterion is described in section 6.7. The results can be seen
in table 6.5.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Success rate
85 %
84 %
73 %
69 %
Table 6.5: The method’s performance at estimating correct damage severity given correct
estimation of location
42
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:53==
6.9
Discussion of results
In this section the results presented in subsection 6.8.1 and 6.8.2 is discussed.
6.9.1
Damage location
It is from table 6.4 evident that the method is quite successful in detecting the damage
location in the structure investigated in this thesis.
In case 1, the baseline, the method shows a success rate of 98 %. As discussed before,
case 1 represents absolute ideal conditions for the method and it is therefore seen as the
best possible result.
In case 2, with noise in the signal, the success rate only drops by 1 % from the baseline
combination, case 1. This indicates that the damage detection method is quite robust
against noise in the signal, and can handle the realistic signal noise set to 60 DB in this
project.
Case 3, with deviations in model A’s Young’s modulus shows a success rate of 92 %. This
is a 5 % drop from case 2 and a 6 % drop from case 1. This shows that the change in the
models influences the method’s ability to detect the damage location to some extent.
Case 4, with deviations in model A’s Young’s modulus and masses gave a success rate
of 85 %. This is a drop of 13 % from case 1, and 7 % from case 3. This indicates, like in
case 3 that further differences in mode shapes influences the performance of the method.
The success rates for all 4 cases is quite good, especially for the 3 first cases with success
rates of over 90 % is seen as good results. The success rate drops when the models start
to deviate from each other. This was expected, since the method heavily relies on the
mode shapes.
6.9.2
Damage severity
As with damage localisation, table 6.5 shows that the method’s success rate in severity
estimation decreases when the cases gets more realistic. The decrease is 1-11-4 %
between the four cases. This shows that the drop from case 2 to 3 is the largest. This
differs from the performance drops seen in damage location, where the biggest drop was
between case 3 and 4. It is not clear why these are not similar.
From table 6.4 and table 6.5 it is evident that with the success rates defined in subsec-
tion 6.7.3, the method performed better when estimating the location of damage than the
damage severity. One could argue that the margin of ± 5 % is small, and that a larger
margin would perform better, and still be useful in a real world application.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:55==
7
Further investigations of results
In this section the goal was to investigate why the damage detection method some times
failed to detect the location of damage. The results from the methods ability to predict
severity is also investigated further.
7.1
Damage severity of failed damage localisations
To better understand why the method sometimes fail to detect the location of damage, it
was chosen to investigate what severities of damage were simulated when the method
failed. In table 7.1 the mean values and standard deviations of damage severities when
the method failed to detect the location of damage is presented.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Mean of severity
14 %
16 %
30 %
30 %
Std of severity
3 %
8 %
18 %
20 %
Table 7.1: Mean values of damage severity when location estimation failed
It is from table 7.1 evident that the method failed more often when the damage is small.
This makes sense since a smaller damage severity would lead to smaller deviations in the
mode shapes, and it was also predicted in chapter 2. Table 7.1 also shows that the method
failed at higher damage severities when differences was introduced in the models. Even
though the mean of the severities is the same for case 3 and 4, the standard deviation
increases. This makes sense for the same reasons.
7.2
Location of damage
It was decided to investigate at which location in the structure the method had the most
problems with identifying the location of damage.
Table 7.2 presents the amount of failed damage location detections per damaged node.
Wrong estimation of damage location
Node
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
1
0
0
2
1
2
0
0
0
4
3
0
0
0
5
4
0
0
0
4
5
11
11
34
42
6
16
18
28
39
7
1
4
17
37
8
1
2
18
33
9
0
0
0
3
10
0
0
1
5
11
0
0
0
2
12
0
0
0
4
Sum
29
35
100
179
Table 7.2: Number of failed damage location estimations per node
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
45
==PAGE:56==
From Table 7.2 it is clear that the method struggles the most with detecting damage loca-
tion in the first floor (node 5-8) of the structure. There is only a few failed estimations in
the ground floor and top floor combined in case 1-3.
There is no clear reason to why the method should fail more often in damage localisation
in the first floor than in the rest of the structure.
7.2.1
Moments
To further investigate why the method struggles to localise damage in the first floor, it was
decided to look at the moments in the structure from the applied loads. This was done by
applying 1 kN load to the same DOF’s as the dynamic loading was applied, as shown in
Figure 6.1. This resulted in the moment diagrams seen in Figure 7.1.
(a) Moments in y-direction
(b) Moments in z-direction
Figure 7.1: Moments in structure from applied forces
From fig. 7.1 it is evident that the moments on the structure is largest at the base columns.
The method was therefore expected to perform best in regards to damage location esti-
mation in node 1-4. From Table 7.2 its clear that the method performs quite well in the
ground floor, but the method performs similarly well in the top floor, even tough the mo-
ments are smaller there. There are also no big difference in the moments between the
top floor and the first floor, even though the method works quite much better in the top
floor.
This could indicate that the moments in the structure does not correspond to how well the
method performs.
7.2.2
MAC values
The main driver of the method is the mode shapes, more precise the differences in the
mode shapes. It was therefore speculated that the poor performance of the method in the
first floor could be due to very similar mode shapes.
46
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:57==
Damaged node
Mode shape 1
Mode shape 2
Mode shape 3
1
0.9908
0.9797
0.9946
2
0.9908
0.9797
0.9946
3
0.9921
0.9857
0.9923
4
0.9921
0.9857
0.9923
5
0.9763
0.9732
0.9938
6
0.9763
0.9732
0.9938
7
0.9854
0.9832
0.9930
8
0.9854
0.9832
0.9930
9
0.9932
0.9872
0.9964
10
0.9932
0.9872
0.9964
11
0.9926
0.9913
0.9928
12
0.9926
0.9913
0.9928
Table 7.3: MAC values between model A and B at each possible damage location between
the three first mode shapes with 90 % reduction in Young’s modulus. Green color indicates
small differences, while red color indicates larger differences.
Table 7.3 shows the MAC values between model A and B when a damage is introduced
to model B in different places. The damage severity was set to 90 %. Mode 1 of model A
is compared with mode 1 of model B and so on.
From table 7.3 it is clear that the first floor has the lowest MAC values. Damages in the
first floor creates lower MAC values than damages in the ground and top floor in mode 1
and 2. The first floor also has lower MAC values than the top floor in all 3 modes. This
contradicts the speculations that the higher MAC values results in worse performance of
the method.
7.3
Estimated damage severity
In this section the performance of the damage severity estimation is investigated. Since
the method’s performance as seen in table 6.5 is obtained with ± 5 % margin, it could be
interesting to see how the rest of the estimations are spread out. To investigate this, the
mean and absolute mean of the difference between the actual and the estimated severity
was taken of the simulations where the method estimated correct damage location, but
incorrect severity. This can be found in table 7.4.
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Mean
-0.9 %
-0.1 %
-1.2 %
-1.5 %
Abs mean
7.2 %
7.9 %
9.6 %
11.4 %
Table 7.4: Mean and absolute mean of difference between actual and estimated damage
severity
The results from table 7.4 shows that the method predicts higher damage severity than the
actual damage severity when the method fails, indicating that the method is conservative
in its predictions. These are not huge numbers, and the wrong estimations are quite
centered around the actual severity.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
47
==PAGE:58==
Table 7.4 also shows that when the method predicts the wrong damage severity, it is still
relatively close to the actual damage, with absolute mean of 7, 8, 10 and 11 %. This could
indicate that a small increase in the margin for success would influence the success rate
of the method greatly.
48
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:59==
8
Conclusions and further work
8.1
Summary
The main objective of this work was to detect the damage location and the damage
severity in a structure exposed to dynamic loading using the proposed damage detec-
tion method.
The idea of the method is to utilise signal synthesising of displacement time histories, by
using mode shapes with known properties. The signal synthesising reveals differences
between the assumed mode shapes and the actual underlying mode shapes in the signal
as error estimates. The method utilises these error estimates to find the damage locations
and the severities. The error estimates could also be used to detect damage occurrence,
but it was however not a part of this project.
The method was tested on a steel frame with concrete hollow core slabs as flooring and
roof working as rigid diaphragms. Four different cases were created to test the methods
robustness to noise and deviations between models. Each case was tested by running
1200 damage simulations, 100 in each connection, with varying severities.
8.2
Conclusions
The testing of the method showed promising results. The method estimated the damage
location with high accuracy. The damage detection method showed promising results
for all the cases of interest. Noise had little influence on the performance, but changes
between the numerical models had larger negative effects. This was expected, since the
method relies heavily on the mode shapes to detect damages.
The method managed to detect the location of damages with all the applied severities
with the smallest being a reduction of the E-modulus of only 9 %. When the method did
fail to detect damage location, it was often associated with a lower damage severity.
The methods ability to estimate the damage severity given correct damage location es-
timation were also promising. However, not as high as for damage localisation with the
given success criterion. When the method failed to estimate the severity of the damage
according to the aforementioned success criterion, the estimated severity did not deviate
greatly from the actual severity.
Even though the overall performance of the method seems promising, the method showed
some weaknesses and failed to localise damages in certain parts of the structure more
than others. The method’s problems in some parts of the structure was not something
that could be explained by moments in the structure nor the mode shapes.
The main issue of the method was the aforementioned failures to detect some of the ap-
plied damages in certain places of the structure. However, the failed damage localisations
were often associated with lower damage severities. These facts indicate that the method
could perform well for real case applications.
8.3
Further work
During the work of this thesis we have stumbled upon several areas of studies that could
have been interesting to investigate further, but they have not been in the scope or time
frame of this project. Some of them are listed below.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
49
==PAGE:60==
8.3.1
Data from real structure
It would be interesting to test the method on data from a real structure, instead of us-
ing simulated time history data as was the case in this work. This could show how real
modeling errors would affect the method’s performance.
8.3.2
Model updating - MAC values
The damage detection method performed best when model A and model B were as similar
as possible. Accordingly, it would (greatly) enhance/improve the method’s results/efficacy
to apply a model-updating algorithm to ensure that the models are as equal as possible.
Notwithstanding the numerous studies[31] in the field of model updating (e.g. the sensi-
tivity method[32]), we decided not to include it in this work since the field is so vast.
8.3.3
Changes in natural frequency
When a damage occurs, there will be a change in the natural frequency of the structure.
There have been a lot of investigations[33][34] utilising these changes in the natural fre-
quencies to detect damage in a structure, and it could be interesting to combine these
changes in natural frequencies with the method presented in this thesis to strengthen the
performance.
8.3.4
Damage occurrence
The time window of the damage occurrence is as previously mentioned used to obtain
the damaged mode shapes. The time window of the damage occurrence is manually
extracted by reading the time history of the error estimate, but should instead be auto-
matically extracted so as to render the method semi-automated/(fully) automated.
8.3.5
Mid section of structure
The poorer performance on the first floor of the structure is unexpected, and the causes
of this are (as of yet) not known. This should be a priority for further investigations of the
method.
8.3.6
Sensor placement and measurements
This work did not investigate different placings of the sensors. It could be interesting to
see how different configurations of sensor placements would affect the performance of
the method.
In the final work of this thesis, we experimented with the use of acceleration instead of
displacement as measurements from the sensors on the structure. The damage detection
method’s performance using the acceleration measurements was tested on case 4 from
chapter 6, and it seemed to perform worse when estimating the location of the damage,
with the new success rate being 81 %, down from 85 % using the displacements. The
difference is small, and it would be interesting to further investigate this.
8.3.7
Different materials
The frame of the structure was - as mentioned in chapter 5 - steel. Even tough changes in
the material are not expected to have an influence on the method’s performance, it would
be interesting to verify this by building a similar model using another material to compare.
50
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
ReportLinker. Global Structural Health Monitoring Market Size, Share Industry Trends
Analysis Report By Technology, By End Use, By Offering, By Hardware Type, By
Regional Outlook and Forecast, 2021 - 2027. 2022. URL: https://www.reportlinker.
com/p06249536/Global-Structural-Health-Monitoring-Market-Size-Share-Industry-
Trends-Analysis-Report-By-Technology-By-End-Use-By-Offering-By-Hardware-Type-
By-Regional-Outlook-and-Forecast.html?utm_source=GNW (visited on 04/21/2022).
[2]
Onur Avci et al. “A review of vibration-based damage detection in civil structures:
From traditional methods to Machine Learning and Deep Learning applications”. In:
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 147 (2021), p. 107077. ISSN: 0888-
3270. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107077. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888327020304635.
[3]
Xuan Kong, C. Cai, and Jiexuan Hu. “The State-of-the-Art on Framework of Vibration-
Based Structural Damage Identification for Decision Making”. In: Applied Sciences
(Switzerland) 7 (May 2017). DOI: 10.3390/app7050497.
[4]
Gianluca Ruocci, Antonino Quattrone, and Alessandro De Stefano. “Multi-domain
feature selection aimed at the damage detection of historical bridges”. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 305 (July 2011), p. 012106. DOI: 10.1088/1742-
6596/305/1/012106.
[5]
Sergio H.S. Carneiro. “Model-Based Vibration Diagnostic of Cracked Beams in the
Time Domain”. In: 2000.
[6]
Vibration based health monitoring for a lightweight truss structure: Experimental
assessment of several statistical time series methods. https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0888327010001561?via%3Dihub. Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[7]
Dominik Scherer, Andreas Müller, and Sven Behnke. “Evaluation of Pooling Op-
erations in Convolutional Architectures for Object Recognition”. In: Artificial Neural
Networks – ICANN 2010. Ed. by Konstantinos Diamantaras, Wlodek Duch, and
Lazaros S. Iliadis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 92–
101. ISBN: 978-3-642-15825-4.
[8]
Serkan Kiranyaz et al. “Face segmentation in thumbnail images by data-adaptive
convolutional segmentation networks”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP). 2016, pp. 2306–2310. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2016.7532770.
[9]
Dan Claudiu Cireşan et al. “Deep, Big, Simple Neural Nets for Handwritten Digit
Recognition”. In: Neural Computation 22.12 (Dec. 2010), pp. 3207–3220. ISSN:
0899-7667. DOI: 10.1162/NECO_a_00052. eprint: https://direct.mit.edu/neco/
article-pdf/22/12/3207/842857/neco\_a\_00052.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/
NECO%5C_a%5C_00052.
[10]
Serkan Kiranyaz, Turker Ince, and Moncef Gabbouj. “Real-Time Patient-Specific
ECG Classification by 1-D Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 63.3 (2016), pp. 664–675. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2015.
2468589.
[11]
Osama Abdeljaber et al. “Fault detection and severity identification of ball bear-
ings by online condition monitoring”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
66.10 (2018), pp. 8136–8147.
[12]
Serkan Kiranyaz et al. “Real-time fault detection and identification for MMC using
1-D convolutional neural networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
66.11 (2018), pp. 8760–8771.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
51
==PAGE:62==
[13]
Rune Brincker and Carlos E. Ventura. Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis.
John Wiley Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
8SQ, United Kingdom: Wiley, 2015.
[14]
White noise. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_noise. Accessed: 2022-06-09.
[15]
Vasilis Z Marmarelis. “Appendix 2 - Gaussian White Noise”. In: Nonlinear dynamic
modeling of physiological systems. Wiley-Interscience, 2004, pp. 499–499. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780471679370.app2.
[16]
What is an Orthonormal Vector? https://deepai.org/machine-learning-glossary-and-
terms/orthonormal-vectors. Accessed: 2022-06-29.
[17]
Stuart Riffle. Understanding the Fourier transform. URL: https://web.archive.org/
web/20120418231513/http://www.altdevblogaday.com/2011/05/17/understanding-
the-fourier-transform/ (visited on 05/27/2022).
[18]
Nyquist Frequency. https://www.ni.com/en- no/innovations/white- papers/06/
understanding-ffts-and-windowing.html. Accessed: 2022-05-31.
[19]
Nyquist Frequency. https://mathworld.wolfram.com/NyquistFrequency.html. Ac-
cessed: 2022-05-31.
[20]
Steen Krenk. Dynamics of structures. Kgs. Lyngby Denmark: Department of Me-
chanical Engineering Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[21]
Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC). https://community.sw.siemens.com/s/article/
modal-assurance-criterion-mac. Accessed: 2022-06-16.
[22]
geomTransf commands. https : / / openseespydoc . readthedocs . io / en / latest / src /
geomTransf.html. Accessed: 2022-06-24.
[23]
Rigid Diaphragms. https://skyciv.com/docs/structural-3d/modelling/rigid-diaphragms/.
Accessed: 2022-06-13.
[24]
Raymond A Serway. Physics for scientists engineers. Philadelphia : Saunders Col-
lege Pub., 1986. URL: https://archive.org/details/physicsforscient02serw/page/202/
mode/2up.
[25]
Altair SimSolid Modal Participation Factors. https://www.altair.com/newsroom/
articles/altair-simsolid-modal-participation-factors/. Accessed: 2022-06-17.
[26]
Bo Li et al. “The Eigenfunction Method for Determining Displacement Time History in
Structural Dynamic Analysis”. In: Periodica Polytechnica Civil Engineering (2019).
[27]
Herbert Goldstein, Charles Poole, and John Safko. Classical mechanics. 2002.
[28]
MA Hadianfard. “Using integrated displacement method to time-history analysis of
steel frames with nonlinear flexible connections”. In: Structural engineering and me-
chanics: An international journal 41.5 (2012), pp. 675–689.
[29]
Rubén L Boroschek and Denis Legrand. “Tilt motion effects on the double-time in-
tegration of linear accelerometers: an experimental approach”. In: Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 96.6 (2006), pp. 2072–2089.
[30]
Sung-Ho Joh et al. “Experimental verification of displacement estimation algorithm
using velocity time History”. In: Journal of the Korean Society of Safety 30.4 (2015),
pp. 99–105.
[31]
John E Mottershead and MI Friswell. “Model updating in structural dynamics: a sur-
vey”. In: Journal of sound and vibration 167.2 (1993), pp. 347–375.
[32]
John E Mottershead, Michael Link, and Michael I Friswell. “The sensitivity method
in finite element model updating: A tutorial”. In: Mechanical systems and signal pro-
cessing 25.7 (2011), pp. 2275–2296.
[33]
S Hassiotis. “Identification of damage using natural frequencies and Markov param-
eters”. In: Computers & Structures 74.3 (2000), pp. 365–373.
52
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:63==
[34]
K He and WD Zhu. “Structural damage detection using changes in natural frequen-
cies: theory and applications”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 305.
1. IOP Publishing. 2011, p. 012054.
[35]
ULS design of steel member. https://eurocodeapplied.com/design/en1993/flanged-
steel-beam-column-uls-design. Accessed: 2022-06-01.
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:65==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
55
==PAGE:66==
A
Models
A.1
Base code for models
1
2
import openseespy.opensees as ops
3
4
def get_element_nr(a,b):
5
return int(f"{a}{b}")
6
7
8
def createModel_with_damage(H, L1, L2, M1, M2, damages , E_damaged): # L1 in x-
direction , L2 in y-direction , M1 at roof, M2 at 1. floor
9
10
11
# Units
12
# -----------
13
m = 1
14
mm = 0.001*m
15
16
Pa = 1
17
GPa = 1e9*Pa
18
19
20
# Cross section dimensions
21
# -------------------------
22
h_c = 4 * 200 * mm # cross-sectional height of columns
23
h_b = 4 * 220 * mm # cross-sectional height of beams
24
25
# Rotational mass
26
# -----------------
27
28
MZ1 = (1/12)*M1*(L1**2+L2**2) -4*(M1/4*((L1/2)**2+(L2/2)**2))
29
MZ2 = (1/12)*M2*(L1**2+L2**2) -4*(M2/4*((L1/2)**2+(L2/2)**2))
30
31
ops.model('basic', '-ndm', 3, '-ndf', 6)
32
33
# definition of nodes
34
# ----------------
35
# node(nodeTag , *crds)
36
37
ops.node(1, 0, 0, 0) # floor 1 (ground)
38
ops.node(2, 0, L2, 0) # ..
39
ops.node(3, L1, 0, 0) # ..
40
ops.node(4, L1, L2, 0) # floor 1 (ground)
41
ops.node(5, 0, 0, H) # floor 2
42
ops.node(6, 0, L2, H) # ..
43
ops.node(7, L1, 0, H) # ..
44
ops.node(8, L1, L2, H) # floor 2
45
ops.node(9, 0, 0, 2*H) # floor 3
46
ops.node(10, 0, L2, 2*H) # ..
47
ops.node(11, L1, 0, 2*H) # ..
48
ops.node(12, L1, L2, 2*H) # roof
49
50
# Damage nodes joint 5 and column 1
51
ops.node(101, 0, 0, h_c)
52
ops.node(105, 0, 0, H-h_c)
53
ops.node(205, 0, 0, H+h_c)
54
ops.node(305, h_b, 0, H)
56
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:67==
55
ops.node(405, 0, h_b, H)
56
57
58
# Damage nodes joint 6 and column 2
59
ops.node(102, 0, L2, h_c)
60
ops.node(106, 0, L2, H-h_c)
61
ops.node(206, 0, L2, H+h_c)
62
ops.node(306, h_b, L2, H)
63
ops.node(406, 0, L2-h_b, H)
64
65
# Damage nodes joint 7 and column 3
66
ops.node(103, L1, 0, h_c)
67
ops.node(107, L1, 0, H-h_c)
68
ops.node(207, L1, 0, H+h_c)
69
ops.node(307, L1-h_b, 0, H)
70
ops.node(407, L1, h_b, H)
71
72
# Damage nodes joint 8 and column 4
73
ops.node(104, L1, L2, h_c)
74
ops.node(108, L1, L2, H-h_c)
75
ops.node(208, L1, L2, H+h_c)
76
ops.node(308, L1, L2-h_b, H)
77
ops.node(408, L1-h_b, L2, H)
78
79
# Damage nodes joint 9
80
ops.node(109, 0, 0, 2*H-h_c)
81
ops.node(209, h_b, 0, 2*H)
82
ops.node(309, 0, h_b, 2*H)
83
84
# Damage nodes joint 10
85
ops.node(110, 0, L2, 2*H-h_c)
86
ops.node(210, 0, L2-h_b, 2*H)
87
ops.node(310, h_b, L2, 2*H)
88
89
# Damage nodes joint 11
90
ops.node(111, L1, 0, 2*H-h_c)
91
ops.node(211, L1-h_b, 0,2*H)
92
ops.node(311, L1, h_b, 2*H)
93
94
# Damage nodes joint 12
95
ops.node(112, L1,L2, 2*H-h_c)
96
ops.node(212, L1, L2-h_b, 2*H)
97
ops.node(312, L1-h_b, L2, 2*H)
98
99
100
ops.fix(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)
101
ops.fix(2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)
102
ops.fix(3, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)
103
ops.fix(4, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)
104
105
106
# Define diaphragms
107
# ----------------------------------------
108
109
# Master nodes for rigid diaphragm
110
# tag
X, Y, Z
111
ops.node(21, L1/2, L2/2, H)
112
ops.node(22, L1/2, L2/2, 2*H)
113
114
115
#rigidDiaphragm(perpDirn , rNodeTag , *cNodeTags)
116
ops.rigidDiaphragm(3, 21, *[5,405,406,6,306,408,8,308,407,7,307,305])
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
57
==PAGE:68==
117
ops.rigidDiaphragm(3, 22, *[9,309,210,10,310,312,12,212,311,11,211,209])
118
119
120
# Constraints for rigid diaphragm master nodes
121
122
# tag
DX DY DZ RX RY RZ
123
ops.fix(21, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0)
124
ops.fix(22, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0)
125
126
127
128
# Define nodal masses
129
# -------------------------------
130
131
132
# Correct mass distribution according to Luigi
133
134
ops.mass(21, *[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, MZ1])
135
136
ops.mass(5,M1/4,M1/4,0,0,0,0)
137
ops.mass(6,M1/4,M1/4,0,0,0,0)
138
ops.mass(7,M1/4,M1/4,0,0,0,0)
139
ops.mass(8,M1/4,M1/4,0,0,0,0)
140
141
ops.mass(22, *[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, MZ2])
142
143
ops.mass(9,M2/4,M2/4,0,0,0,0)
144
ops.mass(10,M2/4,M2/4,0,0,0,0)
145
ops.mass(11,M2/4,M2/4,0,0,0,0)
146
ops.mass(12,M2/4,M2/4,0,0,0,0)
147
148
149
150
# Element properties
151
# ---------------------
152
153
# Column
154
155
Area_c = 7.81*10**3 * mm**2
156
E_mod_c = 210 * GPa
157
G_mod_c = 79.3 * GPa
158
Jxx_c = 495.9*10**3 * mm**4
159
Iy_c = 56.96*10**6 * mm**4
160
Iz_c = 20.03*10**6 * mm**4
161
162
# Beam
163
164
Area_b = 3.34*10**3 * mm**2
165
E_mod_b = 210 * GPa
166
G_mod_b = 79.3 * GPa
167
Jxx_b = 89.82*10**3 * mm**4
168
Iy_b = 27.27*10**6 * mm**4
169
Iz_b = 2.049*10**6 * mm**4
170
171
172
# Define geometric transformations
173
# ----------------------------------
174
LinearGeomTX = 1
175
LinearGeomTY = 2
176
PDeltaGeomT = 3
177
178
# GeoTran
type
tag
58
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:69==
179
ops.geomTransf('Linear', LinearGeomTX ,0,0,1)
#for beams in x-direction
180
ops.geomTransf('Linear', LinearGeomTY ,0,0,1)
#for beams in y-direction
181
ops.geomTransf('PDelta', PDeltaGeomT ,1,0,0)
#for columns
182
183
184
185
186
column_pairs = [[1, 101],
187
[101, 105],
188
[105, 5],
189
[5, 205],
190
[205, 109],
191
[109, 9],
192
[2, 102],
193
[102, 106],
194
[106, 6],
195
[6, 206],
196
[206, 110],
197
[110, 10],
198
[3, 103],
199
[103, 107],
200
[107, 7],
201
[7, 207],
202
[207, 111],
203
[111, 11],
204
[4, 104],
205
[104, 108],
206
[108, 8],
207
[8, 208],
208
[208, 112],
209
[112, 12]]
210
211
beam_pairs_x = [[7, 307],
212
[307, 305],
213
[305, 5],
214
[8, 408],
215
[408, 306],
216
[306, 6],
217
[11, 211],
218
[211, 209],
219
[209, 9],
220
[12, 312],
221
[312, 310],
222
[310, 10]]
223
224
225
beam_pairs_y = [[5, 405],
226
[405, 406],
227
[406, 6],
228
[7, 407],
229
[407, 308],
230
[308, 8],
231
[9, 309],
232
[309, 210],
233
[210, 10],
234
[11, 311],
235
[311, 212],
236
[212, 12]]
237
238
# Define element(s)
239
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
59
==PAGE:70==
240
# element('elasticBeamColumn', eleTag , *eleNodes , Area, E_mod, G_mod, Jxx,
Iy, Iz, transfTag , <'-mass', mass>, <'-cMass'>)
241
242
#columns
243
for pair in column_pairs:
244
element_nr = get_element_nr(pair[0], pair[1])
245
246
247
if element_nr in damages:
248
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_c ,
E_damaged , G_mod_c , Jxx_c, Iy_c, Iz_c, PDeltaGeomT)
249
else:
250
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_c ,
E_mod_c , G_mod_c , Jxx_c, Iy_c, Iz_c, PDeltaGeomT)
251
252
# Beams X
253
for pair in beam_pairs_x:
254
element_nr = get_element_nr(pair[0], pair[1])
255
if element_nr in damages:
256
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_b ,
E_damaged , G_mod_b , Jxx_b, Iy_b, Iz_b, LinearGeomTX)
257
else:
258
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_b ,
E_mod_b , G_mod_b , Jxx_b, Iy_b, Iz_b, LinearGeomTX)
259
260
# Beams Y
261
for pair in beam_pairs_y:
262
element_nr = get_element_nr(pair[0], pair[1])
263
264
if element_nr in damages:
265
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_b ,
E_damaged , G_mod_b , Jxx_b, Iy_b, Iz_b, LinearGeomTY)
266
else:
267
ops.element('elasticBeamColumn', element_nr , *pair, Area_b ,
E_mod_b , G_mod_b , Jxx_b, Iy_b, Iz_b, LinearGeomTY)
60
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Mass and verification
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
61
==PAGE:72==
[35]
62
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:73==
[35]
A.3
Damping
1
def apply_dampening(omega):
2
omega1_ray = omega[0]
3
omega2_ray = omega[2]
4
5
dampRatio = 0.02
6
7
# normal parameters as in dynamics of structures
8
alphaM = 2.0*dampRatio*omega1_ray*omega2_ray/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
9
betaKcurr = 0
10
betaKinit = 0
11
betaKcomm = 2.0*dampRatio/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
63
==PAGE:74==
12
13
ops.rayleigh(alphaM , betaKcurr , betaKinit , betaKcomm)
A.4
Dynamic properties
1
# MODAL ANALYSIS REPORT
2
3
* 1. DOMAIN SIZE:
4
# This is the size of the problem: 2 for 2D problems , 3 for 3D problems.
5
3
6
7
8
* 2. EIGENVALUE ANALYSIS:
9
#
MODE
LAMBDA
OMEGA
FREQUENCY
PERIOD
10
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
11
1
218.201
14.7716
2.35098
0.425355
12
2
344.267
18.5544
2.95303
0.338635
13
3
807.114
28.4097
4.52155
0.221163
14
15
16
* 3. TOTAL MASS OF THE STRUCTURE:
17
# The total masses (translational and rotational) of the structure
18
# including the masses at fixed DOFs (if any).
19
#
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
20
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
-------------
21
10383.4
10383.4
0
35664.5
35664.5
21632.1
22
23
24
* 4. TOTAL FREE MASS OF THE STRUCTURE:
25
# The total masses (translational and rotational) of the structure
26
# including only the masses at free DOFs.
27
#
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
28
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
-------------
29
10383.4
10383.4
0
35664.5
35664.5
21632.1
30
31
32
* 5. CENTER OF MASS:
33
# The center of mass of the structure , calculated from free masses.
34
#
X
Y
Z
35
# ------------- ------------- -------------
36
2
1.5
4.55
37
38
39
* 6. MODAL PARTICIPATION FACTORS:
40
# The participation factor for a certain mode 'a' in a certain direction 'i'
41
# indicates how strongly displacement along (or rotation about)
42
# the global axes is represented in the eigenvector of that mode.
43
#
MODE
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
44
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
------------- -------------
45
1
0
-1.21083
0
1.41586
0
0
64
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:75==
46
2
1.22363
0
0
0
1.60077
0
47
3
0
0
0
0
0
-2.43938
48
49
50
* 7. MODAL PARTICIPATION MASSES:
51
# The modal participation masses for each mode.
52
#
MODE
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
53
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
------------- -------------
54
1
0
9437.38
0
12903.9
0
0
55
2
8975.44
0
0
0
15360.8
0
56
3
0
0
0
0
0
19148.6
57
58
59
* 8. MODAL PARTICIPATION MASSES (cumulative):
60
# The cumulative modal participation masses for each mode.
61
#
MODE
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
62
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
------------- -------------
63
1
0
9437.38
0
12903.9
0
0
64
2
8975.44
9437.38
0
12903.9
15360.8
0
65
3
8975.44
9437.38
0
12903.9
15360.8
19148.6
66
67
68
* 9. MODAL PARTICIPATION MASS RATIOS (\%):
69
# The modal participation mass ratios (\%) for each mode.
70
#
MODE
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
71
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
------------- -------------
72
1
0
90.8891
0
36.1815
0
0
73
2
86.4402
0
0
0
43.0703
0
74
3
0
0
0
0
0
88.5195
75
76
77
* 10. MODAL PARTICIPATION MASS RATIOS (\%) (cumulative):
78
# The cumulative modal participation mass ratios (\%) for each mode.
79
#
MODE
MX
MY
MZ
RMX
RMY
RMZ
80
# ------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
------------- -------------
81
1
0
90.8891
0
36.1815
0
0
82
2
86.4402
90.8891
0
36.1815
43.0703
0
83
3
86.4402
90.8891
0
36.1815
43.0703
88.5195
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
65
==PAGE:76==
A.5
Changes applied to mother nature model
A.5.1
Change in E-modulus
1
def get_e_mod():
2
mean = 210*GPa
3
std = 0.02 * mean
4
return np.random.normal(mean, std, 1)[0]
A.5.2
Change in mass
1
def get_mass(M):
2
mean = M
3
std = 0.02 * mean
4
return np.random.normal(mean, std, 1)[0]
5
6
# Rotational mass
7
# -----------------
8
9
MZ1 = (1/12)*M1*(L1**2+L2**2) -4*(M1/4*((L1/2)**2+(L2/2)**2))
10
MZ2 = (1/12)*M2*(L1**2+L2**2) -4*(M2/4*((L1/2)**2+(L2/2)**2))
11
MZ1_edge = 0
12
MZ2_edge = 0
13
14
for i in range(5,9):
15
M = get_mass(M1)/4
16
ops.mass(i, M, M, 0, 0, 0, MZ1_edge)
17
18
for i in range(9,13):
19
M = get_mass(M2)/4
20
ops.mass(i, M, M, 0, 0, 0, MZ2_edge)
66
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:77==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
67
==PAGE:78==
B
Implementation of method
B.1
Applied load and response recordings
1
import numpy as np
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
from lineplot import lineplot
4
5
6
def get_white_noise(dt, duration , mean, std, window_amp):
7
8
x = np.arange(0, duration , dt)
9
num_samples = np.size(x)
10
11
samples = np.random.normal(mean, std, size=num_samples)
12
13
14
window = np.ones(np.size(x))
15
window[3500:4000] = window_amp
16
17
load = samples * window
18
return load
1
import openseespy.opensees as ops
2
import opsvis as opsv
3
4
5
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6
import numpy as np
7
8
9
from ReadRecord import ReadRecord
10
from white_noise import get_white_noise
11
from lineplot import lineplot
12
from units import *
13
from change_parameter import change_parameter
14
15
16
import timeit
17
18
19
def noise_load(T, damages , E_damaged):
20
21
22
loaded_nodes = [5, 6, 9, 10]
23
24
create_load = True
25
dt = 0.05
26
duration = T[0] * 1000
27
mean = 0
28
std = 1
29
window_amp = 1
30
loadfactor = 1
31
32
if create_load:
33
loadings = []
34
68
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:79==
35
for i in range(6):
36
loadings.append(get_white_noise(dt, duration , mean, std,
window_amp))
37
38
39
# Define Recorders
40
output_directory = 'output_files_white_noise'
41
42
ops.recorder('Node', '-file', output_directory+'/linear_accel_x.out',
43
'-time', '-node', *[7, 8, 11, 12],
'-dof', 1,
'disp')
44
ops.recorder('Node', '-file', output_directory+'/linear_accel_y.out',
45
'-time', '-node', *[7, 11],
'-dof', 2,
'disp')
46
47
48
# Define dynamic load in the horizontal directions
49
# ------------------
50
#time series with tag 1
51
52
if create_load:
53
for j, i in enumerate(loadings):
54
ops.timeSeries('Path', j+1, '-dt', dt, '-values', *list(i), '-
factor', loadfactor)
55
else:
56
loadings = np.loadtxt('white_noise.txt')
57
for j in range(np.size(loadings ,axis=1)):
58
ops.timeSeries('Path', j+1, '-dt', dt, '-values', *loadings[:,j],
'-factor', loadfactor)
59
60
61
j = 1
62
for i in loaded_nodes:
63
#a, b, c = [int(a) for a in str(i)]
64
#pattern(
'UniformExcitation', patternTag , dir,'-accel',
accelSeriesTag)
65
ops.pattern('Plain', j,
1,
'-accel', j)
66
ops.load(i, *[1,0,0,0,0,0])
67
j += 1
68
if i in [5,9]:
69
ops.pattern('Plain', j,
2,
'-accel', j)
70
ops.load(i, *[0,1,0,0,0,0])
71
j += 1
72
73
74
# ---- Create Analysis
75
ops.constraints('Transformation')
#objects that handles the
constraints
76
ops.numberer('Plain')
#objects that numbers the DOFs
77
ops.system('FullGeneral')
#objects for solving the system of
equations
78
ops.test('NormDispIncr', 1e-12, 100)
#convergence test, defines the
tolerance and the number of iterations
79
ops.algorithm('Newton')
#algorithm for solving the nonlinear
equations
80
81
ops.integrator('Newmark',0.5, 0.25)
# integration method
gamma=0.5
beta=0.25
82
83
ops.analysis('Transient')
#creates a dynamic analysis
84
85
86
# ---- Analyze model
87
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
69
==PAGE:80==
88
89
current_time = 0
# start the time of the analysis
90
ok = 0
# as long as ok remains 0.0 it means that the analysis
converges
91
maxT =
duration
# final time of the analysis
92
93
94
95
j = 0
96
#
ops.updateParameter(1, 0.1 * 210 * GPa)
97
98
99
while ok == 0 and current_time <maxT:
100
ok = ops.analyze(1,dt)
101
current_time = ops.getTime()
102
if current_time > 0.5 * maxT and j == 0:
103
change_parameter(len(damages), E_damaged)
104
j += 1
105
elif current_time > 0.5 * maxT + 120 and j == 1:
106
change_parameter(len(damages), 210*GPa)
107
j += 1
108
109
110
if ok == 0: print("-----------------Dynamic analysis successfully
completed --------------------")
111
else: print(f"-----------------Analysis FAILED at time {current_time
}--------------------")
112
113
114
115
# wipe analysis objects and set pseudo time to 0
116
ops.wipeAnalysis()
117
ops.loadConst()
118
ops.loadConst('-time', 0.0)
119
120
121
122
ops.wipe() # to close recorders
123
124
responses_x = np.loadtxt(output_directory+'/linear_accel_x.out')
125
responses_y = np.loadtxt(output_directory+'/linear_accel_y.out')
126
127
m, n_x = responses_x.shape
128
m, n_y = responses_y.shape
129
130
responses = np.zeros((m, n_x + n_y - 1))
131
responses[:,:n_x] = responses_x
132
responses[:,n_x:] = responses_y[:,1:]
133
134
135
added_noise = np.zeros((np.size(responses , axis=0), 6))
136
responses_with_noise = np.zeros((np.size(responses , axis=0), 7))
137
138
for i in range(6):
139
signal_noise = get_white_noise(dt, duration , mean, std, 1)
140
added_noise[:,i] = signal_noise * 5**-2 * np.std(responses[:,1:])
141
142
responses_with_noise[:,0] = responses[:,0]
143
responses_with_noise[:,1:] = responses[:,1:] + added_noise
144
145
146
filename_noise = 'MotherNatureWithDamage.txt'
70
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:81==
147
np.savetxt(r"C:.\OMA/"+ filename_noise , responses_with_noise)
B.2
Estimating damage occurrence
1
2
clear all
3
4
%Load data
5
filename = 'MotherNatureWithDamage.txt';
6
t = importdata(filename , ' ');
7
8
%Get timestep
9
dt = t(2,1) - t(1,1);
10
y = t(:,2:end);
11
12
13
[nr,nc] = size(y);
14
for c=1:nc,
15
y(:,c) = y(:,c) - mean(y(:,c));
16
end
17
18
Nfft = 1024*2^4;
19
20
%Filter the signal
21
yf = fftfilt1(y', Nfft, dt, 'bandpass', [3.436265, 2.5, 0.5]);
22
y = yf';
23
24
%Load the undamaged mode shapes
25
S = load('../all_modes.mat');
26
A = S.original_modes;
27
28
%Create the pseudo inverse of the mode shape matrix
29
A_inv = (A'*A)^-1*A';
30
31
%Get modal coordinates from mode shapes and signal
32
q_modal = A_inv * y';
33
34
%Estimate signal from mode shapes and modal coordinates
35
y_est = A * q_modal;
36
37
%Find difference between the real signal and the estimated
38
e = y - y_est ';
39
40
%Get moving standard deviation window of the difference between the real
signal and the estimated
41
for i=1:6
42
Y(i,:) = movstd(e(:,i)', 20000);
43
end
44
45
%Add the variances together by taking the mean
46
Y = sqrt(mean(Y.^2));
47
48
%Create x-axis
49
[nr,nc] = size(Y);
50
x = [1:nc]*dt;
51
52
plot(x',Y')
Listing B.1: Estimate error
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
71
==PAGE:82==
B.3
Identify placement and severity of damage
1
2
3
clear all
4
5
filename = 'MotherNatureWithDamage.txt';
6
t = importdata(filename , ' ');
7
8
dt = t(2,1) - t(1,1);
9
y = t(:,2:end);
10
11
12
[nr,nc] = size(y);
13
for c=1:nc,
14
y(:,c) = y(:,c) - mean(y(:,c));
15
end
16
17
Nfft = 1024*2^4;
18
19
yf = fftfilt1(y', Nfft, dt, 'bandpass', [3.436265, 2.5, 0.5]);
20
21
y = yf';
22
23
S = load('../all_modes.mat');
24
A = S.original_modes;
25
26
A_inv = (A'*A)^-1*A';
27
q_modal = A_inv * y';
28
29
y_est = A * q_modal;
30
31
e = y - y_est ';
32
33
for i=1:6
34
Y(i,:) = movstd(e(:,i)', 20000);
35
end
36
37
E = sqrt(mean(Y.^2));
38
39
modes = S.damaged_modeshapes;
40
41
42
[nr,nc,nm] = size(modes);
43
44
for i=1:nm,
45
A = modes(:,:,i);
46
A_inv = (A'*A)^-1*A';
47
q_modal = A_inv * y';
48
49
y_est = A * q_modal;
50
51
e = y - y_est ';
52
53
for i=1:6
54
Y(i,:) = movstd(e(:,i)', 20000);
55
end
56
57
Y = sqrt(mean(Y.^2));
58
59
E = [E; Y];
60
61
end
72
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:83==
62
63
start_damage = 96000;
64
end_damage = 99000;
65
66
67
possible_nodes = sqrt(diag(E(:,start_damage:end_damage)*E(:,start_damage:
end_damage)'))';
68
69
[v,i] = min(possible_nodes(2:end));
70
i
71
72
[nr,nc] = size(Y);
73
x = [1:nc]*dt;
74
75
76
77
plot(x', E')
78
title('Moving std. window of error estimate')
79
ylabel('Std. of error estimate')
80
xlabel('Time [s]')
81
82
legend({'original','Damage node 1', 'Damage node 2', 'Damage node 3', 'Damage
node 4', 'Damage node 5', 'Damage node 6', 'Damage node 7', 'Damage node 8
', 'Damage node 9', 'Damage node 10', 'Damage node 11', 'Damage node 12'})
B.4
Testing method
1
import openseespy.opensees as ops
2
import opsvis as opsv
3
4
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
import numpy as np
6
import scipy.io as sio
7
import getpass
8
9
10
from model_definition import createModel
11
from model_forceBeamColumn import createModelForceBeamColumn
12
from white_noise_loading import noise_load
13
from modeshape_vectors import modeshapevector
14
from damage_directory import d as damage
15
from full_analysis import damage_analysis
16
from units import *
17
from change_parameter import change_parameter
18
from get_modes_damage import get_modes
19
from model_with_damage import createModel_with_damage
20
import matlab.engine
21
import timeit
22
23
24
def define_parameter(elements):
25
j = 1
26
for i in elements:
27
ops.parameter(j, 'element', i, 'E')
28
j += 1
29
30
def create_mother_nature():
31
ops.wipe()
32
33
createModel(H, L1, L2, M1, M2)
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
73
==PAGE:84==
34
35
eigenValues = ops.eigen('-fullGenLapack', number_of_modes)
36
omega = np.sqrt(eigenValues)
37
38
T = 2*np.pi/omega
39
40
apply_dampening(omega)
41
42
return T
43
44
45
46
def apply_dampening(omega):
47
omega1_ray = omega[0]
48
omega2_ray = omega[2]
49
50
dampRatio = 0.02 # How is this decided?
51
52
# normal parameters as in dynamics of structures
53
alphaM = 2.0*dampRatio*omega1_ray*omega2_ray/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
54
betaKcurr = 0
55
betaKinit = 0
56
betaKcomm = 2.0*dampRatio/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
57
58
ops.rayleigh(alphaM , betaKcurr , betaKinit , betaKcomm)
59
60
def check_number(a):
61
numbers = []
62
for i in a:
63
if i in numbers:
64
return i
65
else:
66
numbers.append(i)
67
68
# time script
69
start = timeit.default_timer()
70
71
72
# ===========================================================================
73
# Inputs
74
# ===========================================================================
75
76
H = 3.5 *m
77
L1 = 4 *m
78
L2 = 3 *m
79
M1 = 5441.2 *kg
80
M2 = 4942.2 *kg
81
number_of_modes = 3
82
83
dampRatio = 0.02
84
85
86
# ===========================================================================
87
# Model creation
88
# ===========================================================================
89
90
ops.wipe()
91
92
createModel(H, L1, L2, M1, M2)
93
94
95
74
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:85==
96
# ===========================================================================
97
# Eigenvalues and plotting mode shapes
98
# ===========================================================================
99
100
eigenValues = ops.eigen('-fullGenLapack', number_of_modes)
101
omega = np.sqrt(eigenValues)
102
103
104
T = 2*np.pi/omega
105
106
107
108
109
# ===========================================================================
110
# Assign Rayleigh Damping
111
# ===========================================================================
112
113
114
115
omega1_ray = omega[0]
116
omega2_ray = omega[2]
117
118
dampRatio = 0.02 # How is this decided?
119
120
# normal parameters as in dynamics of structures
121
alphaM = 2.0*dampRatio*omega1_ray*omega2_ray/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
122
betaKcurr = 0
123
betaKinit = 0
124
betaKcomm = 2.0*dampRatio/(omega1_ray+omega2_ray)
125
126
ops.rayleigh(alphaM, betaKcurr , betaKinit , betaKcomm)
127
128
129
modes = modeshapevector(1,4)
130
131
132
damaged_nodes = np.array(range(1,13))
133
severities = np.array(range(1,10)) * 0.1
134
severities = np.around(severities ,1)
135
all_modeshapes = np.zeros((6, 3, np.size(damaged_nodes) * np.size(severities))
)
136
possibilities = {}
137
138
j = 0
139
for i in damaged_nodes:
140
for E_damaged in severities:
141
142
possibilities[j+1] = [i, E_damaged]
143
144
## Create model
145
ops.wipe()
146
createModel_with_damage(H, L1, L2, M1, M2, damage[i], E_damaged * 210*
GPa)
147
apply_dampening(omega)
148
149
## Find new mode shapes from new damaged model
150
eigenValues = ops.eigen('-fullGenLapack', number_of_modes)
151
all_modeshapes[:,:,j] = modeshapevector(1,4)
152
j += 1
153
154
results = {'original_modes':modes,
155
'damaged_modeshapes':all_modeshapes
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
75
==PAGE:86==
156
}
157
158
sio.savemat('all_modes.mat', results)
159
160
161
162
possible_damages = np.array(range(1,13))
163
nruns = 100
164
165
result = np.zeros((np.size(possible_damages) * nruns, 5))
166
167
count = 0
168
for dam in possible_damages:
169
for j in range(nruns):
170
print(f'Run {count+1} of {np.size(possible_damages) * nruns}')
171
T = create_mother_nature()
172
173
E_damaged = round(np.random.uniform(0.06,0.91) ,2)
174
175
define_parameter(damage[dam])
176
noise_load(2 * T, damage[dam], E_damaged * 210*GPa)
177
178
## Matlab
179
180
eng = matlab.engine.start_matlab()
181
possible_nodes = np.asarray(eng.compare_with_damage_octave_band_full(
nargout=1))
182
183
possible_nodes = np.reshape(possible_nodes ,109)
184
possible_nodes = possible_nodes[1:]
185
nodes_sorted = np.sort(possible_nodes)
186
187
numbers = 108
188
189
possible_result = np.zeros((numbers ,2))
190
191
for i in range(numbers):
192
location = np.argwhere(possible_nodes == nodes_sorted[i])
193
possible_result[i,:] = possibilities[location[0][0]+1]
194
195
correct = np.array([dam, np.around(E_damaged ,1)])
196
197
placement = np.argwhere(possible_result==correct)
198
estimated_placement = check_number(placement[:,0])
199
print(estimated_placement + 1)
200
201
202
# Damaged node, Predicted damaged node, severity , predicted severity
203
result[count ,:] = dam, possible_result[0,0], 1-E_damaged , 1-
possible_result[0,1], estimated_placement + 1
204
count += 1
205
206
207
208
209
210
stop = timeit.default_timer()
211
comp_time = round(stop - start ,3)
212
print('Computation Time: ', comp_time ,' sec evt.:', int(comp_time/60), 'min',
round(comp_time - int(comp_time/60) * 60, 2), ' sec' )
76
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:87==
1
2
3
function damaged_node = compare_with_damage_octave_band_full()
4
5
filename = 'MotherNatureWithDamage.txt';
6
t = importdata(filename , ' ');
7
8
dt = t(2,1) - t(1,1);
9
y = t(:,2:end);
10
11
[nr,nc] = size(y);
12
for c=1:nc,
13
y(:,c) = y(:,c) - mean(y(:,c));
14
end
15
16
Nfft = 1024*2^4;
17
yf = fftfilt1(y', Nfft, dt, 'bandpass', [3.436265, 2.5, 0.5]);
18
19
y = yf';
20
21
S = load('all_modes.mat');
22
A = S.original_modes;
23
24
A_inv = (A'*A)^-1*A';
25
q_modal = A_inv * y';
26
27
y_est = A * q_modal;
28
29
e = y - y_est ';
30
31
%trace(e'*e)
32
33
for i=1:6
34
Y(i,:) = movstd(e(:,i)', 20000);
35
end
36
37
resp = sqrt(mean(Y.^2));
38
39
modes = S.damaged_modeshapes;
40
41
for i=1:108,
42
A = modes(:,:,i);
43
A_inv = (A'*A)^-1*A';
44
q_modal = A_inv * y';
45
46
y_est = A * q_modal;
47
48
e = y - y_est ';
49
50
for i=1:6
51
Y(i,:) = movstd(e(:,i)', 20000);
52
end
53
54
Y = sqrt(mean(Y.^2));
55
56
resp = [resp; Y];
57
58
end
59
60
start_damage = 96000;
61
end_damage = 99000;
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
77
==PAGE:88==
62
63
possible_nodes = sqrt(diag(resp(:,start_damage:end_damage)*resp(:,start_damage
:end_damage)'))';
64
[v,i] = min(possible_nodes(2:end));
65
66
damaged_node = possible_nodes;
67
68
69
end
78
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:89==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
79
==PAGE:90==
C
Data from simulations
C.1
Case 1: No noise, equal models
Actual
location
Estimated
location
Actual
severity
Estimated
severity
Correct
line from
bottom
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.21
0.2
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.56
0.6
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.37
0.4
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.42
0.4
1
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.37
0.4
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.7
0.7
1
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.92
0.9
1
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.73
0.7
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.85
0.8
1
1
1
0.83
0.8
1
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.62
0.6
1
1
1
0.67
0.7
1
1
1
0.56
0.6
1
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.8
0.8
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.32
0.3
1
1
1
0.52
0.5
1
1
1
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
0.13
0.1
1
1
1
0.24
0.2
1
1
1
0.94
0.9
1
1
1
0.79
0.8
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
80
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:91==
1
1
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
0.19
0.2
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
0.48
0.5
1
1
1
0.45
0.4
1
1
1
0.45
0.5
2
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.23
0.2
1
1
1
0.93
0.9
1
1
1
0.19
0.2
1
1
1
0.35
0.3
2
1
1
0.94
0.9
1
1
1
0.25
0.2
1
1
1
0.37
0.4
1
1
1
0.09
0.1
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.7
0.7
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.62
0.6
1
1
1
0.74
0.7
1
1
1
0.45
0.5
2
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.49
0.5
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.69
0.7
1
1
1
0.09
0.1
1
1
1
0.45
0.4
1
1
1
0.7
0.7
1
1
1
0.29
0.3
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.62
0.6
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.7
0.7
1
1
1
0.86
0.9
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.93
0.9
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.47
0.5
1
1
1
0.14
0.1
1
1
1
0.15
0.1
2
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.1
0.1
1
1
1
0.67
0.7
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
81
==PAGE:92==
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.54
0.5
1
1
1
0.58
0.6
1
1
1
0.31
0.3
1
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.88
0.9
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.79
0.8
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
2
2
0.11
0.1
1
2
2
0.11
0.1
1
2
2
0.49
0.5
1
2
2
0.64
0.6
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.52
0.5
1
2
2
0.6
0.6
1
2
2
0.49
0.5
1
2
2
0.15
0.1
2
2
2
0.88
0.9
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.57
0.6
1
2
2
0.51
0.5
1
2
2
0.34
0.3
1
2
2
0.15
0.2
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.49
0.5
1
2
2
0.88
0.9
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.61
0.6
1
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.21
0.2
1
2
2
0.39
0.4
1
2
2
0.79
0.8
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
82
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:93==
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.25
0.3
2
2
2
0.28
0.3
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.4
0.4
1
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.86
0.9
1
2
2
0.53
0.5
1
2
2
0.33
0.3
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.64
0.6
1
2
2
0.85
0.8
1
2
2
0.1
0.1
1
2
2
0.46
0.5
1
2
2
0.6
0.6
1
2
2
0.66
0.7
1
2
2
0.26
0.3
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.17
0.2
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.34
0.3
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.32
0.3
1
2
2
0.45
0.5
2
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.85
0.8
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.09
0.1
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.09
0.1
1
2
2
0.48
0.5
1
2
2
0.19
0.2
1
2
2
0.2
0.2
1
2
2
0.83
0.8
1
2
2
0.74
0.7
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.46
0.5
1
2
2
0.22
0.2
1
2
2
0.69
0.7
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.13
0.1
1
2
2
0.15
0.1
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
83
==PAGE:94==
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.17
0.2
1
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.37
0.4
1
2
2
0.59
0.6
1
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.23
0.2
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
3
3
0.37
0.4
1
3
3
0.15
0.1
2
3
3
0.76
0.8
1
3
3
0.4
0.4
1
3
3
0.88
0.9
1
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.16
0.2
1
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
3
3
0.74
0.7
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
3
3
0.27
0.3
1
3
3
0.78
0.8
1
3
3
0.81
0.8
1
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.9
0.9
1
3
3
0.66
0.7
1
3
3
0.44
0.4
1
3
3
0.82
0.8
1
3
3
0.32
0.3
1
3
3
0.15
0.1
2
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.29
0.3
1
3
3
0.52
0.5
1
3
3
0.9
0.9
1
3
3
0.41
0.4
1
3
3
0.55
0.5
2
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
3
3
0.46
0.5
1
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.11
0.1
1
3
3
0.67
0.7
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.86
0.9
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.52
0.5
1
3
3
0.94
0.9
1
84
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:95==
3
3
0.6
0.6
1
3
3
0.52
0.5
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.1
0.1
1
3
3
0.56
0.6
1
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.37
0.4
1
3
3
0.78
0.8
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.11
0.1
1
3
3
0.35
0.3
2
3
3
0.84
0.8
1
3
3
0.21
0.2
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.22
0.2
1
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.37
0.4
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.49
0.5
1
3
3
0.62
0.6
1
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.19
0.2
1
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.91
0.9
1
3
3
0.87
0.9
1
3
3
0.81
0.8
1
3
3
0.21
0.2
1
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.46
0.5
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
3
3
0.76
0.8
1
3
3
0.54
0.5
1
3
3
0.17
0.2
1
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.69
0.7
1
3
3
0.09
0.1
1
3
3
0.1
0.1
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.87
0.9
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.56
0.6
1
3
3
0.51
0.5
1
3
3
0.78
0.8
1
3
3
0.61
0.6
1
3
3
0.62
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
85
==PAGE:96==
3
3
0.41
0.4
1
3
3
0.23
0.2
1
3
3
0.56
0.6
1
3
3
0.44
0.4
1
3
3
0.85
0.8
1
3
3
0.33
0.3
1
3
3
0.76
0.8
1
3
3
0.93
0.9
1
3
3
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.29
0.3
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.56
0.6
1
4
4
0.85
0.8
1
4
4
0.52
0.5
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.9
0.9
1
4
4
0.24
0.2
1
4
4
0.86
0.9
1
4
4
0.23
0.2
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.6
0.6
1
4
4
0.42
0.4
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
4
0.43
0.4
1
4
4
0.44
0.4
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.6
0.6
1
4
4
0.85
0.8
1
4
4
0.47
0.5
1
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.85
0.8
1
4
4
0.32
0.3
1
4
4
0.17
0.2
1
4
4
0.6
0.6
1
4
4
0.26
0.3
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.63
0.6
1
4
4
0.25
0.2
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
4
0.16
0.2
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.18
0.2
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.68
0.7
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
86
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:97==
4
4
0.44
0.4
1
4
4
0.43
0.4
1
4
4
0.49
0.5
1
4
4
0.9
0.9
1
4
4
0.12
0.1
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.56
0.6
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.48
0.5
1
4
4
0.6
0.6
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.66
0.6
2
4
4
0.16
0.2
1
4
4
0.15
0.1
2
4
4
0.61
0.6
1
4
4
0.59
0.6
1
4
4
0.78
0.8
1
4
4
0.12
0.1
1
4
4
0.89
0.9
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
4
0.84
0.8
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.36
0.3
2
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.11
0.1
1
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.32
0.3
1
4
4
0.25
0.2
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.9
0.9
1
4
4
0.65
0.6
1
4
4
0.52
0.5
1
4
4
0.59
0.6
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.1
0.1
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.74
0.7
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.21
0.2
1
4
4
0.63
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
87
==PAGE:98==
4
4
0.17
0.2
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.61
0.6
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.79
0.8
1
4
4
0.56
0.6
1
4
4
0.79
0.8
1
5
5
0.17
0.1
3
5
5
0.32
0.2
2
5
7
0.13
0.1
5
5
5
0.84
0.8
1
5
5
0.19
0.1
2
5
5
0.27
0.2
2
5
5
0.85
0.8
1
5
5
0.33
0.3
1
5
5
0.56
0.6
1
5
7
0.11
0.1
2
5
5
0.69
0.7
1
5
5
0.46
0.5
1
5
5
0.42
0.4
1
5
5
0.71
0.7
1
5
5
0.28
0.3
1
5
5
0.44
0.4
1
5
5
0.69
0.7
1
5
5
0.34
0.3
1
5
5
0.53
0.5
1
5
5
0.24
0.1
2
5
5
0.83
0.8
1
5
5
0.61
0.6
1
5
5
0.64
0.6
1
5
5
0.4
0.3
2
5
5
0.82
0.8
1
5
5
0.79
0.8
1
5
5
0.67
0.7
1
5
5
0.36
0.3
2
5
7
0.13
0.1
5
5
5
0.35
0.3
4
5
5
0.56
0.5
2
5
5
0.64
0.6
1
5
5
0.57
0.5
2
5
5
0.79
0.8
1
5
5
0.92
0.9
1
5
5
0.22
0.2
1
5
7
0.15
0.1
5
5
7
0.18
0.1
5
5
7
0.11
0.1
4
5
5
0.86
0.9
1
5
5
0.3
0.2
2
88
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:99==
5
5
0.32
0.3
1
5
5
0.43
0.4
1
5
7
0.11
0.1
4
5
5
0.77
0.7
2
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.72
0.7
1
5
5
0.21
0.1
2
5
5
0.27
0.2
3
5
5
0.65
0.6
1
5
5
0.82
0.8
1
5
5
0.25
0.2
1
5
5
0.34
0.4
2
5
5
0.39
0.3
2
5
5
0.59
0.6
1
5
5
0.53
0.5
1
5
5
0.3
0.3
1
5
5
0.84
0.8
1
5
5
0.78
0.8
1
5
5
0.78
0.8
1
5
5
0.32
0.3
1
5
5
0.91
0.9
1
5
5
0.75
0.8
1
5
5
0.4
0.4
1
5
5
0.9
0.9
1
5
5
0.63
0.6
1
5
5
0.17
0.1
3
5
5
0.51
0.4
2
5
5
0.2
0.1
2
5
7
0.12
0.1
2
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.38
0.3
2
5
5
0.43
0.3
2
5
5
0.47
0.5
1
5
5
0.76
0.8
1
5
7
0.2
0.1
5
5
5
0.29
0.3
1
5
5
0.59
0.6
1
5
5
0.54
0.5
1
5
5
0.75
0.7
2
5
5
0.89
0.9
1
5
5
0.17
0.1
2
5
5
0.36
0.3
3
5
5
0.43
0.4
1
5
5
0.52
0.5
1
5
5
0.7
0.7
1
5
5
0.9
0.9
1
5
5
0.22
0.1
2
5
5
0.53
0.5
1
5
7
0.12
0.1
4
5
5
0.87
0.9
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
89
==PAGE:100==
5
5
0.52
0.5
1
5
5
0.22
0.2
1
5
7
0.13
0.1
3
5
5
0.8
0.8
1
5
5
0.84
0.8
1
5
5
0.76
0.8
1
5
5
0.79
0.8
1
5
5
0.32
0.2
3
5
5
0.78
0.8
1
6
8
0.15
0.1
3
6
6
0.48
0.5
1
6
8
0.14
0.1
4
6
6
0.21
0.1
2
6
8
0.14
0.1
4
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
6
0.26
0.2
2
6
8
0.15
0.1
8
6
6
0.49
0.4
2
6
6
0.39
0.4
1
6
6
0.61
0.6
1
6
6
0.22
0.1
2
6
6
0.7
0.7
1
6
6
0.4
0.3
3
6
6
0.31
0.2
4
6
6
0.52
0.5
1
6
6
0.55
0.5
3
6
6
0.16
0.1
3
6
6
0.39
0.4
1
6
8
0.14
0.1
2
6
6
0.38
0.3
2
6
6
0.45
0.4
1
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
6
0.2
0.1
2
6
6
0.48
0.4
2
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
8
0.11
0.1
4
6
6
0.9
0.9
1
6
6
0.52
0.5
1
6
6
0.37
0.3
3
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
8
0.1
0.1
2
6
6
0.88
0.9
1
6
6
0.62
0.6
1
6
6
0.27
0.2
3
6
6
0.58
0.6
1
6
6
0.79
0.8
1
6
8
0.16
0.1
3
6
8
0.14
0.1
3
6
6
0.88
0.9
1
6
6
0.32
0.2
2
90
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:101==
6
6
0.53
0.5
1
6
6
0.45
0.4
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
6
0.74
0.7
1
6
6
0.5
0.4
2
6
6
0.87
0.9
1
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
6
0.36
0.3
2
6
6
0.53
0.5
1
6
6
0.29
0.2
2
6
6
0.57
0.6
1
6
6
0.75
0.7
2
6
6
0.88
0.9
1
6
6
0.55
0.5
3
6
6
0.68
0.7
1
6
6
0.28
0.3
1
6
6
0.67
0.6
2
6
6
0.76
0.7
2
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.34
0.3
1
6
6
0.68
0.7
1
6
6
0.42
0.4
1
6
6
0.15
0.1
5
6
6
0.59
0.6
1
6
8
0.12
0.1
2
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
8
0.1
0.2
6
6
6
0.87
0.9
1
6
6
0.5
0.5
1
6
6
0.21
0.1
2
6
6
0.94
0.9
1
6
6
0.12
0.1
1
6
6
0.43
0.4
1
6
6
0.86
0.8
2
6
6
0.36
0.3
3
6
6
0.14
0.1
1
6
6
0.38
0.4
1
6
6
0.72
0.7
1
6
8
0.16
0.1
6
6
6
0.64
0.6
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
8
0.14
0.1
2
6
6
0.59
0.6
1
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.12
0.1
1
6
6
0.74
0.7
1
6
6
0.45
0.4
1
6
8
0.2
0.1
5
6
8
0.2
0.1
4
6
6
0.32
0.3
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
91
==PAGE:102==
6
6
0.7
0.7
1
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
8
0.12
0.1
4
6
6
0.64
0.6
1
6
6
0.34
0.3
1
6
6
0.91
0.9
1
6
6
0.63
0.6
1
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.42
0.3
2
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.13
0.2
4
7
7
0.52
0.5
1
7
7
0.85
0.9
2
7
7
0.64
0.7
2
7
7
0.82
0.8
1
7
7
0.94
0.9
1
7
7
0.29
0.3
1
7
7
0.8
0.8
1
7
7
0.59
0.6
1
7
7
0.91
0.9
1
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.22
0.3
2
7
7
0.68
0.7
1
7
7
0.85
0.9
2
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
7
0.33
0.4
3
7
7
0.19
0.3
3
7
7
0.69
0.7
1
7
7
0.29
0.4
2
7
7
0.23
0.3
2
7
7
0.14
0.2
3
7
7
0.29
0.4
2
7
7
0.1
0.2
2
7
7
0.87
0.9
1
7
7
0.32
0.3
1
7
7
0.45
0.5
2
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.25
0.3
3
7
7
0.83
0.9
2
7
7
0.21
0.3
2
7
7
0.33
0.4
3
7
7
0.82
0.8
1
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.16
0.2
1
7
7
0.09
0.1
1
7
7
0.67
0.7
1
7
7
0.22
0.3
2
7
7
0.45
0.5
2
7
7
0.32
0.4
2
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
92
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:103==
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
7
7
0.41
0.4
1
7
7
0.09
0.2
2
7
7
0.91
0.9
1
7
7
0.58
0.6
1
7
7
0.74
0.8
2
7
7
0.74
0.8
2
7
7
0.5
0.5
1
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
7
0.4
0.5
2
7
7
0.3
0.4
2
7
7
0.5
0.5
1
7
7
0.34
0.4
2
7
7
0.42
0.5
2
7
7
0.44
0.5
3
7
7
0.23
0.3
2
7
7
0.09
0.2
2
7
8
0.18
0.3
4
7
7
0.5
0.5
1
7
7
0.83
0.8
1
7
7
0.36
0.4
1
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.81
0.8
1
7
7
0.51
0.5
1
7
7
0.74
0.8
2
7
7
0.47
0.5
1
7
7
0.67
0.7
1
7
7
0.36
0.4
1
7
7
0.81
0.8
1
7
7
0.74
0.8
2
7
7
0.49
0.5
1
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.89
0.9
1
7
7
0.25
0.4
4
7
7
0.32
0.4
2
7
7
0.73
0.8
2
7
7
0.33
0.4
2
7
7
0.31
0.4
2
7
7
0.25
0.4
3
7
7
0.56
0.6
1
7
7
0.74
0.7
1
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
7
0.87
0.9
1
7
7
0.43
0.4
1
7
7
0.44
0.5
2
7
7
0.56
0.6
1
7
7
0.59
0.6
1
7
7
0.11
0.2
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
93
==PAGE:104==
7
7
0.23
0.3
2
7
7
0.73
0.7
1
7
7
0.84
0.8
1
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
7
7
0.64
0.7
2
7
7
0.51
0.5
1
7
7
0.55
0.6
1
7
7
0.79
0.8
1
7
7
0.38
0.5
2
8
8
0.41
0.4
1
8
8
0.47
0.5
1
8
8
0.39
0.4
1
8
8
0.18
0.3
2
8
8
0.76
0.8
1
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.53
0.6
2
8
8
0.57
0.6
1
8
8
0.24
0.3
2
8
8
0.83
0.9
2
8
8
0.61
0.6
1
8
8
0.18
0.2
1
8
8
0.71
0.7
1
8
8
0.66
0.7
1
8
8
0.61
0.6
1
8
8
0.73
0.8
2
8
8
0.4
0.4
1
8
8
0.32
0.4
2
8
8
0.39
0.5
2
8
8
0.41
0.4
1
8
8
0.44
0.5
2
8
8
0.56
0.6
1
8
8
0.73
0.8
2
8
8
0.74
0.8
2
8
8
0.62
0.6
1
8
8
0.42
0.5
2
8
8
0.22
0.3
2
8
8
0.58
0.6
1
8
8
0.79
0.8
1
8
8
0.76
0.8
1
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.55
0.6
1
8
8
0.24
0.3
2
8
8
0.47
0.5
1
8
8
0.73
0.8
2
8
8
0.65
0.7
2
8
8
0.64
0.7
2
8
8
0.65
0.7
2
8
8
0.62
0.6
1
8
8
0.9
0.9
1
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
94
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:105==
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.73
0.8
2
8
8
0.65
0.7
2
8
8
0.94
0.9
1
8
8
0.66
0.7
1
8
8
0.47
0.5
1
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.63
0.7
2
8
8
0.56
0.6
1
8
8
0.75
0.8
1
8
8
0.34
0.4
3
8
8
0.64
0.7
2
8
8
0.2
0.3
2
8
8
0.46
0.5
1
8
8
0.26
0.3
1
8
8
0.82
0.9
2
8
8
0.21
0.3
3
8
8
0.64
0.7
2
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
8
8
0.46
0.5
1
8
8
0.63
0.7
2
8
8
0.41
0.5
2
8
8
0.86
0.9
1
8
8
0.31
0.4
2
8
8
0.76
0.8
1
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
8
0.78
0.8
1
8
8
0.54
0.6
2
8
8
0.23
0.3
3
8
8
0.77
0.8
1
8
8
0.72
0.8
2
8
8
0.16
0.2
1
8
8
0.94
0.9
1
8
8
0.29
0.3
1
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.66
0.7
1
8
8
0.6
0.7
2
8
8
0.35
0.4
1
8
8
0.74
0.8
2
8
8
0.74
0.7
1
8
8
0.16
0.2
1
8
8
0.62
0.7
2
8
8
0.39
0.4
1
8
8
0.19
0.2
1
8
8
0.49
0.5
1
8
8
0.48
0.5
1
8
8
0.42
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
95
==PAGE:106==
8
8
0.3
0.4
2
8
7
0.13
0.2
4
8
8
0.44
0.5
2
8
8
0.12
0.2
4
8
8
0.56
0.6
1
8
8
0.56
0.6
1
8
8
0.63
0.7
2
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.15
0.1
2
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
9
9
0.71
0.7
1
9
9
0.43
0.4
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.81
0.8
1
9
9
0.42
0.4
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.21
0.2
1
9
9
0.82
0.8
1
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.7
0.7
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.49
0.5
1
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.83
0.8
1
9
9
0.27
0.3
1
9
9
0.85
0.8
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
9
9
0.21
0.2
1
9
9
0.37
0.4
1
9
9
0.77
0.8
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.33
0.3
1
9
9
0.45
0.4
1
9
9
0.75
0.7
2
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.34
0.3
1
9
9
0.4
0.4
1
9
9
0.49
0.5
1
9
9
0.39
0.4
1
9
9
0.4
0.4
1
9
9
0.88
0.9
1
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.76
0.8
1
96
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:107==
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.51
0.5
1
9
9
0.39
0.4
1
9
9
0.72
0.7
1
9
9
0.13
0.1
1
9
9
0.42
0.4
1
9
9
0.36
0.4
1
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.52
0.5
1
9
9
0.16
0.2
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.43
0.4
1
9
9
0.21
0.2
1
9
9
0.45
0.4
1
9
9
0.39
0.4
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.25
0.2
1
9
9
0.72
0.7
1
9
9
0.25
0.2
1
9
9
0.14
0.1
1
9
9
0.76
0.8
1
9
9
0.3
0.3
1
9
9
0.21
0.2
1
9
9
0.3
0.3
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.65
0.6
1
9
9
0.12
0.1
1
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.31
0.3
1
9
9
0.75
0.7
2
9
9
0.52
0.5
1
9
9
0.12
0.1
1
9
9
0.51
0.5
1
9
9
0.53
0.5
1
9
9
0.12
0.1
1
9
9
0.23
0.2
1
9
9
0.85
0.8
1
9
9
0.44
0.4
1
9
9
0.59
0.6
1
9
9
0.29
0.3
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.89
0.9
1
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.27
0.3
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
97
==PAGE:108==
9
9
0.75
0.8
1
9
9
0.11
0.1
1
9
9
0.79
0.8
1
9
9
0.83
0.8
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.17
0.2
1
9
9
0.66
0.7
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
10
10
0.56
0.6
1
10
10
0.69
0.7
1
10
10
0.57
0.6
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.66
0.7
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.25
0.2
1
10
10
0.31
0.3
1
10
10
0.26
0.3
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.53
0.5
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.32
0.3
1
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.73
0.7
1
10
10
0.73
0.7
1
10
10
0.85
0.8
1
10
10
0.47
0.5
1
10
10
0.64
0.6
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.81
0.8
1
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.55
0.5
2
10
10
0.53
0.5
1
10
10
0.46
0.5
1
10
10
0.15
0.1
2
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
10
10
0.76
0.8
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.26
0.3
1
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.35
0.4
1
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.81
0.8
1
10
10
0.65
0.6
1
10
10
0.66
0.7
1
10
10
0.64
0.6
1
98
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:109==
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.79
0.8
1
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.35
0.3
2
10
10
0.34
0.3
1
10
10
0.36
0.4
1
10
10
0.58
0.6
1
10
10
0.85
0.8
1
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.45
0.4
1
10
10
0.7
0.7
1
10
10
0.33
0.3
1
10
10
0.73
0.7
1
10
10
0.89
0.9
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.87
0.9
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.24
0.2
1
10
10
0.79
0.8
1
10
10
0.72
0.7
1
10
10
0.15
0.1
2
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.75
0.8
1
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.15
0.1
2
10
10
0.25
0.3
2
10
10
0.61
0.6
1
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.39
0.4
1
10
10
0.84
0.8
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.21
0.2
1
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.39
0.4
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.79
0.8
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
99
==PAGE:110==
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.35
0.3
2
10
10
0.89
0.9
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.51
0.5
1
10
10
0.26
0.3
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.38
0.4
1
11
11
0.74
0.7
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.1
0.1
1
11
11
0.59
0.6
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.86
0.9
1
11
11
0.79
0.8
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.42
0.4
1
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.94
0.9
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.36
0.4
1
11
11
0.64
0.6
1
11
11
0.37
0.4
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.15
0.2
1
11
11
0.37
0.4
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.18
0.2
1
11
11
0.36
0.4
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.85
0.8
1
11
11
0.6
0.6
1
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.25
0.3
2
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.32
0.3
1
11
11
0.75
0.7
2
11
11
0.4
0.4
1
11
11
0.12
0.1
1
11
11
0.68
0.7
1
100
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:111==
11
11
0.61
0.6
1
11
11
0.47
0.5
1
11
11
0.17
0.2
1
11
11
0.73
0.7
1
11
11
0.19
0.2
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.16
0.2
1
11
11
0.61
0.6
1
11
11
0.17
0.2
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.41
0.4
1
11
11
0.64
0.6
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.26
0.3
1
11
11
0.62
0.6
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.44
0.4
1
11
11
0.82
0.8
1
11
11
0.82
0.8
1
11
11
0.51
0.5
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.74
0.7
1
11
11
0.14
0.1
1
11
11
0.41
0.4
1
11
11
0.29
0.3
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.31
0.3
1
11
11
0.65
0.6
1
11
11
0.34
0.3
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.35
0.4
1
11
11
0.46
0.5
1
11
11
0.42
0.4
1
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.64
0.6
1
11
11
0.9
0.9
1
11
11
0.3
0.3
1
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.6
0.6
1
11
11
0.24
0.3
2
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.65
0.7
2
11
11
0.6
0.6
1
11
11
0.79
0.8
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
101
==PAGE:112==
11
11
0.32
0.3
1
11
11
0.53
0.5
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.93
0.9
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.19
0.2
1
11
11
0.55
0.6
1
12
12
0.47
0.5
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.36
0.4
1
12
12
0.43
0.4
1
12
12
0.44
0.4
1
12
12
0.1
0.1
1
12
12
0.11
0.1
1
12
12
0.31
0.3
1
12
12
0.63
0.6
1
12
12
0.74
0.7
1
12
12
0.49
0.5
1
12
12
0.54
0.5
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.6
0.6
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
12
12
0.25
0.3
2
12
12
0.4
0.4
1
12
12
0.12
0.1
1
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.44
0.4
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.17
0.2
1
12
12
0.24
0.2
1
12
12
0.71
0.7
1
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.87
0.9
1
12
12
0.64
0.6
1
12
12
0.16
0.2
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.69
0.7
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.61
0.6
1
12
12
0.79
0.8
1
12
12
0.78
0.8
1
12
12
0.41
0.4
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.79
0.8
1
102
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:113==
12
12
0.65
0.7
2
12
12
0.13
0.1
1
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
12
12
0.5
0.5
1
12
12
0.1
0.1
1
12
12
0.76
0.8
1
12
12
0.83
0.8
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.37
0.4
1
12
12
0.1
0.1
1
12
12
0.32
0.3
1
12
12
0.47
0.5
1
12
12
0.67
0.7
1
12
12
0.54
0.5
1
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.15
0.2
1
12
12
0.51
0.5
1
12
12
0.64
0.6
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.58
0.6
1
12
12
0.55
0.6
1
12
12
0.28
0.3
1
12
12
0.6
0.6
1
12
12
0.79
0.8
1
12
12
0.37
0.4
1
12
12
0.45
0.5
2
12
12
0.35
0.4
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.13
0.1
1
12
12
0.52
0.5
1
12
12
0.25
0.3
2
12
12
0.75
0.7
2
12
12
0.4
0.4
1
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.54
0.5
1
12
12
0.51
0.5
1
12
12
0.78
0.8
1
12
12
0.47
0.5
1
12
12
0.18
0.2
1
12
12
0.9
0.9
1
12
12
0.39
0.4
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.26
0.3
1
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.31
0.3
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.85
0.8
1
12
12
0.16
0.2
1
12
12
0.11
0.1
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
103
==PAGE:114==
12
12
0.25
0.3
2
12
12
0.89
0.9
1
12
12
0.56
0.6
1
12
12
0.38
0.4
1
12
12
0.66
0.7
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
C.2
Case 2: Noise, equal models
Actual
location
Estimated
location
Actual
severity
Estimated
severity
Correct
line from
bottom
1
1
0.74
0.7
1
1
1
0.22
0.2
1
1
1
0.41
0.4
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.18
0.2
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.14
0.1
1
1
1
0.36
0.4
1
1
1
0.11
0.1
1
1
1
0.33
0.3
1
1
1
0.47
0.5
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.23
0.2
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.43
0.4
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.09
0.1
1
1
1
0.93
0.9
1
1
1
0.32
0.3
1
1
1
0.72
0.7
1
1
1
0.67
0.7
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.41
0.4
1
1
1
0.45
0.4
1
1
1
0.58
0.6
1
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.15
0.1
2
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
104
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:115==
1
1
0.56
0.6
1
1
1
0.76
0.8
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.29
0.3
1
1
1
0.53
0.5
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.93
0.9
1
1
1
0.22
0.2
1
1
1
0.92
0.9
1
1
1
0.35
0.4
1
1
1
0.36
0.4
1
1
1
0.76
0.8
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.43
0.4
1
1
1
0.85
0.8
1
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
0.53
0.5
1
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.69
0.7
1
1
1
0.3
0.3
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
0.74
0.7
1
1
1
0.43
0.4
1
1
1
0.83
0.8
1
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.94
0.9
1
1
1
0.13
0.1
1
1
1
0.45
0.5
2
1
1
0.73
0.7
1
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.56
0.6
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.21
0.2
1
1
1
0.51
0.5
1
1
1
0.38
0.4
1
1
1
0.67
0.7
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
1
1
0.19
0.2
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.23
0.2
1
1
1
0.41
0.4
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
105
==PAGE:116==
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.65
0.6
1
1
1
0.59
0.6
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.38
0.4
1
1
1
0.21
0.2
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.88
0.9
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.41
0.4
1
1
1
0.88
0.9
1
1
1
0.27
0.3
1
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
2
2
0.55
0.5
2
2
2
0.57
0.6
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
2
0.55
0.5
2
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.42
0.4
1
2
2
0.2
0.2
1
2
2
0.33
0.3
1
2
2
0.15
0.1
2
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.38
0.4
1
2
2
0.37
0.4
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.43
0.4
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.58
0.6
1
2
2
0.42
0.4
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.64
0.6
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.44
0.4
1
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.26
0.3
1
2
2
0.89
0.9
1
2
2
0.38
0.4
1
106
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:117==
2
2
0.23
0.2
1
2
2
0.59
0.6
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.42
0.4
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.85
0.8
1
2
2
0.82
0.8
1
2
2
0.66
0.7
1
2
2
0.12
0.1
1
2
2
0.85
0.8
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.58
0.6
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.83
0.8
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.73
0.7
1
2
2
0.39
0.4
1
2
2
0.48
0.5
1
2
2
0.52
0.5
1
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.2
0.2
1
2
2
0.35
0.4
1
2
2
0.85
0.8
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.21
0.2
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.13
0.1
1
2
2
0.1
0.1
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.52
0.5
1
2
2
0.34
0.3
1
2
2
0.66
0.6
2
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.28
0.3
1
2
2
0.9
0.9
1
2
2
0.59
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
107
==PAGE:118==
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.55
0.6
1
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.83
0.8
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.58
0.6
1
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
2
2
0.28
0.3
1
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.41
0.4
1
3
3
0.19
0.2
1
3
3
0.26
0.2
2
3
3
0.77
0.8
1
3
3
0.7
0.7
1
3
3
0.2
0.2
1
3
3
0.92
0.9
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.77
0.8
1
3
3
0.92
0.9
1
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.88
0.9
1
3
3
0.17
0.2
1
3
3
0.25
0.2
1
3
3
0.16
0.2
1
3
3
0.62
0.6
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.21
0.2
1
3
3
0.44
0.4
1
3
3
0.09
0.1
1
3
3
0.15
0.1
2
3
3
0.81
0.8
1
3
3
0.92
0.9
1
3
3
0.91
0.9
1
3
3
0.23
0.2
1
3
3
0.22
0.2
1
3
3
0.74
0.7
1
3
3
0.73
0.7
1
3
3
0.85
0.8
1
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
108
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:119==
3
3
0.54
0.5
1
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.45
0.4
1
3
3
0.82
0.8
1
3
3
0.22
0.2
1
3
3
0.12
0.1
1
3
3
0.87
0.9
1
3
3
0.36
0.4
1
3
3
0.2
0.2
1
3
3
0.85
0.8
1
3
3
0.93
0.9
1
3
3
0.28
0.3
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.12
0.1
1
3
3
0.94
0.9
1
3
3
0.92
0.9
1
3
3
0.74
0.7
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.63
0.6
1
3
3
0.86
0.9
1
3
3
0.18
0.2
1
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.1
0.1
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.27
0.3
1
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.86
0.9
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.26
0.2
2
3
3
0.77
0.8
1
3
3
0.65
0.6
1
3
3
0.81
0.8
1
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.87
0.9
1
3
3
0.25
0.2
1
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
3
3
0.17
0.2
1
3
3
0.58
0.6
1
3
3
0.79
0.8
1
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.7
0.7
1
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
109
==PAGE:120==
3
3
0.17
0.1
2
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.11
0.1
1
3
3
0.29
0.3
1
3
3
0.94
0.9
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.67
0.7
1
3
3
0.22
0.2
1
3
3
0.13
0.1
1
3
3
0.77
0.8
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.49
0.5
1
3
3
0.66
0.7
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.32
0.3
1
4
4
0.8
0.8
1
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.26
0.3
1
4
4
0.64
0.6
1
4
4
0.12
0.1
1
4
4
0.36
0.3
2
4
4
0.41
0.4
1
4
4
0.17
0.2
1
4
4
0.28
0.3
1
4
4
0.11
0.1
1
4
4
0.14
0.1
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.59
0.6
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.14
0.1
1
4
4
0.36
0.4
1
4
4
0.67
0.7
1
4
4
0.26
0.2
2
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.65
0.6
1
4
4
0.51
0.5
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.46
0.5
1
4
4
0.15
0.1
2
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.86
0.9
1
110
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:121==
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.72
0.7
1
4
4
0.16
0.2
1
4
4
0.74
0.7
1
4
4
0.57
0.6
1
4
4
0.75
0.7
2
4
4
0.67
0.7
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.29
0.3
1
4
4
0.57
0.6
1
4
4
0.53
0.5
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.21
0.2
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.36
0.4
1
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.52
0.5
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.93
0.9
1
4
4
0.58
0.6
1
4
4
0.26
0.3
1
4
4
0.17
0.2
1
4
4
0.52
0.5
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.47
0.5
1
4
4
0.29
0.3
1
4
4
0.25
0.3
2
4
4
0.16
0.2
1
4
4
0.66
0.7
1
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
4
0.39
0.4
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.18
0.2
1
4
4
0.79
0.8
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.11
0.1
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.36
0.3
2
4
4
0.93
0.9
1
4
4
0.66
0.7
1
4
4
0.21
0.2
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.3
0.3
1
4
4
0.63
0.6
1
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
111
==PAGE:122==
4
4
0.18
0.2
1
4
4
0.89
0.9
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.58
0.6
1
4
4
0.24
0.2
1
4
4
0.87
0.9
1
4
4
0.32
0.3
1
4
4
0.53
0.5
1
4
4
0.44
0.4
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.39
0.4
1
4
4
0.82
0.8
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.89
0.9
1
5
5
0.93
0.9
1
5
5
0.73
0.7
1
5
5
0.63
0.6
1
5
5
0.71
0.6
2
5
5
0.48
0.4
2
5
5
0.65
0.6
1
5
5
0.27
0.1
7
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.74
0.7
1
5
5
0.85
0.9
2
5
5
0.19
0.1
3
5
5
0.82
0.8
1
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.39
0.4
1
5
5
0.47
0.4
2
5
7
0.18
0.1
7
5
5
0.43
0.4
1
5
5
0.24
0.1
2
5
5
0.56
0.5
2
5
5
0.42
0.2
6
5
7
0.24
0.1
5
5
5
0.9
0.9
1
5
5
0.49
0.4
2
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
7
0.11
0.2
5
5
5
0.87
0.9
1
5
5
0.51
0.5
1
5
5
0.34
0.2
2
5
7
0.21
0.1
5
5
5
0.33
0.3
1
5
5
0.55
0.5
3
5
5
0.69
0.6
2
5
5
0.51
0.5
1
5
5
0.9
0.9
1
5
5
0.94
0.9
1
112
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:123==
5
5
0.28
0.2
5
5
7
0.14
0.1
3
5
5
0.28
0.2
2
5
5
0.33
0.2
2
5
5
0.32
0.2
2
5
5
0.36
0.3
3
5
5
0.24
0.2
1
5
5
0.6
0.6
1
5
5
0.27
0.2
3
5
7
0.14
0.2
3
5
5
0.5
0.5
1
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.68
0.7
1
5
5
0.78
0.8
1
5
5
0.4
0.4
1
5
5
0.19
0.2
1
5
5
0.37
0.3
2
5
7
0.1
0.1
2
5
5
0.28
0.2
5
5
5
0.26
0.2
2
5
5
0.25
0.2
1
5
5
0.76
0.8
1
5
5
0.42
0.4
1
5
5
0.5
0.4
2
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.58
0.5
2
5
5
0.73
0.8
2
5
5
0.71
0.7
1
5
5
0.34
0.2
3
5
5
0.85
0.9
2
5
7
0.13
0.1
3
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.67
0.6
2
5
5
0.53
0.5
1
5
5
0.71
0.7
1
5
5
0.43
0.3
2
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.38
0.3
2
5
7
0.1
0.2
4
5
5
0.5
0.5
1
5
5
0.46
0.4
3
5
5
0.92
0.9
1
5
5
0.44
0.5
2
5
5
0.25
0.1
2
5
5
0.16
0.2
1
5
5
0.65
0.6
1
5
5
0.27
0.2
5
5
5
0.45
0.4
1
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.44
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
113
==PAGE:124==
5
5
0.72
0.7
1
5
5
0.52
0.5
1
5
5
0.89
0.9
1
5
5
0.8
0.8
1
5
5
0.42
0.3
3
5
5
0.57
0.6
1
5
5
0.65
0.6
1
5
5
0.42
0.3
2
5
5
0.51
0.4
2
5
9
0.53
0.1
2
5
5
0.36
0.3
3
5
7
0.1
0.1
3
5
5
0.35
0.3
3
5
5
0.56
0.5
2
5
5
0.76
0.8
1
6
6
0.43
0.4
1
6
7
0.15
0.1
8
6
6
0.79
0.8
1
6
6
0.49
0.5
1
6
6
0.39
0.4
1
6
7
0.09
0.1
4
6
8
0.19
0.1
6
6
6
0.45
0.5
2
6
6
0.89
0.9
1
6
6
0.29
0.2
2
6
6
0.94
0.9
1
6
8
0.11
0.2
5
6
6
0.77
0.8
1
6
6
0.48
0.5
1
6
6
0.67
0.6
2
6
6
0.28
0.2
2
6
6
0.47
0.4
3
6
6
0.78
0.8
1
6
7
0.12
0.1
5
6
6
0.49
0.4
2
6
8
0.1
0.1
2
6
6
0.18
0.1
2
6
6
0.59
0.6
1
6
6
0.32
0.3
1
6
6
0.87
0.9
1
6
6
0.59
0.5
2
6
6
0.78
0.8
1
6
8
0.11
0.1
4
6
6
0.71
0.7
1
6
6
0.53
0.5
1
6
8
0.09
0.1
5
6
6
0.27
0.2
7
6
8
0.29
0.1
8
6
6
0.36
0.3
3
6
7
0.14
0.1
5
114
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:125==
6
6
0.65
0.7
2
6
6
0.65
0.5
2
6
6
0.65
0.6
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
6
0.87
0.9
1
6
6
0.34
0.2
2
6
6
0.66
0.7
1
6
5
0.19
0.1
5
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
6
0.54
0.5
1
6
6
0.38
0.4
1
6
6
0.89
0.9
1
6
6
0.79
0.8
1
6
6
0.34
0.2
2
6
7
0.12
0.1
6
6
6
0.64
0.6
1
6
6
0.21
0.2
1
6
6
0.56
0.6
1
6
6
0.36
0.3
2
6
8
0.13
0.1
4
6
6
0.21
0.2
1
6
6
0.72
0.7
1
6
6
0.51
0.5
1
6
6
0.87
0.9
1
6
6
0.31
0.2
2
6
6
0.56
0.4
6
6
6
0.43
0.4
1
6
6
0.64
0.6
1
6
6
0.26
0.2
3
6
6
0.24
0.2
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
6
0.61
0.6
1
6
6
0.84
0.8
1
6
6
0.16
0.1
3
6
6
0.8
0.8
1
6
6
0.7
0.7
1
6
8
0.15
0.1
5
6
6
0.62
0.6
1
6
8
0.11
0.1
5
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.77
0.8
1
6
6
0.93
0.9
1
6
8
0.15
0.2
5
6
6
0.46
0.4
4
6
6
0.69
0.7
1
6
6
0.34
0.2
2
6
6
0.37
0.3
2
6
6
0.88
0.9
1
6
8
0.21
0.1
3
6
6
0.14
0.1
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
115
==PAGE:126==
6
6
0.2
0.1
2
6
6
0.72
0.7
1
6
8
0.18
0.2
2
6
6
0.75
0.8
1
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.71
0.7
1
6
6
0.41
0.4
1
6
6
0.76
0.8
1
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
6
0.76
0.7
2
6
6
0.38
0.3
2
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
6
0.85
0.9
2
6
6
0.35
0.3
4
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
7
8
0.11
0.2
3
7
7
0.64
0.7
2
7
7
0.91
0.9
1
7
7
0.87
0.9
1
7
7
0.44
0.5
3
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
7
7
0.61
0.6
1
7
7
0.8
0.8
1
7
7
0.72
0.8
2
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.89
0.9
1
7
7
0.24
0.4
4
7
7
0.35
0.4
1
7
7
0.72
0.7
1
7
7
0.53
0.6
2
7
7
0.64
0.6
1
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.39
0.4
1
7
7
0.8
0.8
1
7
7
0.79
0.8
1
7
7
0.72
0.7
1
7
7
0.26
0.4
2
7
7
0.35
0.4
1
7
8
0.18
0.3
4
7
7
0.45
0.5
2
7
7
0.73
0.8
2
7
7
0.34
0.4
2
7
7
0.29
0.4
2
7
7
0.19
0.3
2
7
7
0.16
0.3
2
7
7
0.9
0.9
1
7
7
0.89
0.9
1
7
7
0.16
0.2
1
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
7
7
0.86
0.9
1
116
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:127==
7
7
0.79
0.8
1
7
7
0.33
0.4
2
7
7
0.67
0.7
1
7
7
0.32
0.4
3
7
7
0.64
0.7
2
7
7
0.66
0.7
1
7
7
0.51
0.6
2
7
7
0.94
0.9
1
7
7
0.51
0.5
1
7
7
0.48
0.5
1
7
7
0.83
0.9
2
7
7
0.47
0.5
1
7
7
0.25
0.3
3
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.21
0.3
2
7
7
0.56
0.6
1
7
7
0.3
0.4
2
7
7
0.43
0.5
3
7
7
0.25
0.3
3
7
7
0.55
0.6
1
7
7
0.16
0.2
1
7
7
0.19
0.2
1
7
7
0.48
0.5
1
7
7
0.57
0.6
1
7
7
0.85
0.8
1
7
7
0.64
0.7
2
7
7
0.49
0.5
1
7
7
0.75
0.8
1
7
7
0.86
0.9
1
7
7
0.9
0.9
1
7
7
0.76
0.8
1
7
7
0.87
0.9
1
7
7
0.75
0.8
1
7
7
0.32
0.4
2
7
7
0.27
0.4
2
7
7
0.81
0.8
1
7
7
0.2
0.3
2
7
7
0.15
0.2
1
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.63
0.7
2
7
7
0.81
0.9
2
7
7
0.56
0.6
1
7
7
0.42
0.4
1
7
8
0.11
0.2
6
7
7
0.58
0.6
1
7
7
0.23
0.3
3
7
7
0.76
0.8
1
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.42
0.5
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
117
==PAGE:128==
7
7
0.15
0.3
2
7
7
0.44
0.5
2
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.12
0.1
1
7
7
0.11
0.2
3
7
8
0.21
0.2
2
7
7
0.66
0.7
1
7
7
0.59
0.6
1
7
7
0.31
0.4
2
7
7
0.5
0.5
1
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.4
0.4
1
7
7
0.45
0.5
2
7
7
0.78
0.8
1
7
7
0.58
0.6
1
8
8
0.39
0.4
1
8
8
0.21
0.3
2
8
8
0.29
0.3
1
8
8
0.73
0.8
2
8
8
0.29
0.4
2
8
8
0.43
0.5
3
8
8
0.29
0.3
1
8
8
0.49
0.6
2
8
8
0.37
0.5
2
8
8
0.55
0.6
1
8
8
0.85
0.9
2
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.92
0.9
1
8
8
0.74
0.8
2
8
8
0.45
0.5
2
8
8
0.48
0.6
2
8
8
0.51
0.5
1
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.59
0.6
1
8
8
0.65
0.7
2
8
8
0.72
0.7
1
8
8
0.28
0.4
2
8
8
0.85
0.9
2
8
8
0.57
0.6
1
8
8
0.8
0.8
1
8
8
0.68
0.7
1
8
8
0.12
0.2
2
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.47
0.5
1
8
8
0.44
0.5
2
8
8
0.8
0.8
1
8
8
0.15
0.3
2
8
8
0.86
0.9
1
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.77
0.8
1
118
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:129==
8
8
0.57
0.6
1
8
8
0.61
0.6
1
8
8
0.48
0.6
2
8
8
0.83
0.9
2
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.48
0.5
1
8
8
0.42
0.5
2
8
8
0.54
0.6
2
8
8
0.88
0.9
1
8
8
0.75
0.8
1
8
8
0.68
0.7
1
8
8
0.1
0.2
4
8
8
0.52
0.6
2
8
8
0.93
0.9
1
8
8
0.12
0.1
1
8
8
0.81
0.8
1
8
8
0.21
0.3
2
8
8
0.12
0.3
3
8
8
0.7
0.7
1
8
8
0.48
0.5
1
8
8
0.79
0.8
1
8
8
0.9
0.9
1
8
8
0.94
0.9
1
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.63
0.7
2
8
8
0.89
0.9
1
8
8
0.7
0.7
1
8
8
0.77
0.8
1
8
8
0.38
0.4
1
8
8
0.49
0.5
1
8
8
0.92
0.9
1
8
8
0.51
0.5
1
8
8
0.72
0.7
1
8
8
0.67
0.7
1
8
8
0.27
0.4
2
8
8
0.16
0.2
1
8
8
0.26
0.3
1
8
8
0.16
0.3
2
8
8
0.26
0.3
1
8
8
0.27
0.3
1
8
8
0.86
0.9
1
8
8
0.55
0.6
1
8
8
0.39
0.5
2
8
8
0.52
0.6
2
8
8
0.27
0.4
2
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
8
8
0.68
0.7
1
8
8
0.84
0.8
1
8
8
0.22
0.2
1
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
119
==PAGE:130==
8
7
0.1
0.2
3
8
8
0.33
0.4
2
8
8
0.19
0.3
3
8
8
0.42
0.4
1
8
8
0.49
0.5
1
8
8
0.44
0.5
3
8
8
0.79
0.8
1
8
8
0.28
0.3
1
8
7
0.16
0.3
4
8
8
0.27
0.3
1
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.48
0.5
1
8
8
0.71
0.8
2
8
8
0.93
0.9
1
8
8
0.44
0.5
2
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.69
0.7
1
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.59
0.6
1
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.82
0.8
1
9
9
0.57
0.6
1
9
9
0.56
0.6
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.86
0.9
1
9
9
0.18
0.2
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.14
0.1
1
9
9
0.5
0.5
1
9
9
0.87
0.9
1
9
9
0.55
0.6
1
9
9
0.34
0.3
1
9
9
0.87
0.9
1
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.62
0.6
1
9
9
0.63
0.6
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.25
0.2
1
9
9
0.9
0.9
1
9
9
0.18
0.2
1
9
9
0.78
0.8
1
9
9
0.62
0.6
1
9
9
0.36
0.4
1
9
9
0.25
0.3
2
9
9
0.15
0.1
2
9
9
0.57
0.6
1
9
9
0.16
0.2
1
9
9
0.49
0.5
1
120
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:131==
9
9
0.94
0.9
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.79
0.8
1
9
9
0.21
0.2
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.77
0.8
1
9
9
0.13
0.1
1
9
9
0.12
0.1
1
9
9
0.31
0.3
1
9
9
0.11
0.1
1
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.42
0.4
1
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.88
0.9
1
9
9
0.31
0.3
1
9
9
0.76
0.8
1
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.15
0.1
2
9
9
0.78
0.8
1
9
9
0.18
0.2
1
9
9
0.81
0.8
1
9
9
0.31
0.3
1
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.57
0.6
1
9
9
0.63
0.6
1
9
9
0.66
0.7
1
9
9
0.16
0.2
1
9
9
0.1
0.1
1
9
9
0.24
0.2
1
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.35
0.3
2
9
9
0.83
0.8
1
9
9
0.11
0.1
1
9
9
0.55
0.6
1
9
9
0.12
0.1
1
9
9
0.78
0.8
1
9
9
0.15
0.1
2
9
9
0.55
0.6
1
9
9
0.13
0.1
1
9
9
0.88
0.9
1
9
9
0.5
0.5
1
9
9
0.42
0.4
1
9
9
0.29
0.3
1
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
121
==PAGE:132==
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.89
0.9
1
9
9
0.48
0.5
1
9
9
0.23
0.2
1
9
9
0.52
0.5
1
9
9
0.23
0.2
1
9
9
0.49
0.5
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.76
0.8
1
9
9
0.5
0.5
1
9
9
0.3
0.3
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.69
0.7
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.1
0.1
1
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.32
0.3
1
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.51
0.5
1
10
10
0.24
0.2
1
10
10
0.34
0.3
1
10
10
0.71
0.7
1
10
10
0.25
0.3
2
10
10
0.24
0.2
1
10
10
0.4
0.4
1
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.28
0.3
1
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
10
10
0.81
0.8
1
10
10
0.87
0.9
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.15
0.1
2
10
10
0.53
0.5
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.86
0.9
1
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.44
0.4
1
10
10
0.37
0.4
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.65
0.6
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
10
10
0.75
0.7
2
10
10
0.14
0.1
1
122
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:133==
10
10
0.17
0.2
1
10
10
0.7
0.7
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.47
0.5
1
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.17
0.2
1
10
10
0.28
0.3
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.09
0.1
1
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
10
10
0.44
0.4
1
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.1
0.1
1
10
10
0.29
0.3
1
10
10
0.75
0.7
2
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.4
0.4
1
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.7
0.7
1
10
10
0.85
0.8
1
10
10
0.21
0.2
1
10
10
0.31
0.3
1
10
10
0.51
0.5
1
10
10
0.35
0.3
2
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.16
0.2
1
10
10
0.14
0.1
1
10
10
0.33
0.3
1
10
10
0.45
0.4
1
10
10
0.11
0.1
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.51
0.5
1
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
10
10
0.14
0.1
1
10
10
0.29
0.3
1
10
10
0.45
0.5
2
10
10
0.89
0.9
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
123
==PAGE:134==
10
10
0.5
0.5
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.21
0.2
1
10
10
0.27
0.3
1
10
10
0.27
0.3
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.16
0.1
2
10
10
0.21
0.2
1
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
11
11
0.45
0.5
2
11
11
0.29
0.3
1
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.3
0.3
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.44
0.4
1
11
11
0.36
0.4
1
11
11
0.35
0.4
1
11
11
0.8
0.8
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.59
0.6
1
11
11
0.75
0.7
2
11
11
0.38
0.4
1
11
11
0.2
0.2
1
11
11
0.27
0.3
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.37
0.4
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.27
0.3
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.85
0.8
1
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
11
11
0.2
0.2
1
11
11
0.17
0.2
1
11
11
0.74
0.7
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.31
0.3
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.91
0.9
1
11
11
0.75
0.7
2
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.75
0.7
2
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
124
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:135==
11
11
0.25
0.3
2
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.63
0.6
1
11
11
0.5
0.5
1
11
11
0.6
0.6
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.47
0.5
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.64
0.6
1
11
11
0.1
0.1
1
11
11
0.73
0.7
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.77
0.8
1
11
11
0.53
0.5
1
11
11
0.25
0.3
2
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.77
0.8
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.5
0.5
1
11
11
0.37
0.4
1
11
11
0.1
0.1
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.27
0.3
1
11
11
0.46
0.5
1
11
11
0.94
0.9
1
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.18
0.2
1
11
11
0.44
0.4
1
11
11
0.43
0.4
1
11
11
0.43
0.4
1
11
11
0.6
0.6
1
11
11
0.45
0.5
2
11
11
0.82
0.8
1
11
11
0.7
0.7
1
11
11
0.16
0.2
1
11
11
0.51
0.5
1
11
11
0.75
0.8
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.4
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
125
==PAGE:136==
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.55
0.6
1
11
11
0.9
0.9
1
11
11
0.16
0.2
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.35
0.4
1
11
11
0.53
0.5
1
11
11
0.55
0.6
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.09
0.1
1
11
11
0.35
0.4
1
11
11
0.79
0.8
1
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.77
0.8
1
11
11
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.4
0.4
1
12
12
0.7
0.7
1
12
12
0.41
0.4
1
12
12
0.23
0.2
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.94
0.9
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.3
0.3
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
12
12
0.19
0.2
1
12
12
0.72
0.7
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
12
12
0.65
0.7
2
12
12
0.28
0.3
1
12
12
0.84
0.8
1
12
12
0.51
0.5
1
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.67
0.7
1
12
12
0.31
0.3
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
12
12
0.14
0.1
1
12
12
0.89
0.9
1
12
12
0.2
0.2
1
12
12
0.45
0.5
2
12
12
0.67
0.7
1
12
12
0.44
0.4
1
12
12
0.09
0.1
1
12
12
0.58
0.6
1
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
12
12
0.69
0.7
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
126
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:137==
12
12
0.66
0.7
1
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.89
0.9
1
12
12
0.27
0.3
1
12
12
0.71
0.7
1
12
12
0.19
0.2
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.17
0.2
1
12
12
0.75
0.8
1
12
12
0.62
0.6
1
12
12
0.72
0.7
1
12
12
0.92
0.9
1
12
12
0.5
0.5
1
12
12
0.73
0.7
1
12
12
0.52
0.5
1
12
12
0.51
0.5
1
12
12
0.16
0.2
1
12
12
0.43
0.4
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.15
0.2
1
12
12
0.38
0.4
1
12
12
0.92
0.9
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.43
0.4
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.69
0.7
1
12
12
0.78
0.8
1
12
12
0.12
0.1
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.64
0.6
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.36
0.4
1
12
12
0.91
0.9
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.92
0.9
1
12
12
0.31
0.3
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.85
0.8
1
12
12
0.39
0.4
1
12
12
0.92
0.9
1
12
12
0.41
0.4
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.85
0.8
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
127
==PAGE:138==
12
12
0.22
0.2
1
12
12
0.65
0.7
2
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.35
0.4
1
12
12
0.75
0.7
2
12
12
0.83
0.8
1
12
12
0.33
0.3
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.22
0.2
1
12
12
0.15
0.2
1
12
12
0.25
0.2
1
12
12
0.83
0.8
1
12
12
0.36
0.4
1
12
12
0.28
0.3
1
C.3
Case 3: No noise, different E modulus
Actual
location
Estimated
location
Actual
severity
Estimated
severity
Correct
line from
bottom
1
1
0.35
0.3
2
1
7
0.11
0.1
5
1
1
0.51
0.5
1
1
1
0.19
0.1
2
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.14
0.2
2
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.12
0.1
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.85
0.8
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.68
0.7
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.88
0.9
1
1
1
0.35
0.3
2
1
1
0.73
0.7
1
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.12
0.2
2
1
1
0.39
0.4
1
1
1
0.24
0.2
1
1
1
0.15
0.2
1
1
1
0.55
0.6
1
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.74
0.7
1
128
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:139==
1
1
0.31
0.3
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.7
0.7
1
1
8
0.1
0.4
12
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.28
0.3
1
1
1
0.92
0.9
1
1
1
0.23
0.2
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
1
1
0.57
0.5
2
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.65
0.7
2
1
1
0.65
0.7
2
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.11
0.1
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.33
0.4
2
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
1
0.31
0.3
1
1
1
0.68
0.7
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.27
0.3
1
1
1
0.36
0.3
2
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.58
0.6
1
1
1
0.85
0.8
1
1
1
0.22
0.2
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.3
0.3
1
1
1
0.57
0.6
1
1
1
0.45
0.5
2
1
1
0.85
0.9
2
1
1
0.22
0.2
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.49
0.5
1
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.31
0.3
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.53
0.5
1
1
1
0.35
0.3
2
1
1
0.42
0.4
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.65
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
129
==PAGE:140==
1
1
0.26
0.3
1
1
1
0.36
0.4
1
1
1
0.47
0.5
1
1
1
0.94
0.9
1
1
1
0.34
0.3
1
1
1
0.48
0.5
1
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.74
0.7
1
1
1
0.33
0.4
2
1
1
0.48
0.5
1
1
1
0.62
0.6
1
1
1
0.36
0.3
2
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.53
0.5
1
1
1
0.75
0.7
2
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
1
1
0.3
0.3
1
1
1
0.46
0.5
1
1
1
0.47
0.4
2
2
2
0.53
0.5
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.23
0.3
2
2
2
0.59
0.6
1
2
2
0.57
0.6
1
2
2
0.43
0.5
2
2
2
0.66
0.7
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.86
0.8
2
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.22
0.2
1
2
2
0.32
0.4
2
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.21
0.2
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.46
0.4
2
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.76
0.8
1
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.46
0.4
2
2
2
0.84
0.8
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.94
0.9
1
130
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:141==
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.86
0.8
2
2
2
0.74
0.7
1
2
2
0.11
0.1
1
2
2
0.57
0.6
1
2
2
0.65
0.6
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.75
0.7
2
2
2
0.1
0.1
1
2
2
0.89
0.9
1
2
2
0.44
0.4
1
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
2
0.11
0.1
1
2
2
0.88
0.9
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.53
0.5
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.6
0.6
1
2
2
0.29
0.3
1
2
2
0.39
0.4
1
2
2
0.84
0.8
1
2
2
0.16
0.2
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.74
0.7
1
2
2
0.84
0.8
1
2
2
0.35
0.4
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.17
0.2
1
2
2
0.16
0.1
2
2
2
0.35
0.3
2
2
2
0.51
0.5
1
2
2
0.33
0.3
1
2
2
0.28
0.3
1
2
2
0.83
0.8
1
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.22
0.2
1
2
2
0.85
0.9
2
2
2
0.79
0.8
1
2
2
0.47
0.5
1
2
2
0.16
0.1
2
2
2
0.48
0.5
1
2
2
0.23
0.2
1
2
2
0.78
0.8
1
2
2
0.4
0.4
1
2
2
0.42
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
131
==PAGE:142==
2
2
0.46
0.5
1
2
2
0.92
0.9
1
2
2
0.42
0.4
1
2
2
0.51
0.5
1
2
2
0.76
0.7
2
2
2
0.25
0.3
2
2
2
0.22
0.2
1
2
2
0.13
0.2
5
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.6
0.6
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.2
0.2
1
2
2
0.38
0.4
1
2
2
0.4
0.3
2
2
2
0.81
0.8
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
2
0.53
0.5
1
2
2
0.66
0.6
2
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.21
0.2
1
3
3
0.63
0.6
1
3
3
0.56
0.6
1
3
3
0.23
0.2
1
3
3
0.33
0.3
1
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.18
0.2
1
3
3
0.45
0.5
2
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.52
0.5
1
3
3
0.2
0.2
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.51
0.5
1
3
3
0.2
0.2
1
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.26
0.3
1
3
3
0.27
0.3
1
3
3
0.85
0.8
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.82
0.8
1
3
3
0.29
0.3
1
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.61
0.6
1
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.72
0.7
1
3
3
0.24
0.2
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
132
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:143==
3
3
0.37
0.4
1
3
3
0.58
0.6
1
3
3
0.15
0.2
1
3
3
0.34
0.3
1
3
3
0.13
0.1
1
3
3
0.51
0.5
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.63
0.6
1
3
3
0.93
0.9
1
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.41
0.4
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
3
3
0.6
0.6
1
3
3
0.36
0.4
1
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.86
0.9
1
3
3
0.24
0.3
2
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.84
0.8
1
3
3
0.49
0.5
1
3
3
0.84
0.8
1
3
3
0.41
0.4
1
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
3
3
0.83
0.8
1
3
3
0.54
0.5
1
3
3
0.09
0.1
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.6
0.6
1
3
3
0.48
0.5
1
3
3
0.39
0.4
1
3
3
0.17
0.1
2
3
3
0.34
0.3
1
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.34
0.3
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.32
0.3
1
3
3
0.52
0.5
1
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.32
0.3
1
3
3
0.23
0.2
1
3
3
0.12
0.1
1
3
3
0.09
0.1
1
3
3
0.34
0.4
2
3
3
0.1
0.1
1
3
3
0.66
0.6
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
133
==PAGE:144==
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
3
0.67
0.7
1
3
3
0.15
0.1
4
3
3
0.76
0.7
2
3
3
0.79
0.8
1
3
3
0.25
0.2
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
3
3
0.1
0.1
1
3
3
0.23
0.2
1
3
3
0.77
0.7
2
3
3
0.53
0.5
1
3
3
0.27
0.3
1
3
3
0.24
0.2
1
3
3
0.11
0.1
1
3
3
0.32
0.3
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.6
0.6
1
3
3
0.9
0.9
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
4
4
0.59
0.6
1
4
4
0.46
0.5
1
4
4
0.87
0.9
1
4
4
0.28
0.2
2
4
4
0.48
0.5
1
4
4
0.48
0.5
1
4
4
0.39
0.4
1
4
4
0.85
0.8
1
4
4
0.42
0.4
1
4
4
0.9
0.9
1
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
4
0.41
0.4
1
4
4
0.6
0.6
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.83
0.8
1
4
4
0.63
0.6
1
4
4
0.15
0.1
2
4
4
0.33
0.4
2
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.89
0.9
1
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.49
0.5
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.16
0.2
1
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.11
0.1
1
134
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:145==
4
4
0.84
0.8
1
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.87
0.9
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
4
0.93
0.9
1
4
4
0.11
0.1
1
4
4
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.67
0.7
1
4
4
0.78
0.8
1
4
4
0.29
0.3
1
4
4
0.46
0.5
1
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.79
0.8
1
4
4
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.22
0.2
1
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
4
0.33
0.3
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.27
0.3
1
4
4
0.87
0.9
1
4
4
0.47
0.5
1
4
4
0.47
0.5
1
4
4
0.14
0.1
1
4
4
0.36
0.4
1
4
4
0.43
0.4
1
4
4
0.63
0.6
1
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.68
0.6
2
4
4
0.51
0.5
1
4
4
0.28
0.3
1
4
4
0.7
0.7
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.28
0.3
1
4
4
0.36
0.4
1
4
4
0.79
0.8
1
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.77
0.8
1
4
4
0.42
0.4
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.9
0.9
1
4
4
0.49
0.5
1
4
4
0.81
0.8
1
4
4
0.67
0.7
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
135
==PAGE:146==
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
4
0.33
0.3
1
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.51
0.5
1
4
4
0.53
0.5
1
4
4
0.57
0.6
1
4
4
0.1
0.1
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.23
0.2
1
4
4
0.94
0.9
1
4
4
0.93
0.9
1
4
4
0.57
0.5
2
4
4
0.39
0.3
2
4
4
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.23
0.2
1
4
4
0.39
0.4
1
4
4
0.21
0.2
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
5
5
0.41
0.4
1
5
5
0.39
0.3
2
5
5
0.68
0.6
4
5
5
0.81
0.8
1
5
5
0.4
0.3
3
5
5
0.78
0.7
3
5
5
0.8
0.8
1
5
11
0.17
0.1
18
5
5
0.21
0.1
2
5
10
0.64
0.1
2
5
5
0.77
0.7
3
5
5
0.38
0.4
1
5
5
0.42
0.5
2
5
5
0.92
0.9
1
5
4
0.25
0.1
5
5
6
0.1
0.1
4
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.7
0.7
1
5
5
0.53
0.5
1
5
5
0.16
0.2
1
5
7
0.12
0.2
8
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.34
0.3
1
5
7
0.12
0.2
8
5
6
0.2
0.1
6
5
5
0.81
0.7
2
5
11
0.38
0.1
14
5
5
0.85
0.8
1
5
10
0.5
0.1
5
136
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:147==
5
5
0.63
0.6
1
5
5
0.64
0.6
1
5
9
0.61
0.1
4
5
5
0.3
0.3
1
5
5
0.82
0.8
1
5
5
0.82
0.8
1
5
5
0.57
0.6
1
5
7
0.25
0.3
4
5
5
0.84
0.7
2
5
5
0.72
0.7
1
5
7
0.21
0.3
10
5
9
0.55
0.2
5
5
5
0.43
0.4
1
5
5
0.45
0.3
4
5
5
0.42
0.4
1
5
9
0.46
0.1
2
5
5
0.47
0.4
3
5
5
0.84
0.8
1
5
10
0.41
0.1
4
5
9
0.62
0.1
2
5
5
0.62
0.6
1
5
5
0.93
0.9
1
5
5
0.85
0.9
2
5
5
0.4
0.3
3
5
5
0.4
0.4
1
5
9
0.91
0.2
2
5
5
0.93
0.9
1
5
5
0.91
0.8
2
5
5
0.57
0.4
6
5
11
0.29
0.1
20
5
5
0.87
0.9
1
5
5
0.81
0.8
1
5
5
0.9
0.9
1
5
5
0.83
0.8
1
5
6
0.15
0.1
4
5
7
0.25
0.2
6
5
5
0.17
0.1
2
5
5
0.36
0.4
1
5
3
0.15
0.1
7
5
9
0.45
0.1
8
5
9
0.51
0.1
5
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.84
0.9
3
5
5
0.71
0.7
1
5
5
0.54
0.5
1
5
7
0.37
0.3
9
5
8
0.13
0.1
7
5
9
0.53
0.1
3
5
5
0.84
0.8
1
5
12
0.16
0.1
20
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
137
==PAGE:148==
5
9
0.26
0.1
5
5
5
0.67
0.6
3
5
7
0.28
0.1
5
5
5
0.81
0.9
2
5
5
0.93
0.9
1
5
5
0.69
0.7
1
5
5
0.66
0.6
3
5
5
0.8
0.8
1
5
5
0.58
0.5
2
5
9
0.48
0.1
2
5
5
0.7
0.8
2
5
5
0.18
0.2
1
5
5
0.89
0.8
2
5
5
0.45
0.4
1
5
5
0.8
0.7
4
5
7
0.19
0.3
12
5
4
0.32
0.1
3
5
9
0.76
0.2
2
5
5
0.65
0.6
1
5
10
0.37
0.1
2
5
5
0.92
0.9
1
6
6
0.71
0.7
1
6
6
0.42
0.2
6
6
6
0.43
0.3
2
6
8
0.32
0.2
7
6
11
0.1
0.1
16
6
6
0.52
0.4
3
6
6
0.8
0.8
1
6
10
0.7
0.2
2
6
6
0.78
0.8
1
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
6
0.84
0.8
1
6
6
0.81
0.9
3
6
10
0.45
0.1
4
6
8
0.2
0.1
7
6
6
0.91
0.9
1
6
6
0.66
0.7
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
6
0.87
0.8
3
6
6
0.91
0.9
1
6
6
0.49
0.5
1
6
6
0.76
0.7
2
6
6
0.76
0.7
3
6
6
0.89
0.9
1
6
8
0.29
0.1
7
6
11
0.09
0.1
14
6
6
0.54
0.4
2
6
6
0.83
0.9
2
6
6
0.59
0.6
1
6
6
0.38
0.2
8
138
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:149==
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
6
0.12
0.2
3
6
12
0.21
0.1
15
6
6
0.67
0.4
19
6
6
0.13
0.1
1
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
6
0.69
0.7
1
6
10
0.26
0.1
14
6
8
0.19
0.2
7
6
6
0.79
0.8
1
6
10
0.65
0.2
4
6
8
0.22
0.3
11
6
6
0.21
0.3
3
6
1
0.27
0.1
13
6
6
0.58
0.6
1
6
6
0.74
0.7
1
6
6
0.56
0.7
3
6
6
0.39
0.4
1
6
6
0.11
0.3
4
6
12
0.43
0.1
18
6
6
0.42
0.4
1
6
6
0.79
0.7
3
6
6
0.54
0.6
2
6
8
0.14
0.1
3
6
9
0.59
0.1
3
6
6
0.6
0.6
1
6
6
0.2
0.3
3
6
10
0.45
0.1
4
6
6
0.82
0.9
2
6
6
0.64
0.5
2
6
6
0.74
0.7
1
6
6
0.41
0.4
1
6
6
0.79
0.8
1
6
6
0.89
0.9
1
6
6
0.22
0.3
2
6
6
0.77
0.8
1
6
6
0.19
0.3
3
6
6
0.5
0.5
1
6
6
0.24
0.2
1
6
8
0.28
0.3
15
6
6
0.94
0.9
1
6
6
0.74
0.7
1
6
6
0.43
0.4
1
6
10
0.62
0.1
2
6
6
0.44
0.1
11
6
6
0.78
0.8
1
6
6
0.62
0.7
3
6
8
0.33
0.2
9
6
9
0.67
0.1
6
6
6
0.44
0.3
3
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
139
==PAGE:150==
6
9
0.25
0.1
9
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
7
0.31
0.1
15
6
6
0.13
0.2
3
6
8
0.24
0.3
13
6
10
0.47
0.1
2
6
6
0.57
0.5
2
6
6
0.54
0.6
2
6
5
0.34
0.3
4
6
9
0.4
0.1
3
6
6
0.37
0.4
1
6
6
0.66
0.6
4
6
6
0.71
0.7
1
6
6
0.14
0.1
1
6
6
0.62
0.7
2
6
9
0.25
0.1
21
6
6
0.45
0.3
4
6
6
0.75
0.8
1
6
6
0.44
0.3
2
6
6
0.36
0.2
7
6
6
0.67
0.7
1
7
7
0.1
0.4
5
7
7
0.41
0.6
6
7
7
0.29
0.4
3
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
7
7
0.49
0.5
1
7
8
0.2
0.3
6
7
8
0.3
0.4
5
7
7
0.58
0.6
1
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.1
0.3
7
7
11
0.12
0.1
8
7
7
0.72
0.7
1
7
7
0.37
0.5
2
7
7
0.22
0.2
1
7
7
0.49
0.5
1
7
7
0.6
0.8
4
7
7
0.48
0.4
2
7
7
0.61
0.6
1
7
7
0.72
0.7
1
7
7
0.19
0.4
8
7
7
0.91
0.9
1
7
7
0.86
0.8
2
7
11
0.67
0.1
3
7
1
0.11
0.1
3
7
7
0.39
0.4
1
7
7
0.6
0.4
6
7
5
0.35
0.3
18
7
7
0.41
0.3
2
7
12
0.4
0.1
4
140
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:151==
7
7
0.56
0.6
1
7
7
0.3
0.3
1
7
7
0.5
0.6
4
7
7
0.79
0.8
1
7
8
0.25
0.4
8
7
12
0.19
0.1
11
7
7
0.42
0.3
3
7
7
0.84
0.8
1
7
7
0.26
0.4
2
7
7
0.17
0.3
2
7
12
0.12
0.1
13
7
7
0.81
0.8
1
7
8
0.22
0.3
4
7
7
0.39
0.3
3
7
7
0.94
0.9
1
7
7
0.35
0.6
3
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
7
7
0.31
0.6
6
7
7
0.5
0.5
1
7
5
0.16
0.2
6
7
7
0.54
0.6
2
7
8
0.11
0.2
3
7
7
0.35
0.5
3
7
7
0.42
0.5
3
7
7
0.82
0.9
2
7
7
0.37
0.5
2
7
7
0.3
0.4
2
7
7
0.74
0.9
4
7
7
0.74
0.8
4
7
7
0.61
0.7
3
7
7
0.81
0.9
2
7
7
0.49
0.7
3
7
7
0.53
0.4
2
7
7
0.76
0.8
1
7
7
0.49
0.6
2
7
7
0.74
0.8
2
7
7
0.27
0.4
2
7
7
0.53
0.7
5
7
7
0.76
0.8
1
7
7
0.19
0.3
2
7
7
0.41
0.5
2
7
7
0.72
0.9
4
7
7
0.22
0.1
6
7
7
0.4
0.5
2
7
7
0.46
0.4
2
7
12
0.19
0.1
8
7
7
0.3
0.2
2
7
11
0.35
0.1
5
7
7
0.46
0.5
1
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
141
==PAGE:152==
7
7
0.21
0.3
3
7
7
0.89
0.8
2
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
7
0.51
0.6
2
7
7
0.15
0.5
9
7
7
0.15
0.3
2
7
7
0.29
0.5
3
7
7
0.4
0.4
1
7
7
0.15
0.3
3
7
7
0.3
0.4
2
7
7
0.84
0.9
2
7
7
0.28
0.5
4
7
5
0.12
0.1
2
7
7
0.45
0.4
1
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.62
0.7
2
7
7
0.78
0.8
1
7
7
0.21
0.1
6
7
7
0.9
0.8
2
7
1
0.14
0.1
5
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
8
8
0.67
0.7
1
8
8
0.65
0.6
1
8
8
0.43
0.5
2
8
8
0.92
0.9
1
8
8
0.9
0.9
1
8
8
0.41
0.4
1
8
8
0.64
0.7
2
8
8
0.45
0.4
1
8
8
0.28
0.5
6
8
6
0.13
0.2
3
8
8
0.6
0.6
1
8
8
0.29
0.2
5
8
8
0.19
0.1
2
8
8
0.23
0.5
9
8
12
0.24
0.1
8
8
1
0.19
0.1
2
8
8
0.7
0.7
1
8
8
0.91
0.8
2
8
12
0.41
0.1
4
8
8
0.62
0.6
1
8
8
0.62
0.7
3
8
8
0.77
0.8
1
8
8
0.44
0.7
7
8
8
0.54
0.8
6
8
8
0.26
0.1
8
8
1
0.24
0.1
6
8
8
0.12
0.3
4
8
8
0.33
0.5
7
8
8
0.82
0.8
1
142
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:153==
8
1
0.48
0.1
7
8
8
0.15
0.3
4
8
8
0.45
0.3
2
8
8
0.29
0.2
2
8
8
0.64
0.7
3
8
8
0.75
0.9
2
8
8
0.93
0.9
1
8
8
0.74
0.6
2
8
8
0.21
0.3
5
8
8
0.2
0.3
3
8
8
0.38
0.5
3
8
8
0.43
0.7
6
8
8
0.89
0.8
2
8
8
0.47
0.3
11
8
8
0.41
0.5
3
8
8
0.53
0.8
6
8
8
0.42
0.4
1
8
7
0.13
0.2
4
8
8
0.83
0.8
1
8
1
0.34
0.1
11
8
8
0.89
0.9
1
8
8
0.18
0.2
1
8
12
0.25
0.1
7
8
8
0.61
0.7
2
8
8
0.44
0.5
3
8
8
0.71
0.7
1
8
7
0.15
0.3
4
8
10
0.1
0.1
5
8
8
0.53
0.6
3
8
7
0.34
0.3
5
8
8
0.36
0.5
2
8
8
0.69
0.8
2
8
8
0.2
0.1
4
8
8
0.32
0.5
10
8
7
0.12
0.4
10
8
7
0.43
0.5
3
8
8
0.25
0.3
2
8
8
0.22
0.3
3
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
8
0.67
0.7
1
8
8
0.31
0.1
7
8
8
0.44
0.3
2
8
8
0.24
0.1
2
8
6
0.11
0.3
6
8
8
0.35
0.4
1
8
8
0.34
0.4
3
8
2
0.32
0.1
2
8
8
0.74
0.8
2
8
8
0.93
0.8
3
8
8
0.27
0.4
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
143
==PAGE:154==
8
8
0.41
0.4
1
8
8
0.58
0.6
1
8
8
0.36
0.4
1
8
8
0.1
0.4
9
8
8
0.59
0.6
1
8
8
0.78
0.8
1
8
8
0.58
0.6
1
8
8
0.68
0.7
1
8
8
0.72
0.7
1
8
8
0.71
0.8
2
8
8
0.57
0.6
1
8
8
0.17
0.4
5
8
8
0.53
0.6
2
8
8
0.69
0.6
4
8
12
0.2
0.1
12
8
8
0.68
0.6
3
8
8
0.59
0.8
4
8
8
0.73
0.7
1
8
8
0.88
0.8
2
8
8
0.74
0.8
3
8
7
0.11
0.3
7
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.25
0.2
1
9
9
0.91
0.9
1
9
9
0.43
0.4
1
9
9
0.91
0.9
1
9
9
0.84
0.9
2
9
9
0.23
0.2
1
9
9
0.63
0.6
1
9
9
0.66
0.7
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.4
0.4
1
9
9
0.69
0.7
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.18
0.1
2
9
9
0.71
0.7
1
9
9
0.15
0.1
21
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.93
0.9
1
9
9
0.22
0.2
1
9
9
0.27
0.2
2
9
9
0.9
0.9
1
9
9
0.1
0.1
1
9
9
0.37
0.4
1
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
144
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:155==
9
9
0.18
0.2
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.66
0.6
2
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.67
0.6
2
9
9
0.85
0.9
2
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.13
0.1
1
9
9
0.53
0.5
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.74
0.8
2
9
9
0.75
0.7
2
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
9
9
0.77
0.8
1
9
9
0.55
0.5
2
9
9
0.56
0.5
2
9
9
0.75
0.8
1
9
9
0.81
0.8
1
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.81
0.8
1
9
9
0.36
0.4
1
9
9
0.45
0.5
2
9
9
0.4
0.4
1
9
9
0.25
0.2
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.1
0.1
1
9
9
0.45
0.4
1
9
9
0.14
0.1
1
9
9
0.26
0.3
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.46
0.5
1
9
9
0.66
0.7
1
9
9
0.56
0.6
1
9
9
0.1
0.1
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.19
0.2
1
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
9
9
0.18
0.1
2
9
9
0.4
0.4
1
9
9
0.56
0.6
1
9
9
0.21
0.3
2
9
9
0.85
0.8
1
9
9
0.17
0.2
1
9
9
0.44
0.5
2
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.29
0.2
2
9
9
0.64
0.6
1
9
9
0.62
0.6
1
9
9
0.48
0.4
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
145
==PAGE:156==
9
9
0.85
0.9
2
9
9
0.35
0.4
1
9
9
0.35
0.3
2
9
9
0.31
0.3
1
9
9
0.37
0.3
2
9
9
0.41
0.4
1
9
9
0.36
0.4
1
9
9
0.89
0.9
1
9
9
0.91
0.9
1
9
9
0.75
0.8
1
9
9
0.24
0.2
1
9
9
0.15
0.2
1
9
9
0.24
0.2
1
9
9
0.83
0.8
1
9
9
0.83
0.9
2
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.86
0.9
1
9
9
0.29
0.3
1
9
9
0.27
0.3
1
9
9
0.47
0.4
2
9
9
0.75
0.7
2
10
10
0.77
0.8
1
10
10
0.69
0.7
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.44
0.5
2
10
10
0.94
0.9
1
10
12
0.09
0.1
2
10
10
0.92
0.9
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.65
0.6
1
10
10
0.73
0.7
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
10
10
0.74
0.8
2
10
10
0.17
0.2
1
10
10
0.72
0.7
1
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.28
0.3
1
10
10
0.39
0.4
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
146
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:157==
10
10
0.51
0.5
1
10
10
0.11
0.1
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
10
0.58
0.6
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.65
0.7
2
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.29
0.3
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.74
0.7
1
10
10
0.4
0.4
1
10
10
0.77
0.8
1
10
10
0.46
0.4
2
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.37
0.3
2
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.64
0.6
1
10
10
0.26
0.3
1
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
10
10
0.76
0.8
1
10
10
0.2
0.2
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.53
0.5
1
10
10
0.27
0.3
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.32
0.3
1
10
10
0.75
0.7
2
10
10
0.86
0.9
1
10
10
0.91
0.9
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.84
0.9
2
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.74
0.7
1
10
10
0.55
0.5
2
10
10
0.41
0.4
1
10
10
0.66
0.6
2
10
10
0.66
0.6
2
10
10
0.75
0.7
2
10
10
0.16
0.2
1
10
10
0.16
0.2
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.72
0.7
1
10
10
0.15
0.1
2
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.84
0.8
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
147
==PAGE:158==
10
10
0.37
0.3
2
10
10
0.65
0.7
2
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.39
0.4
1
10
10
0.89
0.9
1
10
10
0.25
0.3
3
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.85
0.9
2
10
10
0.38
0.4
1
10
10
0.87
0.9
1
10
10
0.27
0.3
1
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.23
0.3
2
10
10
0.34
0.4
2
10
10
0.31
0.3
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.65
0.7
2
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.55
0.6
1
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
11
11
0.14
0.2
2
11
11
0.15
0.2
1
11
11
0.93
0.9
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.65
0.7
2
11
11
0.28
0.3
1
11
11
0.44
0.5
2
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.52
0.5
1
11
11
0.15
0.1
2
11
11
0.7
0.7
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.17
0.2
1
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.19
0.2
1
11
11
0.13
0.1
1
11
11
0.27
0.3
1
11
11
0.68
0.7
1
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.4
0.5
2
11
11
0.55
0.5
2
11
11
0.64
0.6
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.25
0.3
2
11
11
0.43
0.4
1
11
11
0.91
0.9
1
148
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:159==
11
11
0.1
0.2
2
11
11
0.15
0.2
1
11
11
0.19
0.2
1
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.63
0.6
1
11
11
0.5
0.5
1
11
11
0.13
0.2
2
11
11
0.24
0.3
2
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.42
0.4
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.14
0.2
2
11
11
0.82
0.8
1
11
11
0.38
0.4
1
11
11
0.11
0.1
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.26
0.2
2
11
11
0.28
0.3
1
11
11
0.44
0.4
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.38
0.4
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.9
0.9
1
11
11
0.4
0.4
1
11
11
0.56
0.6
1
11
11
0.28
0.3
1
11
11
0.34
0.3
1
11
11
0.3
0.3
1
11
11
0.2
0.2
1
11
11
0.18
0.2
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.63
0.6
1
11
11
0.56
0.6
1
11
11
0.63
0.6
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.2
0.2
1
11
11
0.18
0.2
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.91
0.9
1
11
11
0.18
0.2
1
11
11
0.17
0.2
1
11
11
0.24
0.3
2
11
11
0.61
0.6
1
11
11
0.92
0.9
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.38
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
149
==PAGE:160==
11
11
0.44
0.4
1
11
11
0.73
0.7
1
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.19
0.1
2
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.41
0.4
1
11
11
0.85
0.9
2
11
11
0.24
0.3
2
11
11
0.19
0.2
1
11
11
0.8
0.8
1
11
11
0.89
0.9
1
11
11
0.21
0.2
1
11
11
0.46
0.5
1
11
11
0.44
0.5
2
11
11
0.85
0.9
2
11
11
0.37
0.4
1
11
11
0.92
0.9
1
11
11
0.43
0.4
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.59
0.6
1
12
12
0.84
0.8
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.54
0.5
1
12
12
0.53
0.5
1
12
12
0.74
0.8
2
12
12
0.66
0.7
1
12
12
0.27
0.2
2
12
12
0.52
0.5
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.44
0.5
2
12
12
0.13
0.2
2
12
12
0.84
0.8
1
12
12
0.32
0.3
1
12
12
0.56
0.6
1
12
12
0.79
0.8
1
12
12
0.42
0.5
2
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.53
0.5
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.4
0.4
1
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.71
0.7
1
12
12
0.71
0.7
1
12
12
0.36
0.4
1
12
12
0.7
0.7
1
12
12
0.75
0.8
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
150
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:161==
12
12
0.75
0.7
2
12
12
0.86
0.8
2
12
12
0.87
0.9
1
12
12
0.37
0.3
2
12
12
0.59
0.6
1
12
12
0.78
0.8
1
12
12
0.55
0.5
2
12
12
0.54
0.5
1
12
12
0.65
0.7
2
12
12
0.6
0.6
1
12
12
0.63
0.7
2
12
12
0.26
0.3
1
12
12
0.3
0.3
1
12
12
0.61
0.6
1
12
12
0.23
0.3
2
12
12
0.89
0.9
1
12
12
0.62
0.6
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.43
0.4
1
12
12
0.75
0.7
2
12
12
0.24
0.2
1
12
12
0.45
0.4
1
12
12
0.89
0.9
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.16
0.2
1
12
12
0.88
0.9
1
12
12
0.7
0.7
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.74
0.7
1
12
12
0.39
0.4
1
12
12
0.3
0.3
1
12
12
0.56
0.6
1
12
12
0.1
0.1
1
12
12
0.39
0.4
1
12
12
0.91
0.9
1
12
12
0.36
0.3
2
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.27
0.3
1
12
12
0.37
0.4
1
12
12
0.47
0.5
1
12
12
0.32
0.3
1
12
12
0.56
0.6
1
12
12
0.59
0.6
1
12
12
0.42
0.4
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.68
0.7
1
12
12
0.27
0.2
2
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
151
==PAGE:162==
12
12
0.88
0.9
1
12
12
0.29
0.3
1
12
12
0.56
0.6
1
12
12
0.22
0.2
1
12
12
0.46
0.4
2
12
12
0.28
0.3
1
12
12
0.94
0.9
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.53
0.5
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.26
0.3
1
12
12
0.2
0.1
2
12
12
0.48
0.5
1
12
12
0.9
0.9
1
12
12
0.25
0.2
1
12
12
0.62
0.6
1
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.72
0.7
1
12
12
0.25
0.2
1
12
12
0.42
0.5
2
C.4
Case 4: Noise, different E modulus and mass
Actual
location
Estimated
location
Actual
severity
Estimated
severity
Correct
line from
bottom
1
1
0.77
0.7
2
1
1
0.63
0.7
2
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.83
0.9
2
1
1
0.83
0.8
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.62
0.6
1
1
1
0.56
0.5
2
1
1
0.11
0.1
1
1
1
0.84
0.8
1
1
1
0.35
0.4
1
1
1
0.51
0.5
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.72
0.7
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.16
0.1
19
1
1
0.41
0.4
1
1
1
0.86
0.8
2
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.71
0.7
1
1
1
0.23
0.3
2
152
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:163==
1
1
0.21
0.2
1
1
1
0.32
0.4
2
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.37
0.3
2
1
1
0.33
0.3
1
1
1
0.54
0.5
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.57
0.6
1
1
1
0.21
0.2
1
1
1
0.29
0.2
2
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.8
0.8
1
1
1
0.52
0.6
2
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.52
0.5
1
1
1
0.15
0.1
2
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.64
0.6
1
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
3
0.17
0.1
3
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.16
0.1
2
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.54
0.5
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.91
0.9
1
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.69
0.7
1
1
1
0.44
0.4
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.33
0.3
1
1
1
0.66
0.7
1
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.48
0.4
2
1
1
0.32
0.3
1
1
1
0.15
0.2
1
1
1
0.25
0.2
1
1
1
0.42
0.4
1
1
1
0.2
0.2
1
1
1
0.6
0.6
1
1
1
0.37
0.4
1
1
1
0.92
0.9
1
1
1
0.28
0.3
1
1
1
0.81
0.8
1
1
1
0.87
0.9
1
1
1
0.94
0.9
1
1
1
0.33
0.4
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
153
==PAGE:164==
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
1
1
0.83
0.8
1
1
1
0.17
0.2
1
1
1
0.42
0.4
1
1
1
0.76
0.7
2
1
1
0.8
0.8
1
1
1
0.13
0.2
2
1
1
0.78
0.8
1
1
1
0.79
0.8
1
1
1
0.54
0.5
1
1
1
0.61
0.6
1
1
1
0.63
0.6
1
1
1
0.77
0.8
1
1
1
0.53
0.5
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.26
0.2
2
1
1
0.14
0.1
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.35
0.4
1
1
1
0.09
0.1
1
1
1
0.4
0.4
1
1
1
0.82
0.8
1
1
1
0.79
0.8
1
1
1
0.32
0.3
1
1
1
0.43
0.4
1
1
1
0.16
0.2
1
1
1
0.89
0.9
1
2
2
0.35
0.3
3
2
2
0.47
0.4
2
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.62
0.6
1
2
2
0.49
0.5
1
2
2
0.1
0.1
1
2
2
0.56
0.6
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.55
0.5
2
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.51
0.4
2
2
2
0.39
0.4
1
2
2
0.37
0.4
1
2
2
0.76
0.8
1
2
2
0.51
0.5
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.73
0.7
1
2
2
0.49
0.5
1
2
2
0.26
0.2
5
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
4
0.24
0.2
2
154
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:165==
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
7
0.12
0.3
9
2
2
0.69
0.7
1
2
2
0.79
0.8
1
2
2
0.43
0.5
2
2
2
0.66
0.7
1
2
2
0.19
0.2
1
2
2
0.54
0.6
2
2
2
0.81
0.8
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.53
0.6
2
2
2
0.09
0.1
1
2
2
0.25
0.2
1
2
2
0.35
0.4
1
2
2
0.73
0.7
1
2
2
0.15
0.2
1
2
2
0.53
0.6
2
2
2
0.5
0.5
1
2
2
0.39
0.4
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.11
0.2
2
2
2
0.52
0.6
2
2
2
0.8
0.8
1
2
7
0.13
0.5
14
2
2
0.18
0.2
1
2
2
0.84
0.8
1
2
2
0.15
0.2
1
2
2
0.69
0.7
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.56
0.5
2
2
2
0.35
0.3
2
2
2
0.76
0.8
1
2
2
0.81
0.8
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.86
0.9
1
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
2
2
0.27
0.3
1
2
2
0.82
0.8
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.29
0.3
1
2
4
0.09
0.1
3
2
2
0.31
0.3
1
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.21
0.2
1
2
2
0.4
0.3
2
2
2
0.36
0.4
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
155
==PAGE:166==
2
2
0.68
0.7
1
2
2
0.93
0.9
1
2
2
0.71
0.7
1
2
2
0.87
0.9
1
2
2
0.7
0.7
1
2
2
0.53
0.5
1
2
2
0.75
0.8
1
2
2
0.77
0.8
1
2
2
0.54
0.5
1
2
2
0.46
0.5
1
2
2
0.26
0.3
1
2
2
0.91
0.9
1
2
2
0.33
0.3
1
2
2
0.25
0.2
1
2
2
0.14
0.1
1
2
2
0.82
0.8
1
2
2
0.32
0.3
1
2
2
0.67
0.7
1
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.29
0.3
1
2
2
0.11
0.2
2
2
2
0.45
0.4
1
2
2
0.86
0.8
2
2
2
0.72
0.7
1
2
2
0.3
0.3
1
2
2
0.66
0.6
2
2
2
0.63
0.6
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.42
0.4
1
3
3
0.78
0.8
1
3
3
0.45
0.4
1
3
3
0.29
0.3
1
3
3
0.61
0.6
1
3
3
0.66
0.7
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.69
0.7
1
3
3
0.32
0.3
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.38
0.3
2
3
3
0.69
0.7
1
3
3
0.5
0.5
1
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.4
0.4
1
3
3
0.43
0.4
1
3
3
0.64
0.6
1
3
3
0.48
0.5
1
3
3
0.81
0.8
1
3
3
0.77
0.8
1
3
3
0.13
0.1
1
156
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:167==
3
3
0.28
0.2
2
3
3
0.14
0.1
1
3
3
0.44
0.4
1
3
3
0.35
0.4
1
3
3
0.91
0.9
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.45
0.4
1
3
3
0.14
0.1
1
3
3
0.14
0.1
1
3
3
0.57
0.6
1
3
3
0.69
0.7
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.54
0.6
2
3
3
0.93
0.9
1
3
3
0.71
0.7
1
3
3
0.37
0.3
2
3
3
0.59
0.6
1
3
3
0.34
0.4
2
3
3
0.75
0.7
2
3
3
0.84
0.8
1
3
3
0.19
0.2
1
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.58
0.6
1
3
3
0.65
0.7
2
3
3
0.51
0.6
2
3
3
0.84
0.8
1
3
3
0.89
0.9
1
3
3
0.66
0.7
1
3
3
0.25
0.3
2
3
3
0.66
0.6
2
3
3
0.79
0.8
1
3
3
0.82
0.8
1
3
3
0.15
0.1
2
3
3
0.68
0.7
1
3
3
0.13
0.1
1
3
3
0.62
0.6
1
3
3
0.7
0.7
1
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.38
0.4
1
3
8
0.1
0.6
30
3
1
0.16
0.1
7
3
3
0.3
0.3
1
3
3
0.75
0.7
3
3
3
0.13
0.2
2
3
3
0.36
0.4
1
3
3
0.56
0.5
2
3
3
0.49
0.5
1
3
3
0.8
0.8
1
3
3
0.32
0.4
2
3
1
0.1
0.1
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
157
==PAGE:168==
3
3
0.35
0.3
3
3
1
0.13
0.1
2
3
3
0.85
0.8
1
3
3
0.85
0.9
2
3
3
0.47
0.5
1
3
3
0.58
0.6
1
3
3
0.74
0.8
2
3
3
0.11
0.1
1
3
3
0.76
0.8
1
3
3
0.7
0.7
1
3
3
0.48
0.5
1
3
3
0.61
0.6
1
3
3
0.14
0.1
1
3
1
0.22
0.3
3
3
3
0.88
0.8
2
3
3
0.45
0.5
2
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.78
0.8
1
3
3
0.57
0.5
2
3
3
0.67
0.7
1
3
3
0.69
0.7
1
3
3
0.16
0.1
2
3
3
0.4
0.4
1
3
3
0.83
0.8
1
3
3
0.31
0.3
1
3
3
0.75
0.8
1
3
3
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.37
0.4
1
4
4
0.78
0.8
1
4
4
0.61
0.6
1
4
4
0.76
0.7
2
4
4
0.81
0.8
1
4
4
0.49
0.5
1
4
4
0.35
0.4
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.13
0.1
1
4
4
0.72
0.7
1
4
4
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.24
0.2
1
4
4
0.51
0.5
1
4
4
0.2
0.2
1
4
4
0.62
0.6
1
4
4
0.73
0.7
1
4
4
0.26
0.2
2
4
4
0.3
0.3
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
158
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:169==
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.28
0.3
1
4
4
0.49
0.5
1
4
4
0.8
0.8
1
4
4
0.33
0.3
1
4
4
0.72
0.7
1
4
4
0.93
0.9
1
4
4
0.52
0.5
1
4
4
0.32
0.3
1
4
4
0.58
0.5
2
4
4
0.61
0.6
1
4
4
0.8
0.8
1
4
4
0.25
0.2
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.81
0.8
1
4
4
0.74
0.7
1
4
4
0.48
0.5
1
4
4
0.16
0.1
5
4
4
0.41
0.4
1
4
4
0.23
0.2
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.87
0.8
2
4
4
0.68
0.7
1
4
4
0.45
0.4
1
4
2
0.18
0.2
4
4
4
0.83
0.8
1
4
4
0.77
0.8
1
4
4
0.83
0.8
1
4
4
0.41
0.4
1
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.47
0.5
1
4
4
0.42
0.4
1
4
4
0.66
0.7
1
4
4
0.88
0.8
2
4
4
0.41
0.4
1
4
4
0.17
0.2
1
4
4
0.13
0.2
2
4
4
0.59
0.5
3
4
4
0.21
0.2
1
4
4
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.19
0.1
2
4
4
0.43
0.4
1
4
4
0.19
0.2
1
4
2
0.1
0.1
3
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
2
0.22
0.3
3
4
4
0.83
0.8
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
4
4
0.31
0.3
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
159
==PAGE:170==
4
4
0.12
0.1
1
4
4
0.34
0.3
1
4
4
0.26
0.2
2
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.15
0.2
1
4
9
0.14
0.1
2
4
4
0.87
0.9
1
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.91
0.9
1
4
4
0.76
0.8
1
4
4
0.62
0.7
2
4
4
0.69
0.7
1
4
4
0.56
0.5
2
4
4
0.92
0.9
1
4
4
0.38
0.4
1
4
4
0.55
0.5
2
4
4
0.71
0.7
1
4
4
0.88
0.9
1
4
4
0.4
0.4
1
4
4
0.54
0.5
1
4
4
0.8
0.8
1
4
4
0.35
0.4
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.5
0.5
1
4
4
0.85
0.8
1
4
4
0.1
0.1
1
4
4
0.18
0.2
1
5
8
0.09
0.4
15
5
5
0.32
0.3
1
5
8
0.38
0.4
22
5
5
0.56
0.7
2
5
10
0.32
0.1
7
5
9
0.52
0.1
4
5
10
0.19
0.1
12
5
5
0.46
0.3
4
5
10
0.17
0.1
2
5
5
0.73
0.9
3
5
5
0.62
0.8
4
5
5
0.2
0.4
4
5
5
0.84
0.9
2
5
7
0.34
0.3
19
5
5
0.76
0.8
1
5
9
0.51
0.1
3
5
5
0.8
0.6
6
5
5
0.36
0.3
2
5
5
0.22
0.1
2
5
9
0.82
0.2
2
5
5
0.69
0.7
1
5
4
0.41
0.1
3
5
5
0.15
0.2
1
160
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:171==
5
5
0.64
0.4
4
5
5
0.33
0.3
1
5
5
0.29
0.2
4
5
7
0.11
0.4
13
5
5
0.55
0.5
2
5
9
0.84
0.2
4
5
9
0.31
0.1
5
5
3
0.45
0.1
12
5
3
0.12
0.1
3
5
9
0.5
0.1
2
5
5
0.85
0.8
1
5
11
0.1
0.1
24
5
9
0.26
0.1
8
5
5
0.69
0.6
2
5
5
0.59
0.5
2
5
5
0.39
0.5
3
5
5
0.7
0.7
1
5
5
0.18
0.2
1
5
5
0.48
0.7
3
5
5
0.75
0.8
1
5
5
0.69
0.8
2
5
7
0.22
0.4
16
5
5
0.26
0.2
5
5
5
0.56
0.6
1
5
7
0.8
0.7
39
5
5
0.72
0.5
5
5
5
0.48
0.6
2
5
5
0.29
0.5
3
5
5
0.6
0.5
2
5
5
0.71
0.7
1
5
7
0.16
0.2
12
5
12
0.3
0.1
22
5
9
0.53
0.1
8
5
5
0.84
0.9
2
5
6
0.38
0.2
10
5
7
0.4
0.4
21
5
5
0.85
0.9
2
5
7
0.38
0.3
18
5
7
0.37
0.5
22
5
5
0.73
0.8
2
5
5
0.52
0.6
2
5
5
0.83
0.9
2
5
5
0.87
0.9
1
5
5
0.88
0.9
1
5
5
0.35
0.3
3
5
5
0.86
0.9
1
5
9
0.76
0.1
5
5
5
0.2
0.6
14
5
12
0.24
0.1
20
5
5
0.57
0.5
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
161
==PAGE:172==
5
5
0.25
0.4
3
5
10
0.16
0.1
3
5
8
0.1
0.1
6
5
5
0.73
0.8
2
5
7
0.77
0.4
28
5
5
0.32
0.3
1
5
11
0.38
0.1
22
5
5
0.54
0.4
2
5
5
0.83
0.7
2
5
9
0.77
0.2
2
5
5
0.3
0.6
6
5
5
0.87
0.9
1
5
5
0.73
0.8
2
5
5
0.61
0.4
11
5
2
0.14
0.1
3
5
5
0.68
0.7
1
5
10
0.13
0.1
16
5
8
0.16
0.3
13
5
4
0.15
0.1
8
5
2
0.13
0.1
2
5
5
0.53
0.4
2
5
5
0.65
0.4
9
5
9
0.7
0.1
5
5
5
0.25
0.4
3
5
5
0.93
0.9
1
5
7
0.23
0.1
4
5
8
0.09
0.7
23
6
6
0.7
0.5
5
6
5
0.2
0.4
8
6
3
0.13
0.1
7
6
6
0.52
0.5
1
6
6
0.55
0.7
2
6
6
0.31
0.2
3
6
6
0.88
0.8
2
6
6
0.37
0.5
2
6
6
0.77
0.7
2
6
10
0.91
0.2
3
6
8
0.29
0.3
7
6
6
0.66
0.8
3
6
12
0.79
0.2
13
6
10
0.49
0.1
3
6
1
0.1
0.1
5
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
6
0.57
0.7
2
6
6
0.93
0.9
1
6
10
0.85
0.2
3
6
3
0.51
0.1
2
6
6
0.6
0.5
4
6
12
0.37
0.1
21
6
6
0.75
0.6
6
162
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:173==
6
9
0.18
0.1
11
6
6
0.51
0.6
2
6
7
0.12
0.4
15
6
1
0.1
0.1
4
6
6
0.56
0.5
5
6
6
0.64
0.8
3
6
6
0.5
0.7
4
6
6
0.3
0.4
4
6
8
0.25
0.3
9
6
6
0.44
0.4
1
6
6
0.55
0.4
5
6
12
0.39
0.1
17
6
6
0.93
0.9
1
6
8
0.27
0.2
12
6
10
0.19
0.1
9
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
8
0.46
0.4
21
6
6
0.72
0.8
2
6
10
0.39
0.1
12
6
10
0.37
0.1
2
6
10
0.62
0.1
8
6
6
0.8
0.7
3
6
6
0.55
0.3
13
6
6
0.12
0.5
14
6
10
0.47
0.1
4
6
6
0.64
0.4
12
6
6
0.26
0.2
3
6
6
0.86
0.9
1
6
6
0.29
0.2
2
6
5
0.1
0.5
12
6
8
0.41
0.2
11
6
6
0.52
0.7
4
6
6
0.17
0.1
2
6
6
0.27
0.7
9
6
6
0.81
0.8
1
6
6
0.73
0.7
1
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
8
0.37
0.5
27
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
10
0.43
0.1
5
6
4
0.37
0.1
7
6
6
0.85
0.8
1
6
10
0.66
0.1
3
6
6
0.68
0.5
5
6
6
0.64
0.7
3
6
6
0.87
0.8
3
6
9
0.35
0.1
7
6
6
0.82
0.9
2
6
6
0.23
0.5
7
6
8
0.32
0.1
7
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
163
==PAGE:174==
6
12
0.74
0.1
27
6
6
0.28
0.5
4
6
6
0.78
0.7
3
6
6
0.88
0.9
1
6
6
0.9
0.9
1
6
10
0.26
0.1
4
6
6
0.42
0.4
1
6
6
0.8
0.8
1
6
6
0.33
0.2
2
6
8
0.27
0.7
30
6
6
0.44
0.5
3
6
6
0.83
0.8
1
6
6
0.89
0.8
2
6
6
0.5
0.4
2
6
6
0.41
0.4
1
6
12
0.33
0.1
8
6
6
0.34
0.5
3
6
12
0.14
0.1
19
6
6
0.92
0.9
1
6
6
0.55
0.8
4
6
10
0.87
0.2
4
6
11
0.21
0.1
18
6
8
0.51
0.4
12
6
6
0.86
0.8
5
6
6
0.57
0.6
1
6
11
0.12
0.1
14
6
6
0.21
0.2
1
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
1
0.14
0.1
3
7
2
0.56
0.1
27
7
5
0.12
0.2
5
7
7
0.43
0.4
1
7
1
0.16
0.1
8
7
9
0.16
0.1
6
7
12
0.27
0.1
17
7
7
0.54
0.5
1
7
7
0.48
0.4
2
7
1
0.35
0.1
20
7
8
0.18
0.2
2
7
11
0.9
0.2
2
7
7
0.64
0.7
3
7
7
0.57
0.6
1
7
7
0.3
0.7
12
7
7
0.7
0.7
1
7
7
0.55
0.7
2
7
10
0.5
0.1
31
7
3
0.18
0.1
21
7
9
0.49
0.1
2
7
7
0.77
0.8
1
7
7
0.48
0.8
12
164
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:175==
7
7
0.37
0.6
6
7
7
0.56
0.8
4
7
7
0.67
0.8
2
7
1
0.16
0.1
9
7
2
0.3
0.1
2
7
8
0.23
0.4
8
7
7
0.94
0.9
1
7
7
0.53
0.6
2
7
11
0.54
0.1
3
7
7
0.77
0.7
3
7
1
0.46
0.1
23
7
7
0.41
0.2
7
7
10
0.24
0.1
2
7
7
0.63
0.7
2
7
7
0.67
0.9
4
7
7
0.9
0.9
1
7
2
0.38
0.1
15
7
11
0.2
0.1
11
7
7
0.67
0.7
1
7
11
0.25
0.1
12
7
5
0.29
0.1
16
7
7
0.63
0.7
2
7
12
0.45
0.1
10
7
7
0.68
0.6
3
7
12
0.22
0.1
12
7
7
0.93
0.9
1
7
7
0.36
0.1
14
7
11
0.77
0.1
4
7
7
0.76
0.7
3
7
12
0.36
0.1
5
7
7
0.22
0.5
5
7
2
0.21
0.1
2
7
7
0.28
0.2
2
7
7
0.2
0.4
9
7
7
0.17
0.6
13
7
7
0.49
0.7
4
7
10
0.39
0.1
4
7
12
0.28
0.1
8
7
7
0.24
0.4
4
7
7
0.61
0.6
1
7
7
0.52
0.4
3
7
7
0.33
0.4
2
7
7
0.88
0.9
1
7
8
0.3
0.2
6
7
7
0.57
0.8
3
7
8
0.18
0.4
6
7
7
0.78
0.6
8
7
7
0.92
0.9
1
7
7
0.49
0.5
1
7
5
0.29
0.4
17
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
165
==PAGE:176==
7
7
0.75
0.9
2
7
3
0.17
0.1
16
7
5
0.18
0.5
17
7
7
0.12
0.3
8
7
7
0.73
0.9
4
7
7
0.29
0.6
12
7
5
0.17
0.3
15
7
7
0.75
0.9
2
7
7
0.34
0.7
12
7
7
0.31
0.4
2
7
7
0.53
0.4
2
7
11
0.45
0.1
6
7
7
0.39
0.4
1
7
7
0.2
0.4
4
7
7
0.5
0.7
3
7
7
0.12
0.3
7
7
7
0.62
0.6
1
7
7
0.11
0.2
3
7
7
0.44
0.3
2
7
7
0.51
0.5
1
7
7
0.65
0.5
2
7
7
0.42
0.9
13
7
7
0.21
0.1
2
7
7
0.65
0.7
2
7
7
0.73
0.5
8
7
7
0.71
0.8
3
7
12
0.31
0.1
12
8
8
0.39
0.2
6
8
8
0.92
0.9
1
8
8
0.62
0.9
5
8
8
0.57
0.4
8
8
10
0.15
0.1
4
8
12
0.49
0.1
5
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
8
8
0.72
0.7
1
8
6
0.49
0.4
22
8
8
0.87
0.9
1
8
8
0.47
0.6
3
8
8
0.28
0.3
1
8
2
0.16
0.1
10
8
6
0.4
0.5
23
8
8
0.89
0.8
2
8
8
0.24
0.6
13
8
8
0.72
0.7
1
8
8
0.28
0.5
4
8
8
0.85
0.9
2
8
8
0.9
0.8
2
8
5
0.2
0.2
14
8
8
0.51
0.7
4
8
8
0.79
0.7
2
166
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:177==
8
8
0.75
0.5
19
8
7
0.12
0.6
17
8
8
0.41
0.4
1
8
8
0.46
0.4
3
8
7
0.34
0.3
3
8
11
0.51
0.1
4
8
8
0.61
0.7
2
8
1
0.29
0.1
2
8
8
0.36
0.3
2
8
7
0.15
0.3
4
8
8
0.39
0.4
1
8
8
0.53
0.6
3
8
4
0.32
0.1
21
8
7
0.25
0.3
4
8
8
0.66
0.8
2
8
8
0.53
0.4
2
8
11
0.27
0.1
8
8
8
0.75
0.7
3
8
8
0.92
0.8
2
8
8
0.5
0.6
4
8
9
0.21
0.1
10
8
8
0.64
0.7
3
8
6
0.4
0.3
16
8
8
0.52
0.6
2
8
8
0.24
0.3
2
8
8
0.73
0.6
3
8
8
0.83
0.9
2
8
8
0.19
0.3
2
8
8
0.84
0.9
2
8
12
0.45
0.1
8
8
8
0.42
0.5
3
8
8
0.54
0.5
1
8
8
0.78
0.9
2
8
8
0.73
0.5
7
8
12
0.1
0.1
15
8
8
0.68
0.9
5
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
8
0.34
0.4
2
8
6
0.36
0.1
22
8
8
0.27
0.4
3
8
8
0.6
0.6
1
8
7
0.16
0.1
5
8
10
0.32
0.1
17
8
8
0.71
0.7
1
8
8
0.82
0.8
1
8
6
0.21
0.2
9
8
8
0.9
0.7
6
8
8
0.59
0.9
6
8
8
0.31
0.2
2
8
11
0.23
0.1
9
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
167
==PAGE:178==
8
6
0.4
0.2
18
8
8
0.69
0.7
1
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
8
0.9
0.9
1
8
6
0.1
0.3
12
8
8
0.71
0.5
5
8
8
0.11
0.4
9
8
8
0.69
0.8
2
8
1
0.09
0.1
7
8
2
0.32
0.1
9
8
8
0.76
0.7
2
8
11
0.1
0.1
15
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
2
0.23
0.1
6
8
12
0.48
0.1
2
8
8
0.91
0.9
1
8
8
0.5
0.3
5
8
8
0.2
0.6
14
8
9
0.38
0.1
10
8
8
0.79
0.8
1
8
8
0.56
0.4
7
8
8
0.28
0.4
3
8
8
0.79
0.7
2
8
8
0.39
0.5
3
8
6
0.1
0.3
12
8
8
0.87
0.8
2
8
6
0.15
0.4
15
9
9
0.53
0.5
1
9
9
0.82
0.8
1
9
9
0.77
0.8
1
9
9
0.27
0.3
1
9
9
0.79
0.7
2
9
9
0.3
0.2
2
9
9
0.66
0.6
2
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.46
0.4
2
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.27
0.3
1
9
9
0.5
0.5
1
9
9
0.12
0.2
4
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.79
0.7
2
9
9
0.88
0.9
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.9
0.9
1
9
9
0.37
0.4
1
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.39
0.4
1
168
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:179==
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.44
0.5
2
9
9
0.16
0.1
2
9
9
0.91
0.9
1
9
9
0.17
0.2
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.86
0.8
2
9
9
0.26
0.2
2
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.28
0.3
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.37
0.4
1
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.21
0.3
2
9
9
0.34
0.4
2
9
9
0.14
0.1
1
9
9
0.92
0.9
1
9
9
0.87
0.9
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.66
0.7
1
9
9
0.89
0.9
1
9
9
0.19
0.2
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.41
0.4
1
9
9
0.79
0.7
2
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.91
0.9
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.47
0.5
1
9
9
0.17
0.1
2
9
9
0.78
0.8
1
9
9
0.2
0.2
1
9
9
0.75
0.7
2
9
9
0.58
0.6
1
9
9
0.32
0.3
1
9
9
0.35
0.3
2
9
9
0.88
0.9
1
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
9
9
0.65
0.7
2
9
11
0.19
0.2
2
9
11
0.11
0.1
2
9
9
0.68
0.7
1
9
9
0.26
0.4
2
9
9
0.86
0.9
1
9
9
0.8
0.8
1
9
9
0.29
0.2
2
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
169
==PAGE:180==
9
9
0.42
0.5
2
9
9
0.76
0.8
1
9
9
0.11
0.1
1
9
9
0.25
0.3
2
9
9
0.82
0.8
1
9
9
0.29
0.3
1
9
9
0.71
0.7
1
9
9
0.61
0.6
1
9
9
0.34
0.3
1
9
9
0.23
0.2
1
9
5
0.1
0.5
2
9
9
0.57
0.6
1
9
9
0.59
0.6
1
9
9
0.5
0.5
1
9
9
0.19
0.2
1
9
9
0.74
0.7
1
9
9
0.37
0.4
1
9
9
0.43
0.4
1
9
9
0.46
0.4
2
9
9
0.36
0.4
1
9
9
0.34
0.3
1
9
9
0.67
0.7
1
9
9
0.38
0.4
1
9
9
0.83
0.8
1
9
9
0.84
0.8
1
9
9
0.39
0.4
1
9
9
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.68
0.7
1
10
10
0.66
0.7
1
10
10
0.28
0.3
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
10
10
0.21
0.2
1
10
10
0.19
0.2
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.36
0.4
1
10
10
0.55
0.6
1
10
12
0.1
0.2
17
10
10
0.73
0.7
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.92
0.9
1
10
10
0.63
0.6
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
6
0.22
0.7
6
10
10
0.23
0.2
1
10
10
0.85
0.8
1
10
10
0.2
0.2
1
10
10
0.43
0.4
1
10
10
0.58
0.6
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.71
0.7
1
170
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:181==
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.27
0.3
1
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.27
0.2
2
10
10
0.54
0.5
1
10
10
0.57
0.5
2
10
10
0.44
0.5
2
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.5
0.5
1
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.55
0.5
2
10
10
0.88
0.9
1
10
10
0.76
0.8
1
10
10
0.72
0.7
1
10
10
0.37
0.4
1
10
10
0.42
0.4
1
10
10
0.93
0.9
1
10
10
0.81
0.8
1
10
10
0.52
0.5
1
10
10
0.17
0.2
1
10
10
0.82
0.8
1
10
10
0.64
0.6
1
10
10
0.34
0.4
2
10
10
0.2
0.2
1
10
10
0.69
0.7
1
10
10
0.29
0.3
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
10
0.25
0.3
2
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
10
10
0.47
0.5
1
10
12
0.1
0.1
2
10
10
0.55
0.5
2
10
10
0.3
0.3
1
10
10
0.76
0.8
1
10
10
0.74
0.8
2
10
10
0.35
0.3
2
10
10
0.15
0.1
3
10
10
0.18
0.2
1
10
10
0.75
0.8
1
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
10
10
0.49
0.5
1
10
6
0.31
0.8
9
10
10
0.36
0.3
2
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.66
0.6
2
10
10
0.79
0.8
1
10
10
0.62
0.6
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
171
==PAGE:182==
10
10
0.4
0.4
1
10
10
0.48
0.5
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.81
0.8
1
10
10
0.69
0.7
1
10
10
0.6
0.6
1
10
10
0.22
0.2
1
10
8
0.1
0.7
25
10
10
0.83
0.8
1
10
10
0.59
0.6
1
10
10
0.58
0.6
1
10
10
0.13
0.1
1
10
10
0.25
0.3
3
10
10
0.12
0.1
1
10
10
0.24
0.2
1
10
10
0.78
0.8
1
10
10
0.8
0.8
1
10
10
0.67
0.7
1
10
10
0.92
0.9
1
10
10
0.56
0.6
1
10
10
0.24
0.3
2
10
10
0.38
0.4
1
10
10
0.74
0.7
1
10
10
0.2
0.1
7
10
10
0.85
0.8
1
10
10
0.9
0.9
1
11
11
0.45
0.4
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.54
0.6
2
11
11
0.18
0.1
10
11
11
0.31
0.3
1
11
11
0.3
0.3
1
11
11
0.38
0.4
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.89
0.9
1
11
11
0.47
0.5
1
11
11
0.35
0.4
1
11
11
0.43
0.4
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.82
0.8
1
11
11
0.31
0.4
2
11
11
0.76
0.7
2
11
11
0.54
0.5
1
11
11
0.83
0.8
1
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.79
0.8
1
172
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:183==
11
11
0.4
0.4
1
11
11
0.42
0.4
1
11
11
0.91
0.9
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.26
0.3
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.62
0.6
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.76
0.7
2
11
11
0.36
0.3
6
11
11
0.5
0.5
1
11
11
0.12
0.1
1
11
11
0.5
0.5
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.81
0.8
1
11
11
0.61
0.6
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.48
0.5
1
11
11
0.58
0.6
1
11
11
0.73
0.7
1
11
11
0.61
0.6
1
11
11
0.68
0.7
1
11
11
0.79
0.8
1
11
11
0.22
0.2
1
11
11
0.89
0.9
1
11
11
0.66
0.7
1
11
11
0.34
0.4
2
11
11
0.78
0.8
1
11
11
0.71
0.7
1
11
11
0.39
0.4
1
11
11
0.59
0.6
1
11
11
0.89
0.9
1
11
11
0.63
0.6
1
11
11
0.21
0.1
4
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.57
0.6
1
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
11
11
0.2
0.2
1
11
11
0.72
0.7
1
11
11
0.84
0.9
2
11
11
0.23
0.2
1
11
11
0.7
0.7
1
11
11
0.36
0.4
1
11
11
0.42
0.4
1
11
11
0.88
0.9
1
11
11
0.41
0.4
1
11
11
0.4
0.4
1
11
7
0.09
0.4
16
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
173
==PAGE:184==
11
11
0.33
0.3
1
11
11
0.16
0.2
1
11
11
0.89
0.9
1
11
11
0.87
0.8
2
11
11
0.87
0.9
1
11
11
0.46
0.5
1
11
11
0.73
0.7
1
11
12
0.09
0.2
11
11
11
0.76
0.8
1
11
11
0.93
0.9
1
11
11
0.31
0.2
2
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.69
0.7
1
11
11
0.28
0.3
1
11
11
0.24
0.2
1
11
11
0.12
0.1
1
11
11
0.68
0.7
1
11
11
0.38
0.3
3
11
11
0.47
0.5
1
11
11
0.53
0.5
1
11
11
0.53
0.5
1
11
11
0.47
0.5
1
11
11
0.2
0.3
2
11
11
0.49
0.5
1
11
11
0.92
0.9
1
11
11
0.26
0.4
2
11
11
0.59
0.6
1
12
12
0.91
0.9
1
12
10
0.16
0.1
37
12
12
0.61
0.6
1
12
12
0.17
0.2
1
12
12
0.75
0.8
1
12
12
0.24
0.2
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.24
0.1
4
12
12
0.87
0.9
1
12
12
0.74
0.7
1
12
12
0.76
0.8
1
12
12
0.12
0.2
3
12
12
0.23
0.2
1
12
12
0.37
0.4
1
12
12
0.68
0.6
2
12
12
0.19
0.2
1
12
12
0.77
0.8
1
12
12
0.45
0.4
1
12
12
0.55
0.5
2
12
12
0.12
0.1
1
12
12
0.41
0.3
2
12
12
0.16
0.2
1
174
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:185==
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.84
0.8
1
12
12
0.4
0.5
2
12
12
0.51
0.5
1
12
12
0.31
0.2
2
12
12
0.2
0.2
1
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.41
0.4
1
12
12
0.47
0.5
1
12
12
0.88
0.9
1
12
12
0.49
0.5
1
12
12
0.52
0.6
2
12
12
0.36
0.4
1
12
12
0.17
0.1
5
12
12
0.24
0.3
3
12
12
0.76
0.8
1
12
12
0.79
0.8
1
12
12
0.25
0.3
2
12
8
0.13
0.3
19
12
12
0.64
0.7
2
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.33
0.4
2
12
12
0.91
0.9
1
12
12
0.86
0.9
1
12
12
0.92
0.9
1
12
12
0.7
0.7
1
12
12
0.57
0.6
1
12
12
0.9
0.9
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.19
0.1
33
12
10
0.09
0.1
21
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.67
0.7
1
12
12
0.87
0.9
1
12
12
0.9
0.9
1
12
12
0.84
0.8
1
12
12
0.24
0.2
1
12
12
0.85
0.8
1
12
12
0.38
0.4
1
12
12
0.34
0.3
1
12
12
0.11
0.1
1
12
12
0.31
0.3
1
12
12
0.45
0.5
2
12
12
0.42
0.4
1
12
12
0.35
0.4
1
12
12
0.21
0.2
1
12
12
0.52
0.5
1
12
12
0.26
0.3
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
175
==PAGE:186==
12
12
0.27
0.4
2
12
12
0.81
0.8
1
12
12
0.28
0.2
2
12
12
0.93
0.9
1
12
12
0.44
0.4
1
12
12
0.14
0.1
1
12
12
0.8
0.8
1
12
12
0.73
0.7
1
12
12
0.71
0.7
1
12
12
0.85
0.8
1
12
12
0.39
0.4
1
12
12
0.46
0.5
1
12
12
0.59
0.6
1
12
12
0.75
0.7
2
12
12
0.82
0.8
1
12
12
0.19
0.2
1
12
12
0.41
0.4
1
12
12
0.91
0.9
1
12
12
0.25
0.3
3
12
12
0.75
0.8
1
12
12
0.22
0.2
1
12
10
0.12
0.1
25
12
12
0.27
0.3
1
12
12
0.19
0.1
2
12
12
0.6
0.5
2
12
12
0.13
0.2
2
12
12
0.59
0.6
1
176
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
==PAGE:187==
Damage Detection of structures subjected to dynamic loads
177
==PAGE:188==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
