==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Continual Learning
for NLP ranking models
Pawel M. Darulewski (s200123)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting may occur when a machine learning model is pre-trained with
one type of data, and then is fine-tuned on a different kind of data, e.g. when it is
used to solve another problem. After exposure to new experiences, the model tends
to forget previously acquired knowledge.
This issue is called a stability-plasticity
dilemma, where the stability of predictions is in competition with plasticity to solve
multiple tasks. A continual learning framework was hence invented to counteract
the forgetting and increase the plasticity. Thus, a continual learning approach was
applied to an NLP problem – document ranking – a combination not yet investigated
in the research. In this project, various deep learning text processing models were
described, and BERT was chosen to be used for document ranking, by implementing
a bi-encoder architecture. To investigate how impactful catastrophic forgetting is in
this domain, two datasets were used – Natural Questions for pre-training the model,
and MS MARCO passage retrieval triples for fine-tuning with new data distribution.
Based on such a framework, multiple CL strategies were applied and investigated, to
test how well they combat forgetting when applied to the document ranking problem.
The naive, replay, and elastic weight consolidation methods were investigated. All
strategies turned out to countermeasure the catastrophic forgetting, compared to a
naive way of fine-tuning. Taking into consideration the scores, as well as the pros and
cons of each of the methods, replay techniques were identified as suﬀicient to decrease
training times up to 80% and still result in satisfactory evaluation and ranking scores.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark done in collaboration with
raffle.ai in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in
Engineering.
Pawel M. Darulewski (s200123)
Kongens Lyngby, June 23, 2022
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my thanks to the supervisor of the thesis, Professor Ole Winther
at Section for Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark,
for the opportunity to undertake such interesting and complex topic, for his support,
and the possibility of cooperation with raffle.ai, access to computational resources,
and option to work alongside experienced people.
Moreover, I am grateful to Jonas Lyngsø and Mathias Baltzersen for lots of help
and dedicated time throughout the course of the thesis.
Your experience helped
me understand nuances about the problem and your suggestions shaped the whole
project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Natural language processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Document ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Continual learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Document ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Continual learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Continual learning in natural language processing . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
9
3.1
Deep learning in NLP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Document ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Continual learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methods
25
4.1
Workflow design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Framework and environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Document ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Continual learning strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Results and discussion
43
5.1
Training, testing, and forgetting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Ranking evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Cost measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusions
51
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Recently, natural language processing (NLP) has established itself as a very dynamic
field of science. Thanks to the development of deep learning (DL), it is now possible
to apply deep learning methods to various branches of NLP and obtain much better
results than using previous, probabilistic approaches [Qad+20]. Nonetheless, due to
the novelty factor of using the DL/NLP combination, it is sometimes diﬀicult to find
a robust and stable implementation for a given problem. A lot of work has been
put into model development for NLP, collecting data for pretraining, and defining
benchmarks, but some aspects are not yet mature enough. And there is no consensus
about one standard way of benchmarking these models.
One of the examples is document ranking. This problem deals with the idea of
retrieving documents that answer a given question or query. Then, the documents
are ranked on the probability of having the answer somewhere in the text. Examples
of such algorithms may be found in online search engines, where a client can type in
a question, and receive a link to a wanted resource.
Figure 1.1: DuckDuckGo search engine example. After the user provides a
query, the search engine can find a number of resources that contain an answer to the
given question.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Natural language processing
One of the artificial intelligence (AI) domains is natural language processing. This
branch is responsible for machine comprehension of human language, written as well
as spoken [RRC19]. The beginnings of NLP can be described as defining a lot of hand-
written rules, later replaced by statistical and probabilistic models. Currently, deep
learning techniques are successfully applied to solve language problems. NLP may
be used in many areas, amongst others: text summarising, translations, sentiment
analysis, or information retrieval [DL18].
Recently, many NLP models have been using what is known as an attention mech-
anism. This framework, presented for the first time in Bahdanau, Cho and Bengio
[BCB16], turned out to be a breakthrough in the DL domain and significantly in-
creased the accuracy of contemporary models. One of the biggest advancements in
the attention mechanism inside the encoder-decoder architecture was presented in
Vaswani et al. [Vas+17] where the so-called transformers replaced previous models,
such as Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [RHW85] and Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) [HS97], in solving numerous language tasks.
BERT [Dev+19] or GPT-3
[Bro+20] are examples of models exhibiting transformer mechanics, and obtaining
state-of-the-art results.
1.2
Document ranking
Search engines, such as Google or DuckDuckGo, are facilitating a process of infor-
mation retrieval. Having huge amounts of documents to work with, in this case –
websites containing multitudes of text, users, by asking a simple question, can easily
find a requested resource.
This task can be also simplified by replacing documents with shorter texts called
passages.
To find the best possible matches between a given query and a set of
documents, statistical analyses, such as BM25 were developed in many forms over the
years [RZ09]. Such algorithms are simply ranking functions, that return probabilities
of finding the best match between the query and document.
Thanks to advancements in NLP and DL, one can use state-of-the-art transformer
models to develop a document ranking tool. Moreover, the industry tries to spark and
promote the development of NLP algorithms by providing collections of datasets for
multiple NLP tasks. One of such examples is the MS MARCO dataset, collected by
Microsoft, which can be used for document or passage retrieval, question answering,
and natural language generation [Baj+18].
In this paper, the document ranking problem will be presented alongside the
possible implementation proposed by Karpukhin et al. [Kar+20].
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Continual learning
3
1.3
Continual learning
Every time there is a shift in data distribution or a change in the predicted classes,
a machine learning model has to accommodate such new knowledge. The models
can then be trained from scratch, however, that option is sub-optimal, considering
time and computing costs. One of the possible solutions is a framework called con-
tinual learning (CL), which can be defined as an incremental model training method
that uses new data, or tasks, without losing previously acquired knowledge [Par+19].
Typically, when new data is introduced, the model suffers from what is known as
catastrophic forgetting, which causes a decline in previous task understanding ability
[MC89]. This fact is especially impactful in the natural language processing domain
since languages are constantly changing due to social and cultural processes [Kut+18]
and overall amounts of training data. Therefore keeping the most up-to-date NLP
models is crucial to obtaining relevant results.
In this dissertation, multiple categories and methods for counteracting the catas-
trophic forgetting problem are investigated, such as regularisation and rehearsal tech-
niques [Cos+21]. Moreover, due to the scarcity of scientific papers discussing CL in
NLP [BBC20], it is necessary to establish reproducible benchmarking and evaluation
methods, appropriate for the NLP ranking area.
1.4
Motivation
For the time being, there is no one well-established model, training dataset, and im-
plementation to solve the problem of document ranking. A lot of approaches and
their combinations have been proposed in research, and many more are being devel-
oped currently [Tra+21]. A lot of NLP models are being designed and released, such
as ELMo [Pet+18], BERT [Dev+19] or GPT-3 [Bro+20], together with their mod-
ified, improved versions. However, there is still no one obvious strongest candidate
for the document ranking task, especially when every new model can have even more
parameters and can be trained on even bigger datasets, resulting in yet better per-
formance. Moreover, transformer-based models tend to be big, and training requires
huge amounts of computing power and time, which makes the whole process more
cumbersome and expensive for companies. Especially, when one needs to train the
model from scratch and repeat that step whenever data changes.
This work is also motivated by the lack of well-established CL techniques for
the aforementioned ranking problem [BBC20].
Research mainly focuses on static
approaches – e.g. finding new model architectures or approaches to already existing
problems. However, not much has been presented for dynamic situations, when a
model or data evolves over time, especially for complex problems such as document
ranking. One of the most popular methodologies used for training a model with new
samples is naive fine-tuning, where the model is simply trained further with new data.
Unfortunately, this is not an optimal solution. What if new classification targets are
introduced or new samples have different distribution and are therefore biased? In
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
the former case, a change in the model architecture needs to be introduced, to add
classification nodes in the last layer of the network. In the latter, a model might
suffer from a performance drop, because it was not used to such disproportion of
data sample types between training procedures. On the other hand, one can also
train the model from scratch, using all data samples – this may take a lot of time and
computational resources, and probably it will have to be done multiple times whenever
needed. There are, however, approaches to solve these issues in an intelligent way,
which are well-analysed in research for different deep learning domains. At the time of
writing, however, none of these techniques have been applied to solving the document
ranking problem.
Thus, this dissertation aims to define a robust methodology of CL techniques for
document ranking tasks. Such framework should consist of multiple steps: model
and baseline dataset definition, choosing and applying CL strategies, defining proper
metrics and collecting scores, benchmarking, and analysis of the results. By analysing
such a pipeline, it would be possible to define better approaches to continuously train
a model, than training it from scratch or applying standard fine-tuning. Looking at
metrics concerning training times might also help to reduce costs by verifying how
computer resources are utilised in both cases, and how much resources can be saved
by implementing a CL framework.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
In this chapter, related works were compiled, in order to present state-of-the-art
approaches and solutions, highlighting areas crucial to this dissertation.
2.1
Document ranking
As a primary source of information about document ranking, Dense Passage Re-
trieval (DPR) architecture presented in Karpukhin et al. [Kar+20] was selected. The
paper describes in details how a bi-encoder architecture can be applied for queries
and passages, as well as index construction, and how final evaluation can be exe-
cuted. The authors also performed ablation studies to find out how many negative
passages should be present in a batch. Moreover, they released a full implementation
in Python with a wide gamut of configurations. The implementation performed in
this thesis was based on their work. However, the paper focuses mostly on passage
retrieval performance and accuracy scores, therefore only architecture and pieces of
implementation were applied to this dissertation. Very long training times, complex
indexing of passages using a dedicated library, or using a multitude of datasets, are
not of interest. This implementation was also adjusted for ranking purposes.
DPR uses two encoders called BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers), presented in Devlin et al. [Dev+19].
The paper introduces an ap-
proach to analysing sequences of text in both directions, by connecting every token
with every other one, which is an improvement over the previous generation of mod-
els, such as vanilla RNN and LSTM, which could look only backwards in sequences.
This is also relevant in ranking documents, since BERT, thanks to the transformer
self-attention mechanism, and masked pre-training procedure, can look in both direc-
tions to understand the context. This influences not only general text understanding,
but also is crucial in ranking, since approaches such as BM25 take into account only
amount of words, not their order or verb conjugation, which influences semantic un-
derstanding. In this document ranking project, two BERT models are going to be
used, as described for DPR, one for query, and one for passage encoding.
Two datasets were chosen to be used here. Natural Questions (NQ) [Kwi+19] was
used in the DPR paper, so to keep reproducibility of the results, a subset from the
same dataset was chosen for training the model. Since the original dataset contains
HTML tags and other artefacts, the DPR authors processed the dataset and created
a ready-to-use structure with queries, positive, and two types of negative passages.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature review
For the purpose of CL scenarios, one needs to introduce a change of task or shift
in data distribution, hence MS MARCO triples dataset was selected to do the for-
mer [Baj+18]. MS MARCO is one of the most commonly used datasets for various
text processing tasks in deep learning, such as retrieval, key phrase extraction, or
question answering. The popularity of both datasets is being powered by competi-
tions organised by Google and Microsoft respectively – whose main aim is to promote
advancements in the field of artificial intelligence around the world.
2.2
Continual learning
While a lot of research has been done around CL for feed-forward and convolu-
tional deep learning models, a growing interest has been expressed for Recurrent
Networks, e.g. in a recently published report by Cossu et al. [Cos+21]. They re-
leased a comprehensive categorisation of CL scenarios, the overall methodology and
approaches. Furthermore, the authors conducted experiments using various strate-
gies and tasks. Based on their results, replay and Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM)
strategies obtained the best results for chosen model architectures and deep learning
problems. The EWC method, although being commonly used, resulted in average
scores, amongst all categories. Although the authors were using RNNs and LSTMs,
the problems concerned Permuted MNIST and Quick, Draw! datasets, which are not
strictly NLP-related tasks.
Long sequences used to train RNNs may result in vanishing or exploding gradient
problem, which makes CL use even more vital and applicable. As far as the trans-
former architecture is concerned, Cossu et al. [Cos+21] mentions that not much has
been published in this domain, which added to the motivation behind this thesis.
Another paper of interest is Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [Kir+16]. It
presented one of the most popular approaches that limit forgetting in deep learning
models. The idea behind it is that a regularisation term is added to the loss just
before the optimisation procedure. The term is calculated by finding a difference
between the model’s weights from current and previous training experiences. The
paper does not investigate the performance of this strategy in the NLP domains, but
only on supervised hand-written digit recognition and multiple reinforcement tasks.
Another method, presented in Rebuﬀi et al. [Reb+17], is a replay method. There
are a lot of flavours of that, but the main goal is the same – reintroducing data from
previous experiences into new ones. It can be achieved by simply storing previous
data samples, or, if there are some constraints, such as data security concerns, one
can design a generative model, which creates data samples resembling previous expe-
riences [VST20]. Similarly to EWC, no comparison was made for NLP tasks in these
reports — mainly images were used to validate the techniques.
Currently, there are only three Python libraries available for CL. The most com-
plex and documented one is called Avalanche created by ContinualAI [Lom+21].
This library enables quick prototyping of methods for a given problem. It offers a
wide gamut of CL strategies, scenarios, and benchmarking datasets. Another library
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Continual learning in natural language processing
7
worth mentioning is Sequoia [Nor+22]. A big advantage of that one is facilitating pre-
viously implemented CL strategies from other libraries, amongst others Avalanche’s,
and compiles them into one package. One can also mention a library called Contin-
uum providing similar functionalities [DL21].
However, these libraries have a lot of limitations. Firstly, all of them use PyTorch
as the main deep learning framework; there is no alternative for using TensorFlow
for now. Moreover, the aforementioned CL packages are not compatible with already
existing and deployed environments. Their main purpose is to improve research and
prototyping possibilities, but one cannot include the code in custom projects, and it
is very diﬀicult to build a project from scratch using these packages. Additionally,
they are missing crucial production functionalities, such as model serving, training
loop customisation, etc. For now, there is no CL library to use it as an add-on, and
base deep learning libraries, such as PyTorch, do not offer in-built CL functionalities.
For evaluation of CL strategies applied to various models and ML problems, Díaz-
Rodríguez et al. [Día+18] proposed a set of metrics based on training and testing
tasks. For each of the introduced tasks, one can construct a training set and a testing
set, and the authors defined multiple formulas comparing combinations of obtained
accuracies across these sets.
2.3
Continual learning in natural language processing
As has been described in depth above, not much has been done in CL for NLP.
Biesialska, Biesialska and Costa-jussà [BBC20] presented a survey concerning CL
techniques in the natural language processing domain. The paper summarises CL
strategies, evaluation datasets, and NLP tasks, and the key takeaway is a scarcity of
solutions combining these two domains. The strategies are mainly applied to machine
translation problems. Some of them tackle sentiment analysis and question answer-
ing. For the time being, there is no paper available presenting CL application in the
document ranking domain. There is one paper, however, recently published by [sub],
presenting promising results of EWC for transformer-based GPT-2 model in the con-
text of modelling and conversational tasks. They also mention EWC limitations such
as processing time, so crucial for big transformer models and saving computational
resources. In the future work section, the authors recommended researching the EWC
possibilities for BERT models.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
In the following chapter, a theoretical aspect of the problem is described. Firstly, a few
well-established deep learning frameworks for NLP will be presented and compared.
Afterwards, the document ranking problem will be defined, alongside the methodology,
and constraints, followed by the depiction of a continual learning framework.
3.1
Deep learning in NLP
First solutions to NLP problems were constructed in a form of hand-crafted rules as
conditions and workflows [DL18]. Then, statistical approaches arose. They typically
consist of calculating similarity metrics, frequency of terms, or relevance probabilities
between queries and documents [RZ09]. However, with the advent of deep learning,
a more generalised way emerged. Thanks to the structure of deep neural networks,
each layer learns underlying features. Moreover, high-level features are based on low-
level ones, which creates a cascade model that is able to understand a variety of
concepts [DL18]. Based on that, DL models were applied to NLP domains, and these
architectures are introduced below.
3.1.1
Recurrent Neural Network
First type of a relevant network introduced in mid 80’s by Rumelhart, Hinton and
Williams [RHW85] is Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Such models, in contrast to
Feedforward Neural Networks (FNN), e.g. described in Schmidhuber [Sch15], may
be generally differentiated by two features. The first one is the fact that RNNs can
receive a variable length of data, which makes them more flexible, so they can process
continuous streams. The second difference is a way of connecting the nodes, which
can be seen in Figure 3.1.
The left-hand side of the image is depicting what the node looks like – highlighting
the recurrent connections. The unfolded structure shows a network fragment after
multiple steps in time. Thanks to this virtual linearity, RNN models perform well in
handling streams of data and can deal with next-word prediction problems. On the
other hand, due to the uni-directed connections, this kind of a model cannot traverse
around the text to e.g. fill a missing gap at the beginning of the text, when important
information is provided at the end of it [Sch15].
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Theory
x
h
o
U
V
W
Unfold
xt-1
ht-1
ot-1
U
W
xt
ht
ot
U
W
xt+1
ht+1
ot+1
U
W
V
V
V
V
...
...
Figure 3.1: Recurrent Neural Network. Visual representation of RNN showing
how neurons are connected to themselves. When the stream of data is passing through
the network, this can be depicted as an unfolded structure. Figure retrieved from
[fde17].
Moreover, such long uni-directed connections (whilst processing a huge amount
of text) make the networks really susceptible to phenomena called vanishing and
exploding gradients. The error during a process called Backpropagation Through Time
(BPTT) is accumulated, which may lead the error to diminish (go towards zero) or
skyrocket (go towards infinity) due to computational limitations of finite-precision
calculations [Sch15].
New solutions, however, were since proposed, to solve these
kinds of issues, capturing long-term dependencies from the data.
3.1.2
Long Short-Term Memory
In 1997, a solution to vanishing and exploding gradients in the form of RNN was
introduced [HS97]. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) can be characterised by a cell
and three gates: input, forget, and output gate – all these components control the
flow of the data. The first gate is responsible for controlling the activation, or one
can say influence, of the input data. The second one selects what data needs to be
disregarded, thus forgotten, at a given step in time. The last one, the output gate,
takes care of activation of the computed data – selects which outputs are going to be
used and passed further [Tra+21].
The increased complexity of LSTM over RNN architecture can be seen in Figure
3.2.
As one can see, LSTM features a complex structure with many inputs and
recurrent connections. LSTM present one more, however optional, feature – peepholes.
Thanks to them, the gates are able to see the cell state, which can be used as an input
[GS00].
3.1.3
Transformer
The attention mechanism was firstly introduced by Bahdanau, Cho and Bengio
[BCB16], however, its application in an encoder-decoder architecture advanced the
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Deep learning in NLP
11
unweighted connection
Legend
weighted connection
connection with time-lag
mutliplication
+
sum over all inputs
branching point
gate activation function
(always sigmoid)
+
+
+
+
forget gate
input gate
block input
cell
+
output gate
peepholes
LSTM block
g
h
...
input
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
recurrent
...
input
recurrent
input
recurrent
input
recurrent
output
recurrent
+
g
SRN
unit
...
input
...
recurrent
...
...
output
recurrent
g
input activation function
(usually tanh)
h
output activation function
(usually tanh)
block output
Figure 3.2: LSTM architecture. LSTM block is a much more complex structure
than a Single Recurrent Node (SNR), an RNN fragment. Each gate may have its own
activation function and can be connected in a recurrent fashion. Figure retrieved
from [Gre+17].
state of the art. A transformer proposed by Vaswani et al. [Vas+17] features a dif-
ferent approach to its predecessors. The architecture can be seen presented in Figure
3.3.
To explain the architecture, let’s start by describing Figure 3.3a. Here, the atten-
tion for input data is calculated. To do so, three objects are needed: query, keys, and
values. This idea comes from retrieval systems, where typically query Q stands for
the phrase that is used for searching for a given key K, and a value V corresponds to
the output of the retrieval process. The attention mechanism between these elements
is calculated using the following Formula (3.1):
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(3.1)
This equation is called scaled dot-product attention, because attention is calculated
by computing similarity between Q and K with a dot product, which is then scaled
by some factor dk presented by Britz et al. [Bri+17]. As a side note, Vaswani et al.
[Vas+17] introduced
1
√dk to improve the performance of the softmax function. The
dot product between Q and K will produce the biggest weights for the queries and
keys that are closest to each other, and then the weights can be multiplied by the
values to produce the attention score. Thus, the scores need to be normalised (scaled),
to set a limit for very big similarity values. It is also possible to add a mask to the
aforementioned attention formula, so the fraction’s numerator will look like QKT +M.
This mask helps the model to ensure that information flows only in one direction, so
the model learns only from the previous data entries, not the future ones.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Theory
(a) Scaled Dot-Product Attention
(b) Multi-Head Attention
(c) Transformer
Figure 3.3: Transformer architecture. Three main building blocks of a trans-
former. The smallest fragment of the architecture shown in 3.3a is responsible for
attention calculations.
Such pieces are combined into multiple heads of attention
presented in 3.3b. Finally, such a structure is built into the whole encoder-decoder
transformer block, Figure retrieved from Vaswani et al. [Vas+17].
Then, such fragments of scaled dot-product attention are combined into multiple
linear projections assembled into a single Multi-Head Attention element, presented in
figure 3.3b. The variable h represents the number of heads (learnt linear projections
of queries, keys, and values) in this module. The authors proposed h = 8. After that
step, all the results are concatenated and passed further.
The whole transformer block in Figure 3.3c consists of two elements – an encoder
(to the left) and a decoder (to the right). There are 6 stacked encoders and decoders
in the transformer.
The encoder is responsible for generating features out of the input data. Thanks to
the fact that a self-attention mechanism is used (by calculating a dot product between
queries and keys), the encoder can use a single token to look in both directions for
context understanding. This can be useful in e.g. machine translation, where an
English sentence might have been fed to the network, and a Danish translation was
returned, based on features extracted in the meantime. The decoder can only look in
one direction, to disable the possibility of predictions from future inputs.
In the whole architecture, one can see multiple other features. The transformer
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Deep learning in NLP
13
also features normalisation, which sets the model intermediate results to the same
magnitude. Moreover, in many places, basic feedforward layers are used to compute
non-linear features in a hierarchical fashion.
Furthermore, a dedicated structure of the data needs to be provided to the trans-
former model. For the word embeddings, authors of the transformer paper described
above decided to use learnt embeddings – these are of dynamic nature, in contrast to
static ones like Global Vectors for Word Representation (GloVe) [PSM14]. These dy-
namic embeddings are initialised as a lookup table, and then the weights are refined
(or learnt) during the training procedure.
Since the transformer model does not take into account the relative position of the
words, i.e. all words are processed simultaneously and the results are aggregated later
on, one needs to also provide positional embeddings. These positional embeddings are
added to the input and output embeddings presented with a + sign in Figure 3.3c.
If a sequential positioning was applied (e.g. 0, 1, 2, ..., n), embeddings further away
would get a much bigger value for representation, especially for long sentences. Thus,
a sine and cosine function of a very low frequency was used.
Such functions are
bounded between −1 and +1 and the elongated wave allows the position to still be
sequential, without a great positional bias.
As far as the comparison between the transformer and previous models is con-
cerned, there are no recurrent connections between the elements of the network, which
makes the model resistant to the problem of vanishing or exploding gradients. What
really gives the transformer an advantage over previous models is the computational
complexity presented in table 3.1.
Layer type
Complexity
per layer
Sequential
operations
Maximum
path length
Self-attention
O(n2 · d)
O(1)
O(1)
Recurrent
O(n · d2)
O(n)
O(n)
Table 3.1: Complexity comparison. The self-attention mechanisms exhibit much
better performance – not only for computation complexity, but also for handling long-
term dependencies. n is a length of a sequence and d is a representation dimension.
Fragment of the table retrieved from Vaswani et al. [Vas+17].
Self-attention layer has n2 · d layer complexity, because for a given position, at-
tention is calculated with respect to every other piece of the sequence, and for each
of such pairs, the embedding of size d will be computed. It is different for a recurrent
layer, where data is processed sequentially, and for every sequence, a squared length
of embeddings is produced (recurrency). Sequential operations complexity is constant
for the self-attention case, due to the fact that every pair of words is processed simulta-
neously. Unfortunately, for recurrent layers, the sentence has to be processed linearly.
The last important thing is the fact that maximum path length is also constant for
transformers. In contrast to RNNs, there are no long-term dependencies, and every
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Theory
corresponding item in a pair can be accessed immediately – in RNNs after introduc-
ing many words in sequence, the information provided at the beginning might be lost.
Moreover, constant time complexities allow for a huge speed improvement, thanks
to distributed and parallelised training. Thus, many state-of-the-art models benefit
from transformer scalability and parallelisation, amongst others – GPT-3 [Bro+20]
or BERT [Dev+19].
3.1.4
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model, presented
in Devlin et al. [Dev+19], benefits from the transformers. This architecture solves
the problem of unidirectionality in models such as RNN or LSTM.
BERT expects input in a certain way of representation. The input is constructed
to contain tokenised embeddings, markings to indicate segments of the input, and
positional information. The following Figure 3.4 shows the overall structure of the
embeddings.
>&/6@
KH
OLNHV
SOD\
LQJ
>6(3@
P\
GRJ
LV
FXWH
>6(3@
,QSXW
(>&/6@
(KH
(OLNHV
(SOD\
(LQJ
(>6(3@
(P\
(GRJ
(LV
(FXWH
(>6(3@
7RNHQ
(PEHGGLQJV
($
(%
(%
(%
(%
(%
($
($
($
($
($
6HJPHQW
(PEHGGLQJV
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
(
3RVLWLRQ
(PEHGGLQJV
Figure 3.4: Text embeddings for BERT. The input consists of three types of
embeddings: token, segment, and position embeddings. Figure retrieved from Devlin
et al. [Dev+19].
To create token embeddings, WordPiece algorithm with a 30,000 token vocabulary
presented in Wu et al. [Wu+16] was used by the BERT authors. First of all, two
sentences were provided to the tokeniser: ”My dog is cute” and ”He likes playing”.
At the beginning of the whole stream, a classification token [CLS] was added. In
between the two sentences, another token [SEP] was inserted, to indicate that these
sentences are related, e.g.
first one is a title and the second one is a document
content, or a question and answer respectively.
Other than that, the words were
set to lowercase and some of them (in this case play and FF#ing) are split based on
probabilities calculated by the WordPiece algorithm. It tries to maximise probabilities
by checking if a division of the probability of merged tokens by individual tokens in
a pair is greater than the probability of any other token pair [Hug].
Then, the segment embeddings are simply indicators of the sentences sequence.
At the end, position embeddings, similarly to the transformers, provide information
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Deep learning in NLP
15
about the order of tokens. When all of the above embeddings are constructed, the
final input is just a sum of the above. All of the embeddings are learnt – they are
passed through dedicated embedding layers of the network and stored inside a lookup
table, so one can retrieve them easily.
Having the texts converted into a proper, tokenised and embedded, structure, it is
finally possible to train the model. The whole process of model generation was split
into two parts – pre-training and fine-tuning.
Pre-training
in a bidirectional manner is performed using a masked language model
(MLM) and next sentence prediction (NSP).
Firstly, let’s consider MLM. For example, a sentence ”The quick red fox jumps
over the lazy brown dog”, can be masked using a dedicated token in the following
way: The quick red [MASK] jumps over the [MASK] brown dog.
In order to predict what words are hidden behind the masks, a model has to have
an ability to see and understand words in both directions – backwards and forwards.
Masking might be a double-edged sword – if too many words are hidden, not enough
context will be provided, and the performance will be low. On the other hand, if too
few words are going to be masked, it might be necessary to train the model multiple
times. In the case of the aforementioned paper, the authors are masking 15% of the
words. Moreover, due to the fact that the [MASK] token is not present during the
fine-tuning process, out of these 15% of randomly selected words, 80% are replaced
with the [MASK], a random word is used 10% of the time, and for the rest, the word
stays the same. Then, the masked word is predicted by the model. This procedure
enables the model to look in both directions (hence the name bidirectional).
Secondly, the NSP is performed, because the previous step only trained the model
at a word level, however, the relationship between sentences is also important for
language tasks. To do so, the authors of the paper selected a sentence randomly and
50% of the time there is an actual next sentence provided. For the remainder of the
cases, a random sentence from the corpus is given instead. Then, the model tries to
predict if the second sentence IsNext or is NotNext.
Fine-tuning
can be performed afterwards, which is an inexpensive task, as far as
computing resources are concerned, in contrast to the pre-training. For this step,
pairs of text sequences may be provided to the model, which simulates various tasks,
such as paraphrasing one sentence into another or, more vital for this dissertation, a
question-answering scenario. This step can be performed by anybody, to adjust the
model to current needs. Since BERT uses only the encoder part of transformers, it
applies a cross self-attention mechanism between two sentences, which means that
every word is in relation to every other word.
The authors created two models: BERTBASE (110M parameters in total) and
BERTLARGE (340M parameters). Both BERT architectures feature multiple layers
of transformer encoders. Devlin et al. [Dev+19] additionally presented results that
the BERT model raises the bar, as far as scores are concerned, for 11 NLP problems.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Theory
Their results suggest that this model is a good candidate for solving the document
ranking problem.
3.2
Document ranking
The information retrieval (IR) can be defined as a process of providing a question (in
general – a query) by a user, after which the system returns an object in a form of
a text or document containing a proper answer (document retrieval). These results
should be ranked in some way, for example, ordered from the highest probability of
having a correct answer [Tra+21]. The problem of document ranking can be solved
by classic, statistical approaches or by using deep learning models.
3.2.1
TF-IDF
One of the basic techniques used in IR is a method called Term Frequency — Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF). It is a combination of two statistics. First one if
related to the term frequency and can be defined as in Formula (3.2):
TF = td
Td
(3.2)
The term frequency is a ratio of a number of times term t is present in the content
of document d and a sum of all individual terms T in the document d. The second
element in TF-IDF statistics is the inverse document frequency, presented in Formula
(3.3):
IDF = log(N
nt
),
(3.3)
where N is the total number of documents and n indicates how many documents
contain the aforementioned term t inside.
Moreover, there are many variants of
these two frequencies, e.g. taking the presence of the term in a document as boolean
values 0 and 1 or more normalised approaches considering the length of the document
[MRS08].
As one can see, TF-IDF takes into account only the frequency of the term con-
tained inside documents, hence, no semantic meaning is considered here. Both queries
”my dog is cute he likes playing” and ”he likes my cute dog playing” will re-
sult in the same score considering the same set of documents. Nonetheless, if a given
term is often used in one of the documents, but relatively rare in others, there are
high chances that this document will be retrieved.
3.2.2
BM25
Another method, described in Manning, Raghavan and Schütze [MRS08], is called
Best Matching 25 (BM25). It might be treated as an upgrade of the TF-IDF tech-
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Document ranking
17
nique since it takes into account the length of the documents and saturation of the
important tokens; after a certain amount of repeated tokens, the importance is not
increasing anymore [RZ09]. The following formula (3.4) shows how to calculate the
BM25 statistic.
score(D, Q) =
n
∑
i=1
IDF(qi)
f(qi, D)(k1 + 1)
f(qi, D) + k1(1 −b + b |D|
davg )
(3.4)
For the query Q, using terms indicated as q0, q1, . . . , qi, one can calculate the IDF
score according to the aforementioned formula or one of its variants. The frequency
f(qi, D) can be defined as the number of times a query term q is in the document D
with its length of |D|. davg is an average document length, k1 and b are freely chosen
hyperparameters that might be adjusted.
Similarly to TF-IDF, BM25 also does not take into consideration the semantics
of the query and the documents’ content. However, the algorithm is a major im-
provement compared to the previous statistic. Moreover, a few other modifications
have been added to BM25, for example, different weights for a document header and
its text (called BM25F [RZ09]) and setting optimised bounds to document lengths
(BM25+ [LZ11]).
3.2.3
Bi-Encoder approach
With the astonishing advances of DL in the NLP domain and development in pro-
cessing units, it is now possible to use deep neural networks to solve the problem of
document retrieval. In this case, an application of BERT performed by Karpukhin
et al. [Kar+20] in a dense passage retrieval (DPR) task will be introduced and de-
scribed. This is a special case of the question-answering problem, where queries play
the role of questions, and answers are passages or whole documents (typically mul-
tiple passages). The document retrieval, and consequently ranking, in this scenario
requires multiple steps and cannot be solved using one single mathematical formula.
One of the first steps is the process of dataset acquisition and preparation. For
the purpose of training a model to decide which documents are relevant to a given
query, the model has to differentiate between appropriate and incorrect examples.
The authors of DPR constructed a dataset, where every record in a batch consists of
a positive passage (fragment of a text containing the answer to a given query) and
multiples of negative passages (texts not containing an answer). There are various
ways to construct a set of negatives. One can, for example, select negative samples
randomly from the corpus, excluding the positive ones. It is also possible to select
more diﬀicult negative samples – by calculating e.g.
a BM25 metric between the
query and documents, and select the documents with the bests scores but ones that
are not the answer at the same time. Both scenarios were used in DPR.
The DPR model is structured as a dual-encoder, where the first BERT encoder
EQ maps the query q and a second, different encoder EP is applied to a passage p.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Theory
By performing a dot product operation on the resulting vectors, one can obtain a
matrix of similarities, as defined in the Formula (3.5).
sim(q, p) = EQ(q)T EP (p)
(3.5)
If the dot product is big, it means that two vectors are close to each other. Hence,
the similarity matrix can be used to define a loss function (3.6), which takes into
account positive and negative passages.
L(qi, p+
i , p−
i,1, . . . , p−
i,n) = −log
esim(qi,p+
i )
esim(qi,p+
i ) + ∑n
j=1 esim(qi,p−
i,j)
(3.6)
In the Formula above, a + sign is used to indicate positive passages, and the −
sign relates to negative ones. A single positive passage does not have to be compared
with previously chosen negatives. The positive can be also contrasted with all the
negatives in a batch – the authors called them in-batch negatives. This boosts the
amount of training information in a single step. The loss function is then used to
optimise weights in both encoders, and this process repeats throughout the training.
The procedure is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
Using a dataset constructed in this way, the bi-encoder architecture, and a loss
function, one can perform the training procedure. When this step is done, embeddings
for an index dataset can be generated by passing passages p through the EP encoder.
These embeddings are stored inside a file in a form of an index structure. To finally
evaluate the model, a dot product between a given encoded question EQ from a testing
dataset, and the whole index containing encoded positive passages EP is calculated.
Then, the records resulting in the highest dot products (meaning the most similar
pairs) can be used to compare a retrieved positive passage for a given question and
a current index passage. If they are the same, it means that there is a hit, as far as
accuracy is concerned.
The whole pipeline, however, due to its approach of bi-model architecture, has
some drawbacks. First of all, such big transformer models contain a lot of param-
eters, which may result in very long training times, even whilst using an average
GPU. Moreover, memory management is crucial – longer text sequences (Karpukhin
et al. [Kar+20] used 256) may not fit into GPU memory, especially if the batch size
is relatively big. Furthermore, if the index is to be constructed based on a dataset
containing millions of passages, the index structure has to be created and processed
in chunks, for example, every epoch, and stored e.g. into files. To solve many of
these issues, the authors of the DPR paper used a framework for distributed train-
ing, alongside a dedicated library called FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) for
eﬀicient computation of similarity metrics between very large vectors [JDJ17].
Because of all the aforementioned constraints of extensive training times and com-
putations, it might be vital to optimise the process when new data is available. Such
a scenario is a perfect use-case for a continual learning approach.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Document ranking
19
 vector
 BERT
Encoder
 vector
 BERT
Encoder
Optimiser
Adjust 
 and 
 weights to
increase
similarity
between a query
and positive
passage
1. The molecule has the shape of a
double helix...
2. During initial stages of
assimilation, Borg nanoprobes...
...
n. The National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey...
1. What is the twisted shape of dna
called?
2. Where does assimilation begins
in the body?
...
n. Average amount of calories for
healthy adult
Passages
Queries
Figure 3.5: DPR architecture. In DPR, queries and passages are passed to the
individual encoders (hence the name bi-encoder). The vectors obtained are used to
calculate a similarity metric between a passage and a query, which is needed for a
proper loss calculation. Then, the loss takes part in the optimisation procedure for
both models. Figure adapted from Briggs [Bri21].
3.2.4
Metrics
To properly assess a document ranking model, evaluation metrics have to be defined.
Typically, these are calculated for multiple retrieved relevant documents versus all
retrieved documents – a multi-class categorisation problem. In the project described
in this thesis however, only one relevant document is going to be retrieved – a docu-
ment having the highest similarity score for a given query across all documents. Since
there is 100% chance that a relevant document is found somewhere across all possible
documents, a k parameter was introduced to the metrics to create computational
boundaries, so one can evaluate if a relevant document is in the top 5, 10, or 20 first
items. It is expected that the greater the k parameter is, the higher the overall score
should be because there is a higher probability for a relevant document to be inside
a wider subset of documents.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Theory
The simplest metric for ranking can be defined as the Accuracy – a sum of relevant
documents retrieved across all rankings.
It can be defined as in the Formula 3.7
adapted from [Sci] presenting top-k mean Accuracy.
top-k mAcc(y, ˆf) =
1
Nrankings
nrankings−1
∑
i=0
k
∑
j=1
1( ˆfi,j = yi)
(3.7)
This metric however, does not take into account the position of the retrieved doc-
uments, only their presence amongst all of them. Considering a retrieval system such
as an online search engine, it would be beneficial that the most relevant documents
are at the top of the list. Thus, another metric has been introduced, called top-k
mean Average Precision shown in Formula 3.8.
top-k mAP(y, ˆf) =
1
Nrankings
nrankings−1
∑
i=0
k
∑
j=1
1( ˆfi,j = yi)
j
(3.8)
This is a specified version of a standard definition of precision, which is a division
between true positives and the sum of true positives and false positives. Since only one
true positive document is retrieved here, false positives are treated as the documents
ranked higher than the correct one. As one can see, this denominator plays the role of
penalty; it decreases the scores for documents that are further away than at the first
place. Then, as stated previously in the mean accuracy definition, the mean average
precision is calculated by dividing the scores by the number of all rankings.
3.3
Continual learning
A production scenario in which one trains the model only once for the whole system life
cycle practically does not exist. Data changes over time, new sources are introduced
or new classes emerge. The most intuitive approach to solve these kinds of problems
is to train the model from scratch, using the whole dataset available at the moment,
with optional model architecture changes. If no new categories have been introduced,
a straightforward approach called fine-tuning may be applied. A model, trained on
a previously known dataset, can be trained further with new samples.
However,
this may lead to a phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting (CF). It means that
old, previously acquired by a model knowledge deteriorates after introducing new
experiences [MC89].
To solve that problem, a framework called continual learning (CL), also called
lifelong learning, has been proposed, to accommodate knowledge coming from new
experiences without losing prior cognisance.
CL tries to solve a trade-off of the
stability–plasticity dilemma, where stability defines how good is the knowledge reten-
tion of a model, and plasticity represents the ability to adjust to new experiences.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Continual learning
21
3.3.1
Scenarios
In CL, one can differentiate multiple scenarios, depending on the type of data and
its characteristics, as presented by Maltoni and Lomonaco [ML18]. The first kind of
scenario is called Multi Task – new tasks are different from the previous ones. This
is a common situation in transfer learning, where a model is primarily trained on a
wide variety of data and then fine-tuned to solve a specific task, e.g. used in NLP
for neural machine translation [Zop+16]. Another scenario can be defined as a Single
Incremental Task, where the previous and following tasks stay the same – a typical
fine-tuning case.
The last scenario type is a combination of those two – a Multi
Incremental Task, where old and new experiences are mixed together. On the other
hand, it is possible to categorise scenarios based on the machine learning problem
type. New Instances may be encountered when new data samples are introduced but
the categories stay the same, in contrast to New Classes. Both situations can be
combined into New Instances and Classes.
3.3.2
Taxonomy
Furthermore, CL strategies, i.e. algorithms resolving catastrophic forgetting, may be
grouped into a few categories. The first class of approaches is called regularisation
strategies. Here, a regularisation term is added to the loss function, to limit major
changes in the model’s parameters. Such an approach increases the plasticity, allow-
ing for small changes in stability. Thanks to that, the model is able to learn new
tasks, whilst accommodating old knowledge. Another category can be described as
architectural. The methods from this class may change the structure of a model by
e.g. adding new components or freezing them [Rus+16]. As a downside, architectural
strategies may introduce a computational time increase, due to reorganisation of the
structure or growth in size [Cos+21]. One can distinguish yet another category –
rehearsal or replay strategies. These approaches mix the data samples that were al-
ready used for training, with new samples. Such a newly constructed dataset contains
information about both old and new experiences, which should increase the model’s
plasticity.
3.3.3
Methods
In this paper, two CL strategies will be discussed and applied to the document ranking
domain. Since two big transformer-based models will be used to solve that task using
the DPR approach, only regularisation and rehearsal approaches have been chosen
for experiments. Architectural approaches have been rejected due to the possibility
of increasing computing time, which is not compatible with the main aims of this
thesis – reducing computational resources by introducing CL strategies. Regularisa-
tion methods however, may be applied during the training procedure, and rehearsal
methods introduce new data mixtures. Both of these approaches should not introduce
much development and structural overhead.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Theory
Elastic Weight Consolidation
One method selected from the regularisation fam-
ily is Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [Kir+16]. This strategy slows down learn-
ing of the new tasks by computing their importance with respect to previous ones.
The main aim of EWC is to calculate a regularisation term, similarly to already
existing L2 regularisation. The intuition behind that can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: EWC regularisation. Without regularisation, a model goes towards
the loss minimum of new experience which causes catastrophic forgetting. The stan-
dard L2 penalty moves the error in between of the planes which might be sub-optimal.
EWC though, heads into the planes intersection area. Figure adapted from Kirk-
patrick et al. [Kir+16].
The EWC method slows down the learning of new experiences by heading towards
the intersection of the loss planes, in contrast to L2. EWC achieves that by calculating
the regularisation term in an elastic way and adding it to the new experience loss
LB(θ). Formula 3.9 shows the EWC calculations.
L(θ) = LB(θ) +
∑
i
λFi(θi −θ∗
A,i)2
(3.9)
The regularisation term is calculated based on the Fisher information matrix F,
which can be easily calculated even for big models. It is achieved by passing the
training data through a model that has been already exposed to that data and storing
the model’s parameters in a vector. The matrix can also be computed using first-order
derivatives and its result is near the minimum of a second-order derivative of the loss
[Cos+21; PB14]. A given weights matrix at index i is then multiplied by a distance
between weights and biases of the current θi parameters, and the parameters from
the previous experience A. This gives the EWC elasticity because the regularisation
depends on the importance. Overall, it composes a regularisation term which is added
to the current experience loss LB(θ) and produces the final loss function.
As one can see, there is little computational overhead for this method, since ma-
trix derivative computation is eﬀicient, can be vectorised, and performed during the
training loss calculation procedure. Nonetheless, for large models and datasets, this
method might be very ineﬀicient. For starters, a model using EWC needs to go over
training data twice. Firstly to train the model, and secondly, to calculate weights
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Continual learning
23
again after this step is done, in order to generate the Fisher matrix. Moreover, in or-
der to calculate the matrix, one needs to store the current training model, calculated
weights of the model after passing through learnt training data, and weights from
previous experience in memory. For models having a lot of parameters, such as a bi-
encoder (218 million trainable parameters in total, resulting in almost 876 MB of size),
handling three models at the same time is memory-consuming and computationally
exhaustive.
Replay
For a rehearsal method, replay has been selected. The method in its basic
form was presented in iCaRL model by Rebuﬀi et al. [Reb+17]. A subset of train-
ing samples is put aside and reintroduced during the training for a new task. Many
variations of such approaches have been introduced over the years. For example, Ven,
Siegelmann and Tolias [VST20] argued that sometimes, one cannot retain previous
data because of e.g. security concerns or limited space. Furthermore, if one would
like to take inspiration from a human brain, it is unreasonable to believe that a brain
stores all of the data it has been exposed to. It is crucial to reintroduce the whole
learning experience multiple times since it’s the constant exposition and multiple rep-
etitions that lead to creating new neural connections. Hence, the authors introduced
a generative adversarial network to create data samples based on previous experiences
that are going to be presented along with the task at hand.
In this project, a basic replay approach has been chosen to verify the results. The
amount of retained data samples can be treated as a hyper-parameter, thus multiple
experiments can be conducted to find a proper combination of old and new data.
3.3.4
Evaluation
To properly evaluate the effectiveness of counteracting catastrophic forgetting, ded-
icated metrics have to be added to the framework. Díaz-Rodríguez et al. [Día+18]
introduced multiple CL metrics that are calculated based on accuracies from different
points in time. Let’s consider a following matrix presented in Table 3.2.
R
Te1
Te2
Te3
Tr1
Ri,i
Ri,j
Ri,j
Tr2
Ri,j
Ri,i
Ri,j
Tr3
Ri,j
Ri,j
Ri,i
Table 3.2: Accuracy matrix.
Table represents the training Tr and testing Te
accuracies for tasks (experiences) j and previous tasks i in CL scenarios.
Based
on this table, multiple CL metrics can be calculated.
Table retrieved from Díaz-
Rodríguez et al. [Día+18]. Best viewed in colour.
Every training experience can be evaluated by using a dedicated test set – such
scores lie on the diagonal. Having a set of training experiences and respective testing
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Theory
scores, it is possible to compute the forgetting loss, or in this case, accuracy, by using
scores from various combinations of training and testing datasets. One of the metrics
introduced is called Backward Transfer (BWT) – a difference in accuracy between
current and previous experiences. It can be defined as in Formula 3.10. The equation
relates to the red part of Table 3.2.
BWT =
∑N
i=2
∑i−1
j=1(Ri,j −Rj,j)
N(N−1)
2
(3.10)
Díaz-Rodríguez et al. [Día+18] also defined Forward Transfer (FWT) as evalu-
ating the influence of the current task on future tasks, defined in the Formula 3.11.
This equation can be described as a sum of the accuracies highlighted in turquoise in
Table 3.2.
BWT =
∑N
i<j Ri,j
N(N−1)
2
(3.11)
The formulas presented above are designed in a way, such that the results are
bound between [0; 1], thus it is convenient to compare multiple models, machine
learning tasks, and CL strategies.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
The aim of this dissertation is to implement and validate various CL strategies for the
document retrieval problem. To meet the criteria, firstly, a proper CL scenario was
designed, and secondly, a whole machine learning pipeline was established. It consists
of standard steps for deep learning – dataset preparation and processing, model setup
and training, metric collection, and visualisation. However, the ranking task needs
a few more things to be prepared. Document retrieval needs an index object to be
constructed as well as ranking evaluation metrics. Moreover, CL strategies have to
be implemented and dedicated metrics and comparison techniques need to be applied,
to appropriately compare baseline runs versus CL scenarios.
For starters, an overview of experiments will be provided, followed by the im-
plementation details. The code and all hyper-parameters can be found at GitHub
[Dar22].
4.1
Workflow design
Firstly, CL experiences needed to be designed. To do so, one has to define a base
scenario, where the model is initially trained, followed by the CL tasks. It was decided
that the model, after primary training done on Natural Questions (NQ) subset, will
be introduced to 5 consecutive fine-tuning experiences on a different than the initial
data distribution (the MS MARCO dataset). Thus, the scenario can be categorised
as a sequence of Single Incremental Tasks. To ensure that all runs and CL strategies
were exposed to the exact same data splits and samples, duplicates were removed, the
data was processed and splits were stored in files in a separate pipeline. Additionally,
the same random seed was set beforehand. The seed defines e.g. how data is shuffled,
so whenever the application was run anew, random operations would give the same
results. Both of these facts guaranteed that there was no data leak between training,
validation, and test datasets, and the results are reproducible.
To describe the whole workflow, a common notation has to be established. Every
CL strategy run can be described as an experiment that exposes the model to a
sequence of experiences. The base training is going to be referred to as Experience
#0, and subsequent CL trainings, are going to be indicated as Experiences #1, #2,
…, #5.
One of the motivations was to compare CL methods to training the model from
scratch, therefore for each corresponding experience, Baselines #1, #2, …, #5 were
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methods
trained. A baseline can be defined as a training procedure done from scratch with
all data available before the training. Baselines for the following experiences were
performed to compare situations of consecutive additions of data, versus a single
training with all data available to the model from start. The corresponding baselines
for every experience are depicted in Figure 4.1.
15k NQ + 1·5k MS MARCO
15k NQ + 2·5k MS MARCO
15k NQ + 3·5k MS MARCO
15k NQ + 4·5k MS MARCO
15k NQ + 5·5k MS MARCO
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
Figure 4.1: Graphical representation of the different baselines used. Every
baseline is a mixture of the same NQ records and increasing amount of MS MARCO
samples.
4.1.1
Experiences
For every baseline, an experience was proposed for a proper comparison.
Experience #0
The primary task is always trained on a Natural Questions (NQ)
subset and the NQ dataset is not used for training in any other experience. The
model is trained on 15,000 samples of predefined and shuffled tuples.
One tuple
contains a query, a positive passage, and 6 hard negative passages. The validation
procedure is done on a separate set of 3,000 samples of the same structure. The
training stops when an early stopping function is triggered, meaning that ∆of loss
has not increased more than 0.01, and the patience parameter reaches the set value
of 3 (3 epochs without change of 0.01). All runs should have the same result for this
step since no CL strategy is applied here. There is no baseline in this case because
in every experience this step was always the same.
Experience #1
After the initial training, the model was fine-tuned with 5,000
samples from the MS MARCO dataset. In contrast to NQ, MS MARCO provides
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Workflow design
27
only one negative – the remaining 5 negatives are sampled randomly from both the
NQ and MS MARCO training subsets. Validation is conducted on a different set
of 1,000 samples from MS MARCO. Such a change in the dataset will introduce a
shift in distribution.
Since most of the negatives are selected randomly, it might
happen that a semantically and contextually correct answer to the question will be
chosen as a negative. This fact might confront the model with a slight increase in
task complexity – differentiating positives and randomly selected negatives. At this
step, the early stopping is reset and the model is trained until the stopping conditions
are met. All following experiences, including this one, contain different data samples
and there is no leak between the splits and experiences. The differences between
runs start to be visible from this point since CL strategies are being applied. The
corresponding Baseline #1 is trained from scratch on the same amount of data (initial
15,000 NQ samples plus the 5,000 MS MARCO samples used for fine-tuning, 20,000
in total) but shuffled. Validation for this baseline is a combination of validation sets
from Experience #0 and Experience #1 shuffled.
Experience #2
The model is trained further with another 5,000 MS MARCO sam-
ples and validated with a different 1,000 samples. Training goes until early stopping
is triggered. The rest is the same as in Experience #1. The Baseline #2 for this step
is a model trained on 15,000 NQ records and 10,000 MS MARCO samples (5,000 from
this experience + 5,000 from the previous) combined and shuffled. Again, validation
for this baseline is performed on the shuffled NQ validation dataset, plus both MS
MARCO validation sets, from the previous and current experience.
Experience #3
Training and validating the model even further with subsequent
5,000 and 1,000 MS MARCO samples respectively. The rest goes as stated above. The
Baseline #3 is done on a total of 30,000 samples (both, NQ from Experience #0 and
MS MARCO from the remaining 3 experiences, combined and shuffled). The Baseline
for a given experience is always a combination of the baseline data for the previous
experience, and the 5,000 MS MARCO samples from this experience’s training.
Experience #4
Similarly to the previous steps. The Baseline #4 is performed
with 35,000 records.
Experience #5
Same as above. The Baseline #4 was trained on 40,000 records
in total.
By composing experiments in such a manner, it is possible to compare every
CL experience with a corresponding baseline, to answer the question whether CL
strategies are better or worse than training from scratch with all the data available
in terms of scores and computation times.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methods
4.1.2
Evaluations
Every aforementioned experience and baseline is evaluated in terms of model perfor-
mance, forgetting, and ranking.
Forgetting evaluation
Every experience, even 0th, is evaluated in terms of forget-
ting, by performing validation on the primary training NQ dataset. After Experience
#0, it is expected that the model is going to have almost perfect performance, but it
will drop when new data samples are introduced in the following training experiences
because of forgetting.
Test evaluation
This is a standard ML testing procedure. Testing is performed
after every experience on a shuffled combination of the NQ dataset (3,000 records
of the same type) and the MS MARCO dataset (5,000 records similar to the NQ
but 5 more negatives are sampled from the whole test split).
After training the
NQ base experience, the test loss might be relatively large, because the model was
not yet exposed to the MS MARCO distribution present in the test set. As far as
the MS MARCO experiences are concerned, it is expected that testing loss should
decrease and accuracy increase after each CL task, since the model was finally trained
on data from the other distribution. However, the test evaluation produces overall
metrics for each experience, without distinction between datasets. It was decided
that no separation should be performed because the selected way better generalises
the evaluation results. During this step, encoded queries are stored, since they are
needed during the ranking evaluation.
Indexing
The index structure is composed of 42,000 NQ passages (positives and
only first negative, all from training, validation, and test splits) and 69,561 MS
MARCO passages (positives and negatives from training, validation, and test). The
number of MS MARCO passages is not a round one because duplicates were found be-
tween positive and negative passages after initial sampling. The index data is passed
through the model and stored into files after every experience for ranking evaluation.
Ranking evaluation
After each experience, having test queries and index passages
encoded, a ranking evaluation is performed. The top-k metrics should increase after
introducing new distributions since they were included in the index dataset. Then
however, the loss should increase for the NQ subset (CL should combat the forgetting)
but decrease for the MS MARCO subset. Scores will again be presented for the two
distributions combined.
The whole workflow was visualised in Figure 4.2. The image presents the iterative
process of continual training experience and a pipeline of evaluations after the initial
training. Firstly, the model is trained with base 15,000 NQ samples, then it is evalu-
ated, new CL experiences are introduced, and the model is evaluated again after learnt
experiences. This is an iterative process of multiple experiences and evaluations.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Framework and environment
29
Base training
15k NQ samples
Indexing
Testing
Ranking
evaluation
CL strategy
+5k MS MARCO samples
Forgetting
evaluation
Figure 4.2: CL workflow graphical representation.
4.2
Framework and environment
The application was developed and run using Python programming language, version
3.9.6. All results presented in this dissertation were obtained by performing compu-
tations on Tesla T4 GPU, with CUDA version 11.2. The virtual machine’s OS was
Debian GNU/Linux 10 (buster).
This, and the libraries mentioned below, are considered a state-of-the-art frame-
work for research and production environments. Moreover, such a combination of
libraries was a deliberate choice, so one can examine how to apply CL methods and
metrics to an already working ranking setup.
4.2.1
Deep Learning
For a deep learning framework in Python, the PyTorch package was selected. This
was done not only due to the fact that the DPR model by Karpukhin et al. [Kar+20]
was developed using it, but mainly because of its popularity in research, as well as in
production. Compatibility with the other DL libraries used in this project was also
taken into account.
In order to use a transformer architecture in the bi-encoder implementation, the
transformers package developed by HuggingFace was used.
This library provides
various BERT model configurations, alongside compatible word tokenisers. Thanks
to these features one can eﬀiciently develop the necessary application.
To orchestrate the whole process of model training, validation, and testing, with-
out the necessity of custom training loop implementation, the PyTorch Lightning
framework was used. It automates the whole pipeline execution – provides processed
data batches to the model, handles optimisers and the back-propagation process, and
has a lot of customisation features.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methods
As a supplementary library, Hydra was used for managing configurations, and easy
storage of artefacts [Yad19].
It is important to mention that the stability and reproducibility of the conducted
runs were guaranteed by setting the same random seed for all libraries, so shuffling the
data would always result in the same order of samples. All data was rid of duplicates,
shuffled, and all splits were stored in files, so there were no leaks between the datasets.
For the CL strategies custom implementation was performed.
Although the
Avalanche library mentioned previously seemed the most mature package out of the
ones identified in 2.2, it is unfortunately not compatible with the current framework.
4.2.2
Exploratory work
Multiple CL libraries were explored: Sequoia, Continuum, and Avalanche. Out of
these three, Avalanche seemed to be the most promising. It has a well-written docu-
mentation page, many implemented CL scenarios, and strategies. Thus, this frame-
work was selected for exploratory works.
Firstly, a basic MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology)
database of handwritten digits was used to verify how the library works – MNIST is
a hello word dataset of machine learning programs.
It facilitates a similar architecture as PyTorch Lightning, i.e. the usage of so-called
callbacks. These are placeholder methods that are called in various places in code
(e.g. before_forward, after_training_epoch) and might be overridden to execute
custom logic. Avalanche implements general training, validation, and testing loops,
as well as surrounding callbacks that execute CL strategies.
There are however, two main issues with using that implementation. First of all,
the callbacks differ significantly from the PyTorch Lightning callbacks, which makes
both libraries initially incompatible. Nonetheless, considering the fact that Avalanche
is open-source, it is possible to rewrite selected CL strategies to be compatible with
Lightning’s methods, but that requires additional effort. The second problem with
Avalanche concerns the type of DL problems – it has hard-coded standard training
steps.
For example, in Avalanche’s Elastic Weight Consolidation implementation
shown in the Listing 4.2.1, a batch is unpacked in a standard way, where simply x
(an input), y (an expected output), and class labels are assigned. Then, all tensors
are moved into a chosen computational unit, and actual training takes place.
First of all, utilising PyTorch Lightning, there is no need to move tensors between
CPU and GPU – the library automatically does that. Moreover, in a complex project
such as document ranking, a lot more operations should be performed.
In-batch
negatives need to be composed, and the outputs from both query and passage encoders
ought to be returned from the forward method. Afterwards, a loss is calculated based
on two encoded vectors and target information. Instead of task labels, the indices of
positive passages are present. To summarise, it is not possible to apply Avalanche’s
snippet shown before, by simply importing the module. It is essential to either rewrite
an already existing project to fit Avalanche’s general tuple unpacking strategies (which
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Data preparation
31
1
x, y, task_labels = batch[0], batch[1], batch[-1]
2
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
3
4
optimizer.zero_grad()
5
out = avalanche_forward(model, x, task_labels)
6
loss = criterion(out, y)
7
loss.backward()
Listing
4.2.1:
Avalanche’s
EWC
importance
calculation
fragment.
Avalanche’s implementation of CL methods is not compatible with more complex
problems, such as document ranking.
decreases code readability, increases the technological debt, complexity, and makes the
project strongly tethered to its dependencies). One might also override Avalanche’s
strategies to be compatible with already existing projects but this step is equal to
writing a custom CL logic from scratch, without using the library at all.
As far as rehearsal methods are concerned, Avalanche’s replay method implemen-
tation uses callbacks to add data from previous experiences to the current one. It
might come in handy when one would like to execute multiple training routines in a
sequence when data is automatically memorised. However, in production scenarios,
a model would be initially trained, stored, deployed, and after some time fine-tuning
with a mixture of data would be performed.
Considering all of the above, Avalanche was considered not ideal for use in this
project. A custom implementation of naive, replay, and EWC methods was performed
instead.
4.2.3
Logging
An experiment tracking and metric visualisation tool called Weights and Biases
(WandB) was used, which can be easily integrated with PyTorch Lightning. WandB
allows for fast and eﬀicient metric logging during all training phases. The results, as
well as additional information, e.g. hyper-parameters, can be presented in real-time,
using the dedicated website. This tool is free for personal use and does not require the
setup of any additional servers or connectors, which is perfect for quick prototyping
and development.
4.3
Data preparation
Since the main aim of this paper is to investigate CL strategies in NLP, a change in
data distribution was introduced. Hence, two datasets were used to conduct the CL
experiments – Natural Questions and MS MARCO triples.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methods
Natural Questions
The NQ dataset was already processed and restructured into
a useful format by the DPR authors. The texts were cleaned from any residual HTML
(HyperText Markup Language) tags. The dataset contains queries that are each linked
to 3 types of passages: positive, negative, and hard-negative, and there are multiple
passages provided in each type. In the document ranking problem, a positive passage
is a text sequence shorter than a document, that contains an answer to a given query.
A negative passage is one that should not be treated as an appropriate answer. In
the DPR case, negatives are selected randomly from the whole dataset and hard-
negatives are the passages resulting in the lowest BM25 scores for a query. Since for
a single query multiple positives, negatives, and hard-negatives were provided in the
NQ dataset, which were not all necessary, only a query with the first positive passage,
together with a subset of hard-negatives was used.
Based on initial experiments
concerning optimal batch sizes to fill a GPU, 6 negatives per query were used. After
such construction, records having duplicates in positive passages were removed. This
had to be done because when the index structure is going to be created, duplicates
would increase the final accuracy – two same entries in the index would increase the
number of matches for a given query. In this project, only one match per retrieval
was going to be found.
After the NQ processing, the dataset was shuffled and, based on the workflow
design mentioned in Section 4.1, three subsets were selected: the training dataset
(first 15,000 records, 60% of the subset), validation dataset (next 3,000 records –
20%), testing dataset (another next 3,000 records – 20%). The data samples were
transferred into a tabular form and separate slices were retrieved, assuring that there
was no data leak between the constructed splits. The sets were stored into JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON) files. This dataset was used for the initial training, referred
to as Experience #0.
Moreover, an index structure was created by concatenating positive and first neg-
ative passages from all 21,000 samples. So, 42,000 tuples were stored in a dedicated
index file. There were only 15,000 positive passages in the training set, so it is cer-
tain that all training positives are inside the index, accompanied by large amounts of
positives and negatives not included in the training procedure.
MS MARCO
For CL experiences, one of the MS MARCO datasets – Passage
Retrieval was used. A data sample can be seen in the Table 4.1. The Train Triples
Small file in TSV (tab-separated value) format contains only a single positive and neg-
ative passage per query, thus random additional negatives from the dataset are added
during training and validation. The testing dataset is a combination of NQ and MS
MARCO test sets, so additional negatives are sampled from both of them. It might
so happen, that a randomly selected negative sample is a semantically matching pas-
sage to a given question, while not being the correct answer, and such CL experiences
might be harder for the model to process. This fact also introduces a slightly different
problem to the model, since the negatives are not certain, in contrast to the NQ set
made by DPR, where BM25 was used to find hard-negatives.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Data preparation
33
Query
Positive passage
Negative passage
what
is
consid-
ered a first time
buyer
First-time buyer. A first-time
buyer (FTB) is a term used in
the British and Irish property
markets…
Buyer beware! When you buy
a new condominium, be pre-
pared to pay occupancy…
definition of phy-
lum biology
2. phylum - (biology) the ma-
jor taxonomic group of animals
and plants…
visceral muscle noun [C]. biol-
ogy any of the muscles that
work automatically…
Table 4.1: Data examples from the Passage Retrival MS MARCO dataset.
The dataset contains over 39 million triples of a query, a single positive, and a sin-
gle negative passage, hence the name – triples.
The passages were truncated for
visualisation purposes.
For every 100,000 rows in the source MS MARCO dataset, 200 rows were randomly
sampled. Then, rows containing duplicates in positive passages were dropped, and
the records were shuffled. Afterwards, similarly as before, the subset was split into
three sets with a 60:20:20 ratio – training dataset (first 25,000 rows), validation and
testing dataset (both containing consecutive, non-overlapping 5,000 rows) respectively.
Also, the index dataset (all passages from the sampled subset) was constructed. Such
structure was used to perform all the CL experiences (Experiences #1, #2, …, #5)
in this project. In the Listing 4.3.1 one can see a data fragment obtained after all
aforementioned operations were completed.
1
{
2
"question": "the meaning of the name oscar",
3
"positive_ctxs": [
4
"Celtic Meaning: The name Oscar is a Celtic baby nameFF."
5
],
6
"negative_ctxs": [
7
"During the 1985 Academy Awards showFF."
8
]
9
}
Listing 4.3.1: A JSON file fragment for a processed MS MARCO dataset.
Such structure is present inside training, validation, and testing datasets. In contrast,
the NQ dataset has 6-item lists under "negative_ctxs" keys.
What is worth mentioning is that the MS MARCO dataset was already prepro-
cessed, so the entries contain only text, without any noise, like website information
or HTML code. Thus, cleaning the data was not performed.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methods
4.4
Document ranking
The project core – a document ranking model, was based on DPR released imple-
mentation. Since the DPR code implements many features from scratch, it contains
things like distributed training, usage of many different datasets, and a custom in-
dexing technique.
Considering the fact that the aim of this implementation was
conducting experiments for CL purposes, it was only used as a starting point for this
project.
A custom implementation of document ranking was then developed based on the
DPR. Firstly, the PyTorch Lightning library was introduced. This meant that there
was no need to implement all the training, validation, testing loops, and data loading
routines – the code looks much cleaner, it is simplified, and allows for focusing only
on the main aims of this project, instead of spending time on various obligatory,
though satellite, components. PyTorch Lightning expects three main things to be
implemented: a data module, model class, and trainer object.
4.4.1
Data module
In order to create a dedicated data module, one first needs to prepare PyTorch
Dataset objects.
In this case, these contain references to the original data struc-
tures defined in the JSON files. They can either be read whole into memory, or read
line by line by the Dataset class. Such a class would contain either a single subset
(NQ for Experience #0, MS MARCO for the rest of experiences) or a shuffled com-
bination of subsets (testing and index sets, baselines). The module requires that two
double under methods are implemented.
The F_lengthF_() method should return how many entries there are in the whole
dataset. Whereas F_getitemF_(index) takes an integer as an argument and should
return the appropriate entry. Since MS MARCO triples dataset contains only one
negative passage, the method also samples a chosen amount of negatives from the
whole dataset and appends them to the negatives list. In this case, 6 negatives in
total are used in a single data sample. For the NQ dataset that is not necessary.
After these requirements are met, the sample needs to be properly tokenised. The
BERT model expects sequences to be the same length, so a distribution analysis was
initially performed to see, how long the sequences are, and if it is possible to truncate
them to save memory space. The results can be seen in Figure 4.3.
The analysis was performed for queries, as well as positive, and negative pas-
sages. The queries are much shorter than the average length of passages, thus the
passage lengths were used to determine the cut-off point. First of all, the passages
were truncated to the length of 100 tokens. Based on the presented histograms, the
distributions have long right tails, and the majority of the information resides around
the length of 60 tokens. Thus, it was decided that all sequences longer than 100 are
going to be truncated for both datasets. Secondly, the tokenised sequences that are
shorter than the cutoff (mainly the queries), needed to be padded with zeroes at the
end of the tokens, in order to match the length of 100.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Document ranking
35
0
10
20
30
40
50
Query length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
Query distribution
(a) Queries
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Positive passage length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
Positive passage distribution
(b) Positive passages
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Negative passage length
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
Negative passage distribution
(c) Negative passages
Figure 4.3: Text lengths distribution of MS MARCO sample. Based on the
histograms, the cut-off length was set to 100 tokens.
An object containing the query, positive, as well as 6 negative passages is tokenised
using a dedicated BertTokenizer object from the transformers library, with the
truncation and padding options. The processed result is returned by a DataLoader
object whenever the model expects the input data.
Every programme loop has its own DataLoader.
A data loader is used as an
iterable to provide batches to the model. The data loader expects a batch size to be
defined. To maximise the usage of GPU, a batch size of 15 samples was chosen for
the whole process. For indexing, the batch size was set to 2,000, because there is only
one positive and one negative per batch. Since all the data was shuffled previously,
there is no need to specifically instruct data loaders to mix the data again.
A dedicated DataModule from PyTorch Lightning handles the whole process of
creating datasets and embedding them inside data loaders. The whole data module
can be used during training, or one can use its methods to return the necessary data
loaders. In this case, a manual approach was used, since it gives much more flexibility
whilst handling consecutive CL experiments. Multiple training and validation data
loaders were used sequentially.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Methods
4.4.2
Model
A model class should inherit from a dedicated PyTorch Lightning LightningModule
class, which is fully compatible with a standard PyTorch nn.Module.
According
to the DPR paper, the main model is a combination of the two transformer-based
encoders. Thus, two Encoder objects, that are BERT models with a standard uncased
configuration, were created. The first one is for learning from queries and was called
query_encoder, and the second one is for handling passages – context_encoder. Both
were inserted into the main BiEncoder class as attributes. Lightning automatically
handles nested nn.Modules as PyTorch models, so there is no need to additionally
handle processing of the parameters. All the models’ parameters are accessible from
the named_parameters() method. Combining two models together resulted in 218
million trainable parameters, of estimated 875.858 megabytes in total. In order to
make the LightningModule work properly, it was also important to implement a few
additional methods.
Forward
One of them is the forward method – a requirement of the base PyTorch
library. Generally, this function defines the flow of data through the layers. It also
takes a batch as an argument, which in this case contains already tokenised queries,
positive, and negative passages of a given amount (the batch size parameter), returned
by a data loader. Then, the queries are passed to the forward method of the query
encoder. As far as the passage (context) encoder is concerned, one more step is needed.
To increase the model performance, all batch negative passages are concatenated and
used during one step.
Thus, having a batch size of 15, instead of just 1 positive
versus 6 negatives, the model effectively learns the differences between 1 positive and
90 negatives sentences. DPR calls those the in-batch negatives. All these passages are
then passed through the second encoder, and both results are used to calculate the
loss. There is no need to implement any additional functionalities on the encoders’
side since everything is handled by the transformers library.
To calculate the loss, a dot product between the output query vector and context
vector, which were returned previously, is calculated. Then, the softmax function
followed by a logarithm is used to get the probabilities.
After that, the negative
logarithmic likelihood loss (NLL loss) is calculated with respect to the locations of
positive passages in the vector. The DPR authors, based on previously conducted
ablation studies, obtained two important findings here. Firstly, they identified that
using an alternative triplet loss does not change the obtained results in any significant
way. Secondly, the dot product similarity metric is comparable with the Euclidean
L2 distance and measurably better than the cosine similarity. Thus, in this project,
the same NLL loss is calculated, and the dot product is used as a similarity metric.
Optimiser
Another method that the framework required to be filled, before the
model could be used, is the configure_optimizers function. Here, similarly to the
implementation in the DPR paper, the model’s parameters are being set accordingly
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Document ranking
37
to a given decay hyperparameter and passed to the AdamW optimiser, with a learning
rate of 1 × 10−5, default betas, and epsilon values.
Steps
The training_step, validation_step, and testing_step methods needed
to be implemented as well. During training, PyTorch Lightning automatically zeroes
all gradients before operations, performs back-propagation, and makes the optimiser
step into the direction indicated by gradients. Thus, it is not required to implement
these features inside the training step. For validation and testing, the library disables
the gradients, so the model is not trained by accident. All of these methods however,
have to call the model’s forward method, which passes a batch through the model,
calculates loss and returns it, as well as optionally logs results to a file or service of
choice. The testing_step facilitates a state-machine feature – depending on a given
flag, it can evaluate the model’s forgetting, test the performance, prepare the index
structure, or run the CL strategies. The reasoning behind that will be provided in
Subsections 4.4.6 and 4.5. Inside all these steps, loss and accuracy metrics are logged
into the Weights and Biases tool, for visualisation and comparison purposes.
Callbacks
PyTorch Lightning automatically handles the loops execution, and to
introduce modifications into the processing steps, the library gives a possibility to
use callbacks.
One can override default empty callbacks, so custom logic can be
executed before or after training milestones, e.g. before or after a training epoch
starts. In this case, the on_after_backward callback is used to clip gradients, and
on_train_epoch_end and other functionalities like logging metrics are used during
validation and test methods. This feature was crucial to execute the CL strategies,
which are described in Section 4.5.
4.4.3
Training
To perform the training procedure using PyTorch Lightning, there is no need to im-
plement all the logic executing loops. The Trainer object is responsible for handling
the iterations for the developer. For the purpose of CL scenarios, the Trainer needed
to be modified, by creating a ContinualTrainer class inheriting from the original one.
Such a class extends default functionalities by keeping track of the total number of
CL tasks, and the number of completed experiences.
To train, one needs to call the trainer’s fit method with a created model, training,
and validation data loaders. This method automatically uses dedicated training_step
and validation_step model methods implemented earlier, handles all the gradient
calculations, and navigates the data between CPU and GPU.
However, fit cannot at present be run more than once (PyTorch Lightning v1.6.4).
To work around that issue, a default FitLoop object needed to be overridden. The
fit loop class checks if the iterations should start, how they should be executed, and
when they should end. In this case, ContinualFitLoop was created and initial checks
to start iterations were removed. PyTorch Lightning is not going to start training if
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Methods
a given number of steps and epochs were already met or if the training was already
run in the current applications lifetime; one cannot start training more than once. So,
in this project, initial checks were removed, in order to provide seamless fine-tuning
between tasks.
The Trainer was included with an EarlyStopping callback. The callback over-
looks changes of a metric of choice, and, for a selected number of training epochs,
checks if the metric changed suﬀiciently. If the change is negligible or goes in the
wrong direction, which might indicate overfitting, the training is stopped. In this case,
monitored validation loss is supposed to go down, therefore the patience of early stop-
ping is set to 3 epochs, and ∆of change is set to 0.01. This is going to allow the
model to train at least three epochs for the base training scenario, as well as for each
subsequent CL scenario.
4.4.4
Forgetting evaluation
Trainer’s test method, which is used for evaluation purposes, can be executed mul-
tiple times, in contrast to fit.
Thus, this method is used for multiple purposes,
amongst others – forgetting evaluation.
To perform this routine, the trainer’s test method is used, with a forgetting flag
set beforehand to true. Then, all training samples from the base, Experience #0 are
passed through the model, so the loss and accuracy can be calculated. It is expected
that this loss should be close to 0, and accuracy close to 100%. Each of the following
experiences should increase the loss and decrease accuracy, since new data has been
introduced, and some of the prior knowledge was forgotten. The forgetting loop is
similar to validation – as it was mentioned before, PyTorch Lightning disables the
gradient calculations when test is running.
4.4.5
Testing
To perform the testing routine, the trainer’s test method is run again with a data
loader combining both NQ and MS MARCO test datasets. This time though the
method is started without any flags. It calculates the loss and accuracy as the for-
getting test.
The only difference is that the outputs from the query encoder are
stored in a file, to perform a final ranking evaluation later on. For testing, both NQ
and MS MARCO testing subsets are concatenated and shuffled, so one can see the
performance differences after introducing new experiences.
4.4.6
Indexing
To construct the index, two JSON files are used, for NQ and MS MARCO passages
respectively. For the time being, both datasets can be stored in memory, but an
implementation was also created, which can retrieve the passages line by line during
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Continual learning strategies
39
the training procedure, without reading the whole file at once. This can be especially
useful if the index datasets are very big.
When the indexing flag is set to true, _index_step(batch) is called to generate
the structure by looping over the index dataset. In contrast to a standard test step
described previously, this step uses only the context encoder, to process passages
in batches. Because of that fact, the batch sizes can be significantly larger – there
are no in-batch negatives, and calculations are performed much faster since no loss is
calculated. The output, which consists of arrays with latent sequences representation,
is firstly stored inside a buffer array. If the buffer size is filled, the content is stored
inside an index file, the buffer is cleaned, and the loop continues. This is similar to
real-life scenarios – indexes are huge structures that need to be processed in stages,
and stored in some kind of a database.
4.4.7
Ranking evaluation
During the previous steps, test queries and index passages were encoded and stored
into binary files. Then, it is possible to calculate ranking metrics – top-k metrics
from Formulas 3.7 and 3.8 for various values of k. To do that, one has to calculate a
dot product between the test and index structures; as it was stated before in Formula
3.5, the big values of the dot product mean that the vectors are similar. The top-k
scores are calculated for k = {1, 5, 10, 20, 50}. Thus, the dot product is computed for
each index file and the test file. The top-50 results are retrieved for every chunk file –
since it is done for the biggest value of k, for a given query, one can definitely find the
50 highest scores across all the index files. The best 50 can either be found in a single
file or split amongst multiple files. Then, the scores are concatenated, and indices
of corresponding queries and answers are stored aside. Having those location indices,
one can compare each answer from the testing dataset with a retrieved answer from
the index structure.
For the top-k mAcc metric, only the presence amongst the retrieved k documents
is recorded. However, for the top-k mAP metric, the document’s position is taken
into account as well, to penalise retrieved items that are not the first ones; the further
they are, the bigger the penalty is. In the end, the obtained scores are divided by the
total number of documents in the testing dataset to find the final mean metrics.
4.5
Continual learning strategies
The Avalanche library is oriented towards research by providing well-implemented
CL methods for reproducibility and prototyping. It was not however, designed to be
imported by already implemented frameworks, especially in production environments.
Thus, it was decided that for this thesis the library will only serve as an inspiration
and a new, compatible approach will be proposed.
Firstly, Avalanche implements all the processing loops and surrounds certain mile-
stones with callbacks. Since PyTorch Lightning was chosen as a foundation for this
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Methods
project, re-implementing the loops is not necessary anymore. Lightning, similarly to
Avalanche, provides callbacks, but Lightning offers many more of them, which was
helpful when implementing CL strategies into this project.
A number of CL strategies were chosen: naive, replay, and EWC. For all of these
experiments, the base NQ subset was prepared beforehand and an initial case called
Experience #0 was trained with that dataset. Then, all following experiences were
run with the CL strategies on MS MARCO splits.
Naive
This method is a basic fine-tuning after exposing the model to the initial
base experience.
Firstly, the model is trained with the NQ dataset, and then 5
consecutive trainings are done on the MS MARCO dataset. The data is prepared
before the training inside the DataModule. There is no additional CL logic other than
fine-tuning. This approach may be described as a CL framework baseline.
Replay
A method similar to the naive one, but to every next experience, a subset
of data from the previous one is added to the current data pool. The amount of
data is treated as a hyper-parameter and is added to both the training and validation
subset. In this case, 20% of data from the previous experience is added to the current
one. Thus, Experience #1 contains its own 5,000 records from MS MARCO enriched
with 3,000 NQ samples. The next experiences would sample 20% of data from only
the previous experience data pool – Experience #2 would sample 20% of the 5,000
Experience #1 MS MARCO records resulting in a total of 6,000 training samples.
This will be later referred to as replay (sum).
The second type of a replay experiment was also conducted, where all experiences
would have the same 5,000 samples. To do so, 20% of the previous experience data
is collected, similarly to the previous replay experiment. To obtain 5,000 samples
in total, the remainder is taken from the current MS MARCO data experience pool.
This creates a much more balanced distribution than the primary replay case, and
imitates a scenario where one would like to set aside some of the current samples
and add more previous experience data. Since not all of the new data has been used,
the model would need further experience to gather all the knowledge from a chosen
MS MARCO subset. In the results section, this strategy will be referred to as replay
(balanced).
EWC
It was decided to generalise Avalanche’s implementation and adapt it to the
current project. The EWC method needs to pass the current experience data through
the model again, after initial training, in order to calculate the model’s weights impor-
tance. To do so, previously coded training and testing steps were reused for passing
the data through the forward method and, similarly to Avalanche architecture, all
the logic was inserted into callbacks, by creating a Lightning’s Callback class. The
Callback object was added to the ContinualTrainer to automatically execute the
EWC logic. Since EWC has a λ parameter defining the strength of the regularisation,
three parameters λ = {1 × 10−1, 1 × 102, 1 × 106} were arbitrarily chosen.
==PAGE:51==
4.6 Metrics
41
To summarise, 4 continual learning experiments were conducted: a single naive
one (a baseline for CL approaches), two replay methods, and EWC run with different
lambdas.
4.6
Metrics
This project encompasses multiple domains, such as deep learning, document ranking,
and continual learning.
An aim of this thesis is to optimise GPU usage costs by
replacing training anew with CL strategies, so a way to measure savings is needed as
well. To properly evaluate the model’s performance across all these areas, it is vital
to define some evaluation metrics.
4.6.1
Training metrics
During training, a deep learning model’s loss and accuracy are typically calculated.
It is also true in this project. The loss metric is defined as an NLL of loss, and it is
computed in the following manner. Firstly, the dot product of queries and passages
(positive and negatives) is calculated. Then, softmax is found for the similarities, so
by providing the indices of correct matches, one can calculate the loss. Accuracy, on
the other hand, is just a ratio of correct hits found by the softmax function for a
given query and the number of records. Both loss and accuracy are calculated for
training, validation, forgetting, and testing. These metrics define the model’s learning
performance on datasets.
4.6.2
Forgetting metrics
To measure forgetting, one can compare all the previously mentioned metrics from
a previous experience with those for the current experience. Díaz-Rodríguez et al.
[Día+18] proposed multiple accuracy metrics, and in this case, a modification of
backward transfer was used. The proposed formula was simplified to a difference
between the metrics of the current experience and the previous one since only one
constant test dataset was used for the evaluation of multiple training experiences.
Moreover, a model evaluation on an initial training dataset was performed after every
completed experience to measure actual forgetting of previously well-known data.
Validating every training experience with every other testing set, as it was done in
Díaz-Rodríguez et al. [Día+18] would take too much time in this case. Thus, only one
testing set, combining both NQ and MS MARCO, was constructed, that the model
can be evaluated on.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Methods
4.6.3
Ranking metrics
Since the model is trained for retrieval and ranking purposes, two metrics from the
Formulas 3.7 and 3.8 were used.
Top-k mAcc
gives an overall estimation how many relevant documents are returned
in the current top slice. A good model should always propose, for a given query, a
document that is first or close to the first position.
Top-k mAP
on the other hand, shows not only the accuracy but it is enriched
with positional information – if the document is further away than the first position,
its score is penalised. Thanks to that, one can assess how far the predictions lie.
Moreover, there is a special case for k = 1, where top-k mAcc and top-k mAP give
the same score because denominators in both cases are 1 (if the relevant document
is the only one document retrieved). This metric represents how many perfect hits
occurred on the final model evaluation.
4.6.4
Cost related
The GPU costs on cloud services have two factors – the type of GPU chosen, and
usage time. Moreover, complex machine learning training frameworks have to be run
on a flexible virtual machine (VM) and costs of CPU time are also an additional
factor. Since prices are defined by cloud providers, the main cost-related metric in
this thesis will be the actual training time. Validation, testing, and indexing times
were not included in the measurements, because these are the procedures that have to
be done either way, regardless of the chosen training approach, and optimising these
steps is not an aim of this thesis. Savings in training time can be easily translated
into the costs of CPU and GPU usage.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
Overall, 4 continual learning experiments were conducted, each of them having 5
subsequent continual learning experiences. To compare these experiments, for every
one of them a respective baseline model was trained on the same data records as the
experience was done. Thanks to that a thorough comparative analysis for every step
could be performed.
The run results were of very small magnitude and differences between correspond-
ing scores were minuscule. However, since all the runs were performed on constant
data splits and no changes were introduced other than applying CL strategies, the
result can be treated as insightful.
Moreover, due to the fact that all of the CL
experiments were trained initially on the same Experience #0, the results for that
step always started at the same point. After the introduction of new experiences and
applying various CL strategies, the results began to diverge.
5.1
Training, testing, and forgetting
Firstly, overall deep learning model performance was analysed – amongst others the
training process, model’s forgetting characteristics, and test evaluation.
5.1.1
Training results
All experiments started with the base training of Experience #0 and were followed by
new distribution experiences. Due to the fact that throughout the training procedure,
the current loss and accuracy (an average over 50 batches) were logged and plotted,
it was possible to see how these metrics behaved during the training loop. Selected
training curves for the Baseline #5 (trained from scratch on all the data), naive, and
replay cumulative data strategy were plotted and depicted in Figure 5.1.
The Baseline #5, since it was trained only once with all the data available from
the beginning, characterised a steady decrease in loss and increase in accuracy. In
contrast to that, the naive, as well as other CL strategies, such as replay, started
with the exact same scores during Experience #0 (the lines are overlapping). After
that, so around 4,000 steps (an early stopping halt), the lines featured bumps in loss
and sudden drops in accuracy whenever a new experience was introduced. The shifts
between performance drops indicated different learning times for strategies; some
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results and discussion
Training: step loss
Baseline #5
Naive
Replay (sum)
!
!
!
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
Step
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Loss
(a) Training loss
Training: step accuracy
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
Step
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Accuracy
(b) Training accuracy
Figure 5.1: Visible fluctuations after introducing new experiences. The
baseline metric curves are smoother and behave more monotonically. The metrics of
naive and replay approaches feature significant fluctuations, especially visible in the
accuracy plot 5.1b. Curves were smoothed for visualisation purposes. Best viewed in
colour.
methods learn quicker than others.
This is similar for every following experience
and other CL strategies, as depicted in Figure 5.1. However, these fluctuations were
gradually decreasing, since the model had been exposed to more and more data from
the subsequent new distributions.
This proved reproducibility of the experiments, since all initial CL trainings were
the same, and after they all started to diverge due to the different learning method-
ologies applied. Similar fluctuations were obtained for other CL strategies since the
strategies only combat the forgetting of knowledge, not the sensitivity to newly pre-
sented tasks.
5.1.2
Forgetting results
After the finalisation of every experience, even the #0 one, the model’s tendency
for forgetting was evaluated. It was performed by passing the Experience #0 data
through the model and storing the result metrics. Forgetting for every experiment
and all experiences, alongside the corresponding baseline, were collected in Figure 5.2.
For every experience, an analogous baseline score was indicated with a dot.
Firstly, as expected, baselines did not exhibit a tendency for forgetting – since
they were trained on whole available data from scratch, they received a nearly perfect
performance on the NQ data only. The same goes for CL strategies at the Experience
#0. Secondly, for the next experiences, the forgetting started to increase – the models,
after exposure to the new distributions, forgot data from the initial NQ split. The
aim of CL strategies is to overcome this catastrophic forgetting.
The best strategy seems to be the replay strategy with balanced distributions,
where a part of the current experience’s records was replaced by 20% from previous
experience data. As expected, the simplest naive solution seems to make the least
difference compared to other methods. The naive strategy line resembles the EWC
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Training, testing, and forgetting
45
Forgetting: loss
Baseline #0
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
EWC λ = 0.1
Naive
Replay (balanced)
Replay (sum)
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Loss
(a) Training loss
Forgetting: accuracy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0.975
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
Accuracy
(b) Training accuracy
Figure 5.2: Replay with balanced distributions combats the base dataset
forgetting to a higher extend than the other strategies. Best viewed in colour.
line with a default λ = 0.1, which might indicate that the regularisation term did not
have suﬀicient effect.
Thus, an EWC penalty plot was made for multiple values of λ.
The penalty,
multiplied by a selected λ, is presented in Figure 5.3.
EWC: penalty
EWC λ = 0.1
EWC λ = 1000
!
!
4k
5k
6k
7k
8k
9k
Step
1e-8
1e-6
0.0001
Penalty
Figure 5.3: EWC penalty, without setting any λ, results in very low im-
portance. Logarithmic scale applied to the y-axis. Best viewed in colour.
As one can see, the penalty’s order of magnitude for λ = 0.1 was very small – the
highest value was approximately 5.31 × 10−7. It is because the difference between
the current model weights and the previous experience ones was already very small,
and it was decreased even further with a fractional λ. Thus, the overall magnitude of
importance calculated during EWC was minuscule. This is probably due to the fact
that the difference in continual learning tasks was not significant — the only change
was the distribution shift between experiences. Only huge values of λ could make
that regularisation possible.
Moreover, different values of λ did not influence the evaluation metrics in any
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results and discussion
way. The EWC strategy for λ = {1 × 10−1, 1 × 103, 1 × 106} produced the same
results for validation, testing, forgetting, and ranking metrics. One of the possible
explanations for this could be that the AdamW optimiser used here, normalises the
average running gradient, thus increasing all losses by a chosen order of magnitude,
and therefore the value of λ does not make a difference. The optimiser had to make
bigger or smaller steps but they were directed in the same way, indicated by the
gradient. If the EWC was not working at all, this strategy curve would look like the
standard naive curve, since the only thing that the EWC modifies is it is adding a
penalty to the loss.
[sub] presented importance values for the GPT-2 model, only for the decoder part,
whilst in this project, only an encoder is being used. Nonetheless, in the paper, the
biggest values they obtained were of magnitude 1 × 101. To obtain such an impact in
this project, the λ value had to be set to 1 × 108. The authors performed layer-wise
analysis and argued that the biggest values of importance were for relatively small
normalisation layers, and not for the larger self-attention ones. Since all experiments
conducted here were performed on similar data from two distributions, the normal-
isation layers, which should have the biggest impact, were not changed much, thus
their importance stayed minute too.
5.1.3
Testing results
Furthermore, the testing procedure on a mixture of both datasets was performed for
every baseline and experiment. The plots for testing loss and accuracy are presented
in Figure 5.4.
Testing: loss
Baseline #0
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
EWC λ = 0.1
Naive
Replay (balanced)
Replay (sum)
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Loss
(a) Training loss
Testing: accuracy
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
Accuracy
(b) Training accuracy
Figure 5.4:
Testing loss is similar across all runs but replay strategies
resulted in better accuracy than the rest of approaches.
Best viewed in
colour.
As far as the testing loss shown in 5.4a is concerned, all CL strategies lines and even
the baselines seem to interleave each other and converge to the same values. Thus, it
seems that CL strategies did not influence this metric. In the testing accuracy plot
5.4b though, the naive cumulative approach resulted in similar scores as the baselines,
and its line is almost 1% accuracy higher than the rest of the strategies. The balanced
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Ranking evaluation
47
replay started with better scores, but after introducing the next experiences, it also
converged with the other strategies. Nonetheless, baselines were slightly better than
other CL strategies, and it is diﬀicult to conclude continual learning effectiveness
based on that.
5.2
Ranking evaluation
To analyse CL strategies further, ranking metrics were computed and collected. It
was done by firstly analysing perfect matches. This was done by finding how many
retrieved relevant documents were actually the correct ones. In this case for k = 1
there is a following relationship of mAcc = mAP, because denominators in both of
the metrics are equal to 1. The results of the top-1 metric were collected in Figure
5.5.
Top-1 mAcc
Baseline #0
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
EWC λ = 0.1
Naive
Replay (balanced)
Replay (sum)
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experiment
0.106
0.108
0.11
0.112
0.114
0.116
0.118
mAcc
Figure 5.5: For exact matches, EWC seems to overcome forgetting to a
greater extend. The EWC line is significantly higher than other ones throughout
all experiences. Best viewed in colour.
As one can see in the plot, following the base experience, all the metrics went up
significantly, because of the exposition to the new MS MARCO distribution. The
model could now understand much more data contained within the index structure.
For the next experiences (#2, …, #5), when the model was exposed to even more new
data, two things were probably happening simultaneously. First of all, catastrophic
forgetting took place, hence the ranking scores on the NQ dataset started to drop.
Secondly, the model’s ranking performance on MS MARCO subset was increasing,
since the model was trained further on the new data. Having these two factors in
mind, it seems that forgetting overcomes the MS MARCO subset performance, so all
the lines started to drop after Experience #1.
As expected, the naive approach seems to obtain the worst results amongst all
experiments. The score dropped further after each of the experiences were introduced
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results and discussion
because the catastrophic forgetting took place, and there was no methodology applied
to combat that. The EWC method seems to obtain the best results for Experience
#2 and #3 – it slows down the learning of new experiences, so the NQ knowledge
was maintained for much longer, especially, if compared to naive. Baselines #1 and
#3 resulted in worse scores than all strategies, which might indicate these splits or
shuffles were harder for baseline models to process. The Baseline #5 got the best
score of all methods which may confirm the fact that training from scratch might
produce the best scores.
However, the difference between all these scores is very
small.
Next, the top-k mAcc and mAP metrics were calculated, and are presented in
Figures 5.6a and 5.6b respectively. Only the value of k = 5 was selected, because for
all other values of k the results were similar, and no significant difference was visible,
other than the overall increase of the score’s magnitude. This increase was caused
by the fact that there was a greater chance of finding a relevant passage in a larger
subset of relevant documents.
Top-5 mAcc
Baseline #0
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
EWC λ = 0.1
Naive
Replay (balanced)
Replay (sum)
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0.165
0.17
0.175
mAcc
(a) Training loss
Top-5 mAP
0
1
2
3
4
5
Experience
0.128
0.13
0.132
0.134
0.136
0.138
0.14
mAP
(b) Training accuracy
Figure 5.6: Dropping scores after introduction of new experiences. The
forgetting had greater influence on ranking metrics than accommodating new knowl-
edge. Best viewed in colour.
The mean accuracy and mean average precision plots feature the same finding as
previously, namely that all metrics started to drop after introducing new experiences,
which is even more pronounced than for the top-1 plot. After introducing Experience
#1 much more of the index could be understood, so the results went up, but for the
following experiences, the new knowledge was overwhelmed by catastrophic forgetting,
so the next scores started to drop. Similarly to previous figures, the naive strategy
ranks at the bottom of the field. Baseline scores, however, seem to, after a harder 3rd
experience, increase, providing the best results at the end of experiments.
As an overall observation, it seems that EWC obtained promising results, but
the replay techniques are more consistent since their scores were dropping slower
and were more constant. After the last experience, they outperform other methods.
EWC, despite average results on the test set, obtained much better scores for ranking
evaluation.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Cost measurements
49
5.3
Cost measurements
In order to compare computing costs across all strategies, training times were collected.
Only the time spent on training procedures was taken into account, excluding all
evaluations and indexing. The result are presented in Figure 5.7.
Training time [s]
Baseline #0
Baseline #1
Baseline #2
Baseline #3
Baseline #4
Baseline #5
EWC λ = 0.1
Naive
Replay (balanced)
Replay (sum)
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 18,000 20,000 22,000 24,000 26,000 28,000 30,000
Figure 5.7: EWC resulted in the longest training time. The highest time of
EWC is due to the fact that this method needs an additional pass over the training
data. Training times were provided in seconds. These are overall experiment times,
not averages, since the difference between runs was not significant. Best viewed in
colour.
Despite being the most popular method, EWC is not only memory greedy, since
three models had to be stored in the memory at once (previous and current expe-
rience model, plus the Fisher matrix) but also time expensive. It is because of the
requirement of looping over the training data again, to calculate the importance ma-
trix. This operation prolongs overall training time further, resulting in a time even
greater than a single Baseline #5, which is trained for all data from all experiments
at once. The λ parameter did not affect the training time.
Balanced replay took the shortest time because the new experiences contained
20% of all data from a previous experience, and that fraction was replaced by the
same amount of new data. As expected, the naive strategy resulted in the shortest
training time since no additional approach other than fine-tuning was applied here.
However, due to the fact that the naive technique had been trained on many more
new data samples, the overall time was longer than for the balanced replay strategy.
The balanced replay strategy would have been longer if more than 5 experiences were
introduced, as more time would be required to collect all replaced data and provide it
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results and discussion
to the model. It was decided not to introduce more experiences, so all methods could
be compared together across selected boundaries. The replay approach where the old
samples are added to the new distribution data – replay (sum), takes significantly
longer than the balanced replay because it is trained on more data samples.
Nevertheless, all continual learning methods outperform training on the data from
scratch, as far as the total time is considered.
Let’s consider a scenario where a
base model was trained initially, and then it was trained from scratch 5 times, to
accommodate knowledge from all new data experiences provided sequentially.
To
measure the overall cost of that process, the times of all 6 trainings were added
together.
In this case, the baseline times sum up to 29 hours and 46 minutes of
training, whereas even for EWC, the most complex method, it was only 8h 45min,
for the naive – 6h 30min, replay (balanced) — 6h 14min, and for replay (sum) —
7h 58min. Evaluation and indexing times were not included here since it is required
to perform these steps after every training experience, no matter if it is training
from scratch or with applying CL strategies and this time is constant — CL does
not influence passing through testing sets or index generation. Generally, the CL
strategies resulted in similar scores, so it might be diﬀicult to find the best or worst
method in this project, but the main take-away is that applying any CL strategy may
save a lot of computing time and still produce satisfactory model performance. The
difference between Baseline #5 and naive strategy is almost 1% of top-5 mAcc.
Considering this trade-off of training time versus the obtained scores, it seems
that replay methods are most effective for this kind of ranking problem, where a data
distribution shift occurs. Moreover, replay methods are easy to implement, since only
sampling of previous data is required. Nonetheless, all the CL methods could be used
as a catastrophic forgetting countermeasure, instead of a standard naive approach, to
good effect.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
6.1
Summary
The aims of this dissertation concerned optimising the fine-tuning process of docu-
ment ranking models, by applying continual learning strategies to a selected NLP
architecture – a bi-encoder constructed from two BERT models. Due to the large
overall size and number of parameters of the chosen models, training from scratch
turned out to be ineﬀicient as far as training times are concerned. This can be directly
reformulated as a financial costs optimisation problem since longer training times per-
formed in cloud services result in greater running costs for companies. Unfortunately,
not much has been said about continual learning for NLP models in research and
there is no available paper presenting CL applications for document ranking. Thus,
this project attempted to solve and analyse the following two issues: training cost
optimisation and investigation of CL strategies in the document ranking domain.
In this thesis, many areas were discussed. Firstly, deep learning models for lan-
guage understanding were analysed and their functionalities were compared, by pre-
senting the evolution of various architectures for natural language processing. Neural
networks like recurrent, long short-term memory, transformers, and BERT were pre-
sented, and their strengths and vulnerabilities were contrasted. Then, an information
retrieval problem was investigated. Statistical methods such as TF-IDF and BM25
were described by providing their theoretical background. The main foundation for
this project was laid upon the findings from the Dense Passage Retrieval paper by
Karpukhin et al. [Kar+20]. The authors presented a bi-encoder architecture, consist-
ing of two BERT models – query and passage encoders. They are trained in tandem
to finally provide a functionality used to find relevant documents for a given query.
This state-of-the-art method was selected to be implemented in this thesis in a doc-
ument ranking framework and to investigate its application in solving the continual
learning problem. To do that, various CL scenarios and strategies were analysed, so
the problem could be defined more closely. To properly validate the hypotheses, a
set of metrics was collected and compiled, so the CL solutions could be compared to
the naive fine-tuning and baselines trained from scratch.
Based on the theoretical foundation, a continual ranking library was constructed.
It was inspired by two frameworks – the DPR paper, providing findings relevant to the
document retrieval problem, and Avalanche, which proposed a CL architecture. In the
beginning, data needed to be found and processed. Two commonly used datasets were
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Conclusions
applied – Natural Questions (already processed and structured by the DPR team) and
MS MARCO – for passage retrieval. The NQ data was used as a base training scenario,
and the MS MARCO subset was applied for all continual learning experiences. This
introduced a distribution shift in data across the training experiences, so various CL
strategies could be applied and evaluated. All CL experiences had their corresponding
baselines – models trained from scratch with all the data available to the model from
the beginning. Thanks to that, it was possible to not only compare CL techniques
between themselves but also verify how they performed against a basic scenario.
As far as the results are concerned, no single strategy turned out to combat catas-
trophic forgetting fully. Moreover, there is no one prominent strategy that turned
out to be better than the others. All CL techniques can be treated as forgetting
countermeasures, especially if training from scratch multiple times might not be a
feasible option. Applying any CL strategy resulted in satisfactory results and saved
up to 80% of computing time, if the balanced replay was applied.
Nonetheless, it seems that there are better solutions than naively training the
model further. The simplest solution is to add a fraction of the data from the pre-
vious training procedures to accommodate both old and new knowledge.
Such a
replay method saves training time and gives satisfactory results. Sampling some of
the previous data and mixing it with new data samples can be done outside of the
training procedure by preparing it beforehand which does not increase the overall
model complexity and computational costs.
EWC seems to outperform replay only over a span of multiple experiences, but
the further investigation could boost its general performance. The drawback of EWC
is the fact that two models have to be stored in memory in order to compute a large
information matrix. For large models, such as a composition of two BERTs, this
method might be ineﬀicient.
6.2
Recommendations
Firstly, only a few CL strategies were investigated here – naive, two approaches to
replay, and EWC with various values of the λ parameter. It would be beneficial,
similarly as it was done in [sub], to verify in more details how importance values are
distributed around layers and parameters. Moreover, other methods, such as GEM,
which showed very promising results in other research projects, could be investigated.
No architectural strategies were checked here either, because of the computational
limitations – such strategies might significantly increase the model size and training
times due to a model’s architecture modifications.
However, there are other implementations of BERT, like DistilBERT – much
smaller in size, running 60% faster than the original model [San+20]. By using the
distilled model, one could perform many more experiments and verify other methods
in a shorter time. Moreover, instead of using a bi-encoder architecture, the project
could be simplified even further by using a single encoder for both queries and pas-
sages.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Recommendations
53
Secondly, separate evaluations for both datasets should be conducted in the fu-
ture. This should clarify the issue about increasing and then dropping top-k metrics.
The assumption here was that catastrophic forgetting is stronger than learning new
experiences, so the overall ranking performance after multiple experiences is worse
than at the Experience #1.
All experiments could also be conducted on bigger dataset splits. It is also possible
to provide multiple positives and modify the number of negatives to change the type
of the task for CL scenarios. By that, it is possible that the difference between CL
strategies would be more prominent. In this project, the obtained scores are of a very
small scale, for all training, testing, forgetting, and ranking metrics. Additionally,
more runs should be conducted. The results should be verified by setting up multiple
experiments and checking if the values are reproducible and lie within a significance
level.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[Baj+18]
Payal Bajaj et al. “MS MARCO: A Human Generated MAchine Reading
COmprehension Dataset.” In: arXiv:1611.09268 [cs] (October 2018). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09268.
[BBC20]
Magdalena Biesialska, Katarzyna Biesialska and Marta R. Costa-jussà.
“Continual Lifelong Learning in Natural Language Processing: A Survey.”
In: (December 2020). doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.574. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09823v1.
[BCB16]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural Ma-
chine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate.” In: arXiv:
1409.0473 [cs, stat] (May 2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.
[Bri+17]
Denny Britz et al. “Massive Exploration of Neural Machine Translation
Architectures.” In: arXiv:1703.03906 [cs] (March 2017). url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1703.03906.
[Bri21]
James Briggs. How to Create an Answer From a Question With DPR.
September 2021. url: https : / / towardsdatascience . com / how - to -
create- an- answer- from- a- question- with- dpr- d76e29cc5d60 (vis-
ited on 26th April 2022).
[Bro+20]
Tom B. Brown et al. “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.” In: arXiv:
2005.14165 [cs] (July 2020). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[Cos+21]
Andrea Cossu et al. “Continual Learning for Recurrent Neural Networks:
an Empirical Evaluation.” In: (March 2021). doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.
2021.07.021. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.07492v4.
[Dar22]
Pawel Darulewski. continual-learning. April 2022. url: https://github.
com/pdarulewski/continual-ranking.
[Dev+19]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transform-
ers for Language Understanding.” In: arXiv:1810.04805 [cs] (May 2019).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
[Día+18]
Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez et al. “Don’t forget, there is more than forgetting:
new metrics for Continual Learning.” In: (October 2018). url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1810.13166v1.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
[DL18]
Li Deng and Yang Liu. Deep Learning in Natural Language Processing.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2018. isbn: 978-981-10-5208-8. doi: 10.
1007/978-981-10-5209-5. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-981-10-5209-5.
[DL21]
Arthur Douillard and Timothée Lesort. Continuum: Simple Management
of Complex Continual Learning Scenarios. 2021.
[fde17]
fdeloche. File:Recurrent neural network unfold.svg - Wikipedia. June 2017.
url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Recurrent_neural_
network_unfold.svg (visited on 16th April 2022).
[Gre+17]
Klaus Greff et al. “LSTM: A Search Space Odyssey.” In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 28.10 (October 2017),
pages 2222–2232. issn: 2162-237X, 2162-2388. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2016.
2582924.
[GS00]
F.A. Gers and J. Schmidhuber. “Recurrent nets that time and count.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE-INNS-ENNS International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks. IJCNN 2000. Neural Computing: New Challenges
and Perspectives for the New Millennium. Volume 3. 2000, 189–194 vol.3.
doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2000.861302.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short-term memory.”
In: Neural Computation 9.8 (1997), pages 1735–1780. doi: 10.1162/neco.
1997.9.8.1735.
[Hug]
Hugging Face. Summary of the tokenizers. url: https://huggingface.
co/docs/transformers/main_classes/tokenizer (visited on 21st April
2022).
[JDJ17]
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze and Hervé Jégou. “Billion-scale similarity
search with GPUs.” In: arXiv:1702.08734 [cs] (February 2017). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1702.08734.
[Kar+20]
Vladimir Karpukhin et al. “Dense Passage Retrieval for Open-Domain
Question Answering.” In: arXiv:2004.04906 [cs] (September 2020). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.04906.
[Kir+16]
James Kirkpatrick et al. “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks.” In: (December 2016). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.
00796v2.
[Kut+18]
Andrey Kutuzov et al. “Diachronic word embeddings and semantic shifts:
a survey.” In: arXiv:1806.03537 [cs] (June 2018). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1806.03537.
[Kwi+19]
Tom Kwiatkowski et al. “Natural Questions: a Benchmark for Question
Answering Research.” In: Transactions of the Association of Computa-
tional Linguistics (2019).
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
57
[Lom+21]
Vincenzo Lomonaco et al. “Avalanche: an End-to-End Library for Contin-
ual Learning.” In: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 2nd Continual Learning in Computer Vision
Workshop. 2021.
[LZ11]
Yuanhua Lv and Chengxiang Zhai. “Lower-bounding term frequency nor-
malization: 20th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement, CIKM’11.” In: CIKM’11 - Proceedings of the 2011 ACM In-
ternational Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. In-
ternational Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Pro-
ceedings (2011), pages 7–16. issn: 9781450307178. doi: 10.1145/2063576.
2063584.
[MC89]
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. “Catastrophic Interference in
Connectionist Networks: The Sequential Learning Problem.” In: Psychol-
ogy of Learning and Motivation. Edited by Gordon H. Bower. Volume 24.
Academic Press, January 1989, pages 109–165. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0079 -
7421(08)60536- 8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0079742108605368.
[ML18]
Davide Maltoni and Vincenzo Lomonaco. “Continuous Learning in Single-
Incremental-Task Scenarios.” In: (June 2018). url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1806.08568v3.
[MRS08]
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hinrich Schütze. In-
troduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511809071.
[Nor+22]
Fabrice Normandin et al. Sequoia: A Software Framework to Unify Con-
tinual Learning Research. arXiv:2108.01005. January 2022. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2108.01005. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.01005.
[Par+19]
German I. Parisi et al. “Continual Lifelong Learning with Neural Net-
works: A Review.” In: Neural Networks 113 (May 2019), pages 54–71.
issn: 08936080. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2019.01.012..
[PB14]
Razvan Pascanu and Yoshua Bengio. Revisiting Natural Gradient for
Deep Networks. arXiv:1301.3584. February 2014. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
1301.3584. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3584.
[Pet+18]
Matthew E. Peters et al. “Deep contextualized word representations.” In:
arXiv:1802.05365 [cs] (March 2018). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.
05365.
[PSM14]
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher and Christopher Manning. “GloVe:
Global Vectors for Word Representation.” In: Proceedings of the 2014 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Doha, Qatar: Association for Computational Linguistics, October 2014,
pages 1532–1543. doi: 10.3115/v1/D14-1162. url: https://aclanthology.
org/D14-1162.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
[Qad+20]
Javed Qadrud-Din et al. “Transformer Based Language Models for Sim-
ilar Text Retrieval and Ranking.” In: arXiv:2005.04588 [cs] (May 2020).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04588.
[Reb+17]
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuﬀi et al. iCaRL: Incremental Classifier and Repre-
sentation Learning. arXiv:1611.07725. April 2017. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
1611.07725. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.07725.
[RHW85]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton and Ronald J. Williams. Learn-
ing internal representations by error propagation. Institute for Cognitive
Science, University of California, San Diego, 1985.
[RRC19]
Gopinath Rebala, Ajay Ravi and Sanjay Churiwala. “Natural Language
Processing.” In: An Introduction to Machine Learning. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2019, pages 117–125. isbn: 978-3-030-15728-9. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-15729-6_10. url: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-030-15729-6_10.
[Rus+16]
Andrei A. Rusu et al. Progressive Neural Networks. arXiv:1606.04671.
September 2016. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1606.04671. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1606.04671.
[RZ09]
Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. “The Probabilistic Relevance
Framework: BM25 and Beyond.” In: Found. Trends Inf. Retr. 3.4 (April
2009), pages 333–389. issn: 1554-0669. doi: 10.1561/1500000019. url:
https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000019.
[San+20]
Victor Sanh et al. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller,
faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv:1910.01108. February 2020. doi: 10 .
48550/arXiv.1910.01108. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108.
[Sch15]
Juergen Schmidhuber. “Deep Learning in Neural Networks: An Overview.”
In: Neural Networks 61 (January 2015), pages 85–117. issn: 08936080.
doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2014.09.003.
[Sci]
Scikit-Learn. 3.3. Metrics and scoring: quantifying the quality of predic-
tions – 3.3.2.3. Top-k accuracy score. url: https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/model_evaluation.html#top-k-accuracy-score (vis-
ited on 5th June 2022).
[sub]
Anonymous ACL submission. Elastic Weight Consolidation for Reduction
of Catastrophic Forgetting in GPT-2. en. url: https://paperswithcode.
com/paper/elastic-weight-consolidation-for-reduction-of.
[Tra+21]
Mohamed Trabelsi et al. “Neural ranking models for document retrieval.”
In: Information Retrieval Journal 24.6 (December 2021), pages 400–444.
issn: 1386-4564, 1573-7659. doi: 10.1007/s10791-021-09398-0.
[Vas+17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need.” In: arXiv:1706.03762
[cs] (December 2017). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
[VST20]
Gido M. van de Ven, Hava T. Siegelmann and Andreas S. Tolias. “Brain-
inspired replay for continual learning with artificial neural networks.” In:
Nature Communications 11.11 (August 2020), page 4069. issn: 2041-1723.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17866-2.
[Wu+16]
Yonghui Wu et al. “Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridg-
ing the Gap between Human and Machine Translation.” In: arXiv:1609.08144
[cs] (October 2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144.
[Yad19]
Omry Yadan. Hydra - A framework for elegantly configuring complex ap-
plications. Github. 2019. url: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
hydra.
[Zop+16]
Barret Zoph et al. “Transfer Learning for Low-Resource Neural Machine
Translation.” In: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Austin, Texas: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, November 2016, pages 1568–1575. doi: 10.18653/
v1/D16-1163. url: https://aclanthology.org/D16-1163.
==PAGE:70==
