==PAGE:1==
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolution-
ary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Márton Ferenc Leitold, MSC Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis
Carsten Witt, Professor, Thesis Supervisor
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Algorithms and Problem Instances
3
2.1
EDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
cGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
(μ+1) GA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Hybrid GA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Stagnation Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.6
Problem Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Design
14
3.1
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Program Design and Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Graphical interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Reflecting on design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Implementation
22
4.1
Delta Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
MST Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Graphics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Evaluation
26
5.1
cGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Hybrid GA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
(μ+1) GA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4
SD algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.5
MST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.6
Jump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.7
Cliff
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
34
A How To Use The Program
37
A.1 Compiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.2 Menu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
1
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are generic, population based metaheuristic search algo-
rithms. EAs use methods inspired by Darwin’s evolution theory: reproduction, mutation,
selection, crossover. These methods can generate strong individuals that help to solve
the optimization problem. The history of the evolutionary algorithms dates back to 1960s
and there are numerous evolutionary algorithms and benchmark problems defined.
One of the challenges of EAs are that they can get stuck in local optima. There are
different strategies overcoming this problem, for example the following:
• Stagnation Detection
• Crossover operators
• Estimation-of-distribution algorithms
• Diversity maintaining operators
I selected numerous EAs from recent literature to implement for each strategy, namely:
• SD-RLS, SD-RLS*, (SD-(1+1) EA, SASD-( 1+λ) and SD-RLSm
• Hybrid GA
• compact Genetic Algorithm
• (µ+1) GA with high mutation
Evaluation and benchmarking will be done in different type of Jump functions where the
global optima may be in the middle of the gap. Other benchmarking function will be Cliff,
and the Minimum Spanning Tree problem. The algorithms and these cost functions are
defined in chapter 2. The motivation for this project is to see how these algorithms run
on different problems and to compare them to each other a framework was created. The
framework’s design is explained in chapter 3 and the implementation detail in chapter 4.
Finally, the algorithms are evaluated in the framework, using statistical tests and reflecting
on their runtime in chapter 5.
2
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:6==
2
Algorithms and Problem Instances
2.1
EDA
Estimation of distribution algorithm(EDA) guides the search towards the optimum via cre-
ating and sampling promising candidate solutions. Optimization is done by updating these
candidate solutions which in the end is likely to generate global optimum. The difference
between an EA and an EDA is that EAs use an implicit distribution while EDAs use an
explicit probability distribution.
2.2
cGA
The compact Genetic Algorithm(cGA) is an EDA which was proposed by Harik, Lobo, and
Goldberg in [1]. Described by a frequency vector f ∈[0, 1]n it develops a probabilistic
model. With this frequency vector the probability of each bit is independently described
in the search space. We can use X ∼Sample(f) where X = (X1, ..., Xn) ∈{0, 1}n is a
search point. The Sample(f) means that for each bit i, we sample with a probability of
fi independently of the other bits. For each round, cGA updates f as follows. It samples
two search points x1 and x2. The one with the better fitness score will be assigned to y1
and the other one to y2, so y1 will be the better one if the fitness scores are different. If x1
and x2 equals than x1 will be assigned to y1 and x2 will be assigned to y2. Next, we will
update f as follows: f′ = f + 1
µ(y1−y2) where µ is the hypothetical population size, which
is a crucial parameter of the algorithm. This way, when a position differs, we update the
frequency for it by 1
µ and hope that it moves the right direction since y1 will have a higher
fitness score. To avoid premature convergence a cap is used to not allow too large or to
small numbers, so the frequency vector has to be in [ 1
n, 1 −1
n]n. With µ = √n log n where
k <
1
20ln(n) gives a runtime of O(n log n) on Jumpk [2]. The algorithm’s pseudocode
from [3] can be seen in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 cGA
t ←−0
ft ←−( 1
2, ..., 1
2) ∈[0, 1]n
repeat
x1 ←−Sample(ft)
x2 ←−Sample(ft)
if F(x1) > F(y1) then
(y1, y2) ←−(x1, x2)
else
(y2, y1) ←−(x1, x2)
ft+1 ←−ft + 1
µ(y1 −y2)
ft+1 ←−max{min{ 1
n, ft+1}, 1 −1
n}
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
2.3
(μ+1) GA
The (µ+1) GA is a crossover based algorithm that after the crossover it uses high mutation
rate, 1+δ
n . It is from this article [4]. The idea is that we always use a crossover and with high
mutation rate there will be higher diversity. So, escaping a local optima, all the plateau in
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
3
==PAGE:7==
the case of Jumpk in section 2.6.1 has been discovered and it is easier to make the jump
to the global optimum. For the value of δ it was described to be something higher then
0 so I choose 1, therefore the mutation rate is 2
n. In the uniform crossover phase, each
bitstring is drawn randomly from the two parents. With µ = log n the expected running
time for a Jumpk is O(n
√
k log n log log n + nk−1) [4]. The algorithm’s pseudocode can
be seen in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 (µ+1) GA
P ←−µ individuals, uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
repeat
Choose x, y ∈P uniformly at random
z ←−mutate(crossover(x, y))
P ←−P ∪z
Remove one element from P with lowest fitness, breaking ties uniformly at random
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
2.4
Hybrid GA
The Hybrid GA is a majority vote crossover based algorithm, where there are 3 parents.
In every round each is individually improved using next-ascent hill climbing - using one
bit flip in a random permutation on the indices - until a local optimum found. Then, a
majority vote crossover is applied where a new offspring is created. If this offspring does
not maximize F then the algorithm is rerun. It was introduced in [5]. For k <= ⌊log n⌋
the algorithm runtime on Jumpk is O(n) [5]. The algorithm’s pseudocode from [2] can
be seen in algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Hybrid GA
repeat
for k = 1, 2, 3 do
Let xk ∈{0, 1}n be uniformly at random
repeat
Let σ be a permutation on {1, ..., n} drawn uniformly at random
for 1 = {1, ..., n} do
Create y by flipping bit position σ(i) of xk
if F(y) > F(xk) then
xk ←−y
until none of the n bit flips resulted in F(y) > F(xk)
Create z by applying a majority vote crossover with parents x1, x2, x3
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
2.5
Stagnation Detection
Stagnation Detection(SD) was proposed by Rajabi and Witt in [6]. In Evolutionary al-
gorithms you can adjust the mutation rate, population size during runtime although most
algorithm use static settings. There is evidence that EAs should adjust their static settings
during runtime to achieve better results (e.g.
[7], [8], [9], and [10]). However, these
algorithms were not created for escaping local optima and cannot detect if they are in one.
Therefore, they can not, for example increase their mutation rate in a local optima. Stag-
nation detection can detect being stuck in a local optima and can increase the mutation
rate gradually to escape from it.
4
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:8==
2.5.1
SD-(1+1) EA
Stagnation detection can be applied to the common (1+1) EA [6]. A parameter R can
be applied to control after how long of not finding and improvement should we increase
the mutation rate. Variable u is for counting failed attempts and r controls the mutation
rate, initially r = 1. When u exceeds the threshold of not finding an improvement, r is
increased. The expected running time of the algorithm on Jumpk is O(( en
k )k) [6]. The
algorithm’s pseudocode can be seen in algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 SD-(1+1) EA
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
r1 ←−1
t ←−1
u ←−0
repeat
Create y by flipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a probability of rt
n
u ←−u + 1
if F(y) > F(x) then
x ←−y
rt+1 ←−1
u ←−0
else if F(y) = F(x) and rt = 1 then
x ←−y
if u > 2( en
rt )rtln(nR) then
rt+1 ←−min{rt + 1, n
2 }
u ←−0
else
rt+1 ←−rt
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
2.5.2
SASD-(1+λ) EA
The (1+λ) EA with self-adjusting mutation rate was defined in [11]. Half of the offsprings
are created with a mutation strength of 2r and the other half with r
2. At the end of the round
r will be updated with the best offspring strength with a probability of 1
2. With probability
1
4 the strength will be doubled or with the same probability halved. But the strength will
not exceed n
4 or be smaller than 2. This idea comes from the (1 + λ) EA. Self Adjusting
SD-(1+λ) EA is similar to (1 + λ) EA, that it incorporates this mechanism and works like
that until stagnation detection is triggered by an unsuccessful number of tries. Then it will
increase the mutation rate, and won’t mutate half the offsprings with r/2, just with r as we
would like to leave the local optima. The updating part is also skipped, just the strength(r)
is increased after many unsuccessful tries. If we left the local optimum the algorithm goes
back to the phase where it uses two different mutation rates. Therefore, the algorithm
has two states, one where stagnation detection is triggered and on where it is not. The sd
variable keeps track if there is a stagnation detected or not. There is an rinit variable used
in the original algorithm to initialize r, but I set it to 2 during my testing. There is no runtime
for the algorithm on Jumpk. The algorithm’s pseudocode can be seen in algorithm 5.
2.5.3
SD-RLS
SD-RLS [12] is based on RLS [13] which is a simple algorithm that flips s bits and if
the result is at least as good as the parent then it will replace the parent. In SD-RLS this
strength of bit flipping is controlled from 1 to n The algorithm has a very small chance to
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
5
==PAGE:9==
Algorithm 5 SASD-(1+λ) EA
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
r1 ←−2
t ←−1
u ←−0
sd ←−False
repeat
u ←−u + 1
if sd = True then
for i ←−1, ..., λ do
Create xi by flipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a probability of rt
n
y ←−argmaxxiF(xi)(breaking ties randomly)
if F(y) > F(x) then
x ←−y
rt+1 ←−2
sd ←−False
u ←−0
else
if u > 2( en
rt )rt ln(nR)
λ
then
rt+1 ←−min{rt + 1, n
2 }
u ←−0
else
rt+1 ←−rt
else
for i ←−1, ..., λ do
Create xi by flipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a probability of
rt
2n if i ≤λ
2 and with probability 2rt
n otherwise.
y ←−argmaxxiF(xi)(breaking ties randomly)
if F(y) ≥F(x) then
if F(y) > F(x) then
u ←−0
x ←−y
With probability 1
2:
- Replace rt with the strength y was created
- With probability 1
2 replace rt with 2rt or rt
2
rt+1 ←−min{max{2, rt}, n
4 }
if u > 2( en
rt )rt ln(nR)
λ
then
rt+1 ←−2
sd ←−True
u ←−0
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
6
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:10==
miss the right bit flip strength and this can result in infinite runtime. It has a speed up of
O(
( ne
m )m
( n
m) ) on Jumpk [12] compared to SD-(1+1) EA. The parameter R and unsuccessful
counter u is used to tune the algorithm. If u exceeds
(n
s
)
lnR then s is increased and u is
reset. The algorithm’s pseudocode can be seen in algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6 SD-RLS
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
s1 ←−1
u ←−0
repeat
Create y by flipping st bits in a copy of x uniformly.
u ←−u + 1
if F(y) > F(x) then
x ←−y
st+1 ←−1
u ←−0
else if F(y) > F(x) and st = 1 then
x ←−y
if u >
(n
s
)
lnR then
st+1 ←−min{st + 1, n}
u ←−0
else
st ←−st+1
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
2.5.4
SD-RLS*
There is a higher then 0 chance that SD-RLS will miss the required strength to escape
local optima so it can run forever. In SD-RLS* which is an extension of SD-RLS [12] a
new variable r is introduced called the radius. This controls how far the algorithm should
explore. Variable s = r when the algorithm starts or when r is increased. If the threshold
exceeds it will decrease s if s is greater than 1. If s = 1 and the threshold is reached again
than r will increase. If r = n
2 then r will become n. So it will cover all strengths. With this
repeatedly returning to lower strengths, and trying it again, the infinite runtime is avoided.
This will result in a more robust behaviour then in SD-RLS. The runtime of the algorithm
on Jumpk is O(
(n
m
)
(1 +
m2
n−2mln(n)) if the gap is smaller than n
2 . Otherwise O(2nnln(n))
[12]. The algorithm’s pseudocode can be seen in algorithm 7.
2.5.5
SD-RLSm
SD-RLSm was introduced in [14]. While SD-RLS* will not have an infinite runtime, it
will still spend a considerable amount of time on smaller strengths. In SD-RLSm there
is a mechanism called radiusmemory which reduces the number of iterations on smaller
strengths, when there was a successful iteration on a higher strength. It will still revisit
lower strengths, but it does with a lower number of iterations -
u
(ln(n))(r−1)) - than compared
to SD-RLS*. There is no runtime for the algorithm on Jumpk. The algorithm’s pseudocode
can be seen in algorithm 8.
2.6
Problem Instances
Different problem instances or in other words cost functions were considered for the al-
gorithms to be tested on and measure how well they perform. These will be introduced in
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
7
==PAGE:11==
Algorithm 7 SD-RLS*
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
r1 ←−1
s1 ←−1
u ←−0
repeat
Create y by flipping st bits in a copy of x uniformly.
u ←−u + 1
if F(y) > F(x) then
x ←−y
rt+1 ←−1
st+1 ←−1
u ←−0
else if F(y) > F(x) and rt = 1 then
x ←−y
if u >
(n
s
)
lnR then
if st = 1 then
if rt < n
2 then
rt+1 ←−rt+1 + 1
else
rt+1 ←−n
st+1 ←−rt+1
else
rt+1 ←−rt
st+1 ←−st −1
u ←−0
else
st+1 ←−st
rt+1 ←−rt
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
8
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:12==
Algorithm 8 SD-RLSm
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
r1 ←−1
s1 ←−1
u ←−0
B ←−∞
repeat
Create y by flipping st bits in a copy of x uniformly.
u ←−u + 1
if F(y) > F(x) then
x ←−y
rt+1 ←−st
st+1 ←−1
if r > 1 then
B ←−
u
(ln(n))(r−1)
else
B ←−∞
u ←−0
else if F(y) > F(x) and rt = 1 then
x ←−y
if u > min{B,
(n
s
)
lnR} then
if st = rt then
if rt < n
2 then
rt+1 ←−rt + 1
else
rt+1 ←−n
st+1 ←−1
else
st+1 ←−st + 1
if st = rt then
B ←−∞
u ←−0
t ←−t + 1
until stopping criterion is fulfilled
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
9
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Plot of the Jump function where n = 20 and k = 4.
the following subsections. On the figures, where there is a coordinate-system the x axis
represents the number of 1s in a bitstring while the y axis represents the fitness values.
2.6.1
Jump
In Jump [15] there is a local optimum which is reachable by a OneMax [16] increase,
which means that the number of 1s are counted and returned as a fitness value, so this
part looks like a hill. After the local optimum there is a gap and then the global optimum is
reachable, so the EA typically has to jump over this gap. Some other EAs accept worse
search points so they can approach from there. We can define the fitness value of the
jump function as that k(gap size) + the number of 1s in x if the number of 1s in x is equal or
smaller than n −m or equal to x. Otherwise it’s n minus the number of 1s in x. Then, the
function Jump{0, 1}n 7→N defined as Jump(X, k) =
{
|x|1
if |x|1 = n or |x|1 < n −k
n −|x|1
otherwise.
It can be seen at figure 2.1.
2.6.2
JumpOffset
JumpOffset was proposed in [14] to investigate if SD-RLSm would adapt it’s strength after
overcoming a Jump. The Jump part here is moved away from the end of the search point,
fixed at 3n/4. In this way, there is no new parameter introduced. This is from [2]. After
the Jump the algorithm behaves as a ONEMAX [17] string as it did before it. The global
optimum is at the end, the all 1 bitstring. Then JumpOffset{0, 1}n 7→N can be defined as
JumpOffset(x, k)
=
{
k + |x|1
if |x|1 ≤3n/4 or |x|1 ≥3n/4 + k
3n/4 + k −|x|1
otherwise.
It can be seen at figure 2.2.
2.6.3
JumpOffsetSpike
In JumpOffsetSpike [2] the global optimum is in the middle of the jump, otherwise same
as the JumpOffset
2.6.2.
The idea here is that EAs, and EDAs can easily find the
10
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Plot of the JumpOffset function where n = 20 and k = 4 and the jump starts
at 15.
global optimum this way, but majority-vote crossover functions will take super-polynomial
time to find the search point [2].
Formally, JumpOffsetSpike{0, 1}n 7→N can be de-
fined as JumpOffsetSpike(X, k) =





k + |x|1
if |x|1 ≤3n/4 or |x|1 ≥3n/4 + k
n + k + 1
if |x|1 = 3n/4 + k/2
3n/4 + k −|x|1
otherwise.
It can be seen at figure 2.3.
2.6.4
Cliff
Cliff [18] is similar to Jump as in a sense that, there is a local optimum at 2n/3 and a global
optimum at n. But, in Cliff, after 2n/3 the fitness value for the number of 1s will increase.
So, an elitist EA still has to make a jump a size of n/3, but EAs who accept worse solutions
can overcome this local optima and improve again. Formally Cliff{0, 1}n 7→N can be de-
fined
as
Cliff(X)
=
{
|x|1
if |x|1 ≤2n/3
|x|1 −n/3 + 1/2
otherwise.
It can be seen at figure 2.4.
2.6.5
MST
The minimum spanning tree(MST) is a subset of the edges, that connects the graph to-
gether without any cycles and weight of the edges are minimum. The graph is undirected.
A full graph can be seen at 2.5 while the selected edges can be seen at 2.6.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
11
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Plot of the JumpOffsetSpike function where n = 20 and k = 4 and the jump
starts at 15 and the global optimum is at 17.
Figure 2.4: Plot of the Cliff function where n = 20, the local optimum is at 13 and the
global is at 20.
12
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: A full graph with 7 nodes and 21 edges.
Figure 2.6: The selected edges in red color in the full graph represent an MST.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
13
==PAGE:17==
3
Design
To test the algorithms introduced in the previous section a framework is needed. In this
framework the aim is to be able to define algorithms and cost functions. Algorithms should
be able to work with all the cost functions so we can get data in how many iterations
they solve them. According to the aims of this thesis, there needs to be a graphical
representation of the algorithm running on the cost functions to see how it behaves during
runtime. Lastly, there needs to be a menu, to be able to select the algorithms, bit length,
etc.
3.1
Technologies
In this part, I’m going to introduce the technologies used in the program.
3.1.1
OpenGL and graphics libraries
OpenGL [19] is a cross-platform application programming interface used for rendering
2D and 3D vector graphics, first released in 1992. The API defines a set of functions, that
are usually implemented in the GPU hardware by the vendor. To call these functions I
used the OpenGL Extension Wrangler Library (GLEW) [20]. To create the window where
everything will be displayed I used Graphics Library Framework (glfw) [21]. This way glfw
detects the operating system and selects the correct method to create the window on that
operating system making the application more cross-platform compatible. In addition glfw
can handle input by mouse or keyboard, but this functionality was not used in the project.
Text rendering is also not a simple task in OpenGL as it does not provide a method for
that. Therefore, to display text I used the glText library [22]. This library can be included
as a single header file, easy to use and requires no extra files, for example bitmaps for
different fonts. A possible drawback for this is there a default font used and there is no
simple way to change this. But, since the font they use is readable this works fine.
3.1.2
CMake
CMake [23] is a build automation tool that can generate build files, which can be used to
compile the program. In our case, on Linux and Windows CMake generates a Makefile
from a CMakeLists.txt. Running the makefile with make will compile and link the program,
making it fairly easy to compile the whole program. This is described in detail at section
A.1.
3.2
Program Design and Classes
The design of the program follows the Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) [24]. We
can think of all the major building blocks for this program as objects. This also allows to
define a super class for the Evolutionary Algorithms and for the cost functions and pair
the inherited classes with each other. The program also has two modes, graphics and
non graphics mode. In the graphics mode, there is the possibility to view the algorithm on
different cost functions while it runs. The non graphics mode is better suited for testing as
it is a little bit faster and do not use extra calculations related to displaying the algorithms.
While the non graphics part is a bit faster the average number of iterations for the EAs
do not change. The program can be controlled with input on a terminal Menu where the
algorithms, and their parameters can be selected.
14
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:18==
3.2.1
Cost Functions
The classes implemented for the Cost Function part can be seen on figure 3.1. These
classes represents the Problem Instances introduced in section 2.6. We have a base
class CostFunction and all the other classes inherits from this. All the methods that the
inherited classes have to define are virtual. This is to implement polymorphism and for
the derived classes to override it. We can create a CostFunction from N which is the
length of the bitstring or from an other CostFunction. The GetMaximumFitnessValue is
used as the stopping criterion for the algorithms and is also the global optimum. The
FitnessValueToSum is used to calculate the sum of 1s from the fitness value. This is
useful when displaying the algorithm.
Creating Cliff does not require any additional information. For Jump we have to specify
the size of the gap and optionally the type of the Jump. This can be the Original, Offset
or Offset Spike. There is a CheckGapSize function to check if the gap size we selected
are correct. In the case of the normal(Original) Jump it can be the maximum size of the
bitstring or a minimum size 1. In the Offset cases it can be a maximum of N/4 as the
offset starts at 3N/4.
In the case of MST we need to specify a file which contains the info of the graph we would
like to run the MST on. These files are automatically generated during program run and
saved automatically with an .mst extension. It contains the number of nodes, number
of edges, the weight of the minimum spanning tree, and the edges with their weights.
The format of the file is the following: first line is the number of nodes, second line is the
number of edges, third line is the minimum weight for the graph, and the following lines,
are the edges, where the first and second number are the nodes that the edge connects
and third number is the weight(0-100). The algorithm used to find the minimum weight is
the Kruskal’s algorithm [25]. ReadIn is used to read in this type of file and save the data
into the variables. The VisitEdge function is used along with the ConnectedComponents
to find out how many components does the current bitstring has in terms of the underlying
graph. Calculating the fitness value is done via −((components −1)mM2 + (edgesSum −
mNodesNum+1)mM+weightSum) where the components are the number of connected
components, edgesSum is the number of edges selected by the bitstring(where the bit
is a 1), mNodesNum is the number of nodes, weightSum is the sum of the weight of the
selected edges and mM = 10000. While mM here is a constant and works fine on graphs
with small weights, depending on the edge weights this should be increased. The two
terms, other than the weightSum are used as a penalty. We can see that if the selected
edges make a spanning tree the algorithm will only calculate the weight of the edges.
This formula is designed to guide the algorithm towards connecting all nodes together
then getting rid of cycles and finally minimizing the weight of the tree. The Evolutionary
Algorithms were programmed to maximize the fitness value that is why the negation is
used. This algorithm and the objective function is from [26].
3.2.2
Evolutionary Algorithms
The classes implemented for the Evolutionary Algorithm part can be seen on figure 3.2.
These classes represents the algorithms introduced in section 2. Similar design method
was used here as in the previous section. There is a base class called EvolutionaryAl-
gorithm and all other classes derive from that. An EvolutionaryAlgorithm can be created
with a bitstring length and a CostFunction. The RunEA function is used to run the Evo-
lutionaryAlgorithm on a specific bitstring length and CostFunction, which was defined at
the creation. This function is the same for each EA as it was given in the section 2 in
pseudocode. There is also a possibility to set the delay of each iteration with the SetDelay
function. This can be useful when the algorithm run is being displayed. FlipBasedOnPo-
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
15
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: An UML view of the Cost Function classes. Getter, setter, overridden and
smaller functions are omitted for readability.
sition is an inline function that flips a specific bit and returns the change, +1 or -1. The
mStagnationDetection variable is used to track if stagnation detection has been turned on
in the run of an EA and this information is displayed when the algorithm run is visualized
and an SD algorithm is used.
Genetic Algorithms
The Genetic Algorithms here don’t share many functions, it was just easier to put them un-
der one super class. CreateMutatedOffSpringUniformCrossover will create an offspring
from the parents argument via uniform crossover.
cGA has a hypothetical population, that is specified by mMu and the frequency vector is
given by mF.
HybridGA goes through a permutation of integers (mPermutation) of all the bits position
and then sets it to 0 or 1 checking that which one is better. After 3 rounds of this, the
MajorityVoting will be applied and from the 3 parents an offspring will be created.
In the MuPlusOneGA a population(mPopulation) is used and CreateRandomBitStringFromPar-
ents will create an offspring from this population. Crossover probability is controlled by
mPc, but this is set to 1. Mutate always run on the crossover created offspring. Delete-
Worst will check the population, the parents and the newly added offspring and will delete
the one with the worst fitness. To create an initial population and later delete them, the
CreateInitialPopulation and DeletePopulation is used.
Stagnation Detection Algorithms
Stagnation detection algorithms are part of the superclass SD. Here the common vari-
ables and functions are set, mBitString is for the bitstring, mR is the R, which controls
the threshold of the mutation rate, and mEpsilon also controls R. Variable mR is set in
16
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: An UML view of the Evolutionary Algorithm classes. Getter, setter, overridden
and smaller functions are omitted for readability.
the constructor to be mN3+mEpsilon = mN4. This is in line with the algorithms described
in section 2.5. RandomizeBitString is used to initialize the mBitString with 0s and 1s
randomly.
In SASD_OnePlusLambda we create mLambda offspring with CreateOffsprings and only
keep the best one. CalculateFlipR is used to calculate if a bit should be flipped or not
based on the mutation rate r, same in SD_OnePlusOne. There are no special functions
or variables in SD_RLS, SD_RLS_STAR and SD_RLS_m.
3.2.3
Graphics
Since OpenGL is a very low level API, I had to define the shapes that I would like to create
and display. The Shape class can be seen on figure 3.3. In OpenGL it is easy to define
triangles and lines, so the Shape class is based around that. To be able to draw various
Shape classes easily, polymorphism was used here as well. The creation of the object
requires the color. It also has an abstract function that specifies the return the number of
triangles it holds. All derived classes store the vector points. In the case of the Rectangle
and Circle they store pointers to Triangle objects. A Circle is made up of 20 Triangles and
the Rectangle is made up of 2. The center of the Circle is also stored. Each point requires
3 floats, and I store the 3 points of the triangle, and 2 points for a line, where it ends.
The whole graphics part of the program can be seen on figure 3.4. There are two different
visualization modes, the CoordinateSystem is made for the Jump, and Cliff cost functions,
and the MSTVisualization is for the MST. Both of them uses the Shape class and the Text
structure that is just a simple extension for glText and contains the position of the text.
In the CoordinateSystem the constructor is defined by an EvolutionaryAlgorithm, as this
contains necessary information for the class. Based on this, the type is set, for the Coor-
dinateSystem which can be Jump or Cliff, as the EvolutionaryAlgorithm contains the cost
function. The X and Y axis layout is calculated, as the EA contains the bitstring length
N. This is done with the CreateX, CreateY and the text creating functions. The lines are
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.3: An UML view of the Shapes classes. Getter, setter, overridden and smaller
functions are omitted for readability.
created with the CreateLines function and all this is orchestrated by the CreateOnBoard-
Shapes function. Because the EA updates its bitstring quite frequently, and the fitness
value of the bitstring changes we need to redraw the circle which represents the current
state. This is done by the ModifyCircle function.
Same as in the CoordinateSystem class, in the MSTVisualization class the constructor
takes an EvolutionaryAlgorithm. Here, the class needs to handle the displaying of circles,
the line displaying, which depends if the EA has selected the line in its bitstring or has not.
Also it needs to take care of displaying the weights for the lines.
To handle the graphics calls an OpenGL class was created. In the Setup function the
CoordinateSystem or the MST mode is selected and the setter functions called. These
functions setup the window, the shaders, the texts and the buffers. After this phase, the
Draw function is called which handles the drawing of the triangles, lines and the texts
specified by the CoordinateSystem or the MSTVisualization class. In each frame, all of
this objects are redrawn. The Update function handles getting the new points for updated
circles, or checking which line should be drawn onscreen. The shutdown phase cleans
up the buffers and the allocated memory.
3.2.4
Additional Classes and Everything Working Together
To be able to select different algorithms, cost functions and the parameters for them to
test or display a Menu class is defined. This class handles these selections, while running
continuously and being able to take in commands. It also validates the inputs as for
example a jump size of 20 would be invalid on a 15 length bitstring. If an MST is selected,
with the MSTGenerator class the location of the circles on the screen, the edges and the
weight of the edges are generated and saved. This is the .mst file as mentioned in section
3.2.1. The Menu also interacts with OpenGL to display the algorithm.
The Benchmark class is the class that actually runs the EAs, and with the Schedule func-
tion it schedules them as it is able to run the parallel. The mRepeat is set to 100 so each
EA runs a 100 time. This is to get a consistent result. When testing, I felt that 30 is too little
and 200 would take too much time, so 100 was decided as a middle ground. To change
18
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: An UML view of the Graphic classes. Getter, setter, overridden and smaller
functions are omitted for readability.
it, mRepeat has to be changed in the source code. When displayed, the EA only runs
once. Also, with the SaveEachIteration function the iterations are automatically saved to
a file.
3.3
Graphical interface
The graphical interface is designed to be simple and user friendly. On the top right, the
algorithm’s name, cost function’s name, and if its a jump then its type and length is dis-
played. The number of iterations, fitness value and if the algorithm has equal or less than
30 bits, then the bitstring is visible. In the case of the SD algorithms the program also
outputs if it has been turned on. If the cost function requires the coordinate system then
the X axis is for the number of 1s in the bitstring and the Y is for the fitness value. The
red dot represents the current state of the algorithm’s bitstring and the black is the global
optimum. The line represents the possible points the algorithm can take, although only
discrete values are considered. This is visible on figure 3.6.
On the other hand, when MST is used, instead of the coordinate system the nodes, the
edges and optionally the weight of the edges are visible. Only the selected edges will be
drawn, while the others are omitted from the graph. An example of this can be seen at
figure 3.7.
3.4
Reflecting on design
The class design easily allows to extend with new algorithms or cost functions the pro-
gram, and generally adding new functionalities should be easy as the classes and their
roles are separated and not affected by changes in other classes. Using the terminal
menu instead of a graphical menu is good as it allows the program to function without
the graphical libraries and easier to port to other systems, for example it runs out of the
box on Ubuntu. So, overall I feel satisfied with the design as it achieves the scope of the
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.5: An UML view of the main classes. Getter, setter, overridden and smaller
functions are omitted for readability.
Figure 3.6: An example of the graphical interface where the coordinate system is on
display.
20
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.7: An example of the graphical interface where 7 nodes and 6 edges are on
display with their weights.
thesis project well and new functionalities can easily be added if later needed.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
21
==PAGE:25==
4
Implementation
Here, I will go over implementation details, choices and optimization. Generally, I tried
to use modern C++, specifically C++11 and C++14 and the standard library(STD). When
testing on HPC I had to downgrade the C++14 functions/types to C++11 as it didn’t have
a support for C++14. As mentioned in section 3.2 the algorithm has a graphics and non
graphics mode. This is achieved by using a macro definition GRAPHICS. For example
on figure 4.1 we can see it is enabled as the colors in the top part is more visible and that
the mFitnessValue variable will be an atomic one. The macro can be defined as 1 or 0 or
undefined in which case it becomes 0. Defined 1 means enabled and defined 0 means
disabled. Graphics is only supported on windows and the CMakeLists.txt checks and
disables graphics if it is enabled on other system. The reason for the graphics disabled
on other systems is that it wasn’t in the scope of the thesis to run on other system. But,
since OpenGL, C++ and the other libraries used are both cross compatible, it should be
quite easy to port it to an other system. Without the graphics mode I tested on Linux and it
works well. A memory test was done on Linux as well to test for any memory leaks. This
was done via valgrind. Compiling and using the program is elaborated at appendix A.
4.1
Delta Evaluation
When evaluating a bitstring’s fitness value we need to go over the whole bitstring. In
some cases it is possible to measure the change from one bitstring to an other and eval-
uate only the change. This is called delta evaluation, which is possible when using the
Jump or the Cliff cost functions as these functions fitness value depends on the number
of 1s so we can track the change and apply that. This can improve the algorithms speed
as it does not need to go over the bitstring at every fitness evaluation. This is achieved
by the GetFitnessValue function which can take the change or the bitstring. Since poly-
morphism was used, it gets abstracted when taking a CostFunction parameter that which
CostFunction it is, therefore it is not clear if we can use delta evaluation. It is possible
to create and use an id of some sort to differentiate the CostFunctions based on that,
but an other method is to use a dynamic cast. Dynamic cast will return a valid pointer
when succeeding or it will return a nullptr if not. Based on this, we can use this code
dynamic_cast<Jump*>(mCostFunction) != nullptr to check if a mCostFunction is a Jump
type.
4.2
MST Generation
As mentioned in the previous section, MST uses an .mst extension which holds the edges
and the minimum weight. The edges are generated randomly. This can be a disadvan-
Figure 4.1: The GRAPHICS macro in code, in an enabled(1) state.
22
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: An example .mst file with 3 nodes and 3 edges.
tage, for example, if selecting 200 nodes and 199 edges, the edges has to specify a
spanning tree. But to randomly generate a spanning tree has a very low chance. In case
when a generation did not yield a spanning tree I rerun the generation algorithm. The
weight are generated randomly for each edge from 0-100. An example of a file content
can be seen at figure 4.2.
This file however does not specify where to display the nodes. This is done via randomly
allocating the nodes placement, all over the screen, expect where the info screen is. This
also poses a constraint on the amount of nodes that are possible to place in the screen
as they shouldn’t be too close to each other. This is saved to a .vis file where the filename
contains the number of nodes and inside the file, in each line the x and y coordinate is
saved for each node. In the screen, the center is represented by a 0,0 coordinate, the top
right is 1,1 and the bottom left is -1,-1. This makes it easy to use different resolution for
the window, but I only considered 800x800 for simplicity. An advantage of saving these
files is that the graph will stay the same during different runs as the program checks if
there exists a file for the specified nodes and edges before generating one.
4.3
Graphics
Implementing the functions required in OpenGL is a bit tricky. There is no real debugging
so if something goes wrong the screen can just go black and you are left wondering what is
happening. For each OpenGL function you manually need to check if an error happened
or not. For this, I used a macro, GLCall, which checks each function if it returns an error
and prints out an error code and the line where it happened. This macro is from [27]. It
was much better to use this to handle errors, but sometimes I still had to resort to manually
debugging. In OpenGL 4.3 they added debug messaging [28] so that could come helpful
in the future, unfortunately my graphics driver did not support that version. An example
of GLCall in use can be seen at 4.3.
When using texts, glText required the positions in pixels, so I had to use a TranslateCoor-
dinateX and TranslateCoordinateY function to specify the pixel position for glText. glText
also has a black background on the text by default which did not look great on the white
board that I was using. Luckily, I was able to change that using a code from a github is-
sue [29]. As translating positions goes, inside the coordinate I had to place the lines and
circles correctly, for that the GetLocationXOnCoordinate and GetLocationYOnCoordinate
translate functions are used. An other position issue was displaying the weights next to
the edges. Since the edges can take any direction, I choose to create a small nominal
vector from the middle of the edge and put the text there. There is a chance that that the
edge intersects the text, but since I used low values (0-100) this was not a problem and
overall works perfectly fine.
Displaying the graphics is first done via passing vertex points into a buffer. A vertex point
contains the x,y,z coordinates, where z is set to 0 as we only use 2d graphics. Then, we
can call a draw function on these points, I used the triangles and the line draw functions as
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.3: An example drawing in the case of MST, where the different drawing modes
are used as well as the error checking macro wrapped around the functions.
everything that is displayed expect the texts were using one of these types. An example
for this can be seen at figure 4.3.
As seen, for the drawing function I had to keep track on how many triangles and lines are
going to be displayed. This is very important as otherwise it could try to use points out
of the allocated memory or draw too few objects. Since allocating the buffer is a costly
operation, I only allocated it at the beginning of the program. But then the question arises
that what size of the buffer should be as there are different number of edges that can be
displayed on an MST. So the safest choice is to allocate a buffer for all of them. Also it
is costly to call a draw function on each of the edges based on ID as it would result a lot
of different draw function overhead. Rearranging the buffer is also a possibility, but I just
decided to add a +2 to the x and y coordinate of the edge. This way it still gets drawn, but
outside of the user’s view. This can be updated fast and doesn’t result in a big overhead.
When updating the red circle in the coordinate system, all the triangle points are recalcu-
lated that are part of the circle. Then, the buffers data points that belong to the circle are
updated with these new triangle points. Since the red circle’s center x and y coordinate
on the coordinate system are determined by two different values, it could make sense to
ask both of this from the EA. The problem with this is that getting these two values are not
atomic, so we can have a fitness value not intended for the bitstring we get. This would
result the red circle not displayed on the line. We could recalculate the fitness from the
bitstring, but a faster operation is to calculate the sum of 1s from the fitness value as we
only need that. So the Jump and Cliff cost functions implement a FitnessValueToSum
function for this.
The MST needs the bitstring as that determines if the edges are displayed. Here, the
delay is fine as it does not matter as it the fitness value only being updated one frame
later as it is not noticeable. To get the bitstrings, mutexes are used so the EA does not
update the bitstring while it is being read by the graphics part. Fitness values read atomic
values, so read and write operation are atomic and there is no need for mutexes. This is
the reason, when used the GRAPHICS macro the program is slightly slower.
The colors are passed to a different buffer and has to be drawn as well. Here, it is important
to pass 3 color points for each vertex. These 3 points are the intensity of the red, green
and blue and has to be between 0 and 1, where 1 means it is displayed with full intensity.
The frames per second is also restricted to around 60, so if a frame drawing finishes in
less then 1000/60 ms it has to wait until its total will be 1000/60 ms, then the next frame
will be started.
4.4
Benchmarking
In the benchmarking, parallel running threads are used to speed up the execution of the
EAs.
The
number
of
maximum
parallel
thread
are
determined
by
the
std::thread::hardware_concurrency function. If more EAs, try to run then the maximum
the available thread, they are made to wait until one of the running EA finishes. This is
24
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:28==
also printed to the terminal as well when an EA starts execution and when finishes.
4.5
Testing
Testing was only done manually. A viable unit testing option would be to check the output
bitstring of the algorithms and see if that matches the expected one. An other option
would be stress testing. Seeing that the number of iterations is in between some limits is
a bit hard due to randomness.
The code can be found at [30].
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
25
==PAGE:29==
5
Evaluation
To run the tests I used DTU’s High Performance Computing (HPC) service, which allowed
me to run the tests around the clock and up to a very high number of iterations on a
scientific Linux computer. Each test was run a 100 times to ensure consistency.
5.1
cGA
In section 2.2 I wrote the optimal jump size to be k <
1
20ln(N) to achieve a runtime of
O(n log N). Even for k = 1, N has to be a size of about half billion, which is infeasible to
test as it requires a large memory and also, even one iteration takes 10 seconds due to
the size. But this is the known lower bound from [2] actual bound might be lower than
this. So we can test on smaller instances and see that increasing the gap the iterations
seem to grow exponentially, see figure 5.1. On the other hand we can see on figure 5.2
that cGA is doing really well on the Offset Spike Jump, and the Jump Offset is still better
than the original Jump.
5.2
Hybrid GA
In the case of Hybrid GA, it holds up that runtime is O(N) up to log N size jumps as given
in [5]. I tested it up to a very high number of Ns with the jump size equal to log N and
it can be seen that it holds on figure 5.3. Interesting to note, the time to run the Hybrid
GA does not grow with O(N). This is because Hybrid GA accesses the bits in a random
order. But when loading in data from the memory, not 1 bit is fetched but a whole block
of bits. If in the next iteration a bit is in the previous block there is no need to fetch it
again. But the chance of this decreases when the bitstring gets too large. This can be
seen on figure 5.4. While Hybrid GA seems to perform well in the original Jump, this is
not the case on other Cost Functions. On figure 5.5 we can see that both Jump Offset
and Cliff increases exponentially. Jump Offset Spike seems to increase slower than that.
The lower iteration number in the case of Cliff at 20 is because the second slope of the
cliff is a bit higher compared to 15 as there is a remainder of 2 when dividing with 3. This
is also makes the second slope longer, so there is a higher chance that random sample
will happen there.
Figure 5.1: cGA with a population of 20, N=100 with growing gap sizes.
26
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.2: cGA with a population of 20,with varying N size on different Jump types.
Figure 5.3: Hybrid GA iterations with growing N on log N Jump.
Figure 5.4: Hybrid GA time with growing N on log N Jump.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.5: Hybrid GA on different Cost Functions.
Figure 5.6: (µ + 1) GA different Jump sizes where N is 50.
5.3
(μ+1) GA
In the (µ + 1) GA the Jump’s runtime’s biggest component is O(Nk−1) [4] and we can
see that on figure 5.6 that this holds up as the runtime looks exponential.
5.4
SD algorithms
In the case of SD algorithm we can see that SASD-(1+λ) where λ = 10 performs the
worst on Jump with a gap size 2, followed by SD-(1+1) seen on figure 5.7. The SD-RLS
algorithms perform very similar, especially SD-RLS and SD-RLS* as seen on 5.8.
5.4.1
Mann-Whitney U Test
To see if they differ statistically we can do a Mann-Whitney U Test [31]. Mann-Whitney
U test are used when we want to check if two groups are statically significant from each
other. Each value has to be independently sampled and rankable. This holds in our case
as each run on an EA has no effect on the other runs. We can make a two tailed null
hypothesis that the SD-RLS and SD-RLS* is not significantly different from each other. To
calculate that this is valid I created a simple program called Utest.cpp that can be found
in the tools folder in the code. Utest first reads in the the 2x100 iterations from both .result
files. Then following the calculation described in this video [32] it calculates the Z-score.
Looking up the Z-score in the table [33] we can see if p value is bigger than 0.05, as it is
a commonly chosen threshold in these types of tests. In our case, I tested SD-RLS and
28
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.7: Different SD algorithms on Jump=2 with increasing N.
Figure 5.8: Different SD algorithms on Jump=2 with increasing N.
SD-RLS* on the N=400 benchmark, with Jump=2, same as seen on the figure 5.8. To put
it into numbers, the average iteration for SD-RLS was 91612 and for SD-RLS* 83640. The
Z-score that was calculated is -1.05. In the table this translates to p = 0.29 as we need
to use half the Z-score since it’s two tailed [34]. This 0.29 is higher than 0.05 so we can
see that there is no significant difference between SD-RLS and SD-RLS*. Comparing the
SD-RLS to SD-(1+1) we get a p value of 0.00013 which is smaller than 0.05 so there is a
significant difference between the two. This comes a no surprise as the average number
of iterations for SD-RLS and SD-(1+1) is 91612 and 329448 respectively. Between the
SD-RLSm and SD-RLS and SD-RLS* there is no significant difference.
5.5
MST
On MST I ran a comprehensive test to see how did the algorithms perform compared to
each other. The edge size was fixed to 21 and I used different node sizes. The smallest
node size was 7, in this case the algorithms had to find the minimum spanning tree in a
complete graph. The highest node size that I used is 22, in this case the graph is actually
a minimum spanning tree and the Cost Function equals to a ONEMAX. Naturally, the
algorithms performed the best on this one. In between 7 and 22, the results vary, and
some algorithms performed worse on bigger node sizes compared to smaller ones when
the node size was less or equal than 15. After 15, there is a clear improvement to be
seen. On figure 5.9 we can see the performance of all functions, but because of Hybrid
GA and cGA we cannot see the other algorithms too well, so I made a second figure 5.10
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.9: All algorithms on MST with different node size and edges are fixed to 21.
Figure 5.10: All algorithms expect cGA and Hybrid GA on MST with different node size
and edges are fixed to 21.
where they are more visible. We can see on this figure, that SD-RLSm performs the best.
This could be due to the algorithm reaching local optimum switching to a higher mutation
rate, and when that finds an improvement it will not stay long in the 1 bit mutation rate, but
will quickly go back to a mutation rate where it switches 2 bits. This 2 bit flip is actually the
necessary amount to improve the graph after a spanning tree is found as we are trading
out an edge with higher weight to an edge with lower weight. The rest of the SD algorithms
and (µ + 1) GA performs well too because of this same reason as they can adjust they
mutation rate. This is also the reason, why Hybrid GA performs the worst as it will stop
at a local optimum when creating the population and can’t improve as it only flips one bit
to check for improvements. The reason for using such a small graph size was because
even on this one the Hybrid GA took quite a long time to finish.
5.6
Jump
I did a comprehensive test on different Jump functions as well. Here, Hybrid GA also
makes the figure 5.11 a bit hard too read as it takes really long in the offset cases. The
reason for that is in the offset Hybrid GA usually gets stuck in the local optimum and can’t
use majority voting to find the global optimum efficiently. The reason that it performs better
in the offset spike case that the global optimum is in the offset so it can find that one much
easier. Without that, we can see on figure 5.12 that cGA(20) performed the best in every
30
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.11: All algorithms on Jump with fixed N size 50.
Figure 5.12: All algorithms expect Hybrid GA on Jump with fixed N size 50.
test scenario. I choose the gap size 4 in case of the offset so there will be still a size 2
gap from the local optimum to the global one.
5.7
Cliff
I did a test on Cliff as well, it can be seen on figure 5.13. Here I only sampled points that
are divisible by three, but Cliff can be run on other points as well. Hybrid GA performed
surprisingly well, this could be that there is a good chance that of the three population
get sampled on the 2/3 part and can make it too global optimum. But even though the
bitstring length is small, it takes the algorithms quite a lot of iterations to finish.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
31
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.13: All algorithms on Cliff with different N size.
32
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:36==
6
Conclusion
I created a program and with that I was able to investigate different Evolutionary Algo-
rithms on different problems and compare them to each other. Moreover, the program al-
lows to visualize how different algorithms solve the problems and can easily be extended
with new algorithms or cost functions. I was also able to see, how the different algorithms
can overcome local optimum in different cases. In the case of the regular Jump, Hybrid
GA was the most effective and in Cliff as well. On other Jump types cGA seem to perform
the best. In the case of MST the (µ + 1) GA and the SD algorithms performed well with
SD-RLSm being the best.
Future work could include for the program to be able to add benchmarking task via an
input file, opening multiple windows at the same time, creating re-sizeable windows and
using an efficient algorithm to generate graphs that has spanning trees in them.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
33
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
G.R. Harik, F.G. Lobo, and D.E. Goldberg. “The compact genetic algorithm”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 3.4 (1999), pp. 287–297. DOI: 10.
1109/4235.797971.
[2]
Carsten Witt. “On crossing fitness valleys with majority-vote crossover and estimation-
of-distribution algorithms”. In: FOGA ’21: Foundations of Genetic Algorithms XVI,
Virtual Event, Austria, September 6-8, 2021. Ed. by Steffen Finck, Michael Hellwig,
and Pietro S. Oliveto. ACM, 2021. DOI: 10.1145/3450218.3477303.
[3]
Benjamin Doerr. “A Tight Runtime Analysis for the CGA on Jump Functions: EDAs
Can Cross Fitness Valleys at No Extra Cost”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference. GECCO ’19. Prague, Czech Republic: As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 1488–1496. DOI: 10.1145/3321707.
3321747.
[4]
Duc-Cuong Dang et al. “Escaping Local Optima Using Crossover With Emergent Di-
versity”. In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 22.3 (2018), pp. 484–
497. DOI: 10.1109/TEVC.2017.2724201.
[5]
Darrell Whitley et al. “Exploration and Exploitation Without Mutation: Solving the
Jump Function in Θ(n) Time: 15th International Conference, Coimbra, Portugal,
September 8–12, 2018, Proceedings, Part II”. In: Jan. 2018, pp. 55–66. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-99259-4_5.
[6]
Amirhossein Rajabi and Carsten Witt. “Self-Adjusting Evolutionary Algorithms for
Multimodal Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. GECCO ’20. Cancún, Mexico: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2020, pp. 1314–1322. ISBN: 9781450371285. DOI: 10.1145/3377930.
3389833.
[7]
Carola Doerr and Markus Wagner. “Sensitivity of Parameter Control Mechanisms
with Respect to Their Initialization”. In: Parallel Problem Solving from Nature –
PPSN XV. Ed. by Anne Auger et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018,
pp. 360–372.
[8]
Carola Doerr et al. “Towards a Theory-Guided Benchmarking Suite for Discrete
Black-Box Optimization Heuristics: Profiling (1 + λ) EA Variants on Onemax and
Leadingones”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Con-
ference. GECCO ’18. Kyoto, Japan: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018,
pp. 951–958. DOI: 10.1145/3205455.3205621.
[9]
Mario Alejandro Hevia Fajardo. “An Empirical Evaluation of Success-Based Pa-
rameter Control Mechanisms for Evolutionary Algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. GECCO ’19. Prague, Czech
Republic: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 787–795. DOI: 10.1145/
3321707.3321858.
[10]
Anna Rodionova et al. “Offspring Population Size Matters When Comparing Evolu-
tionary Algorithms with Self-Adjusting Mutation Rates”. In: Proceedings of the Ge-
netic and Evolutionary Computation Conference. GECCO ’19. Prague, Czech Re-
public: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 855–863. DOI: 10.1145/
3321707.3321827.
[11]
Benjamin Doerr et al. “The (1+λ) Evolutionary Algorithm with Self-Adjusting Muta-
tion Rate”. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Confer-
34
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:38==
ence. GECCO ’17. Berlin, Germany: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017,
pp. 1351–1358. DOI: 10.1145/3071178.3071279.
[12]
Amirhossein Rajabi and Carsten Witt. “Stagnation Detection with Randomized Local
Search”. In: Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimization. Ed. by Chris-
tine Zarges and Sébastien Verel. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021,
pp. 152–168.
[13]
Benjamin Doerr and Carola Doerr. “The Impact of Random Initialization on the
Runtime of Randomized Search Heuristics”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Annual
Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. GECCO ’14. Vancouver,
BC, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 1375–1382. DOI:
10.1145/2576768.2598359.
[14]
Amirhossein Rajabi and Carsten Witt. “Stagnation detection in highly multimodal
fitness landscapes”. In: GECCO ’21: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Con-
ference, Lille, France, July 10-14, 2021. Ed. by Francisco Chicano and Krzysztof
Krawiec. ACM, 2021, pp. 1178–1186. DOI: 10.1145/3449639.3459336.
[15]
Stefan Droste, Thomas Jansen, and Ingo Wegener. “On the Analysis of the (1+1)
Evolutionary Algorithm”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 276 (2000), pp. 51–81.
[16]
Thomas Jansen, Kenneth A. De Jong, and Ingo Wegener. “On the Choice of the
Offspring Population Size in Evolutionary Algorithms”. In: Evolutionary Computation
13.4 (Dec. 2005), pp. 413–440. ISSN: 1063-6560. DOI: 10.1162/106365605774666921.
eprint: https://direct.mit.edu/evco/article-pdf/13/4/413/1493619/106365605774666921.
pdf.
[17]
Stefan Droste, Thomas Jansen, and Ingo Wegener. “On the analysis of the (1+1)
evolutionary algorithm”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 276.1 (2002), pp. 51–
81. ISSN: 0304-3975. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3975(01)00182-7. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397501001827.
[18]
Jens Jägersküpper and Tobias Storch. “When the Plus Strategy Outperforms the
Comma Strategyand When Not”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Foun-
dations of Computational Intelligence, FOCI 2007, part of the IEEE Symposium Se-
ries on Computational Intelligence 2007, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 1-5 April 2007.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 25–32. DOI: 10.1109/FOCI.2007.372143.
[19]
Khronos Group. OpenGL. 2022. URL: https://www.opengl.org (visited on 05/26/2022).
[20]
Milan Ikits and Marcelo Magallon. Glew. 2022. URL: http://glew.sourceforge.net
(visited on 05/26/2022).
[21]
The GLFW Development Team. GLFW. 2022. URL: https://www.glfw.org (visited
on 05/26/2022).
[22]
vallentin. glText. 2022. URL: https://github.com/vallentin/glText (visited on 05/26/2022).
[23]
Ken Martin and Bill Hoffman. CMake. 2022. URL: https://cmake.org (visited on
05/26/2022).
[24]
Robert Lafore. Object Oriented Programming in C++. 4th. USA: Sams, 2001.
[25]
Joseph B Kruskal. “On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the travel-
ing salesman problem”. In: Proceedings of the American Mathematical society 7.1
(1956), pp. 48–50.
[26]
Frank Neumann and Ingo Wegener. “Randomized local search, evolutionary algo-
rithms, and the minimum spanning tree problem”. In: Theoretical Computer Science
378.1 (2007), pp. 32–40. ISSN: 0304-3975. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2006.
11.002. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397506008589.
[27]
Yan Chernikov. Dealing with Errors in OpenGL. 2017. URL: https : / / youtu . be /
FBbPWSOQ0-w (visited on 05/31/2022).
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
35
==PAGE:39==
[28]
Khronos Group. OpenGL 4.3 Release Notes. 2012. URL: https://www.khronos.org/
opengl/wiki/History_of_OpenGL#OpenGL_4.3_.282012.29 (visited on 05/31/2022).
[29]
Ken Martin and Bill Hoffman. glTextModification. 2022. URL: https://github.com/
vallentin/glText/issues/2 (visited on 05/29/2022).
[30]
Márton Leitold. Thesis Code. 2022. URL: https://github.com/lmarti95/ThesisCode
(visited on 05/31/2022).
[31]
Nadim Nachar. “The Mann-Whitney U: A Test for Assessing Whether Two Inde-
pendent Samples Come from the Same Distribution”. In: Tutorials in Quantitative
Methods for Psychology 4 (Mar. 2008). DOI: 10.20982/tqmp.04.1.p013.
[32]
DATAtab. Mann-Whitney U Test. 2021. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
Twk6lBhBl88 (visited on 06/04/2022).
[33]
Dr. Saul McLeod. How to Use the Z-Table. 2019. URL: https://www.simplypsychology.
org/z-table.html (visited on 06/04/2022).
[34]
Georgiev G.Z. Z-score to P-value Calculator. 2022. URL: https://www.gigacalculator.
com/calculators/z-score-to-p-value-calculator.php (visited on 06/04/2022).
[35]
Yan Chernikov. Setting up OpenGL and Creating a Window in C++. 2017. URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OR4fNpBjmq8 (visited on 06/05/2022).
[36]
Yan Chernikov. Using Modern OpenGL in C++. 2017. URL: https : / / youtu . be /
H2E3yO0J7TM (visited on 06/05/2022).
[37]
Kaï Tietz. MinGW-w64. 2022. URL: https : / / www . mingw - w64 . org/ (visited on
06/05/2022).
36
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:40==
A
How To Use The Program
A.1
Compiling
To compile the program the cmake file can be used. Simply go to the build folder, enter
cmake .. to the terminal then make and the program will be compiled, and the executable
will be named ThesisCode. To add the graphics option you need to use windows as oth-
erwise the cmake won’t let you do that. It should not be too hard to port to other platforms,
just need the necessary libraries for it. To specify the graphics pass -DGRAPHICS=1. In
the case you have a graphics one compiled just run cmake again with -DGRAPHICS=0.
It is always a good idea to specify the build type, for example the release one. In cmake
you can do that with passing the -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release argument. This will
enable all optimization on the program, equivalent with gcc’s -o3 argument. In the case
of windows the cmake might produce a visual studio solution file. This is undesirable as
then in visual studio you manually have to select where the libraries are. In case you
would like to use that I recommend checking out [35] and [36]. Otherwise I recommend
to use MinGW [37], for that cmake and make works out of the box. To specify mingw,
you can pass cmake the -G ”MinGW Makefiles” argument. So to summarize, to build
with cmake on windows with graphics you should run cmake .. -G ”MinGW Makefiles”
-DGRAPHICS=1 -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release and then make. There are sepa-
rate libraries for visual studio and mingw. In glfw this is marked with the folder names in
glew, the libs for visual studio are in the lib/Release folder where as for mingw its in the
lib/Release/Win32/mingw folder.
A.2
Menu
When running the program, a menu seen on figure A.1. On the first line we can see
if the program was compiled for graphics or testing mode. We can select the algorithm
with typing the digit displayed front of it and then pressing enter. Then, if the algorithm
requires more info the program will ask for that, for example the population. Then we
can specify the bitstring length or the number of edges in case of MST. After that, we
can select the cost function. Here additional question might be asked for example for
the jump type and gap size. If all is specified, two things could happen. If the program
was compiled without graphics enabled, the program will schedule the EA and run it. If
it is compiled for graphics we are asked if we would like it displayed. A delay can be
specified which delays the algorithm by the specified milliseconds. In the case of the
MST a question will be asked if we would like to display the edge weights as well. After
all this is specified the window will be opened and the EA will run there. In the case when
there is one window open, we have to close that to open an other one. If not closed the
window open question will not pop up and the program just schedules the algorithm. To
view two windows simultaneously the program should be started twice. The program will
run up to the total number of threads of algorithms at the same time. If more specified the
program will schedule them and run them once one other algorithm is finished. Exiting can
be done by pressing 9 in the main menu. If there are algorithms are running the program
will ask you if you would like to quit or go back. The run results are saved into a .result file.
In the case of MST the program will search for the graph specification and if not found it
will generate it and save it into to the local directory. The same is done if it needs to be
displayed, but the center of the nodes are not specified yet. Input checking is done and
also usually it is made sure, that only correct values can be passed, for example in a N=10
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
37
==PAGE:41==
Figure A.1: The program’s menu.
a Jump size 12 will result the program returning invalid value. In this case a correct value
has to be entered. In the case when selecting the Cost Functions and one was selected
before and this old one is valid on the new bitstring length, it will be offered to select it,
then there is no need to specify it again. When an algorithm is finished with its run it will
also output that. An example of testing an algorithm in the program can be seen on A.2
and A.3. After selecting everything the main menu will come back and you can specify
algorithms again, even if some algorithms finished in the meanwhile. Unfortunately the
repeat cannot be specified, in the case when graphics are opened it set to 1, otherwise
100. It can be changed in the program code, in the Menu.cpp.
38
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
==PAGE:42==
Figure A.2: Using the program part 1.
Figure A.3: Using the program part 2.
Implementation and Evaluation of Evolutionary Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization
39
