==PAGE:1==
Exploring the technology and business po­
tential of a segmented 3D printing filament so­
lution
Master Thesis
DTU Entrepreneurship
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D print­
ing filament solution
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Eduard Steven Macías Uriña
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship, Diplomvej, Build­
ing 371 and 372, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months supervised by the Department of
Technology Entrepreneurship in conjunction with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of business
development and general engineering.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Euiju Jeon for his inexorable positivity, valu­
able feedback and guidance throughout the project. Also, I would like to mention
Robin van Oorschot and Ryan Michael Arlitt for the initial kick and believing in
this project. I want to point out all the support received from DTU Skylab, espe­
cially from Kristine Garde, Poul Thorbjørn Sørensen, Martin Meister and Astrid
N. Thomsen. Thanks to Jesper Damvig and Alvaro Goyanes for their time and
useful insight. Finally, I need to mention how important the support of my family
has been through the development of this thesis, especially from Maiki Ruiz and
Marta Lorente. Thank you all!
Eduard Steven Macías Uriña ­ s192679
Signature
June 24, 2022
Date
ii
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
3D printing technology allows the manufacturing of complex designs in a reason­
able amount of time and economic costs. For these reasons, its applications have
grown exponentially in the last decades. However, this surge in demand is often
accompanied by a similar growth in the amount of materials used by these de­
vices, and their consequent pollution of the environment if not handled correctly.
This dissertation focuses in the environmental impact and limitations of the current
material feeding system, the spool of filament, and proposes an alternative option:
the segmented filament system. In order to understand why the spool system is
the preferred option for the filament manufacturers, an extensive research and
literature review has been done regarding the origins and evolution of 3D printing,
and also about the interests and behaviour of the potential consumers. This last
section will be further complemented by a series of interviews to professionals
related to the 3D printing sector.
To demonstrate the viability of the proposed solution, two prototypes will be de­
signed, constructed and tested: the thermal­based will use a conventional mech­
anism to fuse the filament segments, while the electric­based one will use an
electric arc to fuse the material.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Literature Review
13
2.1
Additive Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Fused Filament Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.1
The initial patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Technology Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Technology Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Qualitative Content Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Thematic Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Reflective Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Simulation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Prototype Development
29
4.1
Thermal­Based Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
The concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
3D Design and Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Electric­Based Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Analysis and Results
43
5.1
Analysis of current technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Technology Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.1
Prototype Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Business Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Simulations and calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
57
6.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Potential Business Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Bibliography
61
A US5121329A Drawings
67
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
v
==PAGE:8==
B Main Plate Blueprint
71
C Hotend Plate Blueprint
73
D Rectangular Mould Blueprint
75
E
Cylindrical Mould Blueprint
77
F
Segmented Filament Box Render
79
G Interview Questions
80
vi
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
In the recent decade 3D printing has become more and more popular among
society and has gained broad recognition, not only from individual customers, but
also in the organizational sphere.
3D printing, more formally known as additive manufacturing (AM), permits to fab­
ricate intricate forms without extra machining compared to the traditional forms
of manufacturing. Also, due to the nature of 3D printing (that consists on adding
layers of material) this technology is extremely flexible. It does not depend on pre­
made dies like injection molding or specific tooling for each type of operation like
subtractive manufacturing. However, its main limitations are the relatively small
working area (therefore limiting the maximum size of a 3D printed part), the pro­
duction rate and surface quality [1]. For these reasons, it is widely used for rapid
prototyping (RP), but recent improvements in quality and speed allows for use in
production.
Several sectors of the industry are integrating the use of this technology in their
production chains: from the automotive and aerospace industry [2] to consumer
products [3]. This is reflected in the market growth of additive manufacturing:
the Wohlers Report 2016 estimated the AM market to be valued in $5.1 billion
[4] and the 2021 version of the document shows that this number has increased
up to $12.8 billion [5]. The later also showed that despite the pandemic, the AM
industry managed to grow 7.5% [6]. Positively, the data shows that this trend will
continue through the following decade: expecting a a compound yearly growth
rate of 21% from 2021 to 2028 [7].
There are seven families of additive manufacturing processes being the material
extrusion the most common family. The working principle of material extrusion
printers consist on pushing the solid material through a hot nozzle and then de­
positing the fused material in layers on the working area. One of the causes for
the aforementioned growth in the AM industry is the expiration of one of the initial
material extrusion 3D printing patents in 2009. This allowed the appearance of
low­cost desktop consumer versions (i.e. those selling for less than $5,000 [8])
and spread the use of consumer 3D printers.
The aforementioned patent was filed by Stratasys, Ltd.
in 1989 and laid the
groundwork for material extrusion 3D printers. The company minted the acronym
Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM™) that is widely known in the industry and lit­
erature to refer to the material extrusion technology. There is also the term Fused
Filament Fabrication (FFF) which will be used in this dissertation from now on as
it can be used synonymously and does not belong to any organization.
Stratasys was founded the same year that the patent was filed and since then it
has become one of the leading companies in the AM industry for several years
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
1
==PAGE:10==
in a row [9]. It is worth noting that the products that Stratasys manufactures are
industrial professional 3D printers. Nonetheless, both consumer and industrial
FFF 3D printers are part of the additive manufacturing market described at the
beginning of the section.
In order to illustrate the differences between the consumer 3D printers and indus­
trial 3D printers: the average selling price of consumer 3D printers in 2013 was
$1,208 compared to $90,370 for a professional­grade industrial system [10].
(a) Creality Ender 3 Pro
(b) Stratasys Fortus 450 MC
Figure 1.1: Desktop 3D printer (left) compared to industrial 3D printer (right)
Also, Desktop FFF printers are characterized by its reduced size compared to its
industrial counterpart. For example, the desktop 3D printer in fig. 1.1a is 46.5 cm
tall [11] while the industrial printer at fig. 1.1b is 198.4 cm [12]. Independently of
the type of printer (consumer or industrial), the main parts are the following ones:
• Power supply: component that transform the high voltage from the mains
to a suitable voltage for the components of the printer.
• Controller: interface that allows the user to configure and manage the
printer. Typically, the information that allows to print a physical object can
be inserted through an SD card or USB.
• Extruder: geared mechanism that pushes the modeling material through
the nozzle.
• Hotend: combination of heating element, heat sink and nozzle that fuses
the modelling material.
• Heated bed: working surface where the layers of material will be placed by
the nozzle. The temperature of the surface is adjustable in order to increase
2
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:11==
the adhesion of the printed object and decrease the probability of a failed
print.
• Servomotors: actuators used to move the hotend through the working area.
This component is characterized by its rotating precision and its ability to
hold in a specific position. This type of motor is also used in the extruder to
control the amount of material that the nozzle will output.
• Spool of filament: cylindrical structure that contains the raw material (the
filament) used by the 3D printer. The filament is wound around the spool,
whose capacity can range from 500 grams to several kilograms of usable
material. In fig. 1.2 two spools of 1 kilogram each can be observed on top
of the printer.
Figure 1.2: Components of desktop 3D Printer Prusa i3 MK3
This dissertation will focus on the component that contains the material for the
3D printer: the spool of filament. This is because, while the whole concept and
components of FFF 3D printers have been evolving through the last 30 years, the
way that the filament is loaded in the device has barely changed.
The timing to innovate in this specific part of the FFF 3D printers seems just right
because of the lack of innovation in the problem, the positive projection of the
market of 3D printers and all the advantages that innovation in the material loading
system can carry for the final user and the environment.
The implications for the environment are relevant because in the recent days it is
quite common to find consumer FFF 3D printers in offices, educational institutions
and even homes. This is translated in a global adoption of the technology and an
increased demand that makes the environmental footprint of the printing devices
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
3
==PAGE:12==
every time bigger and bigger. The clear example is the current usage of spools
that are not easily recyclable.
Nevertheless, the global adoption of consumer 3D printers has been proven to
generate value to society. Due to this accessibility to FFF 3D printers, the tech­
nology has become the base for some startups, like Limber, who develops af­
fordable FFF prosthesis [13]. The technology is so widely used that researchers
have become concerned about particle emissions during printing and its effects
on health. Papers and articles have been published in order to raise awareness
on the importance of ventilation while 3D printing [14].
The popularity of low­cost FFF desktop 3D printers and the growth of the maker
culture are reflected on the sales of these devices. In 2019, Josef Průša (founder
of Prusa Research) announced that the company sold more than 130,000 con­
sumer printers [15]. According to Forbes Czech Republic, in 2016 this company
alone had a 10% of the market share [16] and was valued in €236 millions [17].
The data shows that 3D printing is a highly innovative and growing market that
encourages developers and entrepreneurs to improve the technology and find
new disruptive applications. That is the case of this dissertation which aims to
analyze the current material loading system of FFF printers and wants to propose
an alternative method. This proposal will be backed up by research, calculations
and interviews in order to determine the feasibility of the proposition.
In the following sections an introduction to the problem that this dissertation is
trying to tackle will be given and also the research questions will be defined.
1.2
Problem statement
The spool of filament is a natural and simple solution to the issue of how to trans­
port the raw material from the filament factory to the final user. When the filament
is produced, there is an industrial extrusion line that melts pellets with the desired
material and coloring. An endless thread extrudes the molten mix and generates
a continuous stream of material, then it is cooled down and rolled in the plastic
spool [18] as it can be seen in fig. 1.3. The working principle is similar to the
hotend of FFF 3D printers but in a much larger scale and with a different goal.
This explains the popularity of the spool system: its manufacturing is relatively
easy and efficient. A typical spool of 1 Kg of filament can contain more than 300
meters of continuous filament. This is the strongest point of filament spools, its
simplicity and reliability. It is hard to imagine how a single stream of rolled plastic
can fail but in reality there are some issues attached to this system. If the user
is not extremely careful while loading and unloading the spool of filament in the
3D printer, the filament can tangle itself. This can be imperceptible for the user
but it is likely that the next time that the spool of filament is used, the print will
fail. Moreover, the knot can appear in one of the inner loops of filament in the
spool therefore the print will not fail at the very beginning. This is a common and
frustrating problem among desktop 3D printer users [19], since it is translated
into material and time loss but in the worst cases can damage components of
the 3D printer itself: like breaking the support where the filament is placed or
4
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Simple illustration of a extrusion line [18].
overloading the extruder. Another problem that filament consumers face is the
humidity absorbed by the material. This lowers the quality of the prints and the
adhesion to the build plate; therefore increasing the print fail ratio.
This issues have been addressed by some of the professional­grade 3D printers
where the spool is placed inside cartridges or canisters to preserve the properties
of the material and facilitate the process of changing spools of filament.
Figure 1.4: Canister used by the Stratasys Fortus.
However, to the knowledge of this dissertation, no organization has innovated
further than the typical cylindrical structure where the filament is wound around.
This leads to environmental challenges like the problem of disposing the spools
correctly or the inefficient usage of the shipping space. Also, it is important to
mention that the cost of the disposable spool is small but not negligible ($0.5­$2
per spool) when it is multiplied by hundreds of thousands of units.
The inefficient use of the space is due to fitting a cylindrical structure inside a
rectangular package. The space in the corners is completely lost. On the other
hand, the core of the spool needs to be empty in order to place the spool in a
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
5
==PAGE:14==
support and allow its free rotation. Moreover, in order to reduce the deformation
of the strand, extra space is allocated in the core of the spool: increasing even
more the space inefficiencies. This can be appreciated in figure fig. 1.5 where the
wasted space is marked with a red transparency. Calculations about the lost of
space will be exposed in the analysis section of this document.
Figure 1.5: Comparison between 2.3Kg and 1Kg filament spool from RS Pro. Due
to the perspective of each image the scale might be altered. Left spool diameter:
30cm, Right spool diameter: 20cm.
Regarding the environmental challenges, it is easy to find desktop 3D printer users
on the Internet that are concerned about what to do with the spools of filament
once it has served its purpose [20, 21] or which ones are the environmentally
friendly brands of 3D printing filament [22]. The concern of the users arrive to the
point that they are willing to invest their time and skills into creating a solution to
reuse the spools of filament and give them a second life. A quick search on a pop­
ular repository of 3D models [23] reveals the different designs that the community
proposes to use the spools as the base structure for storage units [24, 25, 26, 27]
as it can be observed in fig. 1.6.
Another case that exposes the concern of the users to give a second life to the
inert plastic spools is the project launched at Kickstarter by Digital Taxidermy, Ltd.
[28]. This company based in Suffolk, UK sells digital 3D models to attach them
to the plastic spools and create figures for role games that can be 3D printed and
painted by the customer.
The concern of the users is understandable, the spools are solid pieces of plas­
tic that occupy a decent amount of space and weight around 200g [29] for the
1Kg version a more than 660g for the 2.2Kg format. Therefore, the average 3D
printing user has three main options: try to give the spool a second life like in the
aforementioned scenarios, try to recycle the spools or directly throw them to the
trash.
If the user decides to recycle the spool they may face a wishcycling situation.
Heiges and O’Neill defined the term with the following words: ”Wishcycling is
putting something in the recycling bin and hoping it will be recycled, even if there
6
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:15==
(a) Filament spool organizer
(b) Stackable Spool Drawer
(c) Vertical Filament Spool Parts Drawer
(d) Modular Filament Spool Drawer
Figure 1.6: Selection of four projects from members of the Thingiverse community
that designed 3D models to give a second life to the used spools. Keywords during
the search: Filament Spool Organizer
is little evidence to confirm this assumption” [30]. Luke Goodman, Youtuber and
Entrepreneur with more than 100,000 subscribers in the platform stated a similar
issue in his video ”3D Printing Has a Problem…” [31]. He is the founder of Out
Of Darts, LLC that relies on FFF printers for its production and owns a 3D printing
farm of more than 100 printers. Quoting his words: ”The problem with the spools
is that most of them are either not stamped or marked at all for recycling. Even
with an identifier of what polymer went into making the plastic [..], I have called
around recycling facilities here, there is nowhere that would take these in the US. I
could mail them back to the company but the carbon footprint of sending pallets of
spools back, all the way across country does not really make sense either; it is not
economical and ultimately does not solve the problem. The plain fact is that, un­
less you are in a unique situation on the country (nearby a filament manufacturer
facility) these spools are not recyclable.”
The solution that Goodman found for his business was collaborating with Pro­
topasta, Inc. Since both companies are located closely to each other, it is pos­
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
7
==PAGE:16==
sible for Goodman to bring back the packaging and the cardboard spools from
Protopasta until they reach end of life. In the words of Goodman: ”I want to com­
mend them (Protopasta) for sticking with these cardboard spools. Even though
they make a premium product, putting it in a cardboard spool, I think is a really
responsible thing to do”.
Like Goodman, many other people and organizations are taking actions to be
more sustainable and reduce the plastic waste. In the recent years a small por­
tion of the filament manufacturers have been trying to mitigate the environmental
impact of the spools. As early as 2016, the aforementioned filament producer
Protopasta was designing, iterating and manufacturing cardboard spools in order
to reduce the plastic waste [32] and guarantee truly recyclable spools. Recently,
brands like Polymaker, LLC and Overture 3D Technologies, LLC shifted to card­
board spools that innovate even further by using a reinforced type of cardboard
[33]. This is meant to address some the issues that users have had with more
fragile cardboard spools.
(a) Protopasta cardboard spool
(b) Polymaker reinforced cardboard spool
Figure 1.7: Comparison between available cardboard spool options in the market
However, this only reduces the environmental impact (the space inefficiency re­
mains the same) and it is not an attractive solution to some manufactures. It is
cheaper and faster to fabricate injection­moulded spools than hand glued card­
board spools [31]. In other words, nowadays the amount of manufacturers that
produce 3D printing filament in cardboard spools is a minority.
Due to reports like the one published by McKinsey in 2019, the general public
has become more concerned about plastic waste. The document showed some
alarming numbers about plastic waste in the world and specifically, in Denmark.
8
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.8: World plastic waste distribution in 2016 by McKinsey [34]
Compared to the global numbers (figure 1.8), it catches the eye the low percentage
of landfilled plastic in Denmark (figure 1.9). However, the percentage of plastic
exported for recycling is more than twice the amount plastic actually recycled.
The idea of exporting plastic for recycling leads to controversy, since it has been
proved several times that some of the countries that accept this plastic cannot
even deal with their own waste and it ends up landfilled or incinerated [35, 36].
Lastly, it can be observed that the percentage of incinerated plastic in Denmark is
more than double compared to the global numbers.
Figure 1.9: Plastic waste distribution in Denmark published by McKinsey [34]
This entrepreneurial thesis will explore the idea of switching from the current cylin­
drical spool system to a segmented filament concept.
The segmented filament approach consists on producing the filament in straight
segments of a fixed length. The filament producer would package these segments
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
9
==PAGE:18==
in a regular box but compared to the filament spool almost the totality of the ship­
ping space would be used. Once the filament arrives to the final user, the filament
strands would be placed in a device similar to the described in fig. 1.10. The fil­
aments would be grabbed individually by a loader mechanism and the machine
would join several strands to generate a continuous stream of filament. Finally, the
constant stream would be used by the end user’s 3D printer. It is worth mentioning
that this machine aims to be transparent to the current customer 3D printers and
that I would completely replace the spool of filament.
Figure 1.10: Diagram that represents the architecture of a possible implementa­
tion of a finished solution.
The aforementioned workflow would optimize the transport of the material (and
therefore reduce its carbon footprint), substantially reduce the volume of the pack­
aging and potentially save costs to the filament manufacturer since more product
can be shipped in the same space and the cost of the spool is completely removed.
1.3
Research questions
This thesis attempts to explore the state and the evolution of how material is
loaded in FFF 3D printers and aims to investigate if the proposed solution is fea­
sible. Therefore, the following questions will be addressed throughout the study.
• Research Question 1: How did the filament spool solutions for the FFF 3D
printers evolve over time and what are their limitations?
• Research Question 2: Is a segmented filament approach technically fea­
sible and better than the spool of filament?
• Research Question 3: What is the business potential of the segmented
filament approach?
In order to give an answer to these questions secondary data, simulations, reflec­
tions and a series of interviews with relevant professionals directly related with
the industry and the technology will be analyzed and discussed. The interviews
10 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:19==
will also serve as a media to spot relevant pain points in the current solution and
identify potential end users.
The final goal of this dissertation is to broaden the literature regarding the mate­
rial loading system in FFF 3D printers and serve as a precedent of the potential
impact of updating the current filament loading solution with more sustainable al­
ternatives.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 11
==PAGE:20==
12 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:21==
2
Literature Review
In the following section diverse literature will be reviewed in order to highlight
relevant studies and information for this dissertation. Starting with the literature
regarding additive manufacturing that will show the variety of technologies that
form the AM family. Then, the literature will be focused in the material extrusion
class that is the one that directly concerns this thesis. Once the basics of material
extrusion 3D printing are explained, the initial patent that defined the groundwork
for this technology, and that at the time of its expiration motivated the market
growth of the technology will be exposed. This is also interesting because that is
the first reference of the spool of filament regarding 3D printing.
Finally, the topic of technology evolution and technology adoption will be pre­
sented. The relevance of this topics reside in correctly placing the spool of fil­
ament and the segmented filament approach in terms of shipping performance
and also to be familiarized with the adoption of sustainable innovations due to
the environmental goals of the segmented filament approach. This literature will
be also helpful to identify and classify potential customers and to evaluate their
motivations when purchasing sustainable innovations.
2.1
Additive Manufacturing
Originally, at the beginnings of 3D printing, when it was exclusively used by the
industry it was known as Rapid Prototyping (RP). This is described as the capacity
of creating models of a prototype from a digital representation that serve as a
base for subsequent models that eventually will derive in a final product. This
means that the prototype can be tested in several ways before investing in mass
production techniques.
The benefits of this workflow are the potential identification of issues before launch­
ing production and all the savings in resources derived from avoiding these issues
in such early stages of a project. One example of rapid prototyping in the indus­
try is the design and posterior 3D printing of non­edible potato chips by PepsiCo
[37]. This allowed the company to experiment with different shapes and receive
feedback from customers before manufacturing the final product.
Since the first patent related to 3D printing in 1979 [38] and the first commercial­
ization of 3D printing machines in 1987 [39], the technology and its applications
have evolved further than just prototyping.
The improvements in speed and quality closed the gap between the prototypes
and the final products, and nowadays these machines are used in production
[40]. For this reason, the term rapid prototyping does not reflect anymore the
recent applications of the technology and it also ignores the fact that all these
technologies use an additive approach.
In 2009 the Technical Committee within ASTM International adopted the term ad­
ditive manufacturing that refers to a process by which digital 3D design data is
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 13
==PAGE:22==
used to build up a component in layers by depositing material [41]. Also, the
same organization published a standard terminology that defines seven different
families of additive manufacturing [42].
Table 2.1: Additive Manufacturing Process Categories defined by ASTM [42] and
alternative names. Refer to fig. 2.2 for visual examples
ASTM Category Name
Alternative Name
Binder Jetting (fig. 2.2a)
3D Printing (3DP™)
Directed Energy Deposition (DED) (fig. 2.2b)
Laser Metal Deposition (LMD)
Material Extrusion (fig. 2.2c)
Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM™)
Material Jetting (fig. 2.2d)
Multi­Jet Modeling (MJM)
Powder Bed Fusion (PBF) (fig. 2.2e)
Selective Laser Sintering (SLS™)
Sheet Lamination (fig. 2.2f)
Laminated Object Manufacture (LOM)
Vat Photopolymerization (fig. 2.2g)
Stereolithography Apparatus (SLA™)
As it can be observed from table 2.1 some of the common names used to refer
to each category are trademarks. However, these protected terms are often used
in media and academic publications. When possible, this document will prioritize
the use of the unprotected term Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF) before the reg­
istered term Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM™) since they are synonyms and
the first is not owned by any company.
Each of the families have a different working principle but all of them end up adding
layers of material in order to create the final object. Here is a brief description of
how each of them works:
• Binder Jetting: liquid bonding agents are selectively applied to thin layers
of powdered material. After applying the binding agent, the working sur­
face is lowered and a new layer of powder will be applied, then the cycle is
repeated. The final result can be seen in fig. 2.2a, when the operator lifts
the working surface the powder without the bonding agent falls apart and
reveals the final objects. In the powder based systems the leftover material
can be recycled in the next print.
• Directed Energy Deposition: powder or wire is fed into a laser or elec­
tron beam and therefore melting the material as shown in fig. 2.2b. This is
essentially a form of automated build­up welding.
• Material Extrusion: solid material is extruded and melted through a nozzle
and and while it is fused it is placed over the build plate in layers. In fig. 2.2c
can be seen how an object with orange polymer is being materialized on top
of a blue build plate.
• Material Jetting: droplets of material are deposited layer by layer to make
parts. If the material is photosensitive it can be cured with UV light. In
fig. 2.2d, a material jetting 3D printer is manufacturing phone cases in dif­
ferent materials. It can be appreciated how the recently sprayed material is
being cured.
14 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:23==
• Power Bed Fusion: the main difference with binder jetting is that the pow­
dered materials are selectively consolidated using a heat source such as a
laser or electron beam instead of a binding agent. A series of metallic parts
are being produced in fig. 2.2e.
• Sheet Lamination: sheets of material are laminated and then stacked to
form an object. fig. 2.2f shows a demo object where different metallic mate­
rials have been used.
• Vat Photopolymerization: a vat of liquid photosensitive resin is cured through
selective exposure to UV light or laser. A layer of a resin figure is being cured
in fig. 2.2g.
From the 7 families of additive manufacturing, the technologies that have reached
consumer versions of the process are the material extrusion and vat photopoly­
merization technologies. Nowadays it is possible to purchase desktop material
extrusion and vat photopolymerization printers for less than $500. While resin
manufacturers use an space efficient way to transport the resin (plastic bottles),
that is not the case for filament manufacturers (spools). Also, despite the better
results for SLA prints (see fig. 2.1), FFF printers are the most adopted due to the
ease of working with a solid polymer material compared to a toxic liquid prod­
uct. These are the reasons for the selection of FFF printers for this project: lack
of innovation and efficiency in the material loading system and the fact that the
technology has been widely adopted by consumers globally.
Figure 2.1: Comparison of desktop FFF print (left) vs desktop SLA (right)
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Binder Jetting
(b) Direct Energy Deposition
(c) Material Extrusion
(d) Material Jetting
(e) Powder Bed Fusion
(f) Sheet Lamination
(g) Vat Photopolymerization
Figure 2.2: Additive manufacturing families
16 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Fused Filament Fabrication
In 1989, Scott Crump, founder of Stratasys filed a patent application that defined
the base of FFF (named FDM by the company) [43]. Since then, Stratasys con­
tinued their growth and innovation up to the point that the company has sold more
FDM machines than any other AM machine type in the world [44].
Figure 2.3: FDM Diagram by Ricoh Europe [45]
In the ASMT standard [42], the material extrusion process is defined as an ad­
ditive manufacturing process in which material is selectively dispensed through
a nozzle or orifice. In order to do so, the material is dragged through a traction
mechanism (extruder) and it is pushed into a hot chamber where the heated noz­
zle is allocated.
The high temperature in the nozzle and the pressure created by the extruder,
liquefies the strand of material. The molten material is placed onto a build plate
in a two­dimensional fashion. As it can be observed on fig. 2.3, by placing these
2D layers one on top of each other, the object is materialized.
Basic FFF 3D printers use the model material to create support structures when
the printing angle is too steep. However, more complex 3D printers use two inde­
pendent nozzles to print both model material and support material. The key fea­
ture of the support material is that it can be removed from the actual model easier
than support structures made out of model material. This leads to improvements
in the quality of the final print but also increases the cost of the piece due to the
extra material needed and the post processing steps.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 17
==PAGE:26==
2.2.1
The initial patent
The patent filed by Stratasys in 1989 was granted in 1992 [43]. In this application
both concepts of reel and rod are mentioned. Quoting directly from the patent:
”The article­forming material is preferably supplied to the dispensing head in the
form of a flexible strand of solid material from a supply source, such as a reel.
A rod of solid material may also be used as the material­supply medium on the
dispensing head.”
(a) Supply rod (46)
(b) Supply reel (114) and flexible strand (110)
Figure 2.4: Portion of the drawings in the patent US5121329A
The complete drawings of the patent can be found in appendix A. It is interesting
to find in the patent two versions of the same concept. The first version, depicted
on fig. 2.4a, consists of a single material rod that is pushed using a ratchet mecha­
nism. On the other hand, fig. 2.4b, shows a motor­driven roller mechanism that is
used to illustrate a prototype where the material can be withdrawn from a supply
reel. The latter is similar to the system being used nowadays, where the roller
mechanism is a geared extruder.
The only academic reference found regarding the usage of supply rods is an article
published by the University of Bayreuth in Germany where the concept of filament
rods was used for the experimentation with new materials for FFF printers [46].
The group mixed a combination of different types of pellets in order to create the
material they wanted to experiment with. The mix is injection moulded into a Teflon
tube to precisely preserve the form and dimensions of the rod.
The advantage of this proposed method is that in order to experiment with new
materials for FFF, there is no need to set up a continuous filament extrusion line.
This leads to savings in time and material since the amount of material required
for this kind of filament extrusion system is between 1 and 5 kilograms. Despite
using the concept of rods of filament, a regular FFF printer was used.
18 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Technology Evolution
In previous sections, the families of AM and the background of the wide adoption
of FFF printers have been presented. In the following subsections the technology
evolution and adoption literature will be discussed.
Foster (1985) elaborates about the concept of technological limit and technolog­
ical potential [47]. While the technological limit is defined by the laws of nature,
there are practical limits established by the state of the art of the technology. For
example, there is a physical limit to the miniaturization of transistors. However,
this miniaturization started far away from the limit and organically has been clos­
ing the gap over the years [48]. Therefore, in the words of Foster, the goal of
the research and development department is ”to advance toward the limit — both
practical and theoretical — of a particular technology”.
The difference between the technological limit and the state of the art is called
technical potential. However, many companies do not understand where the limits
of their technologies are. Moreover, identifying these limits can be a extremely
difficult task but the reward can be exceptionally fruitful. It is important to take
these limits into account since they are key indicators to properly invest efforts
in research and development. The closer the state of the art is to the technical
limit (low technical potential), the lower the returns from R&D will be. On the
other hand, if the technical potential is high, the technology is expected to be a
paramount element in the strategy of the business.
Figure 2.5: Foster’s S­curve (1985)
The S­curve in fig. 2.5 illustrates how at the birth of a technology it requires a con­
siderably amount of effort to develop a solution that provides some performance.
After surpassing this initial barrier, the relation between effort and performance be­
comes more linear leading to great improvements with the same amount of effort.
Finally, the closer the technology is to its technical limit, the flatter the performance
curve becomes.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 19
==PAGE:28==
Detecting a technological discontinuity from the perspective of an established firm
is an intricate job since they have more to lose with the introduction of a new risky
technology, while a newcomer has little to lose compared to the potential gains.
Therefore, a key aspect to survive to the appearance of discontinuities is ”the
ability to make smooth and timely transitions to new technologies with superior
performance improvement potential”.
In 1990, Philip Anderson and Michael L. Tushman published Technological Dis­
continuities and Dominant Designs, a research that proposed a cyclical and evolu­
tionary model of technology change [49]. The publication introduces the following
terminology:
• Technological discontinuities: innovations that dramatically reduce the
cost or increase the quality by a significant amount and does so by chang­
ing the product or process design, as opposed to merely scaling existing
solutions. As stated in the study ”A discontinuity not only moves the state of
the art; it also represents a new way of making something or a new funda­
mental product architecture.” A clear example used in the document is the
comparison between vacuum tubes and transistors.
• Era of ferment: a period triggered by the appearance of a technological dis­
continuity. During this period, different variations of the original discontinuity
competed to become the single dominant design of the new technology.
• Dominant design: technology that achieves a majority of the market and
closes the era of ferment and inaugurates the era of incremental change.
A dominant design is defined in the document as ”a single configuration
or narrow range of configurations that accounted for over 50 percent of new
product sales or new process installations and maintained a 50­percent mar­
ket share for at least four years”. The appearance of a dominant design also
means the end of the uncertainty that characterized the ferment period. The
older technology vanishes in silence after this point.
• Era of incremental change: period triggered by the appearance of a dom­
inant design and broken by the next technological discontinuity. During this
period, the dominant configuration evolves and it is preserved due to incre­
mental improvements that slowly elaborate a new standard.
20 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.6: Evolutionary technology cycle defined by Anderson and Tushman [49]
The key punctuating events in the evolutionary model are the appearance of tech­
nological discontinuities and the establishment of dominant designs (vertically
marked in fig. 2.6). It is important to stress that the appearance of a new techno­
logical discontinuity re­initiates a new cycle of variation, selection, and retention.
Another interesting point is the hypothesis that states that ”A technological dis­
continuity will not itself become a dominant design.” This is due to the technology
variation and the competition experienced by the technological discontinuity dur­
ing the period of ferment. Despite being the first­mover of the advantages asso­
ciated to the new technology, it is very likely that the original technology will find
cost reductions and improvements before becoming a dominant design.
There is a key difference between technological discontinuities and dominant de­
signs. The appearance of a technological breakthrough can be seen in a clear
deterministic way: if the new technology improves the current dominant design
by an order of magnitude it can be considered a technological discontinuity. How­
ever, the establishment of a dominant design is not that deterministic; the best
solution may not become the standard in the industry. Anderson and Tushman
conclude that actions of individuals, organization and networks of organization
shape dominant designs.
The authors also elaborated the hypothesis that ”A dominant design will not be
located on the frontier of technical performance at the time it becomes dominant”,
instead it lies behind the industry performance frontier. This is argued due to the
fact that ”state­of­the­art designs typically achieve a superior performance through
experimental, risky advances that may be too unreliable and expensive for the
majority of adopters”. As mentioned above, since dominant designs reflect a set
of technical, social and political constrains, the authors expect at least one rival
that is better than the dominant design in purely technical terms.
The same authors found in 1986 that the evolution of technological discontinuities
depend on whether the innovation enhances or destroys the existing competence
[50]. When organizations use their existing know­how to adopt an innovation they
are more keen to support variants that survive the fierce competition during the era
of ferment. The opposite scenario is when a company must abandon their existing
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 21
==PAGE:30==
platform and develop new knowledge, they will defend their aged technology and
stay behind new adopters, that are not bound to the old regime.
Tushman and Anderson (1986) found that newcomers pioneer competence­destroying
innovations [50]. The results of the same authors in 1990 indicate that the domi­
nant designs that follow the aforementioned breakthroughs are initiated by a mix­
ture of newcomers and stabilised firms. Therefore, they conclude that the process
of setting industry standards may require a combination of new thinking to initiate
the creative destruction that renders the current regime obsolete and institutional
experience provided by the established firms that contribute to the creation of
technical order after the ferment period.
The authors also discuss in which scenarios a dominant design may not emerge.
They argue that ”because dominant designs emerge out of demand­driven com­
petition between alternative technological orders, if either demand is low or tech­
nological competition is stunted or cut short, no industry standards will emerge for
a given technological breakthrough”. They refer to the book written by Houndshell
in 1984 [51] to argue that dominant designs might not evolve in product classes
with either limited demand or demand for custom made products.
Finally, the study exposes that dominant designs and technological discontinu­
ities are challenging and strategic choices for institutions. Even if technological
breakthroughs are unpredictable events, firms must develop the expertise to ei­
ther create these discontinuities or to respond quickly to their appearance. This
goes in line with the aforementioned research conducted by Foster in 1985 [47]. A
lack of adaptability to this type of changes can be translated into a lose of market
share, resources or the company’s independence.
2.4
Technology Adoption
The literature regarding the adoption of 3D printing is important to visualize the
potential of the market and its future. This is helpful to determine the viability of
the proposed solution; if the market is insufficient that should be a red flag for the
majority of businesses [52].
On the other hand, it is also important to review the literature regarding the adop­
tion of sustainable innovations since one of the main advantages of the segmented
filament approach is its environmental friendliness.
It is worth noting, that the majority of the literature in both areas has the same
point in common: the literature, in either the field of adoption of 3d printing or
the adoption of sustainable innovations, is quite limited and encourages further
studies.
The most commonly discussed models in the technology adoption research are
the following ones [53]:
• Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) [54]: predicts human behavior prior to
an action.
• Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [55]: predicts the acceptability of a
technology among users.
22 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:31==
• Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) [56]: ex­
plains user intention to use a technology.
• Technology­Organization­Environment (TOE) [53]: examines the influence
of a firm’s context on technology adoption.
• Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) [57]: analyzes how, why and at what rate new
ideas/technology spread among society.
• Institutional Theory (IT) [58]: examines how organizational behavior/action
is influenced by isomorphic pressures.
A literature review conducted by Ukobitz (2020) [53] mentioned that decision drivers
and benefits of 3D printing for individual customers have been widely studied.
However, the organizational adoption of 3D printing remains mostly unexplored.
Despite this topic gaining scientific interest from 2015 onwards, the author con­
cludes that the field is still in its infancy. In the same study it is stated that the most
commonly applied adoption theory across the underlying body of research was the
DOI, but it also mentions that the majority of studies combined the diffusion of an
innovation model with at least one more additional model.
In 1962, Everett Rogers published his book Diffusion of Innovations where he
classified consumers in groups depending on their demographic and psycholog­
ical behaviour. Nowadays, this model is also know as the Technology Adoption
Life Cycle. This model is characterized because of its normal distribution (bell
curve shape) giving to each group a portion of the market.
Figure 2.7: Rogers’ technology adoption life cycle
According to Rogers, customers can fall in one of the following adopter groups:
• Innovators: also know as technology enthusiasts are the group with most
chances of investing in an innovation. The group actively looks for new
products because technology plays a huge role in their life or business. In­
novators is the group that is most permissive with the performance of the
product and that is reflected in the price that they are willing to pay. This
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 23
==PAGE:32==
group is a minority in the distribution of consumers but it is paramount win­
ning them since they will serve as a reference for future customers and also
they can help to develop a more mature product.
• Early Adopters: also know as visionaries are the group that most likely will
buy a product early in its development. They are willing to take high risks
and to pay more than any other group since they are looking for a break­
through that can improve significantly their business or life before anyone
else. These early adopters serve as a reference for the next group.
• Early Majority: also known as the pragmatists, this group is the first half of
the mainstream market. This group looks for a well­established reference
before investing in a product. The size of this segment is approximately
34% of the market and winning this group is vital for the growth and the
profitability of the business.
• Late Majority: also known as the conservatives, this group is as big as the
early majority but they are reluctant to change. The conservatives prefer
to wait until something has become an established standard and bet their
money only at the end of the technology life cycle. In order to win the late
majority is important to become a market leader.
• Laggards: also know as the skeptics. This group is as big as the innovators
and the visionaries together: it represents approximately 16% of the market.
They are completely disinclined towards technological change, this is why
this group is often labeled as not worth pursuing. However, their criticism
could be used to improve the product.
In 1991, Geoffrey A. Moore published his book Crossing the Chasm [59] where
he adapts the adoption life cycle to illustrate the metaphor of the chasm. As it
can be seen in figure fig. 2.8, there is a gap between the early market and the the
mainstream market: the chasm.
This chasm is created due to the fact that adopters prefer to use individuals of
their own group as references than individuals from the group at their left. This
effect is specially magnified between visionaries and pragmatists. Therefore, it is
paramount for a successful business to effectively cross the chasm,. In order to
do so, Moore suggests to target a very specific market within the Early Majority.
The uppermost priority for the company should be to secure a beachhead in the
mainstream market to create a solid base of pragmatist consumers that serve as
a reference inside the early majority. Once the company becomes the market
leader in that beachhead, it should move to the next beachhead market. Finally,
the company would have a positive reputation within different segments of the
Early Majority and therefore it would have crossed the chasm successfully.
24 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.8: Moore’s chasm model
Its is also important to review literature regarding the adoption of sustainable in­
novations due to the environmental relevance of the proposed solution: the seg­
mented filament system. This literature is centered in the adoption of electric cars
and in­house renewable energies. However, the concepts described can be ap­
plied to the adoption of the segmented filament approach and also is useful to
identify the motivations of the subjects in the interviews.
In 2014, Noppers, Ernst H., et al. published the study ”The adoption of sustain­
able innovations: Driven by symbolic and environmental motives”[60]. This paper
introduces the concepts of instrumental, symbolic and environmental attributes of
a sustainable innovation.
• Instrumental attributes: reflect the functional outcomes of the ownership
and use of a sustainable innovation. For example when purchasing a new
car, instrumental attributes are the fuel efficiency or the number of seats.
• Environmental attributes: reflect the outcomes of the ownership and use
of a sustainable innovation for the environment.
• Symbolic attributes: reflect the outcomes of the ownership and use of the
sustainable innovation for one’s identity and social status.
The study concludes that the adoption of sustainable innovations depends on the
evaluation of instrumental, environmental and symbolic attributes of such innova­
tions. However, it is mainly driven by the evaluation of its environmental attributes,
suggesting that people engage in pro­environmental actions because they aim to
benefit the environment.
Their results also suggest that symbolic attributes were important for adopting
sustainable innovations. If people believe that an innovation has a positive im­
pact in their image and social status, the more likely they are to adopt the inno­
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 25
==PAGE:34==
vation. When the participants were asked indirectly about the impact of symbolic
attributes in their purchases, it shows as an important predictor for the adoption.
However, when asked directly the participants indicated that these symbolic at­
tributes would not be important for them when considering the adoption of sus­
tainable innovations. In word of the researchers ”It seems that people do not
recognize the true causes of their behaviour”.
The researchers conclude from their results that ”having the highest standard of
instrumental attributes may be less important for the adoption of sustainable inno­
vations than it is often assumed, and that environmental and symbolic attributes
are important as well, or even more important to enhance the adoption of sustain­
able innovations”.
26 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:35==
3
Methodology
3.1
Qualitative Content Analysis Method
A qualitative content analysis has been carried out to map the evolution of the
filament spool. This method has been used because it is one of the most common
and simple qualitative data analysis techniques. By checking different sources,
the idea is to figure out if there is a pattern or evolution for the spool of filament
through the latest decades. From studying the original patent that defined the
groundwork for material extrusion 3D printing, to reading media articles and 3D
printing users’ posts on forums and social media.
3.2
Thematic Analysis Method
Thematic analysis is used to interpret the interviews that have been carried out
for this project. The interviews have the goals of understanding the pain points
of the interviewed subjects, identify potential end­users and market segment, and
finally evaluate the market potential.
Due to the time constrained nature of the thesis and as suggested by Aulet in Dis­
ciplined Entrepreneurship [52], the respondents were selected because of their
professional relationship with 3D printing but also because of its geographical
proximity and availability. Because of this, the sample of interviews is quite lim­
ited and the results cannot be generalized. However, the information and insight
gathered during the interviews have been paramount for the development of the
project.
On average, the interviews took around 45 minutes and the length of the transcript
was always less than 2 pages (including questions and notes).
Before the beginning of the interview, a brief presentation where the segmented
filament approach and the problems that it aims to solve were exposed to the
respondent. This was done in order to give enough background of the project.
After that, the interview was performed in a semi­structured way: if the interaction
with the subject lead to more questions, they were documented and asked in the
same interview. While the core of the interviews is quite similar, some questions
have been adapted to gather more specific knowledge from the subject depending
on their role in the organization.
3.3
Reflective Analysis Method
A similar method to the one described by Osmond and Darlington [61].
This
method is used to reflect on the experience of developing a new solution and
comparing it with the current standard. These techniques will also help to evalu­
ate the results obtained from the prototype and how they can be improved in the
future.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 27
==PAGE:36==
3.4
Simulation Method
Finally, in order to estimate the cost savings of the segmented filament approach a
simulation method is used. Calculations are performed in order to figure out what
are the actual percentage of volume used by the segmented approach. Also,
computer generated renderings have been generated in order to visualize the
efficient use of the space in the segmented filament approach compared to the
spools of filament.
28 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:37==
4
Prototype Development
The purpose of building prototypes for this project is to ensure the technical fea­
sibility of the idea. It makes sense that at the beginning of the history of FFF
3D printing a spool was used, the technology was in its infancy and the engi­
neers wanted to reduce the uncertainty of the project. However, nowadays FFF
3D printers are plug and play and reached a consumer level, therefore it makes
sense to invest engineering effort to improve the surrounding elements of the de­
vice. Specially if it has a global environmental impact like in the case of the spools
of filament.
For the development of the prototypes a reverse engineering approach has been
used. Existing products have been selected as a reference and then, by under­
standing how they work, they have been adapted to satisfy the goals of the project.
For example, one approach to connect two segments of filament is to heat up
the tips of both segments and then apply pressure between the fused ends to
create a bond. This leads to think in the 3D printer itself, because it contains
components that can heat up enough to fuse the polymer, and actuators that can
create the required mechanical pressure. This was how the idea of the thermal­
based prototype was born.
After its implementation one of the main issues was the heating and cooling time
of one of the main parts of the prototype: the moulds. For this reason, a sec­
ond prototype that could overcome this issue was needed, and the idea of using
electric arcs came up.
(a) Ender 3 Pro 3D Printer
(b) Electric Arc Lighter
Figure 4.1: Products that served as an inspiration to create the reverse engineered
prototypes.
Building from Commercial Off­The­Shelf (COTS) components aims to show that
the idea of joining segments of filament is technologically feasible and low­cost. It
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 29
==PAGE:38==
is important to mention that the prototypes only aim to prove that joining segments
is possible but they do not tackle other issues like the automatic loading of the
filament segments.
4.1
Thermal­Based Prototype
In order to create a working thermal prototype two conditions are needed: reach
enough temperature to fuse the filament and enough pressure to join the two
strands of material. The first step to guarantee the satisfaction of these conditions
is understanding how each component of a 3D printer works. Fortunately, after a
thorough research on the Internet about the architecture of 3D printers and their
components, and then interacting with them, enough knowledge was gained to
determinate the components needed to make the prototype.
The relevant components from a 3D printer that are important for the development
of the thermal prototype are the following ones:
• Motherboard: printed circuit board that contains all the electronic compo­
nents necessary to control the actuators and active parts of the printer. The
microcontroller of the motherboard is flashed with a firmware that allows
the interpretation of commands sent from an USB or an SD card. In other
words, by communicating with this component an experienced user can con­
trol each part of the 3D printer independently. For example, moving the
printing nozzle to an specific height or heating the nozzle to a specific tem­
perature.
• Servomotor: these actuators are controlled by the main board in order to
move the nozzle and the bed through the different axes of the machine.
• Hotend: group of components that receive the strand of filament. In order
to understand how this component is used in the prototype it needs to be
broken down in its subparts:
– Hotend fan: electric fan that is constantly working. Its unique purpose
is to cool down the heat sink.
– Heat sink: aluminum part that dissipates the heat coming from the
heat block. This is translated in a temperature reduction where the
Teflon tube that guides the filament ends. It also provides a relatively
cold point where the hotend can be screwed to the printer, avoiding
unnecessary heat transfer from the hotend to the rest of the printer.
– Heat block: aluminum block that hosts the heat sink, the ceramic car­
tridge, the nozzle and the thermistor together. It allows an efficient
transmission of the temperature between the components.
– Ceramic cartridge: component that transforms electricity into heat.
– Nozzle: component that is heated indirectly from the ceramic cartridge.
It receives the filament strand that will be fused and shaped to the out­
put diameter of the nozzle.
30 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:39==
– Thermistor: electrical resistor that is placed inside the heat block and
that is used to estimate the temperature of the nozzle. It is constantly
used by the motherboard in order to control the activity of the ceramic
cartridge and maintain a constant temperature.
Figure 4.2: Main parts of a hotend.
4.1.1
The concept
The main idea is to replace the nozzle with customized moulds. The mould will
have a groove in its center where the two strands of filament will be placed. After
figuring out which components were needed from a 3D printer an schematic of
the prototype was designed.
Figure 4.3: Main parts of a hotend.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 31
==PAGE:40==
As it can be seen in fig. 4.2, the servomotor will be connected to a leadscrew that
will be used to move up and down the support plate where the hotend is placed.
The theoretical sequence to join filaments is the following one:
1. Lift the hotend.
2. Heat up the upper mould until it reaches the adequate temperature to melt
the filament strands.
3. Place two strands of filament in the lower mould.
4. Lower the upper mould until both moulds are touching each other.
5. Cool down the moulds with the cooling fan.
6. Lift the upper mould and remove the joined strands.
It is worth noting that at the beginning of the project, due to the time constrained
nature of the dissertation it was not considered to manufacture the moulds from
scratch. The initial idea was to buy standard 3D brass nozzles (fig. 4.2) and mod­
ify them. The modifications would be flattening the tip of the nozzle and then cut
a groove in the the new surface to emulate the moulds described in fig. 4.3. How­
ever, after contacting DTU Skylab, they suggested that manufacturing the custom
moulds is totally feasible at their facilities. For this reason, in some of the pictures
and 3D designs of the initial prototype, standard nozzles can be seen instead of
actual moulds.
4.1.2
3D Design and Construction
After deciding and purchasing the needed components, a digital representation of
them was needed in order to create the customized parts of the prototype. Fortu­
nately, the majority of the purchased components had a digital model in GrabCAD
Library [62]. Therefore, it was only needed to download and place the models in
a new FreeCAD [63] project.
(a) Isometric view
(b) Side view
Figure 4.4: Placement of the COTS components from GrabCAD in FreeCAD.
32 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:41==
The components that can be visualized in fig. 4.4 are the servomotor, the lead­
screw, a 40mm fan and a 40mm turbine type fan. After placing these components
and corroborating that their measures matched in the real world, the design of all
the custom made parts started.
The first parts to be designed were the ones related with the hotend. One of the
main models is the support plate where the hotend and the leadscrew are attached
(fig. 4.5b). This plate will be the one moving vertically, therefore a set of guides
is also needed. Finally, a duct to canalize the air from the fan to the heat sink
was also modeled (fig. 4.5a). This piece supports the fan and is is attached to the
bowden coupling at the top of the heat sink.
(a) 40mm Fan Support
(b) Hotend plate
Figure 4.5: Relevant parts designed for the hotend side of the prototype.
The simple parts to design (leadscrew nut, plate guides and washers) have been
omitted in this section. The next component to be designed was the main plate
where the lower mould would be placed. This plate would be screwed to the
servomotor.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.6: Final version of the main plate
As soon as the design was finished the parts were printed using PLA (Polylactic
Acid) to test their correct fitting. This allowed to test that the hotend carriage was
able to move up and down freely when the leadscrew was turned manually. Also,
the firsts issues with the design were spotted at this stage. For example, the
weight of the hotend made the hotend plate flex enough to misalign the moulds.
As it can be seen in fig. 4.7, standard brass nozzles were used to illustrate the idea
of the moulds. By comparing fig. 4.6 and fig. 4.7b we can see subtle differences
that were the result of iterating several times the original design. A set of holes
were made right next to the mounting point of the lower mould in order to allow
the usage of guide rods and reduce the misalignment of the parts.
Additionally, a channel was added right next to the leadscrew hole in order to allow
the replacement of the main plate without disassembling the rest of the prototype.
(a) Virtual design
(b) Real Prototype
Figure 4.7: Fit test of the first designed parts.
34 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:43==
After checking the proper fit of the 3D printed parts, it was time to design a base
plate where the motherboard would be placed and a series of brackets to attach
the servomotor to the base. One of the brackets was designed to serve a double
purpose: hold the servomotor in place and also host the cooling turbine fan.
(a) Virtual design
(b) Real Prototype
Figure 4.8: Integration of the base plate and the brackets with the rest of the
prototype.
In fig. 4.9 a detailed view of the modeled brackets can be seen. It takes advantage
of the servomotor shape to hold it in place. On the other hand, the leaf­shaped
holes serve as air intakes for the turbine fan that will redirect the air to the moulds
placed on top of this compartment. A squared hole can be appreciated, which
serves for wiring purposes.
Figure 4.9: Final version of the main plate
At this point it was possible to wire all the components together and test the correct
functionality of the prototype. In fig. 4.8b it can be seen the first time the prototype
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 35
==PAGE:44==
was turned on. With the help of the software Pronterface [64], the functionality of
all the active components was verified (ceramic cartridge, servomotor, fans and
thermistor).
Figure 4.10: Pronterface graphical user interface.
Pronterface is a software used to control 3D printers. Since 3D printer parts have
been used for the prototype, the software can be used to control the device man­
ually.
At this stage of the prototype the last remaining parts to design and manufacture
were the moulds. At the beginning the proposed design was a rectangular­shaped
mould (fig. 4.11a). However, after planning the manufacturing of the parts with
the DTU Skylab workshop crew, it was concluded that a better design for a proof
of concept would be a cylindrical mould (fig. 4.11b), due to the available material
stock and the type of machines in the workshop. In a similar way, other dimensions
were changed in order to ease the manufacturing of the piece (thicker body of the
mould and longer thread for better grip in the lathe).
36 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:45==
(a) Rectangular mould
(b) Cylindrical mould
Figure 4.11: Mould designs.
As it can be seen in fig. 4.11, both moulds have a groove with a symmetrical shape.
The center of the groove is wider than the ends. Concretely, the extremes of the
grove are 1.5mm wide; this is 0.25mm smaller than the diameter of the filament.
Theoretically, this will create a higher pressure in the edges of the mould compared
to its core: causing the displacement of the fused filament towards the center of
the mould.
The material selected for the moulds is brass. This is the same material used by
the standard nozzles because of its high thermal transfer and ease of machining.
First of all, a segment of a few centimeters is cut from the stock brass bar. Then,
the working material is loaded in the Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine
in order to calibrate the origin of the part.
(a) Brass bar
(b) CNC Machine
Figure 4.12: In the left figure the brass bar used to create the moulds can be
observed. On the picture in the right the operator is calibrating the dimensions of
the bar in order to proceed with the machining.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 37
==PAGE:46==
Next, by using a face mill, the section of the brass bar is flattened to remove the
irregular edges created when the bar was sawed from the stock material. The
next step is to switch from the face mill to a 1mm end mill to create the groove.
Due to the reduced size of the end mill, isopropyl alcohol is constantly applied to
the bit. This removes the chips of material from the working area and avoids the
overheating of the tool. Finally, the end mill is replaced by a drill bit to create the
holes for the guiding rods.
(a) Face milling
(b) Groove machining
(c) Resulting part
Figure 4.13: CNC machining process
The resulting part from the CNC machining process is then placed in a lathe.
The idea is to clamp the machined face inside the chuck of the lathe and then
reduce the diameter of the brass bar to the right width. This process takes several
passes, since the material is reduced using incremental steps of approximately
1mm. Once the final shape of the mould is achieved, by using a threading die the
thread of the mould is created.
(a) Lathe machining of the mould
(b) First mould finished
Figure 4.14: Lathe machining and finished mould.
In order to manufacture the final mould it took approximately one day of work, and
two moulds were needed. An approximate valuation from DTU Skylab’s workshop
38 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:47==
of one mould if they were manufactured outside their facilities would be 3500dkk.
This is due to the work hours an technical expertise required to to create the piece.
However, if a production line would be set to create these specific parts the price
would drop to 10dkk per mould if 1000 parts were ordered.
Finally, stainless steel guiding rods were manufactured using the lathe and the
threading die. The final result for the moulds can be seen in fig. 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Moulds with guiding rods.
The final engineering prototype can be seen in fig. 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Final thermal based engineering prototype
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 39
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Electric­Based Prototype
One of the problems discovered with the thermal based prototype was that be­
cause of the size of the moulds, the time needed for heating up and cooling down
was a couple of minutes. This would limit the rate of filament that the final machine
would create. For this reason it was worth experimenting with a different technol­
ogy that solved the aforementioned issue and therefore increase the output rate
of the machine.
Inspired on an electric arc lighter, the idea is to create an electronic circuit that
generates an electric arc that can melt the filament. In a similar way to the thermal
prototype, research was performed in order to understand how the arc lighters
worked. Next, the needed components to create a similar circuit were purchased.
The proposed architecture for the electric prototype is the following one:
Figure 4.17: Electric Arc Prototype Diagram
The components of this architecture are:
• Microcontroller: microchip used to control precisely the generations of the
arc. It will allow the communication of the prototype with a computer and
therefore modify the exposure time of the filament to the electric arc. Any mi­
crocontroller with GPIO capabilities can be used, but for this specific project
an Arduino Nano was used.
40 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:49==
• Optocoupler: electronic component that allows the isolation of two electric
circuits. As it can be seen in fig. 4.17, the optocoupler lies between the logic
and the power side. The logic side is where the low voltage and expensive
components are placed, like the microcontroller and the laptop. The power
side contains the high voltage and high current components, for example
the 24V power supply and the arc generator.
• MOSFET: Transistor used as a switch to control the high voltage generator.
• High Voltage Generator: Off the shelf circuit that transform a voltage of
approximately 4 volts and converts it to 15 kilovolts.
The functionality of the prototype can be summarized in the following way. The
laptop is used to program the microcontroller and control the activation and the du­
ration of the signal that will control the power circuit. When the signal is generated
by the micrcontroller, this closes the optocoupler circuit in the power side; activat­
ing the gate of the transistor. Once the gate of the transistor is being powered,
this will close the transistor and allow the electricity to flow to the high voltage gen­
erator and create an electric arc. As soon as the signal from the microcontroller
is deactivated the power circuit will be opened and the arc will disappear.
Compared to the thermal based prototype, this version requires less machining
and 3D printed parts in order to perform experiments. This is because the only
part that interacts with the filament are the two arcs where the arc is generated.
Figure 4.18: First test conducted with the electric arc prototype
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 41
==PAGE:50==
42 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:51==
5
Analysis and Results
5.1
Analysis of current technology
After the research conducted by this study, no other similar proposals or products
have been found. There is no precedent for a device that can join segments of
filament and automatically generate a stream of continuous material that can be
used by a 3D printer with the main goal of reducing environmental impact and
plastic waste.
On the other hand, it has been identified that a real problem for 3D printer users is
having leftovers of filament that are not enough material for finishing a single print.
Therefore, by joining these leftovers the user could reach the minimum quantity
of filament needed to finish the print successfully.
The solutions found on the Internet range from home brew methods, for example
using a candle to melt the ends of the filaments and a Teflon tube to try to pre­
serve the cylindrical shape. Also, products like an aluminium die that can hold the
filaments while it is heated with a lighter and when the material is slightly melted
the user can push the strands to hopefully join them. References from the prod­
uct in fig. 5.1a are a couple of years old [65]. However, the electric version was
released in Amazon.com during August 2021 [66].
(a) Filament welder
(b) Electric filament welder
Figure 5.1: Products sold to join leftover filament strands
Users find these solutions of poor quality and not reliable. That is why a lot of users
have come up with their own designs for this task. All the mentioned proposal in
fig. 5.2 have been published in the last 5 years. Concretely, the oldest reference
found of a semiautomatic prototype to join leftovers of filaments is the one seen
in fig. 5.2c that was published in 2017 by members of the UVic Mechanical Engi­
neering Department [67]. It is considered a semiautomatic prototype because it
requires user interaction to join the strands and to spool the resulting filament. In
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 43
==PAGE:52==
2018, the same department of the University of Victoria published and improved
version (fig. 5.2d) that automatized the junction and spooling of the filament [68].
Other relevant projects found are the one carried by Jón Schone in 2020 (fig. 5.2b),
where he attempted to do a filament joining rig similar to the one developed for
this project (using off­the­shelf 3D printer components). Unfortunately he did not
succeed to join filament strands with his design [69]. However, his findings and
created content was inspiring for this thesis. Finally, it is worth noting that this
trend of designing and publishing solutions continues in the recent days. Four
months ago (February 2022), a Japanese youtuber published a design that uses
electricity to heat a spring that is used to melt the filament (fig. 5.2a). Then a
clothespin is used to preserve the cylindrical shape of the filament while it is still
malleable.
Again, none of the aforementioned projects have a segmented approach in mind
to solve the space inefficiencies and reduce the carbon footprint of transporting the
material from the producer to the final user. However, they use working principles
and designs that are useful as precedents to prove the technological feasibility of
the segmented proposal.
(a) Assisted filament joiner
(b) Filament joining rig
(c) Semi­automatic filament joiner
(d) Automatic filament joiner
Figure 5.2: Filament joiners designed by 3D printing users.
For these reasons, it is considered that there is no current standard or state of
the art for a segmented filament approach, and the principal competitor is the old­
fashioned spool. After studying the origins of 3D printing and referring to articles
and other media, an evolution of the spool of filament can be seen through the
last 3 decades.
44 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:53==
As mentioned in the RepRap Wiki article regarding the filament spool [70], there is
no standard in terms of dimensions and labelling. This article was written in 2016
and to the date of the writing of this dissertation, it does not seem like the idea of
an standard spool has moved forward. The article mentions the work of Richard
Horne in the elaboration of an standard for the spools of filament. In his article
of 2014 [71] he documented the issue of different material and dimensions in the
filament spools. Four years later, in 2018, Richard made a new proposal ”Mas­
terSpool ­ A proposed standard for 3D Printing filament supply without a spool”
[72]. He designed a printable refillable spool that pioneered the idea of removing
the filament spool completely from the 3D printing equation. Some months after
the publication of his standard, he managed to collaborate with the German 3D
printing manufacturer Das Filament [73]. The filament producer sent a batch of
filament vacuum sealed and zip tied without a plastic spool. This served to prove
that Horne’s proposal was viable and there were filament manufacturers willing to
bet on the idea. The MasterSpool design went through several iteration and its
fourth version seems to be the design that culminated the proposal. Two years
later, the global Chinese manufacturer eSUN launched his branch of refillable
spools [74].
Figure 5.3: Filament refill from eSUN.
Referring to Anderson and Tushman [49], it is safe to say that the filament spools
are in a clear era of incremental change. The spools have been evolving from
solid injection­moulded plastic part to truly recyclable cardboard spools.
However, the cardboard spools are far from becoming the de facto standard in
the industry; the current dominant design at the time of the writing is the plastic
spool of 1 Kilogram. Nonetheless, manufacturers aware of their footprint try to
reduce the amount of wasted plastic by reducing the amount of material used in
their spools.
For example, Prusament uses a honeycomb design on the sides of the spool to
extremely reduce the material used and uses cardboard cores to join both sides.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 45
==PAGE:54==
Finally, there are the refillable options that seem even less adopted than the card­
board option due to the extra steps required from the user. This era of incremental
change can be easily appreciated in comparison articles; for example the website
ALL3DP, published in January 2022 their article ”PLA Filament: The Best Brands
of 2022” [75]. These are some of the options published in their comparison:
(a) Hatchbox Spool (solid)
(b) Overture Spool (minimal material reduc­
tion)
(c) Sunlu Spool (material reduction)
(d) Prusament (extreme material reduction)
(e) Protopasta (cardboard)
(f) FormFutura (reinforced cardboard)
Figure 5.4: Filament joiners designed by 3D printing users.
The article shows the 13 brands that they consider the best options for PLA 3D
printing. From those, 7 of them use a solid spool of plastic and 4 use some kind
of material reduction. It is important to note that in some of them, the material
reduction is minimal and its main purpose is to allow the user to see the amount
of remaining material. Only 2 spools are fully made of cardboard.
46 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:55==
Table 5.1: Comparison of the proposed solution against current solutions.
Spool Manufacturing
Difficulty
Spool Recycling
Difficulty
Filament
Capacity
Potential Cost
Saving
Solid/Reduced
Plastic Spool
Medium
High
Low
Medium
Cardboard Spool
High
Medium
Low
Low
Refillable Spool
None
None
Low
Medium
Segmented
Filament
None
None
High
High
A comparison between the proposed segmented approach and the current so­
lutions in the market can be seen in table 5.2. The spool manufacturing is con­
sidered medium for the plastic spools because it required the setup of an injec­
tion moulding line. On the other hand, cardboard spools are considered difficult
to manufacture because some manufacturers like Protopasta require to glue the
cardboard parts by hand [31]. Finally, since the refillable system and the seg­
mented filament solution remove completely the usage of disposable spools, there
is no manufacturing difficulty attached to the company. Because of the same rea­
sons, these two solutions have no recycling difficulty since the problem has been
completely removed. However, the manufacturing complexity of cardboard spools
is compensated by its recyclability compared to the plastic option.
The filament capacity is considered low in all the cylindrical systems since only
a fraction of the shipping space is used compared to the segmented approach.
Finally, if we take as a reference the current dominant design (plastic spools), the
cardboard spools adds costs to the filament producer because of its difficulty to
manufacture compared to the injection­moulded spools. The refillable solution is
considered medium because despite removing the spools from their production,
the packaging space and the shipping volume remains the same. The proposed
segmented filament solution removes the cost of the spool of filament, its environ­
mental drawbacks and also leads to saving in the transport of the filament since
more filament can be shipped in the same space.
5.2
Technology Feasibility
As it has been proved throughout this document, rejoining strands of filament is
totally feasible. Not only the prototypes developed during this project are able to
do so, but also other 3D printing users and organizations have tacked this issue
and successfully joined fragments of polymer that afterwards have been used in
3D prints.
The added value of this project is that it mainly uses off­the­shelf components and
tries to reduce the amount of customized and machined parts showing the low
cost potential of the idea.
It is important to mention that during the project, only the problem of joining strands
of filament has been tackled, but more research and development needs to be
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 47
==PAGE:56==
done in order to guarantee the feasibility of a mechanism to load the segments of
filament into the filament joiner.
One clear example that the technology to fuse segments exists is the case of
Moscaic Manufacturing. This company was founded in 2014 and sells a device
able to join filament coming from several different spools in order to create mul­
ticolor 3D prints. As early as 2016, mosaic was already showing their products
[76]. In 2017 they announced the Palette+ (fig. 5.5a) that was able to join material
from 4 different spools. One year later, Mosaic announced the next generation of
the product, the Palette 2 (fig. 5.5b) with a more contained size. Finally, in 2021
the latest iteration was released, the Palette 3 Pro (fig. 5.5c) that can join material
from 8 different spools.
(a) Palette+
(b) Palette 2
(c) Palette 3 Pro
Figure 5.5: Products from Mosaic Manufacturing.
It is worth noting that Mosaic has a similar technology to the one that the seg­
mented filament approach would use to join said strands of filament. However,
the goal of Mosaic is to provide quality colored 3D prints and not to reduce the
plastic waste and the environmental footprint of 3D printing. In fact, in order to
flush the current color from the nozzle, a transition tower needs to be created
right next to the print. In some cases, depending on the amount of transitions this
tower can be even more heavy than the printed object [77]. A torture test used to
determine the quality of the filament used and the limits of the printer in terms of
quality and speed can be seen in fig. 5.6a. The transition tower can be observed
at the right side of the build plate.
48 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:57==
(a) Toaster Torture Test
(b) Splice Core
Figure 5.6: 3D print using the Palette 3 Pro and a detailed view of the Spice Core.
Mosaic Manufacturing even sells the module used to join the strands of filament
(fig. 5.6b) for $120 as a replacement part for their Palette products [78]. The
evolution of Mosaic Manufacturing shows the clear evolution of the filament joining
technology in the last 8 years.
In conclusion, the technological feasibility of a segmented filament approach is
high due to examples in the industry, educational organizations and 3D printer
users that successfully achieved this task.
5.2.1
Prototype Experiments
Once the prototypes developed for this project were finished, some tests were
performed to review their performance.
As expected, the first try of the thermal prototype was not successful. Several
parameters needed to be adjusted: temperature of the moulds, time of heat ex­
posure to the filaments and cooling time. Once those parameters were adjusted
the first junction was performed.
(a) Flat sectioning of the filament
(b) Experiment Result
Figure 5.7: Result of thermal prototype experiment.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 49
==PAGE:58==
A flat sectioning was used in the initial experiments (fig. 5.7a). This experiment
was done to see the result with a completely cylindrical filament segment, this
type of segment should be the easiest to manufacture for the filament producers.
As it can be seen in fig. 5.7b, the resulting bond is poor and superficial. While
it is strong enough to support some tension force it is quite weak when the two
strands are bent. Also, it is worth noting the plastic burr created by the moulds.
This confirms that the design of the groove in the mould indeed creates more
pressure in the extremes of the mould than in its center.
Possible solutions for this issue could be reducing the lowering speed of the upper
mould and a redesign of the groove. Currently the groove has a rectangular profile
as it can be seen in more detail in appendix D and appendix E, this tends to bite
into the material and produce the plastic burr. A softer shape like a semicircle
could reduce this effect.
A experiment with a notched section was performed with the goal of increasing
the quality of the junction. By using a side cutter, a tiny portion of filament was
removed from both strands as it can be observed in fig. 5.8a.
(a) Notch sectioning of the filament
(b) Experiment Result
Figure 5.8: Result of notched
The notching in the end of the filaments dramatically increased the quality of the
bond. Compared to fig. 5.7a, the resulting junction in fig. 5.8b is way stronger both
under tension and bending forces. The final result showed in fig. 5.8b has been
postprocessed and the burr has been removed with a hobby knife.
Maybe the usage of notches could be removed by redesigning the moulds. For
example, a clear drawback of the current design is the size of the mould. Despite
making the manufacturing of the part easier, the current heating and cooling time
for the moulds is on the order of minutes.
Due to technical issues at the end of the project with the electric arc prototype, no
experiments were conducted with this technology.
50 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Business Potential
Based on the literature studied it is safe to say that the segmented filament ap­
proach has indeed a business potential. For example, the transport of filament is
far away from its technological limit. The physical limit for transporting material in
a box is fitting a solid block that occupies the totality of the volume. While the cur­
rent spool system is far away from achieving said limit, the segmented approach
advances towards that edge.
Therefore, the technological potential of the segmented filament approach is high
compared to the spools, and that could be the center of a business.
5.3.1
Simulations and calculations
A set of renders have been created to visually illustrate some of the concepts
and show the space optimization potential of the segmented filament approach.
Figure fig. 5.9a shows the typical packaging of a 1Kg spool while fig. 5.9b shows
the same packaging filled with 20cm filaments. For a more detailed view of the
render visit appendix F.
(a) 1Kg spool
(b) 3.6Kg of filaments
Figure 5.9: Renders created to compare the typical package of a 1Kg spool of
filament against the same box filled with filament segments.
The amount of filament packed in segments is more than 3.5 times the amount of
filament shipped using the conventional spool method.
The first calculation that needs to be done to support these numbers is to show
what is the physical limit of the packaging. This means to calculate the weight of
a solid block of material in the packaging volume. The assumed size of the box is
21.5x20.5x8cm and it is based on real measurements of a box used for packaging
1Kg filament spool. Another assumption that will be done during the calculations
is a perfect arrangement of the segments of filaments as seen in fig. 5.10. Finally,
the density of PLA (1.25g/cm3) will be used for the calculations.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.10: Ideal filament segments arrangement.
The area of each of the circles and dashed squares in fig. 5.10 is 2.4053mm2 and
3.0625mm2 respectively. Therefore the wasted space is 3.0625mm2−2.4053mm2 =
0.6572mm2. This means that approximately, 21.5% of the space is not used in this
ideal arrangement and 78.5% is usable material.
Then, the following calculations can be performed:
Box volume = 8.5cm · 20.5cm · 21.5cm = 3746.375cm3 ≈3745cm3
(5.1)
Material weight before losses = 3745cm3 · 1.25g/cm3 = 4681.25g ≈4680g
(5.2)
Material weight after losses = 4680g · 0.785 = 3673.8g ≈3674g
(5.3)
The material wight obtained in eq. (5.2) represents the technological limit of trans­
porting material in a box. As it can be seen in eq. (5.3), the 3.6Kg obtained in the
calculations is way closer to the technological limit than the modest 1Kg that can
me placed in the spool.
Another advantage of the segmented filament is that it can be easily scalable to
an industrial format. The only change that needs to be introduced is to increase
the length of the filaments. For example, consider the case of an euro pallet
whose dimensions are 120cmx80cm and its safe working load is 1500Kg [79]. As
a maximum height, the longest dimension of the pallet (120cm) will be used as
recommended by the Health and Safety Executive [80].
Now, consider that the segments of filaments are shipped in boxes of 40x20x20cm.
Considering the dimensions of the pallet and the aforementioned limitations, 6 lay­
ers of 6 by 2 boxes can be stacked; a total of 72 boxes. Therefore:
Industrial Box Volume = 40cm · 20cm · 20cm = 16000cm3
(5.4)
Material Per Box = 16000cm3 · 1.25g/cm3 · 0.785 = 15700g = 15.7Kg
(5.5)
Material Per Pallet = 15.7Kg · 72boxes = 1130.4Kg
(5.6)
52 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:61==
In the same volume, 13 layers of 5 by 4 1Kg spool boxes could be arranged. In
other words, while with the current system 260Kg of material can be shipped, with
the segmented filament 1130Kg of material could be shipped in the same space.
The main advantage of the segmented approach is that the length of the segments
could be easily varied. After talking with the Laboratory Responsible at DTU Sky­
lab, and approximation of the amount of filament used by their rapid prototyping
laboratory is around 60 Kilograms every semester. A visualization of the space
efficiency for that specific case can be seen in fig. 5.11. The format of the box in
fig. 5.11b is 30x25x80cm.
(a) Pallet with 1Kg spool boxes
(b) Single box with segments
Figure 5.11: Comparison of the volume used for 60Kg of material.
5.3.2
Interviews
Several interviews have been performed in order to figure out the business viability
of the proposal. The subjects interviewed range from final users of the 3D printing
technology, potential economical buyers and researchers.
In order to determine the subjects to interview an initial market segmentation was
performed as advised in Disciplined Entrepreneurship [52] in order to locate a
beachhead market.
Figure 5.12: Market Segmentation
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 53
==PAGE:62==
Initially, the selected beachhead market was the prototyping companies since
these are the ones that would benefit more from the industrial format of the idea.
However, during the interviews it was discovered that FFF printers are not the
favourite technology for the prototyping companies. Due to the surface quality
discussed formerly in this document, they prefer Selective Laser Sintering (SLS)
machines. Therefore, one of the fist assumptions used in the market segmentation
was wrong: the filament usage of prototyping companies is not higher than that
of educational institutions. Their usage of FFF filament is around 10Kg/month
compared to the 1.5 Tons/month of nylon powder. This amount of used filament is
similar to the one used by educational institutions like DTU Skylab. It is also worth
mentioning that the educational institution consider FFF printers a key technology
for their goals.
Also, after interviewing the Head of Technology at DTU Skylab and the Chief Op­
erations Officer at Damvig A/S it was easier to frame each organization inside the
Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) framework. While both institutions are constantly
pursuing greener and more sustainable solutions, professional institutions tend to
use well established and reliable technologies while educational institutions are
more willing to bet their money in emerging technologies that reduce their footprint
and assume some degree of unreliability.
It is worth noting that the main pain point for the professional organizations is
the surface quality of their prints while the main pain point for the educational
institutions is the availability of the 3D printers. For DTU Skylab, the longer and the
more busy the machines are, the better. That means that the students are using
them for developing their projects, extending their knowledge and innovating in
their facilities which are their top priorities.
After analyzing the interviews, it seems that the educational institutions would play
the role of innovators in the technology adoption life cycle, and environmentally
aware private 3D printing users could be early adopters. Prototyping companies
that follow sustainable goals could be placed as early majority and professional
companies that are mainly driven for savings in cost may be the late majority.
In terms of crossing the chasm, using the educational institutions and the envi­
ronmental private users to improve the quality and reliability of the segment joiner
would be the safest bet to cross the chasm, since professional companies care
the most about products that can work constantly without breaking and stopping
their production.
It is safe to say that while for both types of organizations the symbolic attributes
of a sustainable innovation plays and important role, the instrumental attributes
are way more important for the professional institutions than for the educational
institutions. On the other hand, due to the trade­off between instrumental and
environmental attributes, educational institutions seem more prone to value envi­
ronmental attributes when purchasing a new technology.
Also, during this project the article Fused­filament 3D printing (3DP) for fabrica­
tion of tablets [81] was studied. One of the authors, Dr. Alvaro Goyanes, was
54 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:63==
contacted and he granted an interview where the pain points of the application of
3D printing in the fabrication of personalized drugs were discussed.
The following table summarizes the findings during the interviews and puts in con­
trast the different perspectives of 3D printing for the professionals interviewed:
Table 5.2: Comparison of the proposed solution against current solutions.
Institution Type
Pain Points
Environmental
Attributes
Instrumental
Attributes
Educational
Environmental footprint,
availability and usage
Highly valued
Valued
Professional
Scalability, speed and
surface quality
Valued
Highly valued
Research
Wasted time and
structural stability of the
material
Not valued
Highly valued
It is worth mentioning that the conservatism of each institution is quite different
among them. While the educational institutions are way more flexible in adopting
new technologies, the professional and research institutions are quite conserva­
tive, since their revenue and results directly depend on the machines used. For
this reason, the aforementioned institutions are less sensible to the price of an
innovation compared to the educational institutions.
During the interview with Dr. Goyanes, he pointed that one interesting point of
the segmented approach is that the structural stability of the strands is better than
material extracted from the spool. In their experiments, the group discovered
that the strand of filament can become brittle when loaded with the desired drug,
therefore when introduced in the printer, due to the curvature of the filament there
is the risk of breaking the strand and wasting the material and time invested to
dope the filament.
Also, another interesting insight is that the usage of 3D printing in the pharmaceu­
tical industry is extremely innovative. For this reason, they tend to cut risks and
that is the reason why the environmental attributes are not relevant for their area
of expertise. Also, while it is true that FFF printers are being explored in the devel­
opment of personalized drugs, it is not clear if it will be a dominant solution since
there also exist alternatives like semi­solid extrusion and direct powder extrusion.
Finally, the feedback received from all the subjects is was positive regarding the
segmented filament approach. they agreed that if the solutions is cost effective,
reliable and provides some savings like expected it could be an innovation inte­
grated with 3D printers.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 55
==PAGE:64==
56 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:65==
6
Discussion
6.1
Summary
After studying the material loading system for FFF printers, it seems that the old
saying ”if it works, do not touch it” has been glued to the spool of filament quite
firmly during the last 30 years. Despite the appearance of more sustainable op­
tions, like the refillable spool concept or the cardboard spools, this options seem
minimally adopted by the customers. This could be attributed to the wrong per­
ception of a cheaper product or to the required extra steps from the user compared
to the old plastic spool.
However, it seems that 3D printer users are increasingly aware about their envi­
ronmental footprint. In the case of users that have an over the average printing
activity, this seems even more obvious. Since these users are the first ones to try
to give a second life to their empty spools.
The segmented filament approach can solve some of these adoption issues. Since
the received filament by the user can be directly dumped into the filament con­
tainer of the device. The required interaction from the user is minimal. The device
should take care of making the workflow of the user simpler to ensure the adoption
of the technology. Additionally, the device could control the environment of the
container where the filament is stored in order to reduce the moisture absorption
of the material. Such a device would solve all the current problems identified by
this study regarding the spool of filament.
In terms of the Foster’s S­curve, the spool of filament could be placed at the begin­
ning of the curve since little effort has been invested in its design and the transport
capacity is also poor. In the same way, the segmented filament approach could
be placed much higher in the curve since the required engineering effort is sub­
stantial, but also its gains. As proved in the results sections, if the packaging used
for a 1Kg filament spool is filled with a solid block of plastic, the weight of the box
would be 4.68Kg; that is the physical limit of the box for transporting filament. If
the same space is filled with segments of filament, the shipped weight would be
3.6Kg. This illustrates how the technical potential of the segmented approach is
way higher than the spool of filament and how much closer it is to the physical
limit. This partially answers the research question 2 and 3, showing that indeed
on paper, the segmented filament approach is better than the spool of filament in
terms of shipping volume and therefore it is more cost efficient.
Regarding the technology feasibility of the idea, throughout the document many
examples have appeared of products and projects from users that want to solve
the problem of joining strands of filaments. This clearly shows that the technology
and the interest to solve this issue exists. However, to the knowledge of this dis­
sertation none of the projects is framed from a holistic point of view. The devices
documented just aim to join leftovers of filament while this project proposes the
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 57
==PAGE:66==
concept of the production of segments of filament and the device that will join the
material right before it is needed.
Also, answering the research question 1, through the whole document the evolu­
tion of the material loading system for FFF printers has been documented and this
could be framed in the evolutionary model proposed by Anderson and Tushman.
When the FDM patent was filed, two material loading systems were proposed:
the spool and the rod. This could be seen as an era of ferment where both op­
tions were competing to see which one was going to be the dominant design.
The clear winner was the spool of filament, probably due to its massive capacity
of continuous filament compared to the supply rods. In the recent years, an era
of incremental change can be clearly spotted with the appearance of spools with
material reduction, cardboard spools and refillable spools. However, these are
good news for the segmented filament approach since it could be argued that the
industry is waiting for the next technological discontinuity that moves forward the
performance barrier and starts the cycle all over again; that technology disconti­
nuity could the segmented filament approach.
Even if the segmented filament approach does not become a dominant design,
since technological discontinuities does not likely become dominant designs due
to the competition during the era of ferment, it could be the first mover towards a
more sustainable material loading system for FFF 3D printers.
In summary, the segmented approach solve some of the problems stated thought
this dissertation. For example, it reduces the waste of plastic material and that is
one of the motivations of the filament joiners. Also, it removes the environmental
impact that the plastic spools of filament cause and that some manufacturers are
trying to solved by switching to more sustainable options like the cardboard spools
or the refillable spools. Finally, if the idea can be manufactured with a low cost,
ideally it could be included by default in newer models of 3D printers. However,
for this plastic ”spooless” utopia to become a reality, the support of the whole 3D
printing community and companies is needed.
6.2
Potential Business Model
As mentioned in the results section, the business potential of the segmented fil­
ament approach is undeniable. Its savings in terms of costs and environmental
footprint should give to the 3D printing users and organizations enough functional,
environmental and symbolic attributes to consider the purchasing of such a tech­
nology. However, tacking the market of the customer 3D printers directly is a
mistake. The technology is not mature at all and the customer 3D printing market
is way too big. It is important for a business strategy to keep this market as a
target since there is where the environmental benefits of the segmented filament
approach will shine the most. However, to guarantee the viability of the business,
the startup that uses the segmented filament approach as its value proposition
should focus on a more niche market that behaves as the innovators of the project.
From the results, it can be inferred that the the initial market to tackle and that
behaves as innovators are the technical educational institutions and once that
market is assured the company could jump to the next group in the DOI framework.
58 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:67==
A possible business model for this innovation could be the following one:
• The value proposition: a solution that completely removes the plastic waste
generated by the current dominant design in material loading systems for
FFF 3D printers. This solution also reduces the space used by the material
and potentially reduces the shipping costs.
• The customer: the initial customer would be the educational institutions.
The segmented filament approach would benefit this customer by reducing
their environmental footprint and helping to improve the usability of their
printers. The change of a spool in a 3D printer is a task that can take a
couple of minutes and some research needs to be done if it is the first time
it is performed. On the other hand, the only action required from the user
with the segmented filament approach would be to dump more material in
the filament container of the fusing device.
• Channels: the initial selling channel would be physically contacting the edu­
cational institutions because the filament joiner device needs to be installed
in the prototyping lab of the institution.
• Customer relationships: one of the pain points of educational and profes­
sional organizations is the reliability and availability of the product, therefore
one of the ways to attract new customers and keep the current ones is hav­
ing a serious and proficient customer support for the devices.
• Revenue streams: the strategy for capture value from the customers can
be a subscription model where the joining machines are leased to the insti­
tution for a monthly fee where the renting and maintenance of the machines
is included.
• Resources: for this project to start the key resources are engineers to imple­
ment a functional product, technicians to provide maintenance and customer
support and finally fund raising.
• Partners: a mandatory partner for this project are the filament manufactur­
ers since they are the ones that can produce the segments of filaments.
• Activities: the key activity of the company would be to produce the fila­
ment joining machines. The company could also play a role in the logistics,
packaging and transport of the filaments.
• Costs: the calculation of the costs attached to running a business like the
one described is a pending task that is out of the scope of this project.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 59
==PAGE:68==
6.3
Reflection
At the time of finishing this dissertation and being able to observe the work done
in retrospective a lot of changes in the development of this project could be made.
For example, given a more thorough research of the solutions that users have
come up with for fusing filament, the focus of the prototype developed during this
project could have been different. Instead of producing a prototype for the sole
purpose of demonstrating that fusing filament is possible, the prototype could have
been focused to tackle the issue of automatically loading strands of filament.
Another point to reflect on is the scope of the whole project. It aims to solve issues
in too many different areas: from entrepreneurship to mechanical, electronics and
software engineering. Given a bigger team the current scope would be realistic
and the quality of the results and the document would be dramatically improved.
Due to time constrains sometimes is hard to relate all the areas investigated and
digest all the information gathered.
Finally, the amount of interviews clearly needs to be increased. The insights ob­
tained from the interaction with professionals in the topic have been invaluable for
the project. Therefore, talking with more people could have led to better results
and allowed for more confident generalizations.
60 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Tuan D Ngo et al. “Additive manufacturing (3D printing): A review of mate­
rials, methods, applications and challenges”. In: Composites Part B: Engi­
neering 143 (2018), pp. 172–196.
[2]
Carlota V. Boeing 777X’s first flight with more than 300 3D printed parts.
[Online; accessed Jun 1, 2022]. 2020. URL: https://www.3dnatives.com/en/
boeing-777x-300-3d-printed-parts-290120205/.
[3]
Harm­Jan Steenhuis, Xin Fang, and Tolga Ulusemre. “Global diffusion of
innovation during the fourth industrial revolution: the case of additive manu­
facturing or 3D printing”. In: Emerging Issues And Trends In Innovation And
Technology Management. World Scientific, 2022, pp. 333–368.
[4]
Tim Caffrey, Terry Wohlers, and Ian Campbell. Executive summary of the
Wohlers Report 2016. 2016.
[5]
T.T. Wohlers et al. Wohlers Report 2021: 3D Printing and Additive Manu­
facturing Global State of the Industry. Wohlers Associates, Incorporated,
2021. ISBN: 9780991333271. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
vGJszgEACAAJ.
[6]
Society of Manufacturing Engineers. New Wohlers Report 2021 Finds 7.5%
Growth in Additive Manufacturing Industry Despite Pandemic. [Online; ac­
cessed May 31, 2022]. 2021. URL: https : / / www . sme . org / technologies /
articles/2021/march/new-wohlers-report-2021-finds-7.5-growth-in-additive-
manufacturing-industry-despite-pandemic/.
[7]
Business Wire. Global Metal 3D Printing Market Analysis Report 2021­2028.
[Online; accessed Jun 11, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.businesswire.com/
news/home/20210818005298/en/Global-Metal-3D-Printing-Market-Analysis-
Report-2021-2028-Untapped-End-use-Industry-Verticals-and-Markets-Such-as-
Printed-Electronics-and-3D-Printing-Under-Water-ResearchAndMarkets.com.
[8]
Harm­Jan Steenhuis and Leon Pretorius. “Consumer additive manufactur­
ing or 3D printing adoption: an exploratory study”. In: Journal of Manufac­
turing Technology Management (2016).
[9]
Stratasys, Inc. Stratasys Leads Additive Manufacturing Industry for Ninth
Consecutive Year. [Online; accessed Jun 1, 2022]. 2011. URL: https : / /
investors.stratasys.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/157/stratasys-leads-
additive-manufacturing-industry-for-ninth.
[10]
T.T. Wohlers. Wohlers Report 2014: 3D Printing and Additive Manufactur­
ing State of the Industry Annual Worldwide Progress Report. Wohlers Asso­
ciates, 2014. ISBN: 9780991333202. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=iCamoAEACAAJ.
[11]
Pranav Gharge. Ender 3 (V2/Pro) Dimensions: What Are The Sizes? [On­
line; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://all3dp.com/2/ender-3-
dimensions-how-big-is-the-3d-printer/.
[12]
Stratasys. Fortus 380mc and 450mc. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2018.
URL: https://www.stratasys.com/-/media/files/printer-spec-sheets/pss_fdm_
fortus380mc450mc_0418a.pdf.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 61
==PAGE:70==
[13]
Ioana Patringenar. Student startup ‘Limber’ makes 3D­printed prostheses
affordable and accessible. [Online; accessed Jun 1, 2022]. 2022. URL: https:
/ / www . universityofcalifornia . edu / news / student - startup - limber - makes - 3d -
printed-prostheses-affordable-and-accessible.
[14]
Brent Stephens et al. “Ultrafine particle emissions from desktop 3D printers”.
In: Atmospheric Environment 79 (2013), pp. 334–339.
[15]
Josef Průša. The road to 100k Original Prusa printers. [Online; accessed
May 31, 2022]. 2019. URL: https://blog.prusa3d.com/the- road- to- 100k-
original-prusa-printers-free-shipping_30402/.
[16]
3printr. Josef Prusa celebrates over 130,000 3D printers sold, has 10 %
market share. [Online; accessed May 31, 2022]. 2019. URL: https://www.
3printr.com/josef-prusa-celebrates-130000-3d-printers-sold-10-market-share-
3751922/.
[17]
Forbes. Josef Prusa. [Online; accessed May 31, 2022]. 2018. URL: https:
//www.forbes.com/profile/josef-prusa/.
[18]
Joamin Gonzalez­Gutierrez et al. “Highly­Filled Polymers for Fused Fila­
ment Fabrication”. In: Proceedings of the 27th Leobener Kunststoff­Kolloquium:
Print & Coat­Polymere in Druck­und Beschichtungstechnologien, Leoben,
Austria. 2018, pp. 19–20.
[19]
Christian Schmied. Filament Tangle on Spool: Tips & Tricks to Solve & Pre­
vent It. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2019. URL: https://all3dp.com/2/
filament-spool-tips-tricks-against-filament-tangles/.
[20]
pumadriver1138. What can I do with empty filament spools? I don’t want to
just throw them away. [Online; accessed Jun 14, 2022]. 2021. URL: https:
//www.reddit.com/r/3Dprinting/comments/pw2m22/what_can_i_do_with_
empty_filament_spools_i_dont/.
[21]
caross. What do you do with empty spools? Can they be reused? [Online;
accessed Jun 14, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.reddit.com/r/3Dprinting/
comments/qm2qgf/what_do_you_do_with_empty_spools_can_they_be/.
[22]
Pashto96. What are some filament manufacturers that are using cardboard
spools? [Online; accessed Jun 14, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.reddit.
com/r/3Dprinting/comments/sgqsaz/what_are_some_filament_manufacturers_
that_are/.
[23]
Thingiverse Community. Search: filament spool organizer. [Online; accessed
Jun 12, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.thingiverse.com/search?q=filament+
spool+organizer&page=1&type=things&sort=relevant.
[24]
MistrYpsilon. Modular Filament Spool Drawer ­ storage box. [Online; ac­
cessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2020. URL: https : / / www . thingiverse . com / thing :
4604952.
[25]
spelchek. Vertical Filament Spool Parts Drawer for TECBEARS Spools.
[Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.thingiverse.com/
thing:5245868.
[26]
GOrtega. Stackable Spool Drawer. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2019.
URL: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:3697886.
[27]
XVavron. Filament spool organizer. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2018.
URL: https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:2819098.
62 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:71==
[28]
Digital Taxidermy. Spool Tanks ­ Upcycled beasts of war for 28mm wargames.
[Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.kickstarter.com/
projects/digitaltaxidermy/spool-tanks/description.
[29]
3D Printing Wiki. Spool weight. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2022. URL:
https://3dprintingwiki.info/wiki/Spool_weight.
[30]
Jessica Heiges and Kate O’Neill. What is wishcycling? Two waste experts
explain. [Online; accessed Jun 12, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://theconversation.
com/what-is-wishcycling-two-waste-experts-explain-173825.
[31]
OUT OF DARTS. 3D Printing Has a Problem… [Online; accessed Jun 12,
2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e2MR0gXHHeE.
[32]
Protopasta. About spools, waste, and customer experience. [Online; ac­
cessed Jun 1, 2022]. 2018. URL: https://www.proto- pasta.com/blogs/
editorial/about-spools-waste-and-customer-experience.
[33]
Fabbaloo. Polymaker Shifts To Recyclable Cardboard Spools. [Online; ac­
cessed Jun 1, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.fabbaloo.com/news/polymaker-
shifts-to-recyclable-cardboard-spools.
[34]
McKinsey. The new plastics economy: A Danish research, innovation and
business opportunity. [Online; accessed Jun 13, 2022]. 2019. URL: https:
//www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/europe/the-new-plastics-economy-a-
danish-research-innovation-and-business-opportunity.
[35]
Sandra Laville. UK plastics sent for recycling in Turkey dumped and burned,
Greenpeace finds. [Online; accessed Jun 14, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://
www . theguardian . com / environment / 2021 / may / 17 / uk - plastics - sent - for -
recycling-in-turkey-dumped-and-burned-greenpeace-finds.
[36]
Gil Shochat and Chantal Lavigne. How Canadian recycling could be fuelling
pollution in India. [Online; accessed Jun 14, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.
cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/enquete-recycling-plastics-montreal-1.6345558.
[37]
Iman Dankar et al. “3D printing technology: The new era for food customiza­
tion and elaboration”. In: Trends in food science & technology 75 (2018),
pp. 231–242.
[38]
Ross F. Housholder. Molding process ­ U.S. Patent 4247508A. 1979.
[39]
Terry Wohlers and Tim Gornet. “History of additive manufacturing”. In: Wohlers
report 24.2014 (2014), p. 118.
[40]
Bhrigu Ahuja, Michael Karg, and Michael Schmidt. “Additive manufacturing
in production: challenges and opportunities”. In: Laser 3d manufacturing II.
Vol. 9353. SPIE. 2015, pp. 11–20.
[41]
Pat Picariello. “Committee F42 on additive manufacturing technologies”. In:
ASTM International (2017).
[42]
ASTM International. Standard Terminology for Additive Manufacturing Tech­
nologies ­ F2792. 2012.
[43]
S. Scott Crump. Apparatus and method for creating three­dimensional ob­
jects ­ U.S. Patent 5121329A. 1989.
[44]
Ian Gibson Ian Gibson. Additive manufacturing technologies 3D printing,
rapid prototyping, and direct digital manufacturing. 2015.
[45]
Ricoh Europe. Fused Deposition Modelling. [Online; accessed May 29, 2022].
2019. URL: https://rapidfab.ricoh-europe.com/technologies/fused-deposition-
modelling/.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 63
==PAGE:72==
[46]
Minde Jin et al. “Filament materials screening for FDM 3D printing by means
of injection­molded short rods”. In: Macromolecular Materials and Engineer­
ing 303.12 (2018), p. 1800507.
[47]
Richard N Foster. “Timing technological transitions”. In: Technology in So­
ciety 7.2­3 (1985), pp. 127–141.
[48]
Hiroshi Iwai. “(Gordon E. Moore Award) Impact of Micro­/Nano­Electronics,
Miniaturization Limit, and Technology Development for the Next 10 Years
and After”. In: ECS Transactions 102.4 (2021), p. 81.
[49]
Philip Anderson and Michael L Tushman. “Technological discontinuities and
dominant designs: A cyclical model of technological change”. In: Adminis­
trative science quarterly (1990), pp. 604–633.
[50]
Michael L. Tushman and Philip Anderson. “Technological Discontinuities
and Organizational Environments”. In: Administrative Science Quarterly 31.3
(1986), pp. 439–465. ISSN: 00018392. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/
2392832 (visited on 06/08/2022).
[51]
David Hounshell. From the American system to mass production, 1800­
1932: The development of manufacturing technology in the United States.
4. JHU Press, 1985.
[52]
Bill Aulet. Disciplined entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a successful startup.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[53]
Desiree Valeria Ukobitz. “Organizational adoption of 3D printing technology:
a semisystematic literature review”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Technol­
ogy Management (2020).
[54]
Icek Ajzen. “From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior”. In:
Action control. Springer, 1985, pp. 11–39.
[55]
Fred D Davis. “A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new
end­user information systems: Theory and results”. PhD thesis. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1985.
[56]
Viswanath Venkatesh et al. “User acceptance of information technology:
Toward a unified view”. In: MIS quarterly (2003), pp. 425–478.
[57]
Everett M Rogers and Goodyear Roger. DIFFUSION OF INNOVATIONS
3RD E REV. New York: Free Press; London: Collier Macmillan, 1983.
[58]
W Richard Scott et al. Institutions and organizations. Vol. 2. Sage Thousand
Oaks, CA, 1995.
[59]
G.A. Moore. Crossing the Chasm, 3rd Edition: Marketing and Selling Dis­
ruptive Products to Mainstream Customers. Collins Business Essentials.
HarperCollins, 2014. ISBN: 9780062292988.
[60]
Ernst H Noppers et al. “The adoption of sustainable innovations: Driven by
symbolic and environmental motives”. In: Global Environmental Change 25
(2014), pp. 52–62.
[61]
Jennifer Osmond and Yvonne Darlington. “Reflective analysis: Techniques
for facilitating reflection”. In: Australian social work 58.1 (2005), pp. 3–14.
[62]
GrabCAD Community. GrabCAD Community Library. [Online; accessed Jun
20, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://grabcad.com/library.
[63]
FreeCAD. Your own 3D parametric modeler. [Online; accessed Jun 20,
2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.freecadweb.org/.
64 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:73==
[64]
Printrun. Pure Python 3D printing host software. [Online; accessed Jun 18,
2022]. 2022. URL: https://www.pronterface.com/.
[65]
Jim Horwitz. Sunhokey 3D Printer Parts Filament Welder JennyWelder. [On­
line; accessed Jun 21, 2022]. 2019. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=a3FwzuUcFFI.
[66]
Jim Horwitz. 3D Printing Filament Connector Gen2. [Online; accessed Jun
21, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.amazon.com/Printing-Filament-Connector-
Accessories-Material/dp/B09CP5LBPN.
[67]
Avery Shred. 3D Printer Filament Joiner. [Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022].
2017. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uFxr-8xk33M.
[68]
Simon Borst. 3D Printer Filament Joiner. [Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022].
2018. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rq2kH4teNkA.
[69]
Proper Printing. Experimental home made filament joining rig. How does it
perform? [Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022]. 2020. URL: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=PCHZ672zx0g.
[70]
RepRap Wiki. Filament spool. [Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022]. 2016. URL:
https://reprap.org/wiki/Filament_spool.
[71]
RichRap3D. Universal 3D printing filament spool standard 2014. [Online;
accessed Jun 22, 2022]. 2014. URL: https://richrap.blogspot.com/2014/03/
universal-3d-printing-filament-spool.html.
[72]
RichRap3D. MasterSpool ­ A proposed standard for 3D Printing filament
supply without a spool. [Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022]. 2018. URL: https:
//richrap.blogspot.com/2018/01/masterspool-proposed-standard-for-3d.html.
[73]
RichRap3D. MasterSpool V3 Das Filament ­ First tests. [Online; accessed
Jun 22, 2022]. 2018. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqnFiI3thjQ.
[74]
eSUN. eSUN PLA+ Refilament and eSpool Kit. [Online; accessed Jun 22,
2022]. 2020. URL: https://www.amazon.co.uk/eSUN-Refilament-Removable-
Compatible-Spoolless/dp/B08PTTYMJ4.
[75]
Florian Gehrke. PLA Filament: The Best Brands of 2022. [Online; accessed
Jun 22, 2022]. 2022. URL: https://all3dp.com/1/best-pla-filament/.
[76]
Adam Savage’s Tested. Multi­Color 3D Printing with Palette Filament Splicer.
[Online; accessed Jun 22, 2022]. 2016. URL: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=uecY5ikWdCI.
[77]
3D Printing Nerd. Torture Toaster on the Palette 3 Pro. [Online; accessed
Jun 22, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l9SfHH8ZbdY.
[78]
Mosaic Manufacturing. Palette 2 Pro Splice Core. [Online; accessed Jun
22, 2022]. 2021. URL: https://www.mosaicmfg.com/products/splice-core-pro.
[79]
European Pallet Association. EPAL Euro Pallet. [Online; accessed Jun 22,
2022]. 2017. URL: https://www.epal-pallets.org/eu-en/load-carriers/epal-euro-
pallet.
[80]
UK Health and Safety Executive. Pallet Safety PM15. [Online; accessed Jun
22, 2022]. 2014. URL: https://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/pm15.pdf.
[81]
Alvaro Goyanes et al. “Fused­filament 3D printing (3DP) for fabrication of
tablets”. In: International journal of pharmaceutics 476.1­2 (2014), pp. 88–
92.
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 65
==PAGE:74==
66 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:75==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 67
==PAGE:76==
A
US5121329A Drawings
68 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:77==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 69
==PAGE:78==
70 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:79==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 71
==PAGE:80==
B
Main Plate Blueprint
72 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:81==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 73
==PAGE:82==
C
Hotend Plate Blueprint
74 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:83==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 75
==PAGE:84==
D
Rectangular Mould Blueprint
76 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:85==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 77
==PAGE:86==
E
Cylindrical Mould Blueprint
78 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:87==
F
Segmented Filament Box
Render
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 79
==PAGE:88==
G
Interview Questions
• What is the position of your institution regarding 3D printing?
• What are the main pain­points of 3D printing for your business?
• What is your filament consumption per month?
• What is the budget reserved for 3D printing by your organization?
• How is the procedure of buying new devices/tools?
• How important is a greener solution for your organization?
• How important is a cheaper solution for your organization?
• Do you think your institution will be interested in a greener proposal?
• If the solution is greener, what extra percentage of the current price your
institution is willing to pay?
• Which are the red flags when purchasing a new tool?
• Can your workflow benefit from a segmented approach?
80 Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution
==PAGE:89==
Exploring the technology and business potential of a segmented 3D printing filament solution 81
==PAGE:90==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there
no information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain all
letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is no need
for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Diplomvej, Building 371 and 372
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/
