==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Minimalistic Structural Design Through
Cable Systems
Master Thesis
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
Minimalistisk Konstruktionsdesign via Wiresystemer
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Julian Frederik Sørensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This 30 ECTS points thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Design
and Processes, Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science (MSc) in Architectural Engi-
neering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of structural mechanics.
Julian Frederik Sørensen - s164617
Signature
Date
ii
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
2022.06.27
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the recent repercussions from international conflicts and the COVID pandemic,
materials are at a high demand with low supply. Consequently, building materials have
become far more expensive in only a short amount of time. Beams used today are designed
using traditional methods and may not be fully optimized for handling structural loads,
thus resulting in ineﬀicient use of the available material.
Such cases may exacerbate
material shortages, but also the potentially negative environmental impact. Cable roofs
were thought to have a lot of potential in the 1960s and early 1970s, but have only been
used in a limited amount of structures due to their high price point—a symptom of lacking
construction expertise and research.
To change this, new and alternative solutions must be researched to lower the usage
of material.
In structural engineering, super-light structures use natural geometry to
create structural systems that weigh less and use fewer materials, however still manage
to withstand massive loads. Geometry found in nature has evolved since the beginning
of life on Earth, where natural selection gave geometries with better structural systems
perks compared to the last generation. There have been designed cable systems for the
experimental study and case studies.
Keeping the purpose of a cable system, simple
and parametric, allows for a program to quickly calculate the forces and deformations in
the given system. This will keep the cost of engineering calculations down among other
projects, e.g. smaller residential buildings.
The inspiration for the use of cables in buildings was provided through work on cable-
suspended street illumination. The author of this thesis originally aimed to create a more
open space in an old summer house, section 6.1, which led to the idea of a cable-reinforced
beam.
The CableBEAM concept uses less material, has a lower price point and supports the same
load capacity as other conventional beams. Numerical calculations of CableBEAM are
performed using a novel parametric CableBEAM configurator, allowing potential future
users to design a CableBEAM for their specific case. An experimental study shows that
the installation of a CableBEAM system increases the stiffness of a beam by 123%.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Tim Pat McGinley, Head of studies & Associate professor, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Civil Engineering, Design and Processes
Supervisor
Technical University of Denmark
Martin Alexander Sørensen, MSc. Student.
Support in testing and production of PAI of CableBEAM
Technical University of Denmark
Adnan Özari, MSc. EE.
Support in providing materials for CableBEAM
CEO of WePower A/S (formerly Danintra A/S)
Emilie Bundgaard Serritzlew, MSc. Student.
Support in LCA of CableBEAM
Technical University of Denmark
Kim. K. Wiwe, Structural Engineer at Consulting firm Dines Jørgensen & Co,
External Supervisor.
Dines Jørgensen & Co A/S.
Luisa Giuliani, PhD. Structural Engineering. Associate professor, Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Design and Processes
Support in Structural Fire-Safety Engineering of CableBEAM
Technical University of Denmark
Jesper Harrild Sørensen, Researcher, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Civil
Engineering, Structures and Safety
Test facility supervisor
Technical University of Denmark
Jonathan, Simon J, Svend, Simon & Benjamin,
Participants in usability test
Fablab Nordvest
iv
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation - Problem identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Method and Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Disposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Evolution of Cable Systems
5
2.1
Cable systems in biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Structural cable roof systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Inverted King/queen trusses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
CableBEAM
21
3.1
Structural concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Product concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Development of CableBEAM joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Development of the parametric design script through visual programming .
45
3.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Calculation methods
51
4.1
Analytical analysis of structural elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Analytical analysis of structural joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.3
Finite Element Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.4
Loads and safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.5
Fire-safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.6
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5
Experimental Study
91
5.1
Test Program and Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2
Test Setup & performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.3
Results & discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.4
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
6
Case Study
105
6.1
Case study A - House in Ølsted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.2
Case study B - House in Gammel Holte
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
6.3
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
7
Analysis & Discussion
121
7.1
Comparison of analytical calculations and experimental results
. . . . . . . 121
7.2
Material usage, price and LCA of CableBEAM etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
7.3
Usability test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
7.4
Safety requirements and unforeseen loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
7.5
Market potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
8
Conclusion
143
9
Further Studies
145
9.1
Experimental testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
9.2
Tension check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
9.3
Assisting features for user experience and assembly of CableBEAM . . . . . 147
9.4
CableSYSTEMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Bibliography
149
Appendix
151
Appendix A — CableBEAM installation overview PAI . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Appendix B — CableBEAM PAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
Appendix C — Struts analytical calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Appendix D — 2-point cable system analytical calculations . . . . . . . . . 171
Appendix E — Cable Anchor analytical calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
Appendix F — Beam connector analytical calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
Appendix G — Fire insulated cable calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
vi
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation - Problem identification
Structural engineers have a long reputation with designing structural systems with ele-
ments such as beams, columns and walls. Designing a traditional system is a simple task
for an experienced structural engineer.
Every now and then, structural elements can break spaces inside a building. Columns are
sometimes placed in unwanted locations which could block a clear view or a travel path in
an area. Beams that span a long distance or are cantilever generally have a large profile
which for some are undesirable in their design, where a super-light structure might be
preferred.
Beams and columns are structural elements in which bending plays a dominating role.
In contrast cables are completely flexible and cannot bend, but they can withstand very
large tensile axial forces compared to its cross-sectional area. Cable systems are quite
common for other structural applications, such as suspension bridges, stay cables for large
masts, large stadiums or other large scale projects which requires large spans and has a
high budget. These systems are mostly complex and one of a kind, never to be used again
in other projects. Interestingly cable systems are rarely used in residential buildings.
Cables as a material is relatively cheap, but the time used by the engineer to design
the system can be expensive, because of the complexity of cables.
But cable systems
doesn’t need to be complex 3-dimensional systems. A 2-dimensional system are simpler
and a standardized system where a cable system can be designed through a parametric
program, could simplify the design task.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Objectives
1.2.1
Primary objective
The primary objective for this thesis is to design a parametric CableBEAM system that
will reinforce existing beams or new beams, creating a truss-like system. Large forces
can develop in the CableBEAM system and special connections are needed to transfer
forces, hence special brackets will be designed. The load capacity of the CableBEAM
system is analyzed through analytical and numerical calculations. Furthermore 2 types
of CableBEAMs are analyzed through experimental testing. At last the results will be
compared to verify the calculation methods.
The primary objectives are specified shortly in the list below.
• Analyze existing cable systems, in nature and structures
• Combine structural theories on how to optimize a cable reinforced beam
• Design structural joints for the cable reinforced beam system
• Develop a parametric FEA script, which will estimate the load capacity of the sys-
tem.
• Build and test a conceptual structural model of a cable reinforced beam
• Compare experimental test results, with analytical and numerical calculations.
• Compare the material use and cost of a cable reinforced timber beam with traditional
solutions.
1.2.2
Secondary objectives
The secondary objectives will include the product objectives of CableBEAM, this includes:
Parametric cable-reinforced beam configurator for users
A parametric program will allow users to configure a cable-reinforced beam to their needs.
First off the program will allow the user to setup the dimensions of their building, where
the program will use the structural engineering standard Eurocode, to find the appropri-
ate loads. The parametric program will analyze a cable-reinforced beam with the given
dimensions and loads, and as a result print a pictorial assembly instructions for assembling
their specially designed cable-reinforced beam.
Pictorial Assembly Instructions
Pictorial Assembly Instructions is a great communication tool for products with many
parts and arrives assembled. An average non-craftsman should be able to understand the
pictures and complete the guided steps required to get a finished system. The PAI will be
generated from the program, and will show the steps of the customized system. Through
a usability test, observing people without knowledge of the system, building the system
with a set of instructions will answer if it installation process is diﬀicult and requires
professional craftsmen or special tools to setup the system.
Color coded systems
The color coded system will code different sizes of the system e.g., brackets, fasteners,
struts and cables. It does not necessarily mean that the product itself has a specific color,
but can be type name. A contour palette of colors such as green, yellow and red, could
indicate the robustness of the specific type. Green products could have parts that doesn’t
handle as many forces as red products.
Design language
The design aesthetics of the system will play a large role for the system to be chosen
by the architect compared to a traditional larger beam. Different design languages for
2
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:11==
the system can be incorporated with the design language of the building, or fit the users
personal lifestyle.
Such design languages could be Vintage steampunk-, or modern slim brushed stainless
steel - styled system. The preferred top styles, geometry and material can be discovered
through questionnaires or similar.
1.3
Method and Theory
Design Science Research Methodology is used to develop and design the product in this
thesis.
The design process of the structural system will be designed through the generate-test
cycle, where the product is tested and evaluated over multiple generations.
The knowledge contribution framework leans towards improvement of beams that span
over an open area.
In this case develop new solutions for known problems, research
opportunity and knowledge contribution.
Extensive research on the topic of cable structures has been made, reviewing the evolution
of cables as an element, cable structures, and structural systems that includes cables as a
main element in the design. Based on the research, different options of a structural cable
system in a residential building will be discussed and researched. A specific system will
be researched deeper and calculated analytically and through Finite element. The system
will be built and tested mechanically to verify the calculations. At last a case study on
a small residential building will undergo a renovation where the statically system will be
used.
1.4
Limitations
The structural experimental tests were performed in a test facility at DTU - Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet. The test setup was rather small, due to transportation and budget
limitations. Because of this a full-size test of longer beams than 2m was not done.
1.5
Disposition
1. Introduction
Provides motivation, aim and objectives of this thesis, concerning minimalistic structural
design through cable systems. Furthermore what theory and methods are used during the
thesis.
2. Cable Systems
Provides insight into the evolution of cable structures. Where are cable like structures
observed in nature? What type of cable structures exist, with regard to buildings, and
which buildings use cables as a structural element? What have already been researched
to reinforce timber structures?
3. CableBEAM
Introduction to the structural concept of CableBEAM which would the product of rein-
forcing beams. The chapter further explains the considerations and options during the
development of CableBEAM, and the secondary objectives of this thesis.
4. Calculations Methods
Introduction in analytical design and calculation of the members used in CableBEAM.
This include the elements and joints. How is CableBEAM analyzed in a numerical calcu-
lations via Finite Element Analysis? Lastly, the loads and safety, considered during the
development of the CableBEAM configurator, will be explained.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
5. Experimental study
An experimental study was conducted to verify the results from the analytical and numer-
ical studies. Two different CableBEAM systems were tested, a CableBEAM with 1 strut,
and 2 struts. Both CableBEAMS were tested as non-pretensioned and pre-tensioned. Fur-
thermore a beam without reinforcement was loaded to evaluate the potential benefits of
reinforcing a timber beam.
6. Case study
Case studies are different from the experiment study, since a building is subjected to a
variaty of load combinations, where the load capacity and deflection of the beam would
have to be within a certain limit. Two studies are conducted, Case Study A will go through
the process of designing a CableBEAM after demolishing a load bearing wall, while Case
Study B will go through the process of reinforcing an existing glulam beam.
7. Analysis and Discussion
Results from the calculations, experimental and case study will be analyzed and discussed.
Verification of calculation methods are done by comparing results from the experiment
with the analytical and numerical calculations. Furthermore it will be analyzed if the use of
CableBEAM is eﬀicient and cost-effective in different scenarios, which is the experimental
study and case studies. CableBEAM will be compared with glulam- and steel beams with
similar load capacity and stiffness. Are CableBEAMs enviromentally friendly, a short LCA
section will compare the material usage with the global warming potential, for Case Study
B. A usability test was conducted, which gave an insight of the buildability of CableBEAM
from a DIY persons view. Further questions were asked and reflected upon. Finally the
safety of the product is discussed and how the safety could be improved, considering that
a non-licensed person which has no knowledge of structural systems would be able to
assemble and install a CableBEAM in a building.
8. Conclusion
Summarizes the important conclusions drawn from the analysis and discussion, thereby
concluding the aim of this thesis.
9. Further studies
Proposes further studies on the topic of CableBEAM. Discussing how future experimental
studies can be enhanced with less errors. How the user would be able to check if the
CableBEAM is pretensioned correctly, and maintain a correct tension over time. Assisting
features for user experience of assembling CableBEAM and finally what other designs could
be used further improving CableBEAM and other beams where cables could effectively
reduce the cross-section of a beam.
4
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Evolution of Cable Systems
It’s important to know what types of structural systems that exist today, which include
members that allow large axial tensile forces.
Nature provides many examples of eﬀicient and effective structural systems. By studying
these systems, engineers can develop new theories for structural systems. This is because
nature has been able to sustain itself and its various components for a long time, through
many generations, so it can serve as a good model for designing durable and eﬀicient struc-
tures. Additionally, nature is full of variety, which can give designers ideas for creating
unique and interesting structures. Finally, studying nature can help designers understand
how to create systems that are resilient to external forces. In section 2.1 different geome-
tries, which include tensile members, that handle external forces, with the minimum use
of material and stress in the system, will be studied.
Furthermore different structural cable roof systems that have been designed, will be stud-
ied in section 2.2. This includes the basic understanding of how the most common cable
systems work and are constructed.
Finally in section 2.3 a structural system called Inverted king truss, which has a lot in
common the the structural system on CableBEAM, will be studied.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Cable systems in biology
Cable systems are not any new technology if it is looked at from a higher point of view.
Narrow, completely flexible material that only functions properly when axial tensile forces
are applied can be seen in a variety of objects. From a biological aspect, it can be seen in
the musculoskeletal system. Insects such as spiders and ants has been using the physics
of a cable systems to survive to this day.
The cable system can be found when ants form structures from their own bodies. They
hang on to each other and form living chains, which they use to cover and enclose a given
space; where the queen and the brood would be protected. To cross small watercourses,
they form living bridges: the ants hang onto each other, so that the following can pass.
During floods, they form clumps and float along as a raft. In Figure 2.1 a living ant bridge
takes the shape on a catenary arc, lowering the tension between each ant, creating a strong
rope like bridge.
Figure 2.1: Ants form a live bridge in a catenary arc [1]
6
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:15==
2.1.1
Spiderwebs
Spiders are natural experts in cable systems. The long existence of spiders on our earth -
they appeared more than 500 million years ago, mankind only 1 million years ago - proves
to us that they live in a very stable systems. Very stable life systems always turn out to
be very economical; nothing is wasted.
Figure 2.2: Construction process of a spiderweb [2]
What technical problems could be interesting for a more intensive study of spiders and
their webs? Solutions for load-bearing structures and how they can be kept under tension
could be found; relaxation of the tension would lead to fluttering due to wind loads. Spiders
check the tension with the help of an excellent sense of touch with their legs and tension
the web in certain segments. These segments are usually referred to as stabiliments.
For a long time, it was thought that the often-encountered triangle compounds in these
stabiliments would give the web special stability. However, this is a false static view as,
in purely load-bearing and prestressed structures, which the spider webs are, the triangle
compound is not important in principle. These so-called stabiliment segments have arisen
from the spider’s desire to shorten the ring threads and thus tension the net.
Figure 2.3: Attachment of a spiderweb thread. The multiple attachment points of the
anchorage offer increased safety. [2]
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.2
Musculoskeletal systems
The musculoskeletal system is a construction of vertebrates that is both lightweight and
secure. Static-dynamic investigations of the human support and musculoskeletal system
have found that bones, ligaments, and muscles work together to create an ideal lightweight
construction. If the skeleton is considered by itself, it can be seen that it is unable to take
up any forces or loads, and thereby collapse as a so-called kinematic chain.
A member that is ”floating freely in space”, and connected to another member has six
degrees of freedom. The first 3 degrees of freedom is displacement in x-, y- and z-axis,
the last 3 degrees of freedom is rotational degrees of freedom, rotating around the same 3
axis. A connection that is not allowed to displace from another member but is allowed to
freely rotate can be replaced by a ball joint.
How does the animal skeleton achieve a high level of stress, and why wasn’t the straight-
forward way of directly connecting members to each other chosen? Let’s look at each bone
as a body in itself. It is connected to its neighboring bodies by tendons, ligaments, and
muscles. The bone is suitable for compressive forces and only to a limited extent, bending
forces. Muscles, ligaments, and tendons can only take up tensile forces. The tendons and
ligaments are made of elastic material and can therefore also absorb shocks. The muscles
are firmly anchored in the bone.
The animal support and movement apparatus, consists of different pressure and tension
members.
In technology, this principle - with the exception of prestressed reinforced
concrete - has been relatively little used so far.
Figure 2.4a shows the muscle and ligament under a shift in the center of gravity. The
pelvis and head of the horse are considered as one rigid body. Depending on the position
of the legs, either the front or the rear muscles of the thigh make the connection between
the pelvis and the leg rigid. Figure 2.4b shows muscles and tendons for tension; bones
for pressure allow movement and stability of the skeletal system. Model for collapsible
structures.
(a) Simple illustration of muscles in ten-
sion on a horse
(b) Muscles, tendons and bones in a
skeletal system
Figure 2.4: Compression and tension members of animals [2]
8
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:17==
The separation of compression and tension members leads to considerable savings in ma-
terial and allows for great mobility of the animal skeleton which gives it elastic properties
that protects it from damage by impact, jumps, etc. The bending stress in the bones is
reduced by the combination of two or more muscles.
Figure 2.5: Bending stress of bones when eccentric loaded [2]
The functional arrangement of the compression elements (bones) and tensile elements
(muscles and tendons) can be seen in figure 2.5. The figure shows how nature has re-
duced the bending stress of bones by separating the system into compression and tension
members. Left picture shows large forces in the joint and bones. Middle picture shows re-
duction of stress in the joint by adding a larger compression area and a larger moment arm
between center compression and tension member. Right picture shows global reduction of
stresses by introducing lever arms and external tension ligament. [2]
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Structural cable roof systems
Cable roof structures were thought to have a lot of potential in the 60s and early 70s.
Many people believed that they were more economically stable than other types of struc-
tures. This led to a lot of research being done in order to study the different types of
cable structures. The use of high-speed electronic computing made it possible to develop
numerical methods for solving large systems of nonlinear equations.
However cable roofs are not as widely used as initially predicted, but they have a number
of potential uses that are often overlooked.
Their ability to span large areas without
support makes them ideal for sports stadiums and exhibition halls. Additionally, their
use in earthquake areas has the potential to save many lives. The cost of tension anchors
required is relatively high, but with more construction expertise and research, this cost
could be decreased. [3]
The use of high-tensile steel cables has made it possible to transmit large axial forces
relatively cheaply. The constantly increasing spans and elegance of modern suspension and
cable stayed bridges are the most obvious examples of how large loads can be supported
using members in tension. The use of steel cables in the design of long span roofs has only
recently begun to interest architects and engineers.
Cable roofs are popular for many reasons. They have been used to cover a wide variety
of buildings, from sports stadiums to concert halls. They have been shown to have a lot
of potential in regards to architecture, stability and eﬀiciency. This is because a majority
of the load-bearing members are under tension. Consequently, buildings that have cable
roofs are often both good-looking and structurally sound.
Although cable roof structures have been commonly used for buildings that need expansive
column-free areas, there is a growing body of evidence that suggests they are also cost-
effective for shorter span structures. With the ongoing increase in the price of steel, cables
are increasingly becoming a more appealing economic option compared to conventional
structures.
Cable roof structures can be divided into different categories in which they all support the
roof cladding:
1. Simply suspended cables
2. Pretensioned cable beams
3. Pretensioned cable nets
4. Pretensioned cable grids
A self-balancing building is one where the structure supporting the cables permits the
forces in the cables to be balanced internally. A non-self-balancing building is where the
geometry of the building supporting the roof structure is unable to resist the cable forces
without ground anchors. [3]
10
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:19==
2.2.1
General structural properties
Although cable roofs are commonly misconceived as linear structures, they are in fact
nonlinear mechanisms. The high-tensile steel cables that are used to support these roofs
can endure strains that are up to six times greater than what is permitted in constructional
steel. The stability of a cable roof increases as the displacement increases, so long as all the
cables remain under tension. This means that linear methods of analysis would produce
results that overestimate both the displacements and forces.
At first, nonlinear membrane theories were used to study pretensioned cable structures.
But with the advent of high-speed computers, other methods that are based on minimizing
total potential work, such as nonlinear finite element methods, became more popular.
Such methods can predict the static and dynamic response of linear and nonlinear skeletal
structures.
The stiffness of cable structures depends on:
• The curvature of the cables
• The cross-scetional area of the cable
• The level of pretension of the cable
• The stiffness of the boundary and support structure.
Cables should be kept taut in order to avoid damage to the roofing. A general rule of
thumb is to keep the cables between 4 and 6% of the span. This will give the structure
the necessary stiffness. Pretensioned cable structures are also less likely to experience
problems with instability. They are, however, subject to dynamic stability issues if the
degree of curvature or level of pretension is not high enough.
When a fire breaks out and the temperature rises, the tension in the cables supporting
the structure decreases, as does the force exerted by the structure on its surroundings.
The cables are under pretension, meaning that they are already under stress before the
fire. This tension is lost at a temperature that is well below the point, where steel starts
to weaken. Therefore, the structure is initially stronger and safer against collapse when a
fire occurs.
Cable roofs are a great option for anyone looking for an economical structure. The load-
carrying members are only subjected to tensile forces, making them simpler to construct.
Additionally, small teams of erectors can usually build them.
With the rising cost of
materials, labor, and transport, cable roofs are likely to become even more cost-effective
compared to other types of structures. [3]
2.2.2
Simply suspended cable structures
The cladding on rectangular or trapezoidal roofs can be supported by cables suspended
vertically in a series. For buildings whose roof is circular or elliptical in shape, the cables
supporting the cladding are suspended radially and attached at the perimeter of the roof to
a compression ring and in the center to a tension ring. If a roof is ellipsoidal or has a similar
shape, a combination of the two methods described above can be used by constructing the
tension ring in two halves and connecting them with two horizontal cables. This creates
an elongated tension ring which allows cables to be suspended in parallel planes in the
central area of a roof and in radial planes at either end. This is much like the spider
pre-tensions its web with a tension ring around its web.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.6: Simply suspended cable roof in parallel plane and radial plane [3]
There are two ways to reduce the amount of movement caused by applied loading on a
roof of this type: make the roof cladding very heavy, or make the roof cladding act as
a shell. Concrete is the most suitable roofing material for simply suspended cable roofs
because it is very heavy.
Either prefabricated slabs or in situ concrete can be used. A certain amount of pretension
should be applied to the cables in order to stiffen the structure during construction and
prevent cracks from forming in the finished roof. In the case of circular structures, this can
be done by jacking the central tension ring downwards and releasing it after the concrete
has set. [3]
2.2.3
Pretensioned cable beam structures
If the curvature of the suspension cables is reversed and a second set of cables is connected,
lighter and stiffer systems can be created. These systems or cable beams will be quite stiff
if they are tensioned to a level where both cables remain in tension under any applied
loading. The beams can be referred to as convex, concave, and convex-concave beams
respectively. In a convex beam, the connecting members are in compression. In a concave
beam, the connecting members are in tension. In a convex-concave beam, the two outer
members are in tension and the remainder are in compression.
Cable beams can be
arranged in different patterns to create roofs that are rectangular, trapezoidal, circular,
or elliptical in shape.
Figure 2.7: Pretensioned cable beams in 2D, Top to bottom, Convex, Concave, Convex-
Concave and Jawerth Truss. [3]
12
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.8: Pretensioned cable beams in 3D, parrallel plane and radial plane. [3]
A special cable truss was developed by Swedish engineer, David Jawerth. This truss is
pretensioned and has a system of triangles that work together to keep the structure in
place. The level of pretension is usually such that the ties remain in tension when only
dead load is applied, but when live load is applied, some of the diagonals will go slack
until only half of them remain in tension. The truss changes to a structural mechanism
when one or more of the ties go slack. The Jawerth Truss has been successfully used in a
large number of buildings with spans ranging from 15m to 100m.
Multi-span cable beam constructions are especially advantageous when a number of large
spans need to be interconnected, or when column-free interiors are not required.
The
anchor forces are only a function of the size of the individual maximum span and not of
the number of spans, which reduces the size and cost of the anchors required. In cases
where interior columns can be permitted, using a multi-span construction decreases the
height, dimensions, and foundation loads of the external columns. [3]
Figure 2.9: Pretensioned multi-span cable beams in 2D, Top to bottom, Convex, Concave,
Convex-Concave [3]
A good example of this type of structure is the Renault Distribution Center.
The Renault Distribution Center is the main distribution unit in the UK for the car
manufacturer, Renault. It is located in Swindon, England, and was completed in 1983. It
is one of the most notable examples of High-tech architecture.
High-tech architecture emerged in the 1960s as a response to the steel and glass monotony
of modernism. It is characterized by a fresh approach to the industrial aesthetic that
integrates the technical operations of a building with its structure.
The advancement
in computation and manufacturing technology fuelled structural innovation in building
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
construction that continued this style through the 70s and 80s. Norman Foster is one of
the most notable architects associated with this style.
After conducting a study of the facility’s operations, Foster+Partners derived a modular
approach to planning. This approach was necessitated by the need for a flexible, single-
story layout that could be easily modified for storage purposes every few weeks. 42 modules
were eventually used to accommodate the entrance, showroom, and oﬀice spaces.
The structure is inspired by the Foster+Partners’ experience of designing the Hong Kong
Shanghai Banking Headquarters and Reliance Controls in Swindon.
It is made up of
modules, each of which is covered by a ‘steel umbrella’ with a central steel mast and beams
radiating from the top. This structure was developed as an alternative to a conventional
one that would require large column and beam sections, a braced roof, and braced internal
partitions, making the floor plan rigid. Each of these steel umbrellas was developed as
portal frames on the rectangular and diagonal axes. This forms the primary structure
that takes vertical and horizontal loads on the roof.
The portal frames are made by continuous columns with angled, continuous beams fixed
and stiffened by tension members. The tension members are pre-stressed to ensure the
stability of the column and connection between the beams and column. The vertical ties
on the perimeter replace the angled beams and transfer load directly to ground. The
inverted catenary arch form of the beams resists uplift forces due to wind. The angled
beams vary in depth with respect to the forces that cause them to bend. The beams are
stiffened by horizontal and vertical bracing. [4]
Figure 2.10: Renault Distribution Center modular structural system [4]
14
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:23==
2.2.4
Pretensioned cable net structure
A third type of cable roof structure is one in which all the suspension and pretension cables
lie in a single surface, forming a large net. For this net to remain still, the cables must be
kept in tension, which in turn requires that the net have an anticlastic (saddle/pringle-
shaped) geometry. Otherwise, local flat areas of cables will sag and the roof will be subject
to potentially damaging flutter movements. If, for architectural reasons, flat areas cannot
be avoided, the roof will need to be stiffened with internal or external ties. Flat nets are
not very stiff, which means they are not a practical option for large roofs. However, they
may be used for smaller roofs if the boundary around the net allows for a high level of
pretension. Furthermore nets may also be used in multi-net construction. [3]
Figure 2.11: Saddle-shaped cable net on the ice hockey stadium in Tampere, Finland &
Multi-net system [3]
2.2.5
Pretensioned cable grid structures
Cable grids can be double-layered nets or multi-directional systems of intersecting cable
beams. While several types have been proposed, the most structurally eﬀicient and prac-
tical ones are those that can be constructed as two- or three-directional convex, concave,
and convex-concave systems. However, because of the geometry of cable beams, grids are
limited to roofs that are either circular or elliptical in plan. The construction of cable
grids leads to the same shapes as radial cable beam systems.
Figure 2.12: Radial cable grid system [3]
The radial system does not use a tension ring, which results in a more even distribution of
cables and the use of longer cable units. This again reduces the number of cable terminals
required. The cable beams in grid systems are self-aligning, so the clamps do not have
to exert much force. In practice, clamps may not be necessary. The main disadvantage
of the grid system is that the ring beams at the points of cable attachments are slightly
more diﬀicult to detail. [3]
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Inverted King/queen trusses
Inverted king post trusses are made to reduce bending, deformation, and a trusses’ height
by using steel bars and cables. In other words, they are a collection of continuous beams
(steel or wood) and steel cables that are positioned under the beam, supported by an
upright king post. Although they are slender, they are suited for large spans and have
small sections.
Posts are responsible for connecting beams, which behave as continuous beams, reducing
the span and, consequently, requiring a smaller section. They are tied by steel cables,
which work under tension and support the system.
Compared to a traditional beam,
this system absorbs the bending forces and converts the members into compressive and
tension members, which activates the cross-sections of the members more eﬀiciently. They
are commonly used in buildings where there is a need to free internal space and avoid
pillars, however it requires more space under the system to fully utilize the advantages of
the system. These systems are often used in stadiums, bridges, and roofs with large spans.
2.3.1
Architectural examples
The use of a rigid structural wooden grid of 5.5 meters x 5.5 meters is an example of its
use. It was built in 2017 on uneven ground in Mantiqueira Sierra, Sao Paulo. In order
to avoid an excessive number of pillars in the 2,000 square-meter buildings’ projection,
inverted king post trusses (11 meters in length) were used every two modules
Figure 2.13: Grid House with King truss systems, in Mantiqueira Sierra, Sao Paulo [5]
The system is used in another work, Eucalyptus House by Andre Eisenlohr. It is designed
for a steep slope and positioned parallel to the gradient. It is situated in a forest reserve
in Campos do Jordão. Prefabricated systems were chosen for fast construction and low
environmental impact. In this work, the roof’s main beams are made of inverted king
post trusses to avoid a central pillar, freeing space and guaranteeing they won’t suffer
deformations.
16
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.14: Eucalyptus House, in Campos do Jordão [5]
The usage of an inverted king post truss in a large scale building is demonstrated by
Sebrae Headquarters in Brasilia by gruposp and Luciano Margotto. The structure is a
mix of concrete and steel. The courtyard has a large span roof made of two inverted king
post trusses, 3.60 meters in height and 36 meters in length.
Figure 2.15: Sebrae Headquarters, in Brasilia, Brazil [5]
2.3.2
Studies of inverted king trusses
The inverted truss, or queen (or king) post truss, is little described in structural litera-
ture. The little information that exists is fairly generic. Other information requires buying
articles. Some information of an experimental study was found, an article called ”Numer-
ical and experimental evaluation of a double inverted trussed beam reinforced with steel
cable”, written by Francisco Antonio Romero Gesualdo, Thais Alves Cunha and Romulo
Barbosa Rezende.
Their article compared the strength and stiffness of an inverted king truss with a regular
beam. They found the modified reinforced beam to increase it’s load resistance with 97%
and stiffness with 43%.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.16: Test setup of experimental study, performed in Brazil [6]
They also compared their results with a numerical model (FEA). They had a few dif-
ferences in the result. Generally the experiential displacement would be higher than the
estimated displacement from numerical calculations. However they found that the rein-
forced beam had linear elastic behavior, allowing numerical calculations to use linear elastic
theory, instead of non-linear elastic. This lowers the ”cost” of numerically calculating a
reinforced beam.
The experiment revealed that the system’s weakness is the lack of stiffness in the beam,
compared to the extra load capacity, and the beam had a significant tendency for loss of
lateral stability. The lower stiffness was caused by the localized strains in some of the
connections. Thimbles, turnbuckles and elasticity of the steel cable. They suggest that
the cable, and all the connections are ”overdimensioned” reinforcing thimbles, cable clips
etc.
They had a few good ideas, and some that could be improved upon. The anchor point
of the cable in their experimental study used a single bolt, to transfer the load from the
cable to the timber. This had a very little compressive area, which caused a failure in
the timber at the anchor bolt. If they considered a larger compressive area they would
possibly achieve a higher load capacity of the beam, as designed in Figure 3.18.
Figure 2.17: Failure of timber at anchor point [6]
18
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:27==
2.4
Chapter summary
Nature provides many examples of eﬀicient and effective structural systems. Ants and
actually anything that is fully flexible and can withstand tensile forces, will form a catenary
arc when spanning over a distance. This is also seen in simply suspended cable structures.
Pre-tensioning cable systems can reduce dynamic behavior and stiffen a system to a certain
degree. This is seen in nature when spiderwebs are pre-tensioned with the ”rings” around
the web.
Pre-tensioning a curved cable system allows for tension under any load combination, as
discussed in pre-tensioned cable beam structures. This will create a stiffer structure, but
also additional stress on the components.
Dividing a beam structure into members of compression and tension, will reduce the total
stress received in members. This is seen in how the musculoskeletal system of animals
function and in concrete beams subjected to bending.
Finally inverted king truss systems use the concept of dividing bending moment into axial
forces. The experimental study done in 2013 in Brazil, shows that the system can be
calculated with linear elastic behavior. This is what CableBEAM will use to create a
minimalistic beam, with high load capacity and minimal material.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
CableBEAM
This chapter will explain the concepts of CableBEAM as a structural system and as a
product.
The structural concept of the CableBEAM system, e.g. the different theories and methods
used to fully optimize the cross-section of the beam, being reinforced is presented in
section 3.1 .
Since the CableBEAM system is meant to be used as a product by the
general public, introducing cables as a easy to use and calculate system, the product
concept will be explained in section 3.2.
The chapter will further explain the development of CableBEAM, the parametric design
script and the pictorial assembly Instructions. This is explained in subsection 3.2.1
Further considerations, thoughts and options during the development of CableBEAM are
explained in section 3.3. Some of the options were limited, hence not having the equipment
to manufacture a better part.
The CableBEAM configurator will be based on a parametric design script, created in
grasshopper.
Grasshopper is a visual programming addition to the 3d CAD software
Rhinoceros. The script can be uploaded in a online which is a 3D product configurator,
that can be applied on consumer websites. This is explained in section 3.4
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
3.1
Structural concept
Beams requires a large tall cross-sections to withstand large bending forces over a great
distance. The taller the cross-section the higher the moment of inertia. However beams in
bending only receive the largest stresses in the top and bottom, due to moment bending in
the cross-section. This doesn’t utilize the whole cross-section to 100%, when being loaded
to the maximum capacity. This means the top and bottom fibers will fail while the fibers
in the middles are almost unstressed.
If the cross-section of a beam begins to be too large, a more advanced structural truss
system can be designed by an engineer to carry the loads over a given distance. These are
however expensive to design and manufacture. The structural members in a truss systems
are generally not subjected to bending forces, but axial forces. This activates 100% of the
fibers in a cross-section, compared to bending. Truss systems typically has compression
in the upper part of the system and tension in the lower part. The lower part typically
consist of solid steel or wood, but it might as well be steel cables, which has a higher
tensile strength and a lower use of material.
The best scenario for CableBEAM is that the beam is only subjected to compression as
shown in Figure 3.1. However it is not always possible to achieve this scenario.
Figure 3.1: Stresses in conventional beam vs. best scenario of stress distribution in Ca-
bleBEAM
CableBEAM is at reinforcement cable system product for beams in roof structures, where
there is enough room underneath for a cable system.
CableBEAM consists of 3 types of structural elements. A Beam, Struts and a Cable. Con-
necting the structural elements are the Beam connector, Cable connector and the Cable
Anchor. The elements and the connections can be seen in Figure 3.2. For convenience,
the CableBEAM is flipped upside down for a better view of the components.
22
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: Component names of the CableBEAM
Which in the following theory, creates a very light and strong beam, that is able to handle
linear load well.
At the top of the CableBEAM we find the beam of the structure. This receives load from
the roof structure. The load is transferred to the nearest struts supporting the beam. The
struts are responsible for delivering the load to the cable. The cable will carry the load
from the struts and create a tensile normal force in the cable. The cable is anchored in
each end the end of the beam. The beam is then loaded with a compressive force, hence
creating equilibrium om forces in the system.
The the normal forces static system is viewed from the side in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Normal forces in CableBEAM when loaded linearly
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
3.1.1
Advantages of pre-tensioning CableBEAM
CableBEAM is similar to concrete beams in terms of reinforcement, bending stress in the
cross-section is divided into local compression and tension, instead of a linear bending
along the whole section as in steel and timber beams subjected to bending.
Furthermore concrete beams are typically pre-tensioned or post-tensioned to the specific
load the beam is designed for. The same concept can be applied for CableBEAM.
In figure 3.4 an untensioned CableBEAM is loaded and a deflection will occur, the cable
will be activated after some deflection, hence the non-linear elastic properties of steel
cables. If CableBEAM is pretensioned, the non-linear elastic properties of the steel cable
has been activated and the cable will now act more linear elastic and create a greater
horizontal tension force at the slightest displacement, keeping the beam level.
Figure 3.4: Effects of pre-tensioning CableBEAM
The level of pre-tension is adjusted to match the self-weight load from the roof through
the struts. Further load, such as snow load, will cause CableBEAM to deform slightly
downwards, but not into any critical condition. Wind load is generally more interesting
hence the possible lift of the roof, this will counter the self-weight of the roof. In a case
where the wind load lift of the roof is higher than dead load of the roof, the program will
give a warning. The pretension of CableBEAM should never exceed the maximum load
capacity of the ”compressive top beam” when CableBEAM is unloaded and in possible lift
load condition.
24
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:33==
3.1.2
Advantages of eccentric anchor point
The top beam can be considered as a column. The anchor point of the cable is the point
of attack on the ”column”. If the anchor point is set away from the column center-line,
this would consider the column as an eccentrically loaded column as shown in figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Structural system of eccentrically loaded column similar CableBEAM
The anchor point can be set with an offset by the design of the anchor as shown in figure
3.6. If the anchor connection is designed so that the anchor point is in center-line of the
beam, this would have no additional effect of negative moment on the beam.
If the anchor point is set further down, towards the cable system, this would create a linear
moment curve. The beam would, because of this effect, curve slightly upwards depending
on the tensile force in the anchor and the eccentric distance from the center-line of the
beam to the center-line of attack.
The eccentricity of the anchor point can be offset further with an anchor connection that
allows for this. The connection would have to withstand the moment, which can prove to
be diﬀicult, when large forces occur.
Figure 3.6: Different positions of anchor point and moment curve, (effects of deformation
is not shown)
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
If negative moment curve created by the offset of the anchor point matches the positive
moment curve created by the load, the moment curve would even out. This structural
concept can be compared with biology forming lever-arms on bones to reduce bending
stress in bones, as shown in figure 2.5.
3.2
Product concept
Apart from the structural aspect of CableBEAM, this thesis will also go through how
CableBEAM can be used as a product. In the next subsections in section 3.2 will show the
thoughts that went through developing a PAI for CableBEAM, developing a color-coded
system and finally how CableBEAM is aesthetically different from other conventional
beams.
All products will be CE marked and respect the structural norms e.g. Eurocode, in the
CabelBEAM configurator. This will be shown in the export of the PAI for the Cable-
BEAM.
3.2.1
Development of the PAI for CableBEAM
The PAI (Pictorial Assembly Instruction) will include 2 types of graphics.
• The first type is an overview graphic will greet the user on the website, and explain
the necessary steps that doesn’t include assembling their specially designed Cable-
BEAM. These steps are mostly details needed to use the parametric CableBEAM
configurator, and what the user should be aware of during the construction process.
• The other graphic will explain the details of assembling CableBEAM in a IKEA-like
style. This assembly instruction will be parametric and customized to the parameters
set in the CableBEAM configurator.
Overview graphic
The goal for CableBEAM, as a product, will be explained through Figure 3.7, with detailed
text. The figure shows the most important overview graphics, for higher resolutions, see
appendix.
The animation style chosen for the overview manual is borrowed from the video game
called Portal created by Valve. The puzzle-game explains tests and experiments in small
videos with small stick man called Bendy. Using a person in a pictorial assembly guide,
gives the user a better understanding of what he/she is supposed to do.
Ikea PAI’s
(Pictoral Assembly Instructions) also include a person instructing in preparations needed
for building the furniture. This includes what tools to use, how many people it requires
to build a unit, cautions, support etc.
26
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.7: The most important overview graphics found on the website for CableBEAM
Online CableBEAM configurator
The goal for CableBEAM, as a product, is to create a website where a user can learn more
about the properties and advantages of using a CableBEAM. The website is targeted DIY
people, and will introduce the procedure of tearing down a load bearing wall, setting up
a new CableBEAM or simply reinforcing an existing beam. The website will have both
overview graphics on how the whole process is done. The website will also have explaining
videos, this was made clear that it was needed in the usability test.
On the website the user will have access to a CableBEAM configurator. This allows the
user to design a CableBEAM for their specific needs.
Locate & Measure
The user is asked to locate the load bearing wall that they want to tear down. Furthermore
they are required to measure the dimensions of their house. It is important to note that
the dimensions should be measured on the outside of the building.
The parameters needed to calculate the loads on the CableBEAM are:
Hfacade
Is the height of the facade in meters
αroof
Is the angle of the outside roof in degrees.
Lbeam
Is the length of the wall being teared down which will also be the length of the
future cable BEAM.
Hwall
Is the height of the wall being teared down.
Wbuilding Is the width of the building.
foffset
Is the offset factor of the CableBEAM from the ridge. This is often useful if the
load bearing wall is offset from the center of the building.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
This information will be used to model a quick box of the users situation, and calculate
the expected loads on CableBEAM according to Eurocode 1.
Inspect roof type and topography
It is critical to know the roof type of the building. The type of roof defines the dead load
on the CableBEAM. To define the roof type inspect the outer finish of the rooftop.
In short the roof types can be defined into 2 types. [7, Table 4.9]
• A light roof type typically has a outer finish of asphalt roofing, eternit roofing or
metal sheeting. This roof type generally has a weight on 0.7kN/m2
• A heavy roof type typically has an outer finish of tiles. This type generally has a
weight of 1kN/m2
Further information is needed about the buildings location. First of all the user is asked
if the building is within 25km from the west coast of Jutland. In this case the basic wind
speed is 27m/s instead of 24m/s as in the rest of Denmark.
The user is asked what type of topography their building is placed nearby. They will
be introduced to the pictures in Figure 3.8 and asked what matches the view from their
surroundings. This will calculate the wind loads on the roof.
Figure 3.8: Terrain category
It is suggested that the user could enter their address and a program will locate the
information for the user.
Designing CableBEAM
When all the parameters are found they are inserted into the CableBEAM configurator.
The CableBEAM can now be designed to the users needs.
28
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:37==
Through machine learning and evolutionary solver, the CableBEAM configurator should
be able to design the most optimal CableBEAM for the user, by iterating designs. However
the user is also allowed to design their own beam.
The user can configure their CableBEAM with the following parameters:
Hcable
Is the height of the cable sag. If the sag of the cable is too narrow the configurator
will tell the user that they would have to apply more sag to the system, for
CableBEAM to function properly. The more sag that the cable receives the
stiffer the system will be and the forces in the system will be lower.
nstruts
Is the amount of struts desired. Normally there would be a strut under each
point load. Most roof rafters are placed ever 900mm, so the struts are recom-
mended to be placed with this distance. If the top beam in the CableBEAM is
strong enough to handle larger spans between the struts, the amount of struts
can be reduced.
If the user wants to reinforce an existing beam the following parameters will also have to
be configured:
fm
Is bending strength of the timber beam. This would normally be declared on
the end of a beam.
Hbeam
Is the height of the beam.
Wbeam
Is the width of the beam.
The user can choose to draw on the wall that they selected for demolition.
This will
indicate the size of the system, if the sag and distance is set correctly to their design.
Exporting CableBEAM design to a PAI
When the user is satisfied with the design of the CableBEAM, the project can be exported.
The user will receive a PDF with a Pictorial Assembly Instruction, for assembling the Ca-
bleBEAM. The assembly instruction will be parametric and customized to the parameters
set in the CableBEAM configurator.
The assembly guide will show the components needed to assemble their CableBEAM.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.9: PAI component shopping list
The material necessary for reinforcing a beam can be either delivered via mail or bought
at a local hardware store. A section, in a hardware store, can include all the different
brackets and materials needed in a color-coded cardboard display.
Assembling the CableBEAM
The user will now begin assembling the CableBEAM with the help of a Pictorial Assembly
Guide.
The user is asked to carefully read and study the guide before beginning the
assembly.
Assembling the beam will take one person about 30 minutes and about half the time with
two people.
All joints and members are carefully examined and compared with the drawings in the
PAI, before proceeding to the next step.
Assembling the CableBEAM
The user will now begin assembling the CableBEAM with the help of a Pictorial Assembly
Guide.
The user is asked to carefully read and study the guide before beginning the
assembly.
Assembling the beam will take one person about 30 minutes and about half the time with
two people. Assembling the beam correctly is more important than assembling the beam
fast.
Temporary support
Before a load bearing system is removed it is important to install temporary support of
the structure being supported by the load bearing system. This will keep the users safe
during demolition of load bearing system and installation of the CableBEAM. This type
of support can typically be rented for a day in a local hardware store.
It is later planned that the CableBEAM configurator also will recommend the size of the
30
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:39==
temporary support beam and columns.
Demolition and installation
When the temporary support is installed the load bearing structure can be demolished.
It is important to wear helmet and safety shoes in this stage. Furthermore it should be
investigated if live electrical wires are located inside the wall.
Electrical wires have a
electromagnetic field that can be detected with a relatively cheap tool. In any case the
user is asked to turn of the electricity in their building.
Apart from the timber material for the CableBEAM, the user would also have to buy
columns to support the beam. The columns would also have to be supported on a concrete
foundation, this would typically already be installed.
This is required under any type beam and will not be explained further. However Cable-
BEAM configurator could include this in a future update.
Remove temporary supports and more
When the CableBEAM is installed the user can remove the temporary supports and enjoy
the new open area in their building with a fancy beam no one have ever seen before.
Pictorial Assembly Instructions for CableBEAM
The second graphic will explain the details of assembling CableBEAM in a IKEA-like
style. This assembly instruction will be parametric and customized to the parameters
set in the CableBEAM configurator. This graphic has been created by Martin Alexander
Sørensen, with close collaboration with the author of this thesis.
The assembly guide and usability of the CableBEAM was tested in Fablab Norvest. For
more information about this see section 7.3
Figure 3.10: Pictorial Assembly Instructions for CableBEAM prototype
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
For the full-scale PAI see appendix.
Simple tools are needed to assemble the CableBEAM and can be assembled in 30 minutes
by 1 person.
32
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:41==
3.2.2
Development of Color-coded system
The color coded system will code different sizes of the system e.g., brackets, fasteners,
struts and cables. It does not necessarily mean that the product itself has a specific color,
but will be the type name. A contour palette of colors such as green, yellow and red, will
indicate the robustness of the specific type.
• Green products will handle lower loads.
• Yellow products will handle medium loads.
• Red products will handle the largest loads possible in the series.
Figure 3.11: Component list with indication of color type
This will optimize the use of material and price when the user is designing their system,
the program will recommend the lowest possible color type. The program will print a
material list for the user, specifying the color type of each component.
If Red products cannot handle the loads, the program will show a warning and tell the
user to include more sag in the system. If the latter doesn’t help, then the user should
consider contacting the company responsible for CableBEAM or an engineering consulting
company.
Structural elements
GREEN LINE
YELLOW LINE
RED LINE
Cable
Cable diameter [mm]
Ø6
Ø7
Ø10
Max force [kN]
18.6
28.8
65.7
Struts
Bolt size
M12
M14
M16
Max force [kN]
@ 500mm length
11.9
21.6
35.7
Table 3.1: Color coded structural elements, dimensions and strength
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
Connections
GREEN
YELLOW
RED
Anchor
Bolt / nut size
M12
M14
M16
Max force [kN]
45
61.3
83.7
Washer size [mm]
Ø45x1.5
Ø45x2
Ø45x3.5
Max force [kN]
23.9
35.2
67.4
Plate thickness [mm]
1.5
2
3
Max force [kN]
56.5
75.4
113
eye nut size
M12
M14
M16
Max force [kN]
(Temporary solution)
3.33
4.81
6.86
Cable clips / lock [mm]
Ø6
Ø7
Ø10
Beam
connector
Nut size
M12
M14
M16
Max force [kN]
24.9
29.5
34.1
Timber contact area [mm]
45x50
60x100
85x125
Max force [kN]
11
21
35
Bracket thickness [mm]
1.5
2
2
Max force [kN]
16
32
53.4
Cable
connector
Strut nut size
M12
M14
M16
Max force [kN]
45
61.3
83.7
Cable bolt / nut size
M20
M20
M24
Cable bolt hole [mm]
Ø7
Ø8.5
Ø12
Table 3.2: Color coded structural connections, dimensions and strength
34
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:43==
3.2.3
Design Language
The design aesthetics of the system will play a large role for the system to be chosen
by the architect compared to a traditional larger beam. Different design languages for
the system can be incorporated with the design language of the building, or fit the users
personal lifestyle.
Such design languages could be Vintage steampunk-, or modern slim brushed stainless
steel - styled system. The preferred top styles, geometry and material can be discovered
through questionnaires or similar.
There are some concerns regarding structural fire-safety which could render the design
language of the brackets, near the beam, pointless. The beam and the surrounding con-
nections will most certainly have to be insulated and finished with fire-protective gypsum.
The cable can be decorated with hanging plants, national flags or confetti at festive occa-
sions.
Figure 3.12: Cablebeam decorated with plants
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
3.3
Development of CableBEAM joints
This section will explain the development of the joints used for CableBEAM. All joints
are developed through the method of using morphology tables. Here the individual com-
ponents or connections within the joint are considered in different ways. This allows for a
greater overview of possibilities for the joint. The table consists of two axis, the y-axis is
called Principle structures and shows how a certain function can be done in different ways.
The x-axis is called functions and can explain the connections or functions in a joint.
3.3.1
Beam connector
The beam connector is responsible for transferring the load from the roof, to the compres-
sive struts. Further compressive loads can be developed in the struts by pre-tensioning
the system. In figure 3.17 a morphology table shows the different approaches that has
been considered for the beam connector.
Figure 3.13: Morphology of beam connector
In the bracket to beam function 3 possible principle joint solution was considered.
1. The bracket is custom designed for the specific beam type, and will embrace all sides.
This allows for larger forces to be transferred hence the larger area. The hinges are
welded on the corner for maximum angle of the struts.
Downsides include: eccentric loading ”away” from the beam and will not compress
the beam directly.
Multiple brackets will have to be designed for each type of
standard timber profile.
2. Normal hinge bracket is placed ”inside” the outer sides of the beam, this allows the
bracket to deliver compressive forces without any eccentricity. The bracket is held
36
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:45==
in place by some screws, which is only loaded with shear force, hence the angle of
the struts.
Downsides include: less compressive area between the bracket and the timber beam.
This type has only 1 rotational degree of freedom, which can induce some moment
forces to occur in the struts.
3. A ball bearing joint will allow for 3 rotation degrees of freedom, this ensures that
the struts are not considered clamped in any direction and can rotate freely. This
will allows for only compressive forces in the struts if user error should occur.
Downsides include: Not as robust as the other hinges, since the ball can ”pop” out
of the socket, in case CableBEAM is loaded with an unforeseen load. The bracket
might also be more expensive to produce.
In the bracket to bolt function 3 possible principle joint solution was considered.
1. 2 nuts are welded into a metal plate that connects to a hinge. The compressive force
will load the connection eccentrically, but the distance is small and by using 2 nuts
the forces can be transferred as shear force from the nuts to the metal plate. The
size of the welds will determine the load capacity of the connection. It is important
the that the weld is correct and has no errors. By rotating the bolt in the nuts the
height of the struts can be adjusted.
2. This type on joint has no eccentric forces, and allows for adjusting the struts without
rotating the bolt, but only the nuts. This type of bracket would have to be custom
cast, which increases the production cost, but could be considered if the product is
mass produced.
3. A ball in the ball bearing joint will be hollow and threaded so a bolt can be inserted.
The socket is welded onto a plate which is fastened to the timber beam.
The chosen principle joint solution is picked from a concept perspective. If the products
are to be mass produced other principle joints should be considered.
The chosen principle joint solution for bracket to beam is number 2. The joint is most
practical in all situations, because of its robustness and simplicity.
The chosen principle joint solution for bracket to bolt is number 1. The joint is simple
and has the lowest production cost. The finished product of the beam connector can be
viewed in figure 3.14.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.14: Beam connector
38
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:47==
3.3.2
Cable connector
The cable connector is responsible for transferring the load from the struts to the cable.
The keep the cable ”away” from the beam, also keeping the cable in tension. In figure
3.15 a morphology table shows the different approaches that has been considered for the
cable connector.
Figure 3.15: Morphology of cable connector
In the Cable to base function, (cable clamp) 3 possible principle joint solution was con-
sidered.
1. The first option compress the cable from both sides causing minimal damage to the
cable. The connection is tightened through 2 bolts in each side.
2. a screw like component will squeeze into the cable, clamping it in the middle of the
cable. This might be more secure than first option.
Downsides include: It might also destroy strands in the cable if squeezed to tight.
3. The compressive force onto the strut, from the cable will keep the cable connector
in place. This is the least harmful solution for the cable. Easy to manufacture.
Downsides include: Not as robust as the other solutions. The cable can freely glide in
the connection if the cable becomes loose. The struts might also get pushed inwards
when loaded, instead of staying in its place.
In the base to arm function 3 possible principle joint solution was considered.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
1. There is no base in this solution, the base would otherwise be the cable itself. The
two arms would stay connected on the cable.
Downsides include: This will most likely damage the cable since the cable is respon-
sible for holding the two arms together around the cable’s axis.
2. This joint solution reminds a bit of the third solution, however this has lever arms,
keeping the struts in the same plane. This will reduce the rotational moment created
by struts in different planes. This might also look more aesthetically pleasing, when
considering the struts’ position. The base of this joint is a bolt, keeping the arms
together.
Downsides include: Large forces on the lever arm requires a very strong lever arm,
which will use more material, and harder to produce.
3. This solution is similar to the second solution, but without the arms. This is easier
to produce and will use less material.
Downsides include: The struts would have to be in two different planes. This will
cause a small rotational force in the struts, however the bolt in the base will be able
to handle the forces.
Finally in the arm to strut function only 1 principle joint solution was considered. Welding
a nut to the arm will be able to connect the strut with the arm.
The chosen principle joint solution is picked from a concept perspective. If the products
are to be mass produced other principle joints should be considered.
The chosen principle joint solution for cable to base is number 3. The joint is most practical
in all situations, because of its simplicity and it will be interesting to see how the struts
of CableBEAM behaves when loaded. Will the friction between the cable and the base be
large enough so it doesn’t slip?
The chosen principle joint solution for base to arm is number 3. The joint is simple, and
will protect the cable, compared to solution 1. The finished product of the cable connector
can be viewed in figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Cable connector
40
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:49==
3.3.3
Cable Anchor
The cable anchor is responsible for transferring the large tensile forces from the cable, into
compressive forces in the beam. The placement of cable support is crucial because of these
large tensile forces, at the point of attack. from the cable.
An eccentricity from the center of gravity of the beam will create a leverarm effect, resulting
in a moment in the joint and in the end of the beam. This is in theory great for the beam,
hence a end moment in each end will result in a flat negative moment curve.
Figure 3.17: Morphology of cable anchor
In the Anchor type function 3 possible principle joint solution was considered.
1. This anchor type is simple and cheap. The beam is cut with the desired angle of the
anchor and a steel plate is fixed to the end of the beam. The plate will wrap around
the top of the beam, where it can be fastened with screws. The bolt that will be
anchored to the end, is fastened by a nut and a large spacer. The anchor point can
be located in the center line of the beam, creating no eccentric loads to the beam,
just direct normal force.
Downsides include: The effective cross-section of the beam is lower than the other
solutions, hence requiring a large groove for the bolt to go through the beam. The
procedure to create this large groove can be quite challenging for a DIY person who
doesn’t have the appropriate tools. Small experiments will be done to see if this is
possible with simple tools. The steel plate can come in some standard measurements,
but will most likely have to be cut and bent to the specific design. This could be a
detailed guide in the PAI or simply have a machine that will do it for the user in a
hardware store.
2. Instead of using a bolt to let the anchor go through the beam, a plate could be
used, since it has a thinner profile and requires less area cut away from the beam.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
41
==PAGE:50==
This would also be easier for the user to cut, since it only requires a hand saw to
cut a strip out of the beam. The anchor point can be located in the center line of
the beam, creating no eccentric loads to the beam, just direct normal force. At the
anchor point there will be located a hinge which allows the user to use straight cut
beams. This allows for better compressive strength for the timber beam, and better
usability.
Downsides include: This would require that the bracket is iron-casted. This would
increase the cost of the anchor. A bolt will have to act as the hinge in the anchor
point, which is subjected to large shear forces. Furthermore that steel end plate
will like the previous solution probably need to be cut by the user to match the
dimensions of the beam.
3. A fin plate bracket allows for installation of the CableBEAM system on older beams
in a structure where there is no access to the end of the beam, without removing the
beam. This also ensures that the cross-section of the beam remains intact without
the need to cut the beam. The bracket can simply and quickly be installed with
some screws. This could prove effective when simply needing to reinforce an old
beam that sags or needs a little extra strength. The upside of the eccentric point
of attack is that it creates a linear moment curve from the start of the beam to the
end. This will cause the beam to bend upwards.
Downsides include: There is an eccentricity from the point of attack of the anchor
point the the center line of the beam. With large tensile forces this will create a
large moment, which will pull out the screws in the bracket. This bracket can only
be used from applications where little reinforcement is required.
In the tensioning type function, 2 possible principle joint solution was considered.
1. A bolt is anchored at the end of the beam with a nut and a spacer. The nut and the
bolt is able to resist large tensile forces see table:4.1. As long as the nut is supported
with a large spacer the forces can be transmitted safely to the beam. The tensioning
system of this system is cheap and can be pre-tensioned by turning the nut.
Downsides include: If the cable needs to be tensioned regularly it would require that
the user can access the nut at the end of CableBEAM. Furthermore this kind of
tension device would also require that the beam end is cut, which can be tricky if
the top beam is already installed and needs extra reinforcement.
2. Most steel wires can be tensioned with a turnbuckle. It will be located on the cable,
and can be easily adjusted if the cable seems to lack tension. It works with 2 bolts
in each end where one bolt has a clockwise thread and the other has a counter
clockwise thread. A M12 turnbuckle has a load capacity of 43kN. In hindsight it
would probably have been better to add this with the bolt anchoring type chosen.
Eye-bolts which are used in a turnbuckle can handle larger loads than a eye-nut,
because the geometry of the eye is significantly smaller which reduce the bending
stress in the steel.
In the bolt to wire function, 3 possible principle joint solution was considered.
1. Because of the solutions considered in the cable connector, it was suggest as a solution
to use 2 nuts welded together to form a eye-nut. The cable would go through the
nut hole and be connected with the required amount of cable clips.
Downside include: Reduced safety of the connection.
42
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:51==
2. Using an eye nut and attach it to the bolt. The bolt and nut can be welded to-
gether for increased strength and so the nut doesn’t slip out when the anchor is
pre-tensioned.
Downside includes: Most be fastened to the bolt in some way. Thread lock or a
weld can do the job, but requires more effort. Could also be done at the production,
and sell it as an eye-bolt with different lengths. An eye-nut has a low load capacity
compared to what the bolt and a normal nut can withstand in the same size, creating
a large bottleneck in the CableBEAM.
3. (not drawn) Using an eye bolt DIN444, this type of eye-bolt has a smaller eye, which
increases the load capacity of the eye. The eye and the bolt is casted together.
Downsides include: The bolt would have to be in the length needed for the Cable-
BEAM. This makes this solution less versatile.
The chosen principle joint solution is picked from a concept prototype perspective. If the
products are to be mass produced other principle joints should be considered.
If the CableBEAM system is being used on a new beam, where the end grain of the beam
is accessible the following solution is the most appropriate.
The chosen principle joint solution for anchor type is number 1. The system is the easiest
to produce, and can handle the most tension. The type has however changed from the
one seen in the morphology scheme.
The chosen principle joint solution for tension type is number 1. This solution can be
tensioned easily in a prototype, but if could be considered to use both if the system will
be used in a building. The turnbuckle allows the user to maintain the tension in the system
by turning the turnbuckle, which will most likely be in a more accessible place than the
end bolt.
The chosen principle joint solution for bolt to cable is number 2. The plain threaded bolts
are cheap and can easily be cut in the length needed. The eye-nut has a lower strength
than solution number 3, but is adequate for the experiment. The nut is welded to the bolt
so they wont come apart.
The finished product of the beam connector can be viewed in figure 3.18.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.18: Final product of cable anchor
If the Cable system was to be placed on an existing beam where the end grain is not possible
to access. The principle joint solution for anchor type number 3, would be suggested as a
different product for this purpose. The anchor would not be able to receive quite as much
tension, but certainly enough to ease the stress in the existing beam.
44
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:53==
3.4
Development of the parametric design script through
visual programming
The program that the user will interact with will have to be parametric, since every
case and building is different.
A great tool for parametric programming is the visual
programming language called grasshopper which is a plugin for Rhinoceros, a 3D CAD
tool.
The CableBEAM configurator is based on a script designed in grasshopper. Grasshopper
is a great tool for parametric design, but requires skill to use.
Many would often be
confused very fast when seeing the canvas of a script for the first time. Also Rhinoceros
is not available for everyone to use.
This is where Shapediver comes into play.
Shapediver allows grasshopper files to be
transformed into a cloud application. The user would not have to see the complex script
behind the CableBEAM. configurator.
3.4.1
Grasshopper script
To simplify the grasshopper script, a simplified mindmap of the program is found in
Figure 3.19. The nodes in this simplified map will be explained in detail.
Figure 3.19: Simplified mindmap of CableBEAM configurator
Input parameters
The script receives input data from the user during the visit on the CableBEAM website.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
45
==PAGE:54==
The main data is the geometry and location of the building that will be equipped with a
CableBEAM. The secondary data is the geometry of the CableBEAM itself, this is more
important if the user wants to design the beam themselves or if an existing beam requires
reinforcement.
Building geometry
The building geometry is used to create a box with dimension lines. This gives a visual
understanding to the user what the configurator understands their building looks like,
this can minimize any error that might occur. This also prepares for the next 2 steps,
which are calculating loads according to Eurocode 1 and creating a frame structure to be
analyzed in FEA.
Figure 3.20: Random building geometry
Loads according to Eurocode 1
Knowing the building geometry the snow and wind load can be derived. This is done
through a series of python scripts.
For more information on what has been used to
calculate this see ??
FEA of frame structure
A finite element analysis of a frame structure is derived with the different loads. The
frame is supported in the ridge, where the CableBEAM is placed. The frame analysis also
allows for the cable beam to be eccentric from the ridge.
Figure 3.21: Reactions on ridge beam in dead load, dead load with ridgebeam offset, and
windload
The reaction on the ridge support is then run through different python scripts which
calculates the designing load combination for the CableBEAM. The load combinations
46
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:55==
were added after the frame calculations so that characteristic loads on the CableBEAM
could be used to calculate deflection of the beam in Serviceability Limit State.
This also reduce the work needed to calculate a FEA model for every load combination.
First FEA of CableBEAM to Second FEA of CableBEAM
The first FEA of the CableBEAM requires results from the FEA of the frame structure
and the geometry of the CableBEAM. The results will show what type of color coded
components are needed through analytical calculations.
This is then loaded into the
cross-section selector for the second FEA of the CableBEAM with optimized components.
This can also be done with an iterative solver, which in general would work best because
it can handle multiple iterations than just two.
Results
All the sub calculations are brought to Excel write components that documents all the
necassary information for troubleshooting, and the data needed for the parametric PAI to
customize into the desired design.
The whole script is shown in figure 3.22
Figure 3.22: Grasshopper script
3.4.2
ShapeDiver
ShapeDiver is a cloud platform for building online applications based on parametric 3D
files made with Rhinoceros 3D and Grasshopper. This allows for a better interface and
interaction with the user. ShapeDiver also allows for using their API on external platforms,
which would be the website of CableBEAM.
ShapeDiver supports Karamba3D, which is the FEA program used in Grasshopper. This
allows for on the fly structural analysis with quick response.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.23: Using ShapeDiver to design a CableBEAM
ShapeDiver is free, when using most components. However they have limited the use of
Python for a payed version. For the rest of this thesis, grasshopper will be used to analyze
CableBEAMs without ShapeDiver. This is however a great product when a good user
interface is needed for a parametric design.
Alternativly the grasshopper script could read an excel sheet with the input values, and
output a different excel sheet, when run.
48
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:57==
3.5
Chapter Summary
This chapter has explained the concepts of CableBEAM as a structural system and as a
product.
The structural concept of the CableBEAM system, combines and utilizes many theories
to achieve a higher utlization of the cross-sectional beam. This has been programmed into
the CableBEAM configurator. Case studies will show it the theories are correct, or if they
have no impact.
A detailed explaination of Cablebeam, as a product, showed that still a lot of considerations
will have to be done by the DIY user, no matter what beam will be used.
The designs used in the development of CableBEAM joints were mainly easy to produce
with fair robustness. The joints might not be the prettiest, but they will withstand the
forces for the experimental test.
The CableBEAM configurator will be based on a parametric design script, created in
grasshopper. ShapeDiver proves to be a great user interface for users, but requires pre-
mium membership to use python scripts.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Calculation methods
This chapter will go through the equations used during the research of CableBEAM.
The chapter is divided into 5 sections.
• Analytical analysis of structural elements
• Analytical analysis of structural joints
• Finite Element Analysis
• Loads and safety
• Fire-safety
The analytical calculations of the structural elements and joints will explain what necessary
equations which are needed to estimate the load capacity of CableBEAM. Also a little extra
information is given on how to calculate forces in a cable system, with different types of
loading.
The section of Finite element analysis will cover the static systems used in FEM and the
most important settings to test out the CableBEAM structural system theories.
The section of loads and safety will explain what loads are applied to the building which
has been configured in the CableBEAM configurator. The material strengths and safety
factors are given in this section too.
Finally fire-safety has been a big concern for most of the people who have heard about
CableBEAM. This section will explain how cables behave during fire and how CableBEAM
can be designed to withstand fireloads.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
51
==PAGE:60==
4.1
Analytical analysis of structural elements
This chapter will go through the analytical equations used to design CableBEAM, can be
used to verify the Finite Element Analysis results. Some of the analytical calculations are
used in the CableBEAM configurator in the cross-section selector.
The structural elements include:
• The beam
• The struts
• The cable
4.1.1
The beam
The beam in CableBEAM is the top beam which is being reinforced with cables. The
beam is primarily designed to withstand the compressive force in the system, keeping the
cable in tension.
Compressive force parallel with the grain with moment
The beam is primarily designed to withstand the compressive force in the cross-section.
However moment force will also occur in the cross-section because of varying loads.
σc.d
fc.0.d
+ σm.d
fm.d
≤1
(4.1)
σc.d = FE.d
Anetto
(4.2)
σm.d = ME.d
Iy
+ z
(4.3)
Where,
σc.d
is the design compressive stress in the beam
σm.d
is the design bending stress in the beam
FE.d
is the design normal force perpendicular to the area
Anetto
is the area of the cross-section. In the case of cable beam some of the cross-
sectional area is reduced in order to install the cable anchor, see 4.1. Other
holes that occur in the beam where screws are installed does not count in the
reduced cross-section. How ever if moment occurs in the beam away from this
point, the full cross-section is used.
ME.d
is the design bending moment affecting the beam
Iy
is the moment of inertia for the beam
z
is the distance from the center-line of the beam to the outer fibers h/2.
Figure 4.1: Reduced cross-section of the beam at the anchor points
52
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:61==
The beam is in theory subjected to a positive moment by the linear load on top of the
beam, but this is countered by the cable pressing the struts into the beam creating a
negative moment. These moment curves counter each other out stabilizing the beam from
buckling vertically. Lateral buckling (horizontal buckling) is countered by either the roof
beams or ceiling cladding, supporting the top of the beam from moving sideways. In the
experimental test however this can become an issue, since the beam is loaded without
sideways support.
Shear resistance of the beam
The beam is not reinforced against shear forces, and it is up to the beam to deliver these
shear forces to the support.
Figure 4.2: Shear stress on timber cross-section
The shear stress criteria is:
τd
fv,d
≤1
(4.4)
Where the design shear stress is:
τmax = 3
2
V
A
(4.5)
Where,
τd
is the design shear stress of the beam.
fv,d
is the design shear strength of the material.
V
is the design shear force, this is the reaction force of the support.
A
is the effective cross-sectional area at the support. Normally Eurocode 5 de-
scribes that the effective width of the cross-section should be multiplied with a
factor of kcr = 0, 67, but Danish regulation allows the factor to be kcr = 1
Compressive stress perpendicular to the grain
Finally the compressive area between the beam and the supporting structure needs to be
large enough to transfer the load. If a timber member is affected by a load perpendicular
to the fibers over a short length, as occurs with brackets and concentrated loads from
crossing beams or posts, the strength of the timber member is often greater than if the
load affected the timber member over the whole length. This is because, in addition to the
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
53
==PAGE:62==
fibers immediately under the load being compressed, the adjacent areas also contribute to
absorbing the load.
Figure 4.3: Support area of timber
The calculated compressive stress in the effective contact area must, according to Eurocode
5, meet the condition:
σc,90,d
kc,90fc,90,d
≤1
(4.6)
Where,
σ90,d = Fc,90,d
Aef
(4.7)
Where,
σc,90,d
is the design compressive stress perpendicular to the fibers.
kc,90
is a factor that takes into account the load configuration, the risk of cracking
and the size of the compression.
Aef
is the effective contact area at pressure perpendicular to the fibers. The effective
area allows to use up to 30mm to each side along the fibers.
Aef = b(l +
30 mm)
Aef = b(l + 60 mm)
fc,90,d
is the design strength perpendicular to the fibers.
Fc,90,d
is the design force perpendicular to the fibers.
The kc,90 factor depends on the placement where the beam is compressed perpendicular
to the fibers. At the end supports, which is the case for the columns supporting the beam,
the kc factor is:
• kc,90 = 1, 5 for conifer timber (standard construction wood)
• kc,90 = 1, 75 for glulam timber
At mid-span supports, which is the case for the beam connectors, the kc factor is:
• kc,90 = 1, 25 for conifer timber (standard construction wood)
• kc,90 = 1, 5 for glulam timber
54
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:63==
4.1.2
The struts
The struts are responsible for delivering the load from the beam to the cable and also
withstand the compressive force that occurs when post-tensioning the cable. They are
subjected to compressive force only.
The static system of the struts are designed in such a way that they form a triangle
when looking at the cross-section of the CableBEAM in Figure 4.4.
This is a stable
geometry, keeping the cable from buckling in any horizontal direction. Furthermore it
allows the system to be more robust against unforeseen lateral loads like impacts. The
struts have different support conditions, depending on the axis, the struts are free to rotate
perpendicular to the cross-section, first static system viewed in Figure 4.4, however the
struts are not free to rotate parallel to the beam, second static system viewed in Figure 4.4.
This can cause unwanted bending forces in the struts. This could be fixed by introducing
ball joints. The support of the struts are locked against displacement in both ends.
Figure 4.4: Concept of cross-section, struts highlighted
The struts as mentioned before are subjected to compressive forces only, which are the
characteristics of a column. The struts are ideally straight and will remain straight under
a limited axial load. If the axial load is increased a buckled form will occur. The load
where the ideally straight column will buckle is the Euler load Ncr.y.
Ncr.y =
( π
ls
)2
· E · Iy
(4.8)
Where,
ls
Is the effective length of the column, in this case the strut can freely rotate in
both ends perpendicular to the cross-section. ls = 1. (Clamped beams has a
shorter length, which would in favor, hence this not being checked)
E
Is the Young’s modulus of elasticity for the material
Iy
Is the moment of inertia in the y-axis
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
55
==PAGE:64==
Knowing the Euler load for the column, a slenderness ratio of the column λ can be derived.
This compares the load resistance of a short column with no chance of buckling with the
load resistance of the Euler load.
λ =
√
A · fyk
Ncr.y
(4.9)
Where,
A
Is the area of the columns cross section
fyk
Is thge yielding strength of the material
Ncr.y
Is the Euler load of the column
The slenderness ratio of the column is checked with λ ≥0.2. It this statement is true the
column will buckle at the Euler load. It the statement is false the column is too stiff to
buckle before a different type of failure.
Furthermore the slenderness is checked
ls
(√
Iy
A
) ≤200
(4.10)
In real life columns are not ideally straight. A reduction factor χ is used to reduced the
strength of the column.
χ :=
1
Φ +
√
Φ2 −λ2
(4.11)
For the reduction factor χ a factor Φ, that takes imperfections into account, is needed.
Φ := 0.5 ·
(
1 + α · (λ −0.2) + λ2)
(4.12)
Where,
α
Is the imperfection factor for the cross section.
For CableBEAM all cross-
sections will be massive round profiles, which has a value of α = 0.49
λ
Is slenderness ratio of the column
Finally the design load resistance of the column Nb.Rd can be calculated.
Nb.Rd := χ · A · fyk
γM1
(4.13)
Where,
χ
Is the reduction factor.
A
Is the area of the cross section
fyk
Is the yield strength of the material
γM1
Is the partial coeﬀicient for buckling resistance
56
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:65==
4.1.3
The cable
The cable has a predefined sag from the user, and follows the shape of a catenary curve
with a polygonal line. This subsection will explain what cable is used for the conceptual
beam, and how to estimate the forces in a cable system.
Steel cable material and cross-sectional values
The steel cable used in the experimental study can be viewed in Figure 4.5. The diameter
used is 7mm, with a characteristic tensile strength of fuk = 1670MPa able to withstand
FRd = 28.8kN
Figure 4.5: Cable strength properties used in the experimental study
The tensile stiffness is expressed as EA, where E is Young’s modulus of elasticity and A
is the tensile area of the steel cable. The tensile area of the cable is certain and given by
the supplier.
According to Eurocode 3, EN 1993-1-11:2006 [8, Table 1.1], Strand rope, which is used in
the test, belongs in group B. Where group A is tension bars (rods) and C is multiple cable
wires bundled together. Subsection [8, p. 3.2.2] explains that the modulus of elasticity for
Group B tension components should be derived from tests.
The modulus of elasticity is dependent on the stress level and whether the cable has been
prestreched and cyclically loaded and unloaded. If test results are unavailable, nominal
values of moduli of elasticity for use as first estimates are given in table 4.6. These values
apply for cables which have been pre-stretched through cyclic loading of a range between
30% and 40% of the cable’s breaking strength.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.6: Moduli of elasticity of steel cables [8, p. 3.1]
The modulus of elasticity of the steel cable used in the experiment is not given by the
supplier, therefore a modulus of elasticity of 90GPa is estimated for the stainless steel
Strand wire rope with steel Core Wire Rope (CWR).
It is thought that the cable used in the experiment is a non pre-stretched cable. Non-
prestreched cables in Group B exhibit both elastic and permanent deformations when
subjected to static loading.
Steel cables can become longer by:
• Elongation after cyclic loading
• Difference in design temperature (10 degrees Celsius) and the ambient temperature
when the cable length is fixed on the beam
• Long term cable creep under load
• Additional elongation of cable after installation of cable clips
• Slip of cable withing the cable clip
• Deformation after first loading.
In pre-tensioned elements cables are often installed with higher loads during erection to
account for cable creep after installation.
58
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:67==
Single point load on a cable
The cable is supported on frictionless rollers at points A and B, and it is loaded by a single
vertical force, P, acting midway between A and B. The sag at load point C is called a, and
it depends on the horizontal tension, T, at the cable ends.
Figure 4.7: Static system of a single point loaded cable [9]
To analyze a structural system, all forces need to be in equilibrium, this is done by calcu-
lating the reaction forces of the supports.
Figure 4.8: Force equilibrium of a single point loaded cable [9]
The vertical reactions are determined by:
↶
B :
−R↑
Aℓ+ P 1
2ℓ= 0 ⇒R↑
A = 1
2P
(4.14)
↶
A :
R↑
Bℓ−P 1
2ℓ= 0
⇒
R↑
B = 1
2P
(4.15)
The cable will always have the same unit vector (direction) as the resultant vector of the
horizontal tension force of the cable and the vertical reaction force. With this in mind the
following relation applies:
a
1
2ℓ=
1
2P
T
⇒T
P = ℓ
4a
(4.16)
The amount of force, T, necessary to achieve the desired sag, a, is inversely proportional
to the sag itself. In other words, the larger the desired sag, the less force is required to
achieve it. If a small sag is desired, a large force must be applied. This relationship is
illustrated in figure 4.9
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.9: Horizontal forces as a function of the sag in the system [9]
The horizontal and vertical components of the cables normal force, S, are determined.
This is done by finding the sum of the forces acting on the object in the horizontal and
vertical direction.
Figure 4.10: Horizontal, vertical and normal forces at cable anchor [9]
A cut is made in the cable between A and C, and the normal force of the cable is called
SAC. As shown in Figure 4.10, the horizontal and vertical components of the normal force
are respectively called SAC horizontal and SAC vertical. The relation of equilibrium of
forces in an isolated system, the SAC horizontal and SAC vertical forces can be isolated
and derived.
→:
−T + S−
AC = 0
⇒
S−
AC = T
(4.17)
↑:
R↑
A −S|
AC = 0
⇒
S|
AC = 1
2P
(4.18)
The fact that the cable has the same direction as its normal force, can be used to construct
the shape of the cable, when the horizontal anchoring force is known. The cable curve
in figure 4.11 is now constructed according to this principle. Note that the force vectors
lengths here are proportional to their size.
The vertical reactions can be determined
without knowledge of the cable’s shape, as done above. By choosing that T = P, we start
the construction at A. First, the normal force vector SAC is constructed so equilibrium in A
60
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:69==
is achieved. This determines point D. The line AD is extended until the intersection with
the line of action of the load at point C. Then the normal force vector SCB is constructed
so that there is equilibrium in C. This determines point E. The line CE is extended until
the intersection with the reaction line at point B. The cable curve is now determined, since
equilibrium in B has been achieved. The the sag is determined to be a = L/4. [9]
Figure 4.11: All forces acting in a single point loaded cable system [9]
As an example of this, CableBEAM with 1 strut can be considered. See appendix for an
example of this method used to predict the tension forces in the cable for experimental
study Test 1.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
61
==PAGE:70==
Multiple point loads on a cable
When multiple point loads are supported by a cable, the cable forms a polygon, which we
call the cable polygon. The cable polygon is constructed by looking at the equilibrium of
an isolated part of the cable around the load points. The process starts at the end of the
cable, and moves from one load point to the next load point. Figure 4.12 shows a load
point called J, which is between load point I and load point K. The two support points
are also considered as load points. In the figure it is assumed that we move from left to
right during construction.
Figure 4.12: Equilibrium of load J, between load point I and K [9]
Figure 4.12 demonstrates how to determine the normal force SIJ to the right of the load
point. The principle is to achieve vertical and horizontal equilibrium. A key characteristic
of a cable with a vertical load is that its horizontal projection of the normal force is always
equal to T, which is the horizontal anchoring force for the cable. Therefore, S|
IJ is the
only size that needs to be determined to determine the direction of the cable towards the
right. The value is determined by vertical projection equilibrium, with the projections of
the normal forces of the cable being positive as shown in the figure.
↑:
S|
IJ + S|
JK −PJ = 0
⇒
S|
JK = PJ −S|
IJ
(4.19)
As an example of this, CableBEAM with 2 struts can be considered. See appendix for an
example of this method used to predict the tension forces in the cable for experimental
study Test 2.
62
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:71==
Linear load on a freely hanging cable
If the span is long enough and with enough struts a linear load on a freely hanging cable
is considered suﬀicient to compare with the results of the FEA. A cable with a distributed
load p(z) acting vertically downwards is considered. The cable is assumed to be inelastic,
but otherwise fully flexible with respect to bending. The differential equation for the rope
is derived by considering the differential element of the rope shown in figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Linear loaded cable, zoomed in is a differential part of the cable [9]
The positive and negative projections of the normal forces are considered as shown in the
figure. The requirement for horizontal and vertical projection equilibrium implies that the
sum of the projections of the normal forces is zero.
→:
−S−+
(
S−+ dS−)
= 0
⇒
dS−= 0
(4.20)
↑:
S| −
(
S| + dS|)
−p(x)dx = 0
⇒
dS|
dx = −p(x)
(4.21)
The horizontal component of the force, S−, is constant along the beam. The vertical
component of the force, S|, satisfies a first-order ordinary differential equation, given in
4.21. The beam’s sag u is determined from the condition that the beam’s inclination at
any point is equal to the inclination of the normal force. This can be written as:
duz
dx = S|
S−
(4.22)
Differentiating the expression with respect to x and using 4.21 along with the fact that S−
is equal to the constant horizontal anchoring force. A second-order ordinary differential
equation can be derived for determining the sag.
d2uz
dx2 = −p(x)
T
(4.23)
Considering a rope with an evenly distributed load p.
The general solution to above
mentioned equation can be written as follows:
uz(x) = −1
2
p
T x2 + C1x + C2
(4.24)
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
63
==PAGE:72==
The two support points both lie in z = 0 and the distance between them is l. The two
unknown constants are determined from the following equations:
uz(0) = 0
⇒
C2 = 0
(4.25)
uz(ℓ) = 0
⇒
C1 = pℓ
2T
(4.26)
Inserting the constants into the equation, shows the solution to the cable’s parabolic curve.
uz(x) = pℓ2
2T
(
1 −x
ℓ
) x
ℓ
(4.27)
When the cable is linearly loaded and the supports are in the same height, the sag can be
determined from the following formula.
uz(ℓ/2) = pℓ2/(8T)
(4.28)
64
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:73==
4.2
Analytical analysis of structural joints
This section will go through the analytical analysis of the structural joints. The joints
have not been designed in a FEA software and relies only on calculations in this section.
The different connectors have been calculated for different color types, and is shown in
Table 3.2.
The joints analyzed in this section:
• Beam connector
• Cable connector
• Cable anchor
For a quick overview are shown in Figure 3.2
4.2.1
Beam connector
The beam connector ensures the load from the top beam is transferred to the cable.
Furthermore additional compressive forces are produced when pre-tensioning CableBEAM.
The struts are connected to the beam connector via. 2 nuts welded to a steel plate, in
which shear forces occur.
Welds
The equations needed to check if the welds can withstand the force of the struts, are
presented in this section.
Figure 4.14: Dimensions a and L of welds on the beam connector
The shear capacity for this weld connection is derived from following equation, by rewriting
equation (4.31):
FL,Rd = 2 · fu · a · leff
√
3 · βw · γM2
(4.29)
The depth of the weld and the length of the weld is important factors for welds. The
length of a weld should in theory be longer than they actually are. The length of a weld
should be within this certain length:
max
{ 30 mm
6a
}
≤leff ≤150a
(4.30)
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
65
==PAGE:74==
Where, leff is the effective length of the weld, which considers the risk of small mistakes in
the weld. Since this project is a prototype, this safety risk of small mistakes are neglected
since the filled welds are examined thoroughly after welding.
The stress criteria for welds are given by following equation:
√
σ2
90 + 3
(
τ 2
0 + τ 2
90
)
≤
fu
βwγM2
(4.31)
Where,
σ90
Is the normal stress perpendicular to the weld.
τ0
Is the shear stress parallel to the weld, this is the stress that occurs in the weld
of the beam connector.
τ90
Is the shear stress perpendicular to the weld.
fu
Is the ultimate strength of the lowest grade steel, the value is 360MPa for S235
steel.
βw
Is the correlation factor for fillet welds, the value is 0.80 for S235 steel.
γM2
Is the partial coeﬀicient of steel connections 1.35.
The shear stress parallel to the weld is found through following equation:
τ0 =
V
2 · leff · a
(4.32)
Where, V is the normal force from the struts. [10]
Compressive stress on top beam
The area between the bracket and the top beam should be large enough, so the compressive
stress perpendicular does not surpass the strength of the wood. For more information on
how compressive force perpendicular to the grain is analyzed, check subsubsection 4.1.1.
The color type brackets are designed to be large enough to transfer compressive forces to
the beam.
66
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:75==
4.2.2
Cable connector
The cable connector ensures that 2 struts meet at the cable and holds the cable in place.
The nut which is connected to the strut is welded to a larger nut.
The weld does in
principle not receive any forces, since the direction of the force presses the nuts against
each other. In general no calculations are found necessary for this connector. The shear
force on the bolt between the nuts is not one of the critical weak points in the structural
system of CableBEAM.
Figure 4.15: View of the cable connector
The chosen solution from this connection causes the struts to be offset from each other as
seen in figure 4.15. To have the most optimal stable triangle the struts would have to be
in the same plane. The large nuts could have an ”arm” which would keep the struts in
the same plane.
Figure 4.16: Force diagram of cable connector
The struts will mostly be in an acute angle, leaving the forces ”against” each other to be
rather small as seen in figure 4.16. Furthermore the lever arm between the 2 large nuts
is minimal, and the moment that might occur is stabilized by the cable, that has a even
larger lever arm. The physical model showed that even without a cable to stabilize the
connection, the connection was still very stable and robust.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
67
==PAGE:76==
4.2.3
Cable anchor
The cable anchor ensures the tension force from the cable is transferred to the beam as a
compressive force. A bolt is anchored to the end of the beam and is connected with the
cable. A nut with a large spacer ensures that the bolt is held back and that the cable can
be pre-tensioned by turning the nut.
This type of utilizes the whole effective cross-section of the beam, this should be able to
withstand a lot of force before failing, compared to the experiential test done in Brazil in
2013 as shown in Figure 2.17
The cable anchor consists of many parts and will demand a lot of analysis. The following
failures are calculated and discussed in this section:
• Tension resistance of bolts
• Punching shear resistance
• Compressive resistance of angled timber
• Cable clips
Tension resistance of bolts
The cable is fastened to a eye-nut. The eye-nut is fastenede to a threaded rod, and the
threaded rod will go through the beam and is anchored with a nut with a spacer on the
other side of a metal plate. This creates tension between the threaded rod and the nut,
this is calculated in this subsection:
The tension resistance of bolts Ft,Rd, with rolled threads are calculated as
Ft,Rd = 0.90 · n · As · fub
γM2
(4.33)
Where,
n
Is the number of bolts, in all cases in CableBEAM this would be 1
As
Is the tensile stress area of the bolt, see table 4.1
fub
Is the ultimate strength of the bolt which is 800MPa for class 8.8 bolts.
γM2
Is the partial coeﬀicient of steel connections 1.35
Bolt size
M12
M14
M16
M20
M22
As
[mm2]
84.3
115
157
245
303
Ft,Rd
[kN]
45.0
61.3
83.7
130.7
161.6
Table 4.1: Tensile stress area and design tension resistance for bolts
The tension resistance of the eye-nut, which is what attaches the cable to the bolt, should
also be considered. This is given by the manufacturer. The M12 eye-nut used in the
experimental study has a safe tension resistance of 3.3kN, but a characteristic tension
resistance of 10.3kN In the next version of CableBEAM the threaded rod and eye-nut will
be replaced with a eye-bolt, which can handle very large tensile loads.
Punching shear resistance
If the diameter of the nut is too small, the nut can in principle punch through the metal
sheet that holds the nut back. [10]
The average nut diameter is calculated as:
68
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:77==
dm = e + s
2
=
( 1
√
3 + 1
2
)
· s
(4.34)
The measurements e and s can be viewed in figure 4.17
Figure 4.17: Measurement of a nut
The average diameter of a nut can also be replaced with the diameter of a washer if that
is being used. The punching shear resistance is derived from following equation:
Bp,Rd = 0, 6 · n · π · dm · tp · fu
γM2
(4.35)
Where,
n
Is the number of bolts, in all cases in cable beam this would be 1.
dm
Is the diameter of the nut or washer.
tp
Is the thickness of the metal plate
fu
Is the ultimate strength of the plate material
γM2
Is the partial coeﬀicient of steel joints
Compressive resistance of angled timber beam
Timber has a high compressive capacity parallel to the grain, while having a low com-
pressive capacity perpendicular to the grain. The anchor will be angled on the end of the
timber, thereby loading the timber in an angle, this will lower the strength of the timber,
however the cross-sectional area is large and should be able to withstand the loads of the
anchor steel plate.
The criteria for compressive stress on an angled end grain of a timber beam is as follows:
σc,α,d ≤
fc,0, d
fc,0, d
kc,90fc,90, d sin2 α + cos2 α
(4.36)
Where,
σc,90,d
is the design compressive stress perpendicular to the fibers.
kc,90
is a factor that takes into account the load configuration, the risk of cracking
and the size of the compression.
Aef
is the effective contact area at pressure perpendicular to the fibers. The effective
area allows to use up to 30mm to each side along the fibers.
Aef = b(l +
30 mm)
Aef = b(l + 60 mm)
fc,90,d
is the design strength perpendicular to the fibers.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
69
==PAGE:78==
Fc,90,d
is the design force perpendicular to the fibers.
Figure 4.18: Compression of wood at an angle [11]
The graph in figure 4.19 shows the relation between the strength of the wood at an angle
over the strength of the wood parallel to the grain, as a function of the angle. If the angle
of the cable anchor is 25 degrees, the strength of the wood parallel to the grain is reduced
with 45%.
Figure 4.19: Reduction of strength parallel to the grain as a function of the angle of attack
Because of the large cross-section the beam would have anyway, this doesn’t seem to be
an issue.
70
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:79==
Cable clips
The cables are fastened around the eye nuts welded to the bolt. To lock the cable into
a loop cable clips are used. The cable clips are one of the most vulnerable parts of the
assembly process, since they are responsible to attach the cable securely to the anchor and
can easily be installed incorrectly. There are many different types of wire clips, but the
most popular and common one is the U-bolt wire clip. This type of wire clip is made from
forged steel or cast iron and consists of a U-bolt, two nuts, and a metal base (saddle). U-
bolt wire clips are very strong and provide 80-90% eﬀiciency of the wire breaking strength,
depending on the diameter of the wire. When installing U-bolt wire clips, it is important
to be careful and pay attention to the way they are installed.
Figure 4.20: Correct installation of cable clips [12]
The wire clip has a base made of either forged steel or malleable cast iron. Forged steel is
heated and hammered into shape, resulting in a stronger, more consistent grain structure.
Malleable cast iron may fracture under heavy use and does not have the desirable metal
properties or grain structure of steel.
Wire clips require the use of a torque wrench to function properly. If the clip is over-
torqued, it could damage the threads of the wire or u-bolt. If the clip is under-torqued,
the holding power of the clip is diminished and the wire could slip through. In figure 4.21
the nuts has been over-torqued and the tread is damaged. Use the table in figure 4.22 to
find the appropriate torque for the bolt type.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.21: Damaged thread from over torquing the nut
Figure 4.22: Maximum allowable torque of the nut, before damaging the thread on the
bolt [13]
There is a minimum number of clips required for use related to the wire diameter. De-
pending on the number and size of the wire clips, there is a proportional amount of space
required between the placement on each clip on the wire. There are two sides of a U-Bolt
style wire clip: the saddle and the U-Bolt. When securing a wire eye, it is important to
place the clip on the correct end of the wire. The saddle of the clip rests on the live end
of the wire, while the U-bolt is to rest on the dead end of the wire. A saying commonly
used in rigging to help remember this is: “Never saddle a dead horse!”
If the use is critical, a forged clip must be used that matches the diameter size of the wire.
Re-tightening the clips should happen regularly, they are typically re-tension every 1-2
years according to specialist in street lighting systems [14]. Monitoring the torque on the
nuts is important, as they will loosen over repeated loading, this could be temperature
differences or months with varying loads. [12]
The most important points to remember when installing wire clips
• Torquing the nut to the manufacturer’s demands
• Installing the recommended number of clips
• Correct spacing between clips
• Saddle is on the correct end of the rope
• Correct amount of turnbackwhen forming an eye
72
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:81==
• Using the right type of clip for the application
• Matching the clip size to the wire size
• Regularly maintaining the clips, inspect and tighten
The basic steps of installing a wire clip correctly, use figure 4.20 as visual guide:
1. Begin by taking the wire and wrapping it around the thimble to form an eye loop,
making sure to leave the correct amount of slack as specified by the manufacturer.
2. Take the first wire clip and attach it to the end of the dead end, making sure to
leave one base width of space. Use a torque wrench to tighten the nuts on the wire
clip.
3. For the second clip (if required), attach it as close to the eye loop or thimble as
possible. Once again, be sure to properly tighten the nuts of the clip with a torque
wrench.
4. If more than two clips are needed, they should be evenly spaced between the two
that were placed first.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
73
==PAGE:82==
4.3
Finite Element Analysis
The CableBEAM configurator is parametric design script. Not only can Grasshopper be
used for architectural geometry, but it can also be used for structural analysis. Karamba3D
is a parametric structural engineering tool that provides accurate analysis of spatial
trusses, frames, and shells. Karamba3D is fully embedded in the parametric design en-
vironment of Grasshopper, a plug-in for the 3d modeling tool Rhinoceros, which makes
it easy to combine parameterized geometric models, finite element calculations, and opti-
mization algorithms.
This section will go through the approximations made during the FEA model of Cable-
BEAM, the parametric structural systems used and the most important nodes used to
test the CableBEAM structural theories mentioned in section 3.1
4.3.1
Approximations
Since Karamba3D is not able to calculate non-linear elastic materials yet (although having
a work in progress component), the cable is considered linear elastic.
In theory, using linear methods of analysis will produce results that overestimate both
displacements and forces in the system. Considering that the forces and displacements are
overestimated, the results will always be conservative compared to the actual values.
However results showed from the experimental study in brazil [6], that not much non-linear
elastic behavior was observed when loading a pre-tensioned cable system.
4.3.2
Structural system
The structural systems in the CableBEAM configurator are divided into two. The first
structural system is a 2D frame structure which has a support at the ridge. The load
applied to the frame can be seen in Figure 3.21. The second structural system is the
CableBEAM itself.
Figure 4.23: Static system of frame structure and CableBEAM
The static system of the Cablebeam requires that the cable members can freely rotate
and cannot receive bending moment. The beam and struts are connected together as a
moment stiff joint, however no bending moment occurs in the struts in the FEA because
of this. The struts are purely subjected to axial compressive forces.
4.3.3
CableBEAM structural theories in Karamba3D
The structural theories of utilizing the Beam in CableBEAM in the best possible way, is
mentioned in section 3.1.
The first concept is to create compression in the top beam, while using the cable to take
care of the tension of the CableBEAM. The compressive struts handles compressive forces,
and will not receive any bending moments in the system.
A unloaded FEM model of the CableBEAM is shown in Figure 4.24
74
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:83==
Figure 4.24: A CableBEAM in FEA with no loads and no stresses
When stresses occur in the system, tensile stresses will be highlighted as blue, while
compressive stress is highlighted with red. The saturation of the color depends on the
utilization of the element.
Pre-tensioning of cable
This theory is explained in subsection 3.1.1. The goal for pre-tensioning the cable is to
have a level top beam, and no deformations. When the beam doesn’t bend the bending
moments in the beam is minimal, and only compressive forces occur.
For reference of the theory see Figure 3.4.
Figure 4.25: CableBEAM shown with: 1. Untensioned with load, 2. pre-tensioned without
load, 3. Pretensioned with load.
The pre-tensioning of the cable certainly helps against deformation and will keep the beam
level. This is clear that it minimizes bending moments in the beam and is therefore almost
not utilized, hence using the whole cross-sectional area for the compressive force.
The node used for applying pre-stress in a system is the load node in Karamba3D. This
can be set to load a member with initial strain.
Initial strain parallel to a member is also known as Hooke’s law. Normally known for
mechanical springs. A force is generated when a spring is moved a certain distance relative
to the length of the spring. The spring has an axial stiffness, called the spring stiffness.
Fs = −kx
(4.37)
A structural member made of linear elastic material can be seen as a linear spring. The
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
75
==PAGE:84==
member has a length of L and a cross-sectional area of A. Its tensile stress, σ, is linearly
proportional to the strain epsilon, by the modulus of elasticity, E.
ε = σ
E = F
AE
(4.38)
ε = ∆L
L
(4.39)
The initial strain of a cable is set in the node. The unit input for the node is [mm/m],
which is how many mm is the threaded rod at the anchor moved out from the anchor nut,
compared to the length of the whole cable. The node is seen in Figure 4.28
Figure 4.26: Grasshopper node - Load - Initial strain
Eccentric anchor point
This theory is explained in subsection 3.1.2. When the anchor is eccentrically from the
beam centerline, the tension in the cable will create a linear moment curve on the beam.
This will reduce the moment in the middle of the beam, but will create moment at the
end of the beam because of the little bending stress created from the load.
For figure reference of the theory see Figure 3.6.
Figure 4.27: CableBEAM shown with: 1. no offset of anchor, 2. medium offset of anchor,
3. large offset of anchor.
76
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:85==
The eccentric anchor point helps against deformation and will keep the beam level to some
degree. This minimizes bending moments in the middle of the top beam, however it will
create a negative moment near the beam ends. As long as the moment is not larger than
the positive moment in the middle of the beam this is okay. The anchor point should
generally be put as close as possible to the bottom of beam cross-section.
The node used for eccentric anchor point is the cross-section node in Karamba3D. Apart
from the dimensions of the cross-section the cross-section can be eccentrically moved in
any direction.
Figure 4.28: Grasshopper node - Cross Section
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
77
==PAGE:86==
4.4
Loads and safety
The CableBEAM will have to be designed after the appropriate load combinations for the
specific case. Eurocode 1 provide engineers with the equations needed to calculate the
loads on specific building shapes.
Load combinations are provided through Eurocode 0, and will ensure that structures are
designed to withstand different varying loads on a structure.
Furthermore, material properties and safety factors for the appropriate material are given
in Eurocode 3 for steel, and Eurocode 5 for timber structures.
Finally user error and user agreement will be discussed. If the user does not comply with
the correct design of the CableBEAM, the beam will most likely fail causing serious injury
or loss of life.
4.4.1
Loads according to Eurocode 1
Dead load
The dead load on a roof is determined by the weight of the materials used in the roof
construction. This includes the weight of the roofing materials, any insulation, and any
other materials used in the roof. The dead load is typically between 0.7 and 1.0 kN/m2.
The dead load is a vertically acting force that is applied to the roof surface. [7]
Imposed load
The snow load used in the parametric design program is based on DS/EN 1991-1-1:2007
- Eurocode 1 actions on structures - Part 1-1: General actions - Densities, self-weight,
imposed loads for buildings. The imposed load on roof structures is under category H,
which is a point load that measures 1.5kN for maintenance and repair. This is a load
that affects the roof structure’s construction, with respect to the battens that are placed
across the purlins. This point load is relatively low compared to the other loads and is,
therefore, neglected from the load combinations. [15]
Snow load
The snow load used in the parametric design program is based on DS/EN 1991-1-3:2003 -
Eurocode 1 actions on structures - Part 1-3: general actions - Snow loads. [15] Snow load
is one of the natural loads that can be dominant and must be included in some of the load
combinations. Snow load is found on roofs and is specified as a vertical surface load. This
load is globally projected on the roof. The characteristic value of the snow load is found
by the formula.
s = µiCeCtsk
(4.40)
Where,
µi
Is the snow load shape coeﬀicient
Ce
Is the exposure coeﬀicient.
Ct
Is the thermal coeﬀicient. This is generally 1.
sk
Is the characteristic value of snow load on the ground. This is 1kN/m2 according
to national annex EN 1991-1-3 DK/NA [16, s.130]
The exposure factor Ce is set to 0.8, 1.0, or 1.2 to account for wind-blown topography,
normal topography, or sheltered topography, respectively. The factor is typically 1, but
may be lower if the construction is sheltered from taller buildings or trees.
Shape coeﬀicient depending on the angle of the roof µi, can be found in table 4.2
78
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:87==
Angle of roof α
µi
0◦< α ≤30◦
0.8
30◦< α < 60◦
0.8 (60◦−α) / 30◦
α ≥60◦
0
Table 4.2: Shape coeﬀicient for the roof
Wind load
The snow load used in the parametric design program is based on DS/EN 1991-1-4:2003
- Eurocode 1 actions on structures - Part 1-4: general actions - Wind loads. [15] Wind is
a natural load that either acts on the whole construction or is not present in relation to
the load combination.
Wind is a flow of air between 2 places of different air pressure, the high air pressure seeks
towards a lower air pressure to create equilibrium in the air pressure. This is called the
pressure gradient and the measurable units for this are wind speed and velocity pressure. A
pressure and a suction are exerted on all objects that are exposed to wind. The building’s
geometry determines how large the loads are on the facade, gables and roof. The more a
building brakes the wind, the greater the load.
Wind is a dynamic load, so account must be taken of how a construction reacts to wind. In
this project, wind loads are calculated on a generic building shape, all loads are assumed to
be a static acting load, that is, a quasi-static reaction. Dynamic loading is an interesting
topic on cable structures, but is not taken into account in this project.
The peak wind pressure is the surface load which is used when calculating wind load on
a construction. To calculate the peak wind pressure, you need to know the position and
height of the building. The position has an effect on the basic wind speed and terrain
category. The basic wind speed is set to 24m/s throughout Denmark, except from a 25
km deep zone in west Jutland, where it is set to 27m/s.
The terrain category is based on the surroundings of the construction. In Denmark there
are 4 different categories [15]
Terrain category
Roughness length
z0 [m]
Minimum height
zmin [m]
Explanation
I
0.01
1
Lakes or flat areas without obstacles
II
0.05
2
Agricultural area with scattered obstacles such as houses
and trees.
III
0.3
5
Suburban or industrial areas, and permanent forest.
IV
1
10
Urban areas with closely spaced buildings whose
average height is at least 15m.
Table 4.3: Terrain categories
The peak pressure is calculated with the following function:
qp(z) =

1 +
7
ln
(
z
z0
)

1
2ρ
(
vbkr ln
( z
z0
))2
(4.41)
When the wind pressure is calculated, the shape factors for the building must be calculated.
In the parametric design script for CableBEAM, the building shape is generic, which means
that the building has a gabled roof. The roof is divided into pressure coeﬀicient zones. It
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
79
==PAGE:88==
is assumed that it is not necessary to divide the roof into more zones than H and I, as
the remaining zones are mostly based on local loads for attachment of roofing close to the
ridge. Typically zone H is in pressure and zone I is in suction. If the roof is particularly
flat, zone H will be subjected to suction as well.
The suction on the roof when wind load is on the gable (90 degrees) could introduce a
negative line load on the CableBEAM if the dead load of the roof is not large enough.
Figure 4.29: Pressure coeﬀicient zones on gable roof [15]
Wind direction / zones
0◦
90◦
Roof angle α
H
I
H
I
5◦
-0.6
+0.0
-0.6
-0.7
-0.6
15◦
-0.3
+0.2
-0.4
+0.0
-0.6
-0.5
30◦
-0.2
+0.4
-0.4
+0.0
-0.8
-0.5
45◦
-0.0
+0.6
-0.2
+0.0
-0.9
-0.5
60◦
+0.7
-0.2
-0.8
-0.5
75◦
+0.8
-0.2
-0.8
-0.5
Table 4.4: Pressure coeﬀicients of gable roof
When the wind direction is 90 degrees, the beam will be loaded with the average suction
between zone H and I, relative to their size.
4.4.2
Load combinations according to EC1
When loads are determined, the load effect must be calculated. In general, there is a load
combination for each conceivable situation. The program is based on Table 1.8 from [17].
This load combination is equal to the load combination factor from Teknisk Ståbi [16].
The difference is that in this scheme a load group is specified, that is, whether the load
is P permanent-load, K short-time load or sudden load. This has implications for the
strength of the timber material.
In the program, cases a, f, h and i are considered as possible dimension-giving load com-
binations. Gk denotes the permanent load, Pk denotes the imposed load, Sk is the wind
80
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:89==
load and Wk is the wind load. The load combinations are shown below:
Case
Gk
Pk
Sk
Wk
Load duration
Dominating dead load
a
1.2*KFI
0
0
0
P
Dominating snow load
f
1.0*KFI
0
1.5*KFI
0
K
Dominating wind load
h
1.0*KFI
0
0
1.5*KFI
Ø
Dominating wind load+
i
0.9*KFI
0
0
1.5*KFI
Ø
Table 4.5: Load combinations
KFI is a factor for the consequence class. Since the CableBEAM is only to be used in
smaller residential buildings, this factor is 1.
4.4.3
Material strengths, Partial coeﬀicients & Safety factors
Partial coeﬀicients and safety factors are used by structural engineers to account for un-
certainty in the loads and material properties used in designing a structure. The safety
factors used for loads can be previewed in the table 4.5 for load combinations. The partial
coeﬀicient of materials will be explained in this section.
Apart from standard material safety factors as described in Eurocode, further safety factors
for user error would allow users to do small errors when assembling CableBEAM. This
safety factor should be investigated through many user tests, evaluating their build quality
and finally doing statistics on the load capacity of their assembled beams.
Steel
Many types of steel is used in the CableBEAM system. The generic S235 steel is used in
steel plates for connections. Bolts and nuts use Grade 8.8 steel, while the steel wire use
high strength AISI 316 stainless steel
Characteristic values The strength of steel starts at 235 MPa, meaning the stress in
steel must exceed 235 MPa before the element starts yielding, becoming non-linear. This
is known as the the yielding strength fy.k. After steel yields the steel becomes non-linear
elastic, which means it deforms more when loaded than it did before reaching the yielding
point. At some point steel cannot withstand the stress and breaks apart which is known
as the tensile strength fu.k. Steel is also an isotropic material, so it can withstand this
stress regardless of which axis the element is affected.
Steel parts
fy.c
fu.c
Steel plates
235
360
Bolts
600
800
Nuts
600
800
Steel cable
-
1670
Table 4.6: Steel yield strength and tensile strength in MPa
Design values Table 4.6 lists the characteristic strengths of steel used in CableBEAM.
The design strengths take partial coeﬀicients into account. The partial coeﬀicient is chosen
from what the component is supposed to do. If the component is only analyzed for the
stress in the cross-section γM0 should be used. If the component is in risk of being unstable
during loading (components in compression) like the strut, γM1 should be used. Finally
steel joints allow the steel to yield and the tensile strength of the steel is used, since this
is closer to failure, a larger partial coeﬀicient is used γM2.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
81
==PAGE:90==
Explanation
Symbol
Value
Yield in cross-sections
γM0
1.1
Instability of steel
γM1
1.2
Steel joints
γM2
1.35
Table 4.7: Partial coeﬀicients of steel structures
The design strength of steel is given by following equation.
fd =
fc
γM#
(4.42)
Where,
fd
Is the design value of either yield or tensile strength
fc
Is the characteristic value of either yield or tensile strength
γM#
Is the appropriate partial coeﬀicient for the component.
Steel cables
Steel cables partial factors are somewhat different than normal steel structures. Steel ca-
bles are calculated according to EN 1993-1-11:2007 - Eurocode 3 - Design of steel structures
- Part 1.11: Design of structures with tension components.
Partial factors γM may be based on
• The severity of the conditions used for proving tests
• The measures employed to suppress bending effects.
FEd
FRd
≤1
(4.43)
FRd = min
{ Fuk
1, 5γR
; Fk
γR
}
(4.44)
Where,
FEd
Is the design value of the axial rope force
FRd
Is the design value of the tension resistance
Fuk
Is the characteristic value of the breaking strength
Fk
Is the characteristic value of the proof strength of the tension component.
γR
Is the partial factor. If measures to minimize bending stresses at the anchorage
has been taken the partial factor is 0.9, if the steel cable is subjected to bending,
the factor is 1. [EC3-1-11]
The value of the proof strength Fk for cables under group B (spiral strands), should be
given in the relevant standard EN 10264, however this value is nowhere to be found in the
standard EN 10264.
The design value of the tension resistance of the steel cable is concluded to be:
FRd =
Fuk
1, 5γR
(4.45)
82
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:91==
Timber
CableBEAM reinforcement system can be used on any kind of beam and material. This
project focuses mainly on wooden beams, since the goal is for a user to create a strong
beam, with affordable and highly available materials.
Characteristic values
Wood used in construction has a compressive strength from 18MPa to 30MPa. However,
since wood is an anisotropic (inhomogeneous) material, the compressive strength varies
greatly depending on the axis of the wood. The following table shows the strength and
stiffness values for construction wood and glued laminated timber.
Strength class
Symbol [Mpa]
C30
C24
C18
GL30c
Bending
fm.k
30
24
18
30
Compression 0
fc.0.k
24
21
18
24.5
Compression 90
fc.90.k
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.5
Shear
fv.k
4
4
3.4
3.5
E modulus 0
E0
12000
11000
9000
13000
Table 4.8: Strength and elasticity of wood
Design values
Table 4.8 lists the characteristic strengths. The design strengths take into account load
duration, environment class and partial coeﬀicients. This means that the strengths are
further reduced to ensure that there is room for material error, so that the construction
does not fail while in service. The design strength is thus determined:
fd = k mod
fk
γM
(4.46)
Where,
fk
is the characteristic compressive strength.
γM
is a partial coeﬀicient for timber. The value of γM is 1.3 for glulam, while it is
1.35 for construction wood.
kmod
is a modification factor, which takes load duration and environmental class into
account. See table 4.9 below.
Load duration
Enviromental class
1
2
3
P
0.6
0.6
0.5
L
0.7
0.7
0.55
M
0.8
0.8
0.65
K
0.9
0.9
0.7
Ø
1.1
1.1
0.9
Table 4.9: Modification factor for wood strengths
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
83
==PAGE:92==
4.4.4
User error
During construction of any structure imperfections of the joints will most certainly always
happen. Visual inspection goes a long way when finding errors in a structure. Since the
product of CableBEAM is meant to be done by the user without the need of an engineer,
extra cautions has to be taken into consideration.
The pictorial assembly instruction will show the user where caution is required and what
the joint is allowed to look like, and how it can be corrected.
Tools for assembling CableBEAM can be supplied with a CableBEAM set. If the tools a
specifically designed for a special task during the assembly process, it can help the task
being easier to do and as a result increase safety.
Some of the points during the assembly process that can prove to be critical for the
load capacity of the beam is given in the sections below. These are found from theory,
experience and user tests:
Anchor point of attack
Imperfection factors are often used in structures from the structural engineer.
These
imperfection factors allows structural members to be offset from each other in a structural
connection. This small offset will create moment force in the member because it is eccentric
loaded. The anchor connection of CableBEAM will transfer large forces, so if the anchor’s
point of attack is not dead center of the beam, a moment will occur. As explained in
previous chapter, an offset further down than the center of the beam will create a negative
moment, which is to the CableBEAM’s advantage. But if the point of attack is above the
center of the beam a positive moment will occur, special care in the PAI will show that the
point of attack may not be higher up than the center of the beam, in any circumstances.
Anchor cable clip
Cable clips are easy to over torque, a special wrench that ’clicks’ at a certain torque level,
can increase the likely hood that the clips are installed with the correct torque.
Wrong color coded part
CableBEAM is a system that has 3 different load capacity lines, eg. color coded system.
Having different color coded components, gives the user an opportunity to save money
and material if their CableBEAM design allows for it. If the user will need a yellow line
component, but mistakes a green line product for the specified yellow component, the load
capacity of the CableBEAM will be weakened. A user might also decide to save money
buying the green line instead of the specified color line in their assembly instructions.
This problem can be minimized if the material for the CableBEAM is sent via mail,
and doesn’t have any cardboard displays in hardware stores.
Another way is to keep
proffesionals to install the system.
4.4.5
User agreement
Before CableBEAM can enter the market, more research on the structural behavior is
needed. If CableBEAM does enter the market the users would have to agree to Terms and
Conditions for CableBEAM.
Such terms could be:
• Structural use of CableBEAM (Ridge beam)
• Correct measurements and parameters used in CableBEAM configurator
• Correct components used
84
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:93==
• Correct assembly as guided in PAI
More terms should of course be considered with close dialogue with a lawyer to prevent
lawsuits against CableBEAM company, if a CableBEAM should fail because of incorrect
use.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
85
==PAGE:94==
4.5
Fire-safety
The fire-safety of CableBEAM needs more research, however some thoughts and calcula-
tions have been put into how the CableBEAM behaves during fire and how to protect it
against fire. Fire-safety of buildings has over the last decade played a larger role in Danish
Building Regulation. New laws are introduced in the fire section §82 - §158 at each update
of the Building Regulation.
4.5.1
Fire-safety in buildings
CableBEAM as a product is only to be used in roof structures as a ridge beam. Roof
structures has a fire rating of R30. This fire rating is a code that specifies the demands
for a certain building part. The letters in the fire rating tells the demands for the certain
fire rating and the following number explains the time it has to live up to these demands.
R = Load-bearing: The ability of a construction element to preserve its mechanical char-
acteristics and the relevant load capacity during a normal fire.
4.5.2
Structural fire safety
The structural fire safety of CableBEAM has been analyzed, but is not implemented in
the CableBEAM configurator. This is mostly due to the complex formulas needed and
the uncertainty of the structural behavior during fire.
Different ways of fire proofing
CableBEAM and how they are calculated/designed is given in the sections below.
The easiest way to fireproof CableBEAM is to use gypsum fireboards. 1 layer of fireproof
gypsum will give CableBEAM 30 minutes of fire protection, with 2 layers, 60 minutes. To
further fire-proof the beam insulation can be filled in the hollow cross-sectional area in
the beam. This will hide the design of the beam, but if the beam shows to save material,
money and carbon production even with fire protective boards, it could be used without
the need to see the cable.
Figure 4.30: Fire resistant CableBEAM with 2 layers of Gypsum fire board able to resist
60 minutes of fire.
Steel cables
Questions are often raised about the effect of intense heat on CableBEAM, and whether
there is a risk that the cable will snap and fly through the air at high speeds. However,
in a fire event, the stresses in the cable caused by pre-tensioning are released due to the
increased temperatures; in addition, at higher temperatures, the heat will turn the cable
86
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:95==
from high-tensile steel to mild steel. The result will be a gradual lowering of the roof until
the cables either melts or yields. At first, the rise in temperature will actually make the
structure safer overall, because of the reduction and eventual loss of the pretension forces
caused by the expansion of the steel cable.
If the CableBEAM proves not to have the expected capacity during fire, structural fire
protection will be necessary complicating the process of assembly. This can be used to
prevent the cable from heating up at the start duration of the fire, allowing occupants to
safely exit the building before large deformations or failure will occur. The steel cable can
be insulated with different types of insulation methods.
• Intumescent material, such as intumescent paint or sleeves for the cable.
• Insulation by use of mineral wool, normally used of tubes and cables. The insula-
tion can be encapsulated with a steel cap which leaves a cleaner finish and extra
protection.
• Installing fire resistant gypsum or wooden boards around the entire CableBEAM.
Jarl Vindnæs, founder of Stykka, suggested that the beam could be fire protected
with wooden boards to give the impression of using Glulam, but with higher strength
and with less material.
• The last resort is to use larger cables resulting in lower stresses. This will also allow
the cable to soak more energy delaying the rise of temperature in the center of the
cable.
• At critical installations temperature stabilized cables made of bi-metal, which doesn’t
elongate as much within a broader temperature range.
Intumescent material is an available material for everyone to use. Applying paint on steel
structures requires professionals, since the smallest error can render the whole process
useless.
As an example insulation by use of mineral wool has been analyzed. The results of this
analysis can be found in Chapter 7: Analysis and Discussion.
For the entire analysis
calculation see appendix.
The most important formulas used in this analysis is given
below. The formulas will not be explained in depth since detailed fire safety isn’t within
the scope of this project.
Steel strength degradation as a function of temperature is
ξs (Ts) := k +
1 −k
1 + Ts
T1 +
(
Ts
T2
)2
+
(
Ts
T3
)8
+
(
Ts
T64
)64
(4.47)
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 4.31: Steel strength degradation factor as a function of temperature [K]
Temperature of the steel during a fire, at a given point, is found through following equation:
Tsi := Tsi.1 + SFmod
ρs · cs
· (Tgi.avg −Tsi.1) · ∆t
(4.48)
Temperature of the gas (smoke) during a fire, at a given point, is found through following
equation:
Tg(t) :=


20 + 345 · log
(
8 min−1 ·ΓA · t + 1
)
1 + 0.04 ·
(
t
tmax
)3.5



(4.49)
Figure 4.32: Temperature of hot gas and steel during a fire [C] as a function of time [min]
In general the results from these calculations show that only a very little amount of
insulation will allow the temperature of the steel cable and struts to be low enough to
comply with the RE30 demand for roof structures.
88
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:97==
Timber structures and connections
Using a combination of steel and timber in structures can cause failure prematurely, be-
cause of the different thermal conductivity of the materials. Steel which is inserted into
the wood, such as screws and bolts, will transfer heat into the cross-section of the timber
material allowing the temperature inside the core of the wood to heat faster. Stainless
steel has a lower conductivity, and will transfer less heat into the wood, this can be
experimented with in further studies.
Timber strength is reduced when heated, and the cross-section will also be reduced during
a fire, due to charring. The timber beam will because of this
The beam would have to have a large enough reduced cross-section to withstand the
compressive force from the cable during the fire. If the cable is exposed to the fire without
insulation the compressive forces in the beam will lower automatically, letting the entire
CableBEAM sag.
Fire tests at DBI (Dansk Brand- og sikringsteknisk Institut) must be conducted to truly
know CableBEAM’s reaction to fire exposure.
4.6
Chapter Summary
This chapter has go through structural theory used during the research and estimate load
capacity of a given CableBEAM.
The analytical calculations has been used to estimate the load capacity of the elements
and joints. It has however not shown any of the structural theories of the CableBEAM,
but rather divided each member and joint into smaller parts, calculating the details and
instability of members. This has been used to design the different color coded components.
The finite element analysis proved the theories of the CableBEAM system, eg.
pre-
tensioning cable and eccentric anchor point, correct. The bending moment of the top
beam was reduced, also lowering the utilization of the beam.
The section of loads and safety was implemented in the CableBEAM configurator, applying
the necessary safety factors to the system, according to Eurocode.
However it might
be considered to use additional safety factors to include user error when assembling the
CableBEAM. However safety factors might not be the correct solution, education on how
the CableBEAM works and should be assembled correctly would have larger benefit to
safety.
Finally fire-safety has been a big concern for most of the people who have heard about
CableBEAM. Luckily cable structures doesn’t fail without warning, cables elongate during
a fire resulting in a larger sag of the CableBEAM. However more research on fire-safety is
needed.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 5
Experimental Study
An experimental study was conducted to verify the results from the analytical and numer-
ical studies stated in chapter 3 and chapter 4. However the results will first be compared
with the expected calculations in chapter 7.
Two different CableBEAM systems were
tested, a CableBEAM with 1 strut, and another with 2 struts. Both CableBEAMS were
tested as non-pretensioned and pre-tensioned. Furthermore a beam without reinforcement
was loaded to evaluate the potential benefits of reinforcing a timber beam.
The steel wire in CableBEAM will transfer large tension forces when the top beam is
loaded. This experiment will test if loading CableBEAM with a given set of point loads
will create the estimated tension forces in the cable reinforcing the top beam. The tension
forces are accurately measured with a strain gauge-based sensor. The beam will be loaded
gradually up until the tension in the cable reaches about 5kN and no further. This is due
to the strain gauge’s maximum measurement.
5.1
Test Program and Steps
5.1.1
Test program
The purpose of the experiment is to verify the calculations of the test CableBEAM and
to observe any large deformations and behavior that might occur during loading. The
theoretical load capacity and forces of the beam is known, which is used to compare with
the results from the test.
The experimental study is divided into two experiments.
Experiment 1 is a 3-point bending setup. The CableBEAM has only 1 strut and is designed
to carry a point load at the center of the beam.
Experiment 2 is a 4-point bending setup. The CableBEAM has 2 struts and is designed
to carry 2 point loads 1/3 of the length apart.
In both experiments the CableBEAM will be tested when the cable is pre-tensioned and
”un-tensioned”. Finally the cable will be removed and the beam will be subjected to the
same load without reinforcement. This allows measuring the difference of stiffness between
the beam with and without reinforcement.
5.1.2
Test steps
1. The beam is placed in between 2 tall solid supports. Measurement of the setup is
noted. A laser measurement device or a deflection gauge can be used to measure the
deflection of the beam.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
91
==PAGE:100==
2. Weights are added on the beam above each strut on the beam. The weights are
carefully added one at a time.
The weight, tension force in the cable, and the
deflection is noted each time a weight is added.
3. When the beam is near the maximum load capacity extra caution is necessary, since
the cable or joints can fail. The maximum load capacity is 5kN, at which the strain
gauge cannot measure more tension, the tests stops. Testing the CableBEAM can
be dangerous, be sure to wear eye-protection and safety-shoes at this point.
5.2
Test Setup & performance
Experiment 1, 3-point bending setup, was performed at Danintra Power, Frederiksværkvej
24, 3600 Frederikssund. This is where the prototype of CableBEAM was created. It is
mandatory to wear protective safety-shoes at all time.
Experiment 2, 4-point bending setup, was performed at Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Building 119. This building rooms many different test equipment for mechanical exper-
iments. It is mandatory to wear protective safety-shoes at all time, and eye-protection
during testing.
The equipment needed for this experiment is given in the list below:
• Appropriate amount of dead load bricks to reach about 3.3kN in tension for the
cable
• 1x Weight for measuring the load of each dead load brick
• 2x Solid supports, that can allows for enough clearance under the CableBEAM.
• 1x Assembled CableBEAM
• 1x Un-reinforced beam that matches the performance of the top beam in the Cable-
BEAM
• 1x S-Beam load cell (Strain gauge)
• 1x Displacement gauge fitted at the beams center point capable of measuring the
deflection of the beam. Or laser measurement device with tape to hold it in place
• 1x Notepad + pencil to note down the steps of load, tension force and displacement.
Or a EDB-machine with Microsoft Excel
• 1x Camera
• 1x Measuring tape Ruler
• 1x Torque wrench with 10mm and 19mm socket.
• 4x Extra cable clips if they should fail when assembling the CableBEAM
92
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:101==
The test configuration for experimental test 1 and 2, is seen in Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: Static system of the two test rig
5.3
Results & discussion
This section discusses the observations made during the experimental testing of Cable-
BEAM. The direct comparison between the tests and the calculations will be analyzed in
Chapter 7, Analysis and Discussion.
5.3.1
Experiment 1 - 1-strut CableBEAM
The first experiment was successful, with no failures.
Figure 5.2: Test of 1-strut CableBEAM
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure 5.3: Test of un-reinforced beam
Creep
One unexpected measurement was observed, which was the creep of timber materials when
subjected to bending. Wooden beams typically resist bending moment and deflection very
well when being loaded for a short time period, but if the beam is loaded for a longer
period the timber will creep and deflect further, this allows the timber to relax and form
into a new curve instead of a straight line. When CableBEAM was pre-tensioned up to
1kN, after a few days the tension force in the cable would be about 0.5kN. This was due to
the top beam deflecting slightly upwards and staying in an upwards curve after releasing
the tension. This meant that the beam allowed the cable to relax because it was not
”pulling” the cable as much as it did previously.
Because it was clear that the tension force went down as a function of time, the experiment
waited 5 minutes after the last dead load brick was placed to analyze the deflection and
tension force. 5 minutes are not enough to draw any conclusion of any creep behavior of
CableBEAM, but it shows an indication of what happens just a few minutes after being
loaded.
The deflection of the beam was measured with a laser measurement device, which is
accurate enough for measuring millimeter with no decimals. This can leave a jagged line
in the plots, but will still show that the deformation is somewhat linear.
Pre-tensioned 1-strut cable beam
The pre-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM deflected 16mm upwards when pre-tensioned. This
ensures that the total deflection of the beam will be minimal when dead load is applied.
For this reason 2 plots created, Figure 5.4 shows the deflection of the beam relative to
before pre-tensioning CableBEAM, and Figure 5.5 shows the absolute deflection relative
to after pre-tensioning CableBEAM, but before loading.
94
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:103==
Figure 5.4: Deflection relative to before pre-tensioning - Pre-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM
Figure 5.5: Deflection relative to after pre-tensioning - Pre-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM
The tension curve is completely linear from the start, showing that the cable as activated
from the first load brick. There is a slight dip when loaded at 1.32kN This might be
because the test was interrupted at one point and the creep began to lower the tension in
the cable.
When the last dead load brick was placed, 5-minutes went by before measuring the deflec-
tion and tension. The tension of the cable decreased with 0.1kN and the beam deflected
2mm further downwards.
The load was removed from the beam and the pretension of the beam was decreased with
about 0.5kN leaving the tension in the cable to 452kN. This was expected to reach 1kN
after the loading since the beam was expected to bounce back to the original position. The
position after loading was 9mm upwards instead of the expected 16mm upwards. This
could be a combination of both creep of the wood and possible slip of the cable in the wire
clips.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
95
==PAGE:104==
The cable was able to be pre-tensioned up to 1kN again after being loaded. Though this
required to tension the anchor bolt further than before.
Un-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM
The un-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM has no start tension in the cable, this results in a
flat linear beam when CableBEAM is unloaded. Figure 5.6 shows the absolute deflection
relative to before loading CableBEAM.
Figure 5.6: Deflection relative to before loading - Un-tensioned 1-strut CableBEAM
It is seen that the tension curve is not linear at the start of the test, since it has a less
steep inclination that later during the test. This shows that the cable will need some
load before it is fully activated. This can also be seen from the steep inclination of the
deformation at the start of the test.
When the last dead load brick was placed, 5-minutes went by before measuring the de-
flection and tension. The tension of the cable decreased with only 18N and there were no
significant difference in the deflection.
Before the weights were removed the cable was tensioned with 0.5kN, to see how much it
would reduce the deflection and if it would be possible while the beam was loaded. The
deflection was reduced with 2mm.
Normal un-reinforced timber beam
The un-reinforced timber beam has the same cross-section as the top beam of the Ca-
bleBEAM in the previous two tests. Figure 5.7 shows the absolute deflection relative to
before loading the timber beam.
96
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:105==
Figure 5.7: Deflection relative to before loading - Normal un-reinforced timber beam
The deflection of the beam is linear, but has a steeper angle than the previous two tests.
This shows that the reinforcement of CableBEAM does in fact work.
When the last dead load brick was placed, 5-minutes went by before measuring the deflec-
tion which increased with 1mm.
When the load was removed from the beam, the beam still had a deflection of 12mm
compared to the start position. This shows that the beam was critically loaded and has
permanent deflection. After 15 minutes, the deflection had decreased only to 11mm.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
97
==PAGE:106==
5.3.2
Experiment 2 - 2-strut CableBEAM
The second experiment was successful, with no critical failures causing the CableBEAM
to collapse.
Figure 5.8: Test setup of 2-strut CableBEAM carrying 500kg in a 4-point bending test
with little deflection
Creep
The creep of timber materials when subjected to bending was observed again as in experi-
ment 1. When CableBEAM was pre-tensioned up to 1kN, after a few days the tension force
in the cable would be 0.4kN. This was due to the top beam deflecting slightly upwards
and staying in an upwards curve after releasing the tension, as observed in experiment 1
as well.
Because it was clear that the tension force went down as a function of time, the experiment
waited 15 minutes after the last dead load brick was placed to analyze the deflection and
tension force. After 15 minutes the deflection and tension was somewhat steady compared
to the first few minutes. More testing is needed to observe true creep behavior of the
beam.
Cable Clip slip
Furthermore some of the cable clips seemed to have slipped when the beam was loaded.
The clips allowed the cable to move slightly, so the length of the cable increased, which
resulted in a larger deformation and less tension. The cable clips might have been under-
or over tightened.
Furthermore the clips used on the prototype was not rated to any
specific capacity and the amount of cable clips used was not up to code.
The first two pictures in figure 5.9 show severe slip of the cable in the cable clips. The
dotted lines show the original position of the cable before testing, while the solid lines
show the position of the cable after the experiment. The live cable is being pulled away
from the clip while the dead cable is pulled towards the clip. This also affects the angle of
the u-bolt in the clip. The u-bolt is pushed against the side of the saddle in the clips that
failed. Furthermore it can be seen that the thimble (cable eye) is being rotated towards
the dead wire. The third picture shows very limited slip of the cable in the clip. The
thimble is not rotated, and the u-bolt is centered on the saddle of the clip.
98
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:107==
Figure 5.9: Close-up of cable clips slipping. Solid lines show the placement after test,
while the dotted shows the original position before the test
Struts in bending
The struts were receiving bending moment from tension of the cable acting sideways on
the struts. This caused the struts to bend towards the center. This was no issue for the
1-strut CableBEAM, because the strut pointing towards the center between the two angles
of the cable. The dotted lines in figure 5.10 show the original position of the struts.
Figure 5.10: Close-up of deformed struts, dotted lines shows the original position before
the test
This can be solved by to methods, the first method is to clamp the cable connector to the
cable. The second method is to design the struts differently. The strut will have to be
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
99
==PAGE:108==
angled, and not globally vertical, when viewing the CableBEAM from the side. For a result
without bending, the struts should be angled in such a way, that they are perpendicular
to the tangent of the cable curve, e.g. the angle between the strut and the cable should
be equal on both sides of the strut. This will eliminate the bending moment occurring in
the struts, and it will also keep the cable connectors in place, without needing to ”fasten”
them to the cable.
Figure 5.11: Better strut geometry of CableBEAM with regard to bending.
Pre-tensioned 2-strut cable beam
The pre-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM deflected 15mm upwards when pre-tensioned to
1kN.
This ensures that the total deflection of the beam will be minimal when dead
load is applied. For this reason 2 plots created, Figure 5.12 shows the deflection of the
beam relative to before pre-tensioning CableBEAM, and Figure 5.13 shows the absolute
deflection relative to after pre-tensioning CableBEAM, but before loading. It is important
to note that the point load shown on the x-axis defines how much load was put on the
beam pr. point load.
Figure 5.12: Deflection relative to before pre-tensioning - Pre-tensioned 2-strut Cable-
BEAM
100
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:109==
Figure 5.13: Deflection relative to after pre-tensioning - Pre-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM
As in experiment 1, the tension curve is completely linear from the start, showing that
the cable as activated from the first load brick.
When the last dead load brick was placed, 15-minutes went by before measuring the
deflection and tension.
The tension of the cable decreased with 221N and the beam
deflected 4mm further downwards.
The load was removed from the beam and the pretension of the beam was decreased,
leaving the tension in the cable to only 140N. This was expected to reach 1kN after
the loading since the beam was expected to bounce back to the original position. The
deflection of the beam after the beam was unloaded was unavailable since the deflection
gauge was installed too tightly, which resulted in the pin not following the beam upwards.
The tension was however recorded during the unloading of the beam, as shown in figure
5.14.
Figure 5.14: Tension of the cable during loading and unloading
The cable was able to be pre-tensioned up to 1kN again after being loaded. Though this
required to tension the anchor bolt further than before, just as in experiment 1. This time
it was clearly visible it was because of the slack given from the cable slipping in the cable
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
101
==PAGE:110==
clips.
Un-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM
The un-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM has no start tension in the cable. Figure 5.15 shows
the absolute deflection relative to before loading CableBEAM.
Figure 5.15: Deflection relative to before loading - Un-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM
As in Experiment 1, it is seen that the tension curve is not linear at the start of the test,
since it has a less steep inclination that later during the test. This shows that the cable
will need some load before it is fully activated. This can also be seen from the steep
inclination of the deformation at the start of the test.
When the last dead load brick was placed, 15-minutes went by before measuring the
deflection and tension. The tension of the cable decreased with 66N and deflected 1mm
further downwards.
The deflection and tension of the cable was recorded during unloading of the beam. The
tension in the cable is slightly less than when being loaded. The main difference is the
deflection of the beam which has a significant larger deformation when unloading than
when loading at about 5mm difference. When the beam was fully unloaded the deforma-
tion was noted to 2.7mm. This shows that the beam deformed slightly downwards after
the test.
102
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:111==
Figure 5.16: Tension of the cable and deflection of the beam during loading and unloading
- Un-tensioned 2-strut CableBEAM
5.4
Chapter Summary
An experimental study was conducted to verify the results from the analytical and numer-
ical studies stated in chapter 3 and chapter 4. However the results will first be compared
with the expected calculations in chapter 7.
Two different CableBEAM systems were tested, a CableBEAM with 1 strut, and another
with 2 struts. Both CableBEAMS were tested as non-pretensioned and pre-tensioned.
Non-pretensioned cable beams showed more sag than pre-tensioned CableBEAMs. This
was partly due to the pre-tensioned cable beams buckling upwards before loading, thereby
appearing to have no deflection.
A comparison in relative displacement between the untensioned and pre-tensioned beam,
showed that the beams would have more or less the same stiffness.
The untensioned
CableBEAM had larger displacements in the start, because the cable would have to be
activated creating a non-linear elastic curve, however this curve flattened and became
linear, when the system was in moderate tension. The pre-tensioned CableBEAMS had
higher tension loads during the loading, because of the start tension. This resulted in
errors occuring in joints and elongating the cable. This meant that the relative deflection
was higher, and that the pre-tension was lost when the CableBEAM was unloaded.
For better results, the components used, should be designed for heavy lifting with a Dec-
laration of Performance to minimize errors.
Furthermore a beam without reinforcement was loaded to evaluate the potential benefits
of reinforcing a timber beam.
The difference in deflection was 2.6 times greater than
without reinforcement from a CableBEAM kit.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
103
==PAGE:112==
104
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 6
Case Study
Case studies are relevant to this thesis so the CableBEAM configurator can be tested
in different scenarios. This will show what strengths and weaknesses CableBEAM has.
CableBEAM is supposed to be used as either a new beam, or to reinforce existing beams
in buildings. New beams, meant to be used with CableBEAM components, will generally
have a smaller cross-sectional area, while existing beams are narrow in width, and tall in
height. Furthermore alternatives to these cases will be studied, and the results of this will
be used to compare price, mass of materials etc. in the next chapter.
The structural system tested in the experimental study will be scaled up to a larger
system that can be used in a residential building. These studies are hypothetical and
more research on CableBEAM is needed before it can be used in residential buildings.
The modified modulus of elasticity found in the experimental study will not be used, since
the material properties of the elements used did not live up to the expected performance,
such as weak cable clips and non pre-stretched stainless steel cables.
In the case that CableBEAM will be used in residential buildings, properties of cable clips
and steel cables must be provided by the supplier and designed for ”heavy lifting”. The
cables are considered to be non-stainless steel, strand wire rope (E = 110GPa), because
of its less elastic properties and the low exposure to moisture inside buildings. The least
elastic tensile material that can be used is steel rods (E = 210GPa), which could be used
but requires a different design of the cable connectors.
There are 2 case studies.
• Case study A will replace a load bearing wall inside a house.
• Case study B will reinforce an exciting beam that will suddenly receive a point load
in the middle, because of a renovation of the roof structure
6.1
Case study A - House in Ølsted
6.1.1
Introduction
Case study A will be executed in fall 2022, replacing a load bearing gypsum wall. Further
experimental test with better materials, meant for lifting purposes will hopefully show
closer results to the FEA model. The beam in Case study A, will act as a long term test
to see the behavior of creep. CableBEAM will show warning signs, before failure, such as
large deflection or low tension, which will ensure that the structure can be reinforced by
other means, if needed.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
105
==PAGE:114==
The typical type of beam to use as a ridge beam are glulam beams. Alternatively a steel
beam can also be used.
The plan the house and location of the wall is shown in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Plan of house in Ølsted
The dimensions of the building is measured at: The height of the facade is 2300mm, the
angle of the roof is 10deg, and the width of the building is 6000mm. The length of the
beam is 3.4m, which leaves about 5 rafters to be supported on the CableBEAM with about
850mm apart. The precise location of the rafters are unknown, and the rafters doesn’t
necessarily have to be right about the struts on the CableBEAM. 2 of the rafters will be
supported at the ends of the CableBEAM (over the supports), and 3 of the rafters will be
supported on the CableBEAM between the supports. This indicates that it would be a
fine solution to use 3 struts. The roof cladding is roofing asphalt which is a light roof.
This can be seen in Figure 6.2.
106
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:115==
Figure 6.2: View of Case A in CableBEAM configurator
6.1.2
Results
The CableBEAM configurator will calculate the loads on the ridge beam. These loads will
also be applied to the alternative beams.
CableBEAM Results
This case study will study what materials are needed and estimate the necessary top beam
dimension. The interesting results in this case study, are how much the deflection, and
utilization of the beam varies, in different load combinations. This is seen in Table 6.1.
This is interesting, due to the low stiffness of the beam, considering the higher stiffness of
case study B.
The program will print tables showing results for structural engineering purposes only, the
user will not receive all this information. The user will receive an output that shows their
inputs, and what materials they will need to assemble their CableBEAM through a PAI.
For the full print of this case, see appendix.
Load combination
Displacement [mm]
Utilization of beam
No load
22.7
79%
Gk
8.66
43%
Sk
6.66
37%
Gk+Sk
-7.5
-
Gk+1.5*Sk
-
82%
Table 6.1: Deformation and utilization of CableBEAM designed in case study A
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
107
==PAGE:116==
Explaination
Value
BEAM
.
Height [mm]
100
Width [mm]
90
Length [mm]
3400
End cut angle [deg]
12
CABLE
RED
Length [mm]
3700
STRUTS
GREEN
Length [mm]
181
241
181
pcs
6
ANCHOR CONNECTOR
GREEN
Plate height [mm]
100
Plate width [mm]
90
Anchor hole height [mm]
25
Length of anchor bolt [mm]
200
Length of rope turn-back [mm]
175
Number of clips
4
BEAM CONNECTOR
GREEN
pcs
6
CABLE CONNECTOR
GREEN
pcs
3
Table 6.2: Color coded components for building the CableBEAM to Case A
108
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:117==
Glulam Beam
The glulam beam needed to support the roof is a GL24c with the dimensions 65x267.
Figure 6.3: Calculations of glulam beam
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
109
==PAGE:118==
Steel Beam
The steel beam needed to support the roof is a IPE 140, with steel quality S235.
Figure 6.4: Calculations of steel beam
110
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:119==
6.1.3
Discussion
Multiple discoveries happened during Case Study A.
The different types of loads that is applied to the beam, has a great impact against the
overall stiffness of the beam. Pre-tensioning the system goes a long way to receive little
to no deflection at a certain load combination, but that doesn’t change the stiffness of the
beam, neither does the sag of the cable in CableBEAM. When pre-tensioning the system,
the cable will deflect upwards as explained in section 3.1. The question is by how far the
system should be pre-tensioned. Normally beams are pre-tensioned so the beam deflects
upwards when it isn’t loaded, and when it is loaded with deadload, the beam will have
no deflection at all. However light-weight low-angle roofs are prone to suction, resulting
in a upwards deflection, while snow load will cause the deflection to go downwards. The
stiffness of CableBEAM will change how resistant the beam is against other loads than
dead-load. There are 2 main ways to change the stiffness of CableBEAM.
1. The cross-sectional area of the cable should be larger, not because of maximum
tension forces, but because the axial stiffness of the cable will be larger. As a result
the CableBEAM is more stiff and less prone to large deformations when subjected
to forces.
2. A stiffer cross-section of the top beam, will reduce the change of deflection when
loaded in different scenarios, increasing the overall stiffness of the CableBEAM.
Also the anchor point of attack offset or eccentricity from the top beams center line, greatly
reduce the utilization and the deflection of the CableBEAM.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
111
==PAGE:120==
6.2
Case study B - House in Gammel Holte
6.2.1
Introduction
Case study B is a problem that occured during a project in Dines Jørgensen & Co. A top
main beam of the roof structure was decided that it should support a second beam in the
middle of the main beam’s span. This idea happened after the beams were bought, hence
leaving the user with the options of either buying a new beam that would be able to resist
the new load, or reinforce the beam that was already bought. Normally in such cases a
C-profile steel beam would be connected along the length of the main beam, to withstand
the extra forces of the new point load. This would require a high cost, high material usage
and finally also the work to connect the steel beam with the wooden beam each meter to
create a ”composite” beam. Otherwise the owner could have ordered a new glulam beam
that could withstand the forces.
As a disclaimer: The main beam could in this case withstand the increased load, but
hypothetically it could have been a beam that wouldn’t be able to handle the new point
load. The existing beam is a 5m glulam 65x433mm GL24c, which was overdimensioned
due to the height of the beam in the opposite side of the ridge. The beam that is used in
this case is a 5m glulam 65x366 GL24c, which hypothetically, could have been installed
instead of the taller beam.
The dimensions of the building is measured at: The height of the facade is 3950mm, the
angle of the roof is 55deg, and the width of the building is 8240mm. The length of the
beam is 5m, and has a point load 2.5m into the beam. The roof consists of tiles, which is
a heavy roof.
Figure 6.5: Secondary beam SB loading main beam MB
112
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:121==
Figure 6.6: View of case B in CableBEAM configurator
6.2.2
Results
CableBEAM
This case is studied in 3 sub studies. The results from the program has been shortened
down, so only the most important values are presented in this section. The program will
print tables such as the results presented in Case Study A. For more information of the
result in this case study check the appendix.
1. Linear loading on main beam, from before secondary beam is installed
2. Linear load + point load on main beam, from after secondary beam is installed
3. Linear load + point load on CableBEAM, from after secondary beam is installed
4. Linear load + point load on pre-tensioned CableBEAM, from after secondary beam
is installed
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
113
==PAGE:122==
Explaination
Value
CASE STUDY
B.1
Displacement [mm]
13.92
Utilization of beam [%]
73.6%
CASE STUDY
B.2
Displacement [mm]
24.4
Utilization of beam[%]
141.3%
CASE STUDY
B.3
Displacement [mm]
22.84
Utilization of beam [%]
130.0%
CASE STUDY
B.4
Displacement [mm]
12.43
Utilization of beam [%]
83.00%
Table 6.3: Displacement and utilization of beam in 4 different scenarios
The deflection given in Table 6.3 is the deflection when the beam is loaded with the design
load, this is usually the characteristic load of either dead load or snow load.
The results from Table 6.3 show that the beam would be able to withstand the linear load
before the introduction of the point load. However, when the point load is introduced
the displacement and utilization of the beam is overloaded, resulting in failure. Using the
CableBEAM equipment the utilization of the beam can be lowered and the displacement
of the beam be restored to a acceptable level of deflection. This is only possible by pre-
tensioning the cable introducing larger loads on the struts and cable. This project would
require the following components showed in Table 6.4.
114
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:123==
Explaination
Value
BEAM
.
Height [mm]
366
Width [mm]
65
Length [mm]
5000
End cut angle [deg]
11.31
CABLE
RED
Length [mm]
5449.02
STRUTS
GREEN
Length [mm]
317
pcs
2
ANCHOR CONNECTOR
RED
Plate height [mm]
65
Plate width [mm]
100
Anchor hole height [mm]
50
Length of anchor bolt [mm]
1250
Length of rope turn-back
175
Number of clips
4
BEAM CONNECTOR
GREEN
pcs
2
CABLE CONNECTOR
RED
pcs
1
Table 6.4: Color coded components for building the CableBEAM to Case B.
Buying a new glulam beam
In the case if would have been more affordable to buy a new glulam beam, instead of steel
reinforcement, the profile selected would be a glulam 65x433mm GL24c. Calculations in
the appendix.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
115
==PAGE:124==
Steel profile reinforced glulam beam
The steel profile is designed to handle the pointload only, this will give the additional
reinforcement need for the glulam beam to withstand the point load. The profile able to
withstand this force is a UPE 180, in steel class S235.
Figure 6.7: Calculations of steel beam for Case B
116
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:125==
6.2.3
Discussion
The CableBEAM can, in theory, successfully withstand the additional point load on the
beam. Because of the already very stiff beam, the beam will have almost no deflection
1mm when loaded with dead load. When the beam is not loaded at all, the beam will
buckle upwards and deflect 18.8mm. This is no problem since the beam will always be
loaded with the dead load and the angle of the roof generates little to non upwards lift on
the beam, compared to the weight of the roof.
The owner of the house would have to choose between 3 options:
1. Installing a new glulam beam with the dimensions 65x433mm in class GL24c.
2. Reinforcing the beam with a UPE180 steel profile in class S235.
3. Reinforcing the beam with a CableBEAM system.
Points that are observed during this case study, concerning the CableBEAM system.
1. The beam is an existing beam which needs reinforcement against a point load.
2. The beam is located offset to the ridge of the structure.
3. The beam has other dimensions than what CableBEAM are meant to installed to,
normal beams are taller in height and narrower in width.
1.
The point load required a change in the script which would be unavailable for the user, at
least in first release. Furthermore it raised questions if the point load could be placed at
other placed than only in the center of the beam. This can be developed in future update
of the CableBEAM configurator.
2.
The offset of the beam from the ridge was already programmed into the CableBEAM
configurator, which easily allowed the beam to be designed with the correct amount of
forces. However in this case there are 2 ”ridge” beams, which also would require a change
in the script.
3.
The beam is first of all narrow and tall, which will reduce the cross-section of the beam
when the anchor is installed and will go through the beam. This also requires a long drill
to drill out a hole for the anchor. For this reason being able to adjust the eccentricity of
the anchor from the center of the beam would allow for easier assembly and overall also
better performance of the CableBEAM system on tall beams. Offsetting the anchor from
the beams center line, greatly reduce the utilization and the deflection of the CableBEAM.
Offsetting the anchor also makes sense on taller beams, since it will improve the effective
cross-sectional area because the anchor bolt would have to go through less beam material.
Furthermore it seems that the stiffness of the beam reduce the effectiveness of the cable.
The higher stiffness of the beam prevents the beam from deforming when loaded. This
minimizes downwards movement of the strut therefore very little activation of the cable
will happen. Instead the beam itself will receive large bending forces from the direct load,
rather than compressive forces from the cable anchor. It became obvious that the option
for pre-tensioning the cable in the CableBEAM configurator was necessary, and couldn’t
rely on the beams low stiffness properties. A load component in Karamba3d allows for
initial strain in the cable, hence pre-tensioning the cable. This showed greatly improved
results.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
117
==PAGE:126==
The pre-tensioning the CableBEAM shows great improvement to the utilization of the
beam, lowering the bending moment in the beam, and rising the compressive forces in the
beam. Rising the compressive forces utilizes the entire cross-sectional area, rather than
only the top and bottom fibers when bending moment occurs.
118
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:127==
6.3
Chapter Summary
The case studies show the how the CableBEAM would behave in an environment where
loads differ. Even though CableBEAM can withstand very high loads, these loads would
have to be static and non-changing.
Wind will cause less load on the beam, causing
the beam to deflect upwards and snow will cause the beam to deflect downwards, if the
pre-tension is set to counter the dead load.
Case Study A showed the need of a stiffer beam that could handle varying loads.
The cross-sectional area of the cable should be larger, not because of maximum tension
forces, but because the axial stiffness of the cable will be larger. As a result the Cable-
BEAM is more stiff and less prone to large deformations when subjected to forces.
A stiffer cross-section of the top beam, will reduce the change of deflection when loaded
in different scenarios, increasing the overall stiffness of the CableBEAM.
Case study B had a larger and stiffer top beam. This was less prone to varying loads.
The important of eccentric anchor point and pre-tension was shown in this case, because
of the very stiff beam.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
119
==PAGE:128==
120
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 7
Analysis & Discussion
Results from the calculations, experimental and case study will be analyzed and discussed.
Verification of calculation methods by comparing results from the experiment. Buildability
of cable systems are reflected upon
7.1
Comparison of analytical calculations and experimental
results
The CableBEAMs from the 2 experiments are compared with the analytical- and the finite
element calculations. First the few results and limitations are discussed and in the last
section the results are compared.
7.1.1
Analytical calculation
The analytical calculations were mainly used to estimate the forces in the cable of Cable-
BEAM and compare with the Finite Element results before experimental testing began.
The analytical calculations had limitations such as not using complex non-linear elastic
calculations to find the exact expected result when testing. The equations are based on
static polygon cable system, with infinite tension stiff non elastic cables EA = 0. This
was expected to over estimate the tension forces in the system and calculation on the
deformation and pre-stressing was not possible.
7.1.2
Finite Element Analysis
Finite Element analysis showed lower tensile forces in the cable than the analytical calcu-
lations. This was expected due to the program using linear elastic calculation methods,
hence being Finite element which builds on linear elastic theory EA ̸= 0. The limitations
in this step was, that the finite element program, Karamba3D, is not yet able to calculate
non-linear elastic elements, such as steel cables. This would in theory overestimate the
forces and deformations in the steel cable.
7.1.3
Experimental testing
The test showed promising results, increasing the stiffness of a beam by up to 160% more
than without reinforcement without pre-tensioning the system. Pre-tensioning the system,
would result in beam camber on the timber beam, which further reduced the deformation
of the beam when loaded.
The tension forces observed in the tests were far less than the expected forces calculated in
the analytical- and finite element calculations. The reason being that the cable was more
elastic than anticipated, also some cable slipped in the cable clip releasing some amount
of cable, increasing sag thus decreasing tension forces.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
121
==PAGE:130==
7.1.4
Results & Comparison
For more detailed results and explanation for each experiment see chapter 5.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 had 3 sub experiments where a beam was loaded with the same amount
of weight. The first sub-experiment was a pre-tensioned CableBEAM, the second sub-
experiment was an un-tensioned CableBEAM while the last sub-experiment was a standard
wooden beam with the same cross-sectional dimensions as the beam that was reinforced
in the previous two sub-experiments.
Comparison of stiffness: Unreinforced- vs. Reinforced beam
The comparison of the deflection between the beams showed that a reinforced beam was
up to 160% stiffer than the regular un-reinforced beam. The deformation of a beam as
a function of load is linear. Therefore a linear trendline has been drawn in Figure 7.1
to express the slope of the function, indicating the stiffness of the beam. The increase in
stiffness were 123% for the pre-tensioned system and 180% for the unpre-tensioned system.
The higher stiffness of the unpre-tensioned is however an error due to non-linear properties
of the cable, over estimating the stiffness of the beam. Furthermore the stiffness of the
pre-tensioned system could have been higher if components designed for heavy lifting was
used. This resulted in cable slip in the cable clips, elongating the cable.
Figure 7.1: Stiffness of beams in experiment 1
Comparison of tensile forces and deformations in CableBEAM
If is seen in Figure 7.2 that the tensile forces has been a overestimated in the analyt-
ical calculation and in the FEA model. This was expected as previously mentioned in
section 7.1.
122
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:131==
Figure 7.2: Comparison of tensile forces in cable experiment 1
At first glance, overestimating the tensile forces in the cable can be considered as a safety
factor, however, this will indicate that the beam is more stiff than anticipated resulting in
a lower sag of the cable during deformation of the CableBEAM, as shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Comparison of deflection results experiment 1
The experiment showed that the CableBEAM was less stiff than what was anticipated
from the FEA. This can be corrected by adjusting the tensile stiffness of the cable to
match the results from the experiment.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
123
==PAGE:132==
The tensile stiffness is expressed as EA, where E is Young’s modulus of elasticity and A
is the tensile area of the steel cable. The tensile area of the cable is a given value from the
supplier.
The modulus of elasticity of the steel cable used in the experiment is not given by the
supplier, therefore a modulus of elasticity of 90GPa was estimated for stainless steel Strand
wire rope with steel Core Wire Rope (CWR). However, it is thought that the cable used in
the experiment is a non pre-stretched cable. Non-prestretched cables in Group B exhibit
both elastic and permanent deformations when subjected to static loading. Furthermore,
the introduction of slip of cable in the cable clips releases more cable length, which also
reduces the measured modulus of elasticity of the cable.
The value was modified from the anticipated 90GPa to 20GPa. Doing this shows a result
that fits the tensile- and displacement curves from the experiment, as seen in Figure 7.4
& Figure 7.5. The reason for the modification is to compare if non-linear behavior occurs.
The utilization of the deflection in SLS and the load capacity in ULS would be closer to
eachother, if better cable clips were installed and the cable was pre-stretched from the
supplier. Even better results could occur if a different type of cable was used, as shown
in table 4.6. Deflection of a beam in SLS (Serviceability Limit State) load combination,
is often the designing factor of a structural beam. The maximum load capacity of a beam
will not be fully utilized, as the deformation demand of L/400.
uSLS
( L
400
) > MEd
MRd
(7.1)
Figure 7.4: Comparison of tensile forces, corrected FEA & Experimental results experi-
ment 1
124
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:133==
Figure 7.5: Comparison of deflection, corrected FEA & Experimental results experiment
1
Test 1.2 shows a larger deformation in the beginning of the test, this is due to the non-
linear elastic properties of the cable when starting the load the cable. The deflection will
however follow the curve of FEA once subjected to enough tension.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
125
==PAGE:134==
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 had two sub-experiments where a beam was loaded with the same amount
of weight.
The first sub-experiment was a pre-tensioned CableBEAM and the second
sub-experiment was an un-tensioned CableBEAM. The results from sub experiments in
experiment 2 are also very different from each other. The first sub experiment large tensile
forces in the cable occured which turned the thimble and caused major cable slip in the
cable clips, furthermore the cable might have received permanent elongation, if the cable
hasn’t been prestreched. This allows the cable to elongate lowering the stiffness of the
beam, which results in large deformations. The results of experiment 1 were more alike,
because of less errors occurring in the cable.
Comparison of tensile forces and deformations in CableBEAM
As in experiment 1 the analytical and FEA results were overestimated as seen in Figure 7.6,
and Figure 7.7
Figure 7.6: Comparison of tensile forces in cable experiment 2
126
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:135==
Figure 7.7: Comparison of deflection results experiment 2
If the modulus of elasticity is modified from the anticipated 90GPa to 20GPa, the results
between the experiment and the FEA will match. It is diﬀicult to match the modulus of
elasticity in this experiment because the first sub-experiment has large errors resulting in
large deformations, and the second sub-experiment has a non pre-stressed cable. The non
pre-stressed cable allows the CableBEAM to deform more when first loaded, while being
more stiff after some load, resulting in a what seems to be a logarithmic curve, this might
be due to the cable’s non-linear properties. It is diﬀicult for the FEA program to predict
the level of deflection, since it either underestimates the deflection when loaded with a
smaller force, or overestimating when loaded with a higher force.
Figure 7.8: Comparison of tensile forces, corrected FEA & Experimental results experi-
ment 2
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
127
==PAGE:136==
Figure 7.9: Comparison of deflection, corrected FEA & Experimental results experiment
2
Errors in experimental testing.
7.2
Material usage, price and LCA of CableBEAM etc.
In this section CableBEAM will be compared to other types of beams. Mainly glulam
and steel beams hence being produced as standard beams. The beams designed in the
Experimental- and Case studies are analyzed for material usage and price and compared
with other solutions that are normally used.
The CableBEAM, in theory, showed to be highly effective when subjected to a static high
load load within a shorter span.
However when CableBEAM is designed as a new beam for buildings and subjected to a
variety of static load combinations, the eﬀiciency in material use between CableBEAM
and other types of beams, was reduced.
The CableBEAM system did however score well when used as a reinforcement system for
an existing glulam beam, requiring a higher load capacity.
7.2.1
Material usage
One of the main goals of CableBEAM was to reduce the material usage on structural
beams. In this section the material use of each study is analyzed and discussed. When
identifying the different beam types, CableBEAM will be CB, where the following number
is the total height of the beam.
Experimental Study
The CableBEAM produced in the experimental study would theoretically be able to with-
stand an 18kN point load, mid-span, with a total span of 2m.
This is the reference
structural system for the experimental study. CableBEAM, a glulam beam and a steel
beam have been analyzed to withstand this structural system.
128
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:137==
CableBEAM
Type
Mass pr. unit
Number of units
Mass
Timber beam
60x115
420
kg/m3
0.014
m3
5.80
kg
Steel cable
Yellow
0.187
kg/m
2.3
m
0.43
kg
Struts
Green
0.7
kg/m
1.2
m
0.84
kg
Cable connector
Red
0.78
kg pr. pc.
1
pcs
0.78
kg
Beam connector
Green
0.152
kg pr. pc.
1
pcs
0.15
kg
Anchor connector
Green
0.494
kg pr. pc.
2
pcs
0.99
kg
TOTAL STEEL
3.19
kg
TOTAL WOOD
5.80
kg
TOTAL
8.99
kg
Table 7.1: Material usage on CableBEAM in Case Experimental study
Case ES
Type
Mass pr length
Mass
Difference
CableBEAM
CB352
4.5
kg/m
8.99
kg
Glulam beam
90x200
7.6
kg/m
15.12
kg
68%
Steel beam
IPE120
10.4
kg/m
20.8
kg
131%
Table 7.2: Material usage of beams in Case Experimental study
Case Study A
Case Study A is the case where a new ridge beam will be installed. This shows if it is
realistic to use CableBEAM as a new beam.
CableBEAM
Type
Mass pr. unit
Number of units
Mass
Timber beam
90x100
420
kg/m3
0.031
m3
12.85
kg
Steel cable
Red
0.38
kg/m
3.6
m
1.38
kg
Struts
Green
0.7
kg/m
1.2
m
0.84
kg
Cable connector
Red
0.78
kg pr. pc.
3
pcs
2.34
kg
Beam connector
Green
0.152
kg pr. pc.
3
pcs
0.46
kg
Anchor connector
Green
0.494
kg pr. pc.
2
pcs
0.99
kg
TOTAL STEEL
6.01
kg
TOTAL WOOD
12.85
kg
TOTAL
18.86
kg
Table 7.3: Material usage on CableBEAM in Case Study A
Case A
Type
Mass pr length
Mass
Difference
CableBEAM
CB315
9.4
kg/m
18.9
kg
Glulam beam
90x233
15.0
kg/m
29.9
kg
59%
Steel beam
IPE140
21.9
kg/m
43.9
kg
133%
Table 7.4: Material usage of beams in Case Study A
Case Study B
Case Study B is the case where a main beam receives a point load from a secondary beam.
This shows if it is realistic to use CableBEAM to reinforce already installed beams.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
129
==PAGE:138==
CableBEAM
Type
Mass pr. unit
Number of units
Mass
Timber beam
65x366
420
kg/m3
0.119
m3
49.96
kg
Steel cable
Red
0.38
kg/m
5.2
m
1.98
kg
Struts
Yellow
0.98
kg/m
1.04
m
1.02
kg
Cable connector
Red
0.78
kg pr. pc.
1
pcs
0.78
kg
Beam connector
Yellow
0.2
kg pr. pc.
1
pcs
0.20
kg
Anchor connector
Red
0.694
kg pr. pc.
2
pcs
1.39
kg
TOTAL STEEL
5.36
kg
TOTAL WOOD
49.96
kg
TOTAL
55.32
kg
Table 7.5: Material usage on CableBEAM in Case Study B
Case B
Type
Mass pr length
Mass
Difference
CableBEAM
CB536
11.1
kg/m
55.3
kg
Glulam beam
65x433
11.8
kg/m
59.1
kg
7%
Steel beam
65x366
10.0
kg/m
49.96
kg
168%
UPE180
19.7
kg/m
98.5
kg
Table 7.6: Material usage of beams in Case Study B
Its important to note that the CableBEAM could have used a smaller beam instead of
the beam already installed. The top beam is so-called overdimensioned in this case. Only
additional 5.36kg steel material is actually being used to fix the problem. This is accounted
for in the sections below about price, and LCA performance.
Material usage - Summary
CableBEAM as a product can reduce the weight of a beam. Glulam beams weigh about
60% more than a CableBEAM would, which is not any significant difference. Steel beams
weigh about 130% more when erecting a new beam for a structure.
The amount of
manpower needed to lift a beam to the desired place during construction would be more
or less the same, depending on the length of the beam.
Case A showed that the CableBeam would have to be made out of glulam anyway to have
an appropriate stiffness. Users might rather want to buy the larger glulam beam, and save
the time not assembling a CableBEAM.
In case study B, It showed that only 5.36kg steel was needed to reinforce an existing glulam
beam with a CableBEAM system. This is 18 times less steel used than if the glulam beam
was to be reinforced with a UPE180 profile. Another alternative was to change out the
entire glulam beam with a larger one.
130
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:139==
7.2.2
Price
The mass of the material is not the only factor for analyzing if CableBEAM would be a
good alternative to other beams. The price of materials have risen within the last few
years, a comparison of price difference for each of the cases are made.
Experimental Study
CableBEAM
Type
Price pr. unit
Price
Timber beam
60x115
39
kr/m
78
kr
Steel cable
Yellow
10
kr/m
23
kr
Struts
Green
28
kr/m
33.6
kr
Cable connector
Red
31.2
kr/pc
31.2
kr
Beam connector
Green
37
kr/pc
37
kr
Anchor connector
Green
19.76
kr/pc
39.52
kr
TOTAL STEEL
164.32
kr
TOTAL WOOD
78
kr
TOTAL
242.32
kr
Table 7.7: Price of materials for Experimental Study case
The price of glulam beams are found through [18], prices on steel is found through [19]
Case ES
Type
Price pr. m
Price
Difference
CableBEAM
CB352
121
kr/m
242
kr
Glulam beam
90x200
329
kr/m
658
kr
172%
Steel beam
IPE120
683
kr/m
1365
kr
463%
Table 7.8: Beam prices of beams for experimental study case
Case Study A
Case A
Type
Price pr. unit
Price
Difference
CableBEAM
CB315
273
kr/m
929
kr
Glulam beam
90x233
380
kr/m
1292
kr
39%
Steel beam
IPE140
766
kr/m
2604
kr
180%
Table 7.9: Beam prices of beams for case study A
Case Study B
Case B
Type
Price pr. unit
Price
Difference
CableBEAM
CB536
103
kr/m
351
kr
Glulam beam
65x433
993
kr/m
3375
kr
863%
Steel beam
UPE180
1216
kr/m
4135
kr
1080%
Table 7.10: Beam prices of beams for case study B
Price - Summary
The price of the experimental test beam was quite low, which also gave high expectations
considering the price point of CableBEAM, compared to the strength. A glulam and a
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
131
==PAGE:140==
steel beam, with the same strength, would have a 172% and 463% higher cost respectively.
The prices found are even without delivery costs, which can be relatively expensive. The
steel needed for the CableBEAM system is low cost, compared to the strength.
When comparing the price difference in Case study A, the difference in price between the
CableBEAM and glulam beam is very slim. This is mostly due to the need of a stiffer top
beam in the CableBEAM. To get a timber beam in these dimensions they would normally
be delivered as glulam beams. However a user can easily buy planed construction timber,
and bolt this together to form a strong top beam reducing the price.
CableBEAM has excellent properties when it is considered to reinforce a existing beam.
The beam would most likely stiff enough and compatible with a CableBEAM system.
Reinforcing a 5m beam would only cost 351kr. in materials. The other option is to order
a new glulam beam, and wait for delivery and pay 863% more, without delivery fees.
132
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:141==
7.2.3
LCA
In this project, no actual Life Cycle Assessments (LCAs) were carried out, but verified
Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) for glulam [20], construction timber [21], PC
Strand (Pre-stressed Concrete Strands) [22], and structural steel [23] were examined. All
EPDs were carried out in accordance to standard EN 15804 and verified in accordance
with ISO 14025. These four EPDs each focused on their own functional unit, as shown in
the table below.
Functional unit
Glulam
1m3
Construction timber
1m3
PC Strand
1kg
Galvanized structural steel
1ton
Table 7.11: Functional units used in each EPD
The purpose of this project is to compare the environmental impact of three different
options in Case B, by investigating their global warming potential. The investigation will
be conducted by calculating the quantity of greenhouse gases emitted during each life cycle
stage for each option. The stages included in this investigation are raw material supply
(A1), transport (A2), and manufacturing (A3). It should be noted that this study only
includes data from the product stage, as this is the most relevant stage for comparing the
environmental impact of the different options.
The EPD’s results on the Global Warming Potential’s (GWP) environmental impact
Glulam
-610
kgCO2 −Eqpr.m3
Construction wood
-670
kgCO2 −Eqpr.m3
PC Strand
2.719
kgCO2 −Eqpr.kg
Structural steel
1.490
*kgCO2 −Eqpr.kg
Table 7.12: Global Warming Potential found in EPD’s. *The unit is converted from ton
to kg.
CASE B
Quantity
GWP
CableBEAM
5.4
kg
14.6
kgCO2 −Eq
Glulam beam
0.14
m3
-85.8
kgCO2 −Eq
Steel beam
98.5
kg
146.8
kgCO2 −Eq
Table 7.13: GWP of different scenarios
The existing glulam beam is not considered, since it is included in all options.
As mentioned earlier, it is important to remember that there are other impact categories
that also have a significant environmental impact. In addition, only the production phase
has been considered and not what happens to the products when they have served their
purpose.
For example, if wood is burned, it will emit the CO2 it has stored and thus the GWP
result will go from negative to positive. By looking at stage C3 (Waste processing) in the
EPD for glulam, it will emit 743kgCO2 −Eqperm3 for incineration.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
133
==PAGE:142==
This would mean: 743 −610 = 133kgCO2 −Eqperm3 and that the actual glulam beam
would emit 18.7kgCO2 −Eq which is more than the CableBEAM, however it is not
considered what happens to the CableBEAM after its use stage. The company responsible
for CableBEAM can create a service where users can send in CableBEAM products, after
it has been used. The product can then be resold when an order on that specific length of
cable is needed. Compared to other types of beams, CableBEAM does not require a lot of
space to store the components. Steel material is in high demand to recycle since almost
all of the steel collected can be used to produce new steel components.
Only data for new products is provided in the EPD’s.
If recycled products are used,
emissions can be saved because they are accounted for in previous system boundaries. An
LCA can thus have many different outcomes because it is important to look at all phases
for each individual material and how it is handled after its use stage and if it is recycled
from previously or entirely new. Recycling existing wooden beams can result in a better
GWP score.
134
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:143==
7.3
Usability test
A usability test can evaluate how feasible the product will be, as a DIY kit for reinforcing
beams or creating new minimalistic beams through cable systems. If too many mistakes
are made during the assembly of the product, it will not have the same load capacity as
expected, resulting in a dangerous structure.
The usability test was conducted in Fablab Nordvest, which is a non-profit community
workshop, where there is access to a broad range of tools and digital production machinery.
It is important to note that most of the people conducting the test had technical back-
ground, and might have an advantage building a CableBEAM, compared to non-technical
people. The background on the people in the test were:
• 1x Electrical Engineer
• 1x Civil Engineer
• 2x Students at Academy of Fine Arts
• 1x Wind Energy Engineer
The people at Fablab Norvest showed great interest in the CableBEAM and were keen
to learn more. 5 people had a go at assembling the beam from the PAI. They were all
observed without given hints or tricks on how to assemble the beam. Successes, questions,
and errors were noted and corrected in the PAI.
The CableBEAM can be assembled in a time frame between 12 and 42 minutes. The
average assembly time was 30 minutes. The fastest time of 12 minutes was achieved by a
group of two.
The necessary components and equipment was placed on a table where the participants
could assemble the beam.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
135
==PAGE:144==
Figure 7.10: Components and tools needed to assemble CableBEAM
136
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:145==
7.3.1
User thoughts
The participants were asked a series of questions. This evaluates if the product will have
any kind of demand on the market.
The questions were if they would consider using CableBEAM:
1. From an aesthetic point of view?
2. Low cost compared to other types of beams?
3. Low weight compared to other types of beams?
4. Higher availability (not necessary to place an order) compared to other types of
beams?
5. The complexity and time consumption that is used to assemble the beam.
The main answers were:
1. Many found great interest in the aesthetic part of the CableBEAM, because of the
very different and minimalistic design. 2 people found the beam weird and would
most likely use a regular beam instead. The reasons being the conceptual beam
being bulky, if the struts were non-threaded bolts and the connections were more
elegant, then they might consider using it. All participants found it nice that they
would be able to look ”through the beam”, however the same 2 participants thought
it catch too much attention, which they didn’t consider to be a good thing. If they
would use it, they would have it ”packed” with boards.
2. All participants found the low cost of CableBEAM appealing. And would consider
using it instead of other types of beam, with respect to budget. However if a project
would include more than 5 beams, one participant would rather pay more for regular
beams.
3. Non of the participants had ever tried lifting a large beam, but the reduction of
weight when installing a beam is never a bad thing. A carpenter was later asked if
he would be interested in beams laying less. The answer was: ”As long as the beam
will have the same load capacity, then yes.
Normally we don’t have any special
lifting mechanisms when constructing structures for 1-level residential homes, but
we use all the manpower we have available, to lift heavy things.
4. Being able to buy the products needed within the same day was a nice thought. But
normally a renovation project would require buying all the materials needed in bulk.
So this is not a greatly contributing factor to choose CableBEAM compared to other
beams.
5. 1 user used 42 minutes assembling the beam, this participant would not consider
using this beam because of the time and complexity of assembly. In total 2 users
found the assembly to be complex.
7.3.2
Errors
In Figure 7.11 some of the most crucial or common errors are shown. Going from left to
right and downwards the following error occurred.
1. Nut is inserted too far onto the bolt, this is explained in the PAI that the bolt
should just barely stick out of the nut. This was a common problem that the users
overlooked.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
137
==PAGE:146==
2. The strut is not inserted far enough into the beam connector, resulting in different
lengths of the struts. Furthermore the beam connectors are slightly of angle from
each other.
3. The result of different length of struts will steer the cable connector away from the
center of the beam.
4. When it was clear for the user that the cable connector was offset from the center,
the user chose to rotate the strut. This did in fact let the strut go further into
the beam connector, but further out of the cable connector. This left very little
thread to be in contact between the strut and the cable connector, and left the cable
connector in the coordinate as before. For this to be corrected, the cable connector
should have been disassembled and the strut should have been properly mounted to
the beam connector.
5. One user found it hard to assemble the cable connector, this was solved by a larger
overview of this step in the PAI, than a close-up.
6. The cable clips were installed in each direction. This also seemed to be a bigger
problem than expected. The users would learn a lot from a little pre-text before
the pictorial assembly guide. This may remind the users on certain important steps
that users often forget. This text could introduce what a live wire, and dead wire
is. Furthermore what a saddle and the u-bolt is on a cable clip. Finally introduce
the saying ”Never saddle a dead horse”, keeping the u-bolt on the dead wire, and
the saddle on the live wire.
7. Both clips are installed incorrectly on this picture. But the bigger problem is that the
bolt slips out of the end of the beam, before the cable is assembled. This leaves a lot
of ”bolt” sticking out of the beam, leaving almost nothing of the bolt to pre-tension
the system.
8. In the last picture, the cable is not tensioned enough before installing the cable clips.
This again leaves too much slack for the anchor bolts.
One of the hardest steps were to install the cable around the thimble and lock it into place
with cable clips. This might also be the reason why the anchor bolt have moved and that
the user might be so frustrated creating a loop that they forget which way the cable clip
should be mounted.
138
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:147==
Figure 7.11: Assembly errors
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
139
==PAGE:148==
2 out of the 4 beams assembled were assembled as fair build quality. 1 out of 4 would
most likely fail when loaded, while the last had minimal errors and would probably be
closer to the estimated capacity. The last user read the user manual thoroughly, thereby
minimizing the mistakes made.
7.4
Safety requirements and unforeseen loads
7.4.1
Assembly of beam
During the usability test it became obvious that even technical skilled people made mis-
takes during the assembly. Considering that this product would be available for everyone,
it does not seem feasible yet to sell it and be used by the average person.
A few thoughts could be considered, which could raise the safety and robustness of the
product. Knowledge is key, the user must understand the safety aspects of structures and
that failure can cause loss of life. Some of the pictures in the PAI seemed to have been
skipped or otherwise not notice the details. This can of course be corrected to warn the
user on what to do and not do. Furthermore, just a little text can explain to the user what
is necessary for the structure to be sound along the steps. The PAI could include a short
page before beginning the assembly where a few key terms can be mentioned. Furthermore
the PAI could include a video that explained all of the steps, showed tips and tricks, and
what to look out for after assembling.
Increased safety factors, lowering the design load capacity of the beam, can be used to
increase the safety of the product. Most manufacturers that deliver materials used for
heavy lifting, will typically have a large safety-factor on their products to minimize the
risk of failure when assembled incorrectly. However safety factors can only increase the
safety by a litte, the most important is user education in how the materials work together
and why some things like the cable clips are crucial to install correctly, with the right
amount of force.
7.4.2
Unforeseen loads
Increased safety factors will contribute to the safety of the beam, when loaded by unfore-
seen loads. These are loads that are not included in Eurocode 1, therefore not included in
the CableBEAM configurator.
Unforeseen loads could include people hanging from the cable of the beam, which loads the
cables in a different way. If the beam connector were to be ball joints, the struts should
never come under tension, as the ball would pop out of the socket, unless a more robust
design was made. This would lead to the beam not being able to transfer the forces into
the cable, causing damage to the roof or in worse case, collapse.
7.4.3
Fire-safety
CableBEAM cannot be used bare-boned in buildings before further studies and exper-
iments have been conducted. However, when the structural aspect of the CableBEAM
shows to be structurally sound, the CableBEAM can be installed in buildings (by a pro-
fessional, so far) with fire resistant gypsum boards or timber boards, ensuring that the
cable, beam and all the connections are protected against immense heat and direct fire.
Calculations show that the cable in it self will be able to withstand fire for 30 minutes with
a layer of RockWool around the cable. This protect the cable from heating up, reducing
the sag of the system and keeping the high-tensile steel properties. Other connections
such as the anchor and beam connector will actually be the main problem to protect, if
fire resistant boards are not installed.
140
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:149==
7.5
Market potential
The market potential for CableBEAM has been investigated by asking people in civil
engineering firms what they think of the product, and if they would consider using it.
7.5.1
Adnan Özari
The following is a direct citation from Adnan Özari.
”As a company owner, dealing with poles for streety light and wire suspended street
illumination, I find the concept of CableBeam intriguing. There is a large market potential
for restoring old 1960 to 1980 residential homes where the floor plan does not match the
modern family needs. Also restoring old wooden structures, as wood tends to set over time
hence bringing stress to walls and roof, can be done by using CableBEAM. See Figure 7.12
from a country side restaurant “Julinha” in Portugal. The height between the floor and
the bottom of the truss was approximately 4m, which leaves enough for the CableBEAM
reinforcement.
Figure 7.12: Large long time deformations of timber truss
I believe there is a market for this product once the further studies are finalized.”
7.5.2
Kim K. Wiwe
The following is a translated citation from Kim K. Wiwe, Lead structural Engineer in
Dines Jørgensen A/S.
”I see a clear potential in using cable systems, both for new buildings and for strengthening
existing structures. However, it is my assessment that success depends on if there will be
a supplier who will develop good systems for mounting cables.”
7.5.3
Jarl Vindnæs
With dialog with Jarl Vindnæs, founder of Stykka, the use of CableBEAM could be utilised
in their pre-fabricatred student house ”container” assembly. CableBEAM could be used
instead of glulam beams, if it was cost economic, easy to assemble and environmentally
friendly. Some concerns about fire-safety were brought up, and Jarl drew a quick sketch
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
141
==PAGE:150==
stating that the system could be encapsulated in timber boarding, so CableBEAM would
appear to be a solid glulam beam, while being fire proof.
Figure 7.13: Encapsulated CableBEAM sketch drawn by Jarl
142
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:151==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
With extensive research and development, it was possible to combine structural theories
on how to optimize the performance of beams, by installing a reinforcing cable system.
A parametric finite element analysis script was created, which could test the structural
theories in a variety of CableBEAM designs. The script would be able to suggest color
coded structural components, which would have the necessary capacity, to handle the
forces in the system.
Numerical and experimental studies showed that a timber beam can be reinforced with a
cable system. This transforms the internal moment in the beam, to a compressive force,
utilizing the entire cross-sectional area. The cable attached underneath the beam will
handle the tensile forces.
With a CableBEAM system it is possible to pre-tension a timber beam, creating a beam
with upwards camber. This will be leveled out when dead load is applied to the structural
system, resulting in minimal deformation and internal moment in the beam.
Furthermore numerical calculations on case studies, showed optimized performance of the
CableBEAM system, when the anchor point of the cable is placed below the centerline
of the reinforced beam. This introduce further negative moments to counter the positive
moments occurring when the beam is loaded.
The cableBEAM system can be designed with very narrow cross-section, if the load in
known and will remain constant during the use of the beam. The amount of pre-tension
and eccentric anchor point can be tuned in, to accommodate for the load. During variable
loading, the pre-tension and eccentric anchor point can only do so much for keeping the
beam level. The CableBEAM system would have to use a stiffer beam or cable.
Experimental tests showed a lower stiffness of the CableBEAM than anticipated - this
might be due to the lack of components certified for heavy lifting use.
Furthermore,
when the CableBEAM was pre-tensioned, the tensile force in the cable would slowly fall,
indicating creep behavior of the wood or steel cable.
When compared to a regular beam, the experimental study showed an increase of stiffness
by 123%.
The comparison of material use and cost in case study B, section 6.2, shows that there
are big benefits of using the CableBEAM system on existing beams, rather than replacing
the whole beam or reinforcing with a steel profile.
Finally a usability test was conducted at Fablab Nordvest, which raised safety concerns.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
143
==PAGE:152==
Users would have to be educated in the CableBEAM system prior to assembly, or the PAI
would have to be upgraded to accommodate safety checks.
144
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:153==
Chapter 9
Further Studies
Proposes further studies on the topic of CableBEAM and cable system in buildings.
9.1
Experimental testing
9.1.1
Materials with approved strength values from supplier
Some errors occurred during the testing of CableBEAM, this is due to limited knowledge
of the strength values of the materials used. For next testing, the material used for the
test will have approved strength values from the supplier limiting the unknown factors
and possible errors. Will the experiment match the expected FEA calculations then?
9.1.2
Asymmetrically loaded
Arches and cable curves are prone to assymetric loading. With a longer beam it is possible
to test the beam with asymmetric loading.
9.1.3
Fire testing
CableBEAM is yet to be tested during a fire.
With tests in collaboration with DBI
(Dansk Brand- og sikringsteknisk Institut), behavior of CableBEAM can be observed and
researched. This will tell if CableBEAM will need fire-protective measures to be safe to
use in roof structures.
Different materials can be tested such as
• Stainless steel
• Carbon fiber material
• Fiber strengthened composite materials.
• Bi-metals
9.1.4
Higher strength timber material
Using higher strength timber material instead of coniferous timber, can improve the beam
9.2
Tension check
This section explains the ideas on how users would be able to verify that they have applied
the correct pre-tension to their system.
Cables are prone to elongate when loaded over a longer time, this will result in the Cable-
BEAM creeping, causing a larger deformation over time than when the beam was installed.
This happens for timber and concrete structures as well.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
145
==PAGE:154==
Timber and concrete structures are overdimensioned to compensate for the additional sag
later in the element’s lifespan. This could also be possible for CableBEAM, but the goal
is to use as less material as possible. Cable structures are meant to be checked regularly,
and will be required to add further tension to the system.
9.2.1
Tension alarm
To help the user checking their beam regularly, a tension alarm can be installed on the
cable, checking the tension once a day and sound an alarm if the tension is below a certain
range. Much like a fire-detector/alarm used installed in buildings today.
The tension alarm itself can also act as a turnbuckle, so the alarm would have to be rotated
until it gives a ”all good” notification. This product could also help users pre-tensioning
their system to the required pre-stress level, when assembling the CableBEAM.
9.2.2
Applying weight between struts
Applying a certain weight between the struts will always give a little deflection of the
cable. The following will only work for cablebeams with an even number of struts, since the
middle part will be parallel to the ground, and perpendicular relative to the gravitational
acceleration.
Using the theory from subsubsection 4.1.3, the horizontal tension T can be estimated.
The load P applied on the cable between the struts are known. The length ℓbetween the
struts are known too, while the deflection a of the cable can be measured.
T = ℓP
4a
(9.1)
Since the deflection will be low, relative to unloaded situation, the certain tension in the
cable is only an approximation. But this could be an interesting method to test if the
tension can be estimated from this trick.
9.2.3
Guitar string sound hypothesis
Can the CableBEAM be played like a guitar? Well it sure doesn’t sound like an instrument
when you strum / pluck the cable, however it does play a sound, with certain frequencies.
When a string in tension is plucked, it will create a dynamic response on the string,
resulting in different response frequencies (mode shapes / octaves). The eigenfrequency
of a string depends on the following:
• Tension of the string, higher tension = higher frequency
• Length of the string, smaller distance = higher frequency
• Weight of string, lighter string = higher frequency
The opposite will result in lower frequencies.
146
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:155==
Figure 9.1: Frequency spectrum when the cable on CableBEAM is plucked, waterfall
diagram underneath, shows same frequencies showing up when plucked
9.3
Assisting features for user experience and assembly of
CableBEAM
9.3.1
LiDAR / camera scanning and AI
Through a serious development of phones and AI through the last decade, many high-
tech features are available for all the people with a smartphone. All smartphones today,
are equipped with a decent camera, some phones are even equipped with LiDAR (laser
imaging, detection, and ranging) sensors.
This feature can help the user measure their building, ensuring the correct size is im-
plemented into the CableBEAM configurator.
This will be used for Stykka’s kitchen
configurator, enhancing the user experience.
Furthermore, the camera app can even be used to verify the connections made by the user,
if it detects an error it can give the user a warning and explain what went wrong and show
tips to how it’s done through a video guide or the correct page in the PAI. If the last step
is verified by the app, the user will be able to proceed to the next assembly step.
9.3.2
3D printed accessories
The kit for assembling CableBEAM doesn’t include any tools. But it could include small
3d printed parts, which can help assemble the CableBEAM correctly.
Drill guide
A drill guide can help the user drill a hole perpendicular angled cut done at the end of
the beam. This is where the tension anchor bolt will run through.
Torque wrench bit
Most people who are into DIY builds, will have the necessary tools to assemble a Cable-
BEAM. But not many will have a torque wrench that is able to signal when a nut has
been tensioned to the correct amount of low-end torque (2-20Nm). This is a crucial step
when installing the cable clips. Installing the clip too loose, and the cable will slip, to tight
and the thread is ruined also causing cable slip. Replaceable torque wrench bits could be
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
147
==PAGE:156==
included to each cable clip bolt needed to tensioned (8x). The bit will be designed to
either snap or deform at the bolts required torque capacity. The bit will be loaded by
torque in its own axis, and fail due to torsion overload.
Casing for movable parts
The movable pars of the CableBEAM is the nuts on the cable clips that can be un-
tightened. If the nuts are removed while being loaded, the cable will be released, which
will cause serious damage to the building and the people inside it. Casings around movable
parts, will warn people that this is a structural component not to be removed.
A scenario could be if someone else bought a house with a CableBEAM system, and the
new owners decided to remove the cable without knowledge of the product. They might
think its just some weird installation made by the previous owner for use of decoration,
in form of Christmas lights or other festive decoration.
9.4
CableSYSTEMS
9.4.1
CableBEAM 1.0
So far the possibilities of CableBEAM has been researched. The CableBEAM created in
this project was a rough concept design, to test the behavior of a cable reinforced beam.
Many things were discovered during testing, which can be improved.
First of all the
materials used could have been lifting approved as explained in 9.1.1.
The design of the struts will have to angled, and not globally vertical, when viewing the
beam from the side. For better results the struts should be angled in such a way, that
they are perpendicular to the tangent of the cable curve. This will eliminate the bending
moment occurring in the struts, and it will also keep the cable connectors in place, without
needing to ”fasten” them to the cable.
This would require a hing on the beam connector, which allows the struts to rotate in
multiple degrees of freedom. A ball joint, like the ones found in skeletons would prove to
be the best type of connection for the next version of CableBEAM.
9.4.2
Less complex reinforcement material
Instead of cable systems, steel bands used to stabilize light walls and roofing, might also
proof to be useful to reinforce a beam. This is less complex and can also be pre-tensioned
for possibly a lower price and easier installation. This might be a better solution if the
beam is to be covered in fire-resistant material anyway.
9.4.3
CableCRANE
There are different methods of using cable systems in a residential building. This project
focused mainly on the cable reinforced beam concept, but just as an appetizer different
systems can also be developed.
Cable CRANE takes the structural aspects of a tower crane cable system, which will carry
a cantilever beam, to minimize the large bending moments in a cantilever beam. This
will reduce the cross-section of a cantilever beam and longer overhang of a roof can be
achieved.
148
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
[1]
Vivienne Reiner. Ants filmed building moving bridges from their live bodies. 24.11.2015.
[2]
Otto. Patzelt. Wachsen und Bauen - Konstruktionen in Natur und Tecknik. Verlag
für Bauwesen Berlin, 1st Edition, 1972.
[3]
H. A. Buchholdt. Introduction to Cable Roof Structures. Cambridge University Press,
1st Edition, 1985.
[4]
-. Renault Distribution Center by Foster + partners: A High Tech Building. -.
[5]
Matheus Pereira. How Inverted King Post Trusses Allow for Large, Elegant Open
Spaces. 15.11.2018.
[6]
Thais Alves Cunha Francisco Antonio Romero Gesualdo and Romulo Barbosa Rezende.
Numerical and experimental evaluation of a double inverted trussed beam reinforced
with steel cable. 14.11.2013.
[7]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Last og sikkerhed efter Eurocodes. PRAXIS - Nyt teknisk Forlag,
1. udgave, 2011.
[8]
Technical Committee CEN/TC250. Eurocode 3 - Design of steel structures - Part
1-11: Design of structures with tension components. Dansk Standard, 2006.
[9]
P.N. Poulsen and J.F. Olesen. Bærende konstruktioner 1. Polyteknisk forlag, 1.
udgave, 2015.
[10]
J. B. Hansen and M.A. Herfelt. Find Formlen Stålkonstruktioner. Polyteknisk forlag,
1. udgave, 2. oplag 2015.
[11]
Mikkel Hvass. Eurocode 5 - DS/EN 1995 FU:2020. 6. udgave, 1. oplag 2020.
[12]
Lexie Keller. Wire Rope Clips: Different Types, Installation, and Common Mistakes.
24.08.2020.
[13]
Fastener Mart. METRICBLOTS, SCREWS AND NUTS, TIGHTENING TORQUES.
-.
[14]
Adnan Özari. Specialist in lighting systems for road use.
[15]
Dansk Standard. Forkortet udgave af Eurocode 1 - Last på bærende konstruktioner.
Dansk Standard, 3. udgave, 2. oplag 2015.
[16]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Teknisk Ståbi. PRAXIS - Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 23. udgave, 2015.
[17]
Jørgen Munch-Andersen & Hans Jørgen Larsen. Beregning af TRÆKONSTRUK-
TIONER. Træinformationen, 1. udgave, august 2016.
[18]
Glulam beam prices. 6.2022.
[19]
Steel beam prices. 6.2022.
[20]
Træ.dk. Glulam EPD. 17.05.2022.
[21]
Træ.dk. Construction wood EPD. 22.04.2020.
[22]
Siderurgica Latina Martin S.p.A. PC strand EPD. 4.05.2020.
[23]
DS Stålkonstruktion A/S. Structural Steel EPD. 6.2022.
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
149
==PAGE:158==
150
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
==PAGE:159==
Appendix A
CableBEAM installation overview PAI
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
Appendix B
CableBEAM PAI
==PAGE:166==
assembly manual
CONIFEROUS TIMBER — 2000 MM 
LOAD-BEARING BEAM REINFORCEMENT KIT
2 POINTS
1.0
==PAGE:167==
overview
1
7
 / 
COMPONENTS
PROCESS
TOOLS
x 2
x 2
x 1
x 2
x 4
x 2
x 2
x 2
x 24
x 4
x 4
x 4
x 1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Preparation of beam and anchor plates
Assembly of the two anchors
Assembly of the four struts
Final assembly of the beam
Fitting the steel cable
Pre-tensioning of the cableBEAM
==PAGE:168==
preparation of beam
2
7
 / 
2
3
1
x 1
x 2
x 12
1/3
1/3
1/3
Drill holes before mounting screws
==PAGE:169==
assembly of anchors
3
7
 / 
x 2
x 2
x 2
x 2
1
2
x 1
==PAGE:170==
assembly of struts
4
7
 / 
x 4
x 4
x 4
x 4
1
==PAGE:171==
final assembly
5
7
 / 
x 4
x 12
1
3
Drill holes before mounting screws
2
x 1
==PAGE:172==
fitting of cable
6
7
 / 
x 1
x 4
1
2
3
==PAGE:173==
pre-tensioning
7
7
 / 
==PAGE:174==
congratulations on completing your cableBEAM!
==PAGE:175==
Appendix C
Struts analytical calculations
==PAGE:176==
Struts.mcdx
23/06/2022
Strut Calculations
PRE DEFINITIONS
Parameters
Material parameters
Cross-section calculations
1 of 3
==PAGE:177==
Struts.mcdx
23/06/2022
2 of 3
==PAGE:178==
Struts.mcdx
23/06/2022
3 of 3
==PAGE:179==
Appendix D
2-point cable system analytical calculations
==PAGE:180==
16/05/22
Cable beam force analysis
JFS
Generel parameters and constants
Cable data
Point load data
1 of 5
==PAGE:181==
16/05/22
Calculation of horizontal tension throguh the cable system dimensions
2 of 5
==PAGE:182==
16/05/22
3 of 5
==PAGE:183==
16/05/22
Horizontalt træk for ønsket 
nedhæng
=
H2
-3.27 kN
kN
kN
kN
Horizontalt træk for ønsket 
nedhæng
=
――
H2
g
-333 kg
kg
kg
kg
Beregning af wireophæng med faktiske laster (Check)
4 of 5
==PAGE:184==
16/05/22
Beregning af horizontalt træk fra ledninger
5 of 5
==PAGE:185==
Appendix E
Cable Anchor analytical calculations
==PAGE:186==
Anchor calculations.mcdx
27/06/2022
Anchor Calculations
PRE DEFINITIONS
Tension resistance of bolts
Punching shear resistance
1 of 3
==PAGE:187==
Anchor calculations.mcdx
27/06/2022
Compressive resistance of angled timber beam
2 of 3
==PAGE:188==
Anchor calculations.mcdx
27/06/2022
3 of 3
==PAGE:189==
Appendix F
Beam connector analytical calculations
==PAGE:190==
Beam connector calculations.mcdx
14/06/2022
Beam connector calculations
PRE DEFINITIONS
Welds
Compressive stress perpendicular to the grain
1 of 2
==PAGE:191==
Beam connector calculations.mcdx
14/06/2022
Plate thickness
2 of 2
==PAGE:192==
Appendix G
Fire insulated cable calculations
==PAGE:193==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
Cable - Structural fire safety - Insulated steel cable
PRE DEFINITIONS
Material parameters
Beam section parameters
Fire protection properties
1 of 6
==PAGE:194==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
Fire parameters
Danish solution
2 of 6
==PAGE:195==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
3 of 6
==PAGE:196==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
Steel temperature at 30 min
=
Ts.30
133.8 °C
°C
°C
°C
Max steel temperature
=
Ts.max
483.41 °C
°C
°C
°C
4 of 6
==PAGE:197==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
5 of 6
==PAGE:198==
Cable - Insulated.mcdx
27/06/2022
6 of 6
==PAGE:199==
Minimalistic Structural Design Through Cable Systems
191
==PAGE:200==
With the current world conflicts and pandemics, materials are at a high demand with low supply,
which results in higher material prices. Furthermore it is said that building new structures contributes
to the climate change. Beams used today are designed by man and might not be optimized to the
fully extent of handling loads resulting in high use of material. Cable roofs were thought to have a
lot of potential in the 60s and early 70s, but has only been used in a limited amount of structures
because of lack of construction expertise and research, resulting in expensive engineering projects.
To change this, innovative solutions must be researched to lower the usage of material. In structural
engineering, Super-light structures use natural geometry to create structural systems that weigh less
and use less materials, however still manages to withstand large loads. Geometry found in nature
has evolved since the beginning of life on earth, where natural selection gave geometries with better
structural systems perks compared to the last generation.
There has been designed many cable
systems, for each specific structure. Keeping the purpose of a cable system simple and parametric,
allows for a program to quickly calculate the forces and deformations in a system. This will keep the
cost of engineering calculations down for projects in smaller residential buildings.
The product of CableBEAM use less material, has a lower price, with the same load capacity as
other conventional beams. The calculations of CableBEAM is done online through a parametric
program, allowing the user to design a CableBEAM to their needs, even with minimal structural
knowledge. This will save time and money for the user, not requiring to hire a structural engineer
for their project in a small residential building. The online program will print a pictorial assembly
instruction manual, with guidance on how to assemble and install the beam, the necessary parts for
assembly can either be delivered via mail or bought in a local hardware store.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
