==PAGE:1==
THE SWISS KNIFE FOR HIERARCHICAL
LOCALIZATION
Master thesis
Author
Youyang Shen - s202535
Supervisors
Søren Hauberg
Frederik Rahbæk Warburg
June 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgement
I want to thank my supervisors Prof. Søren Hauberg and Frederik Rahbæk Warburg
for the valuable discussions.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Related work
2
2.1
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Local feature matching/Re-ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
6DOF pose estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5.1
Hierarchical localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5.2
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5.3
Pose estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Metric learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
7
3.1
Preliminaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Triangulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Structure from motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Hierarchical localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.1
GeM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.2
Class (CLS) token . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.3
Siamese learning and loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
6-DOF Localization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4.1
Superpoint and Superglue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.2
LoFTR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Swiss knife
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5.2
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Experimental setup
16
4.1
Hierarchical Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Fine-tuning vision transformer for place recognition
. . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Swiss knife
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results
19
5.1
Hierarchical localization-LoFTR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.1
Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
==PAGE:4==
5.2
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2.1
Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Swiss knife
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Discussion
27
6.1
Hierarchical Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Place recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Local feature matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4
ResNet vs Vision Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Conclusion
30
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Visual localization is a way to determine location from images by estimating the camera
position and orientation. Solving this problem is a key step towards truly autonomous
robots such as self-driving cars and is a prerequisite for augmented and virtual real-
ity systems. It is also an important component for Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping system (SLAM) tasks.
Hierarchical localization is a method that performs visual localization in a hierarchi-
cal fashion, combining 2D image-based localization and 3D structure-based localization
approaches by using image retrieval as an initial step. Hierarchical localization includes
two subtasks, one is place recognition and the other is 6 DOF pose estimation.
However, there are still some challenges in visual localization. One is the robustness
of the feature to visual appearance conditions such as day/night, summer/winter, which
are very difficult for hand crafted features.
Another challenge is computation.
The
process of hierarchical localization consists of several steps. Each step requires feature
extraction, resulting in a long time to complete the entire pipeline.
The goal of the project is to design a novel architecture for hierarchical localization
based on image features obtained from attention layers in Transformer.
In this project, we first utilize the hloc pipeline and reproduce Loftr in hierarchical
localization. We also implement place recognition using DeiT and Swin-T respectively.
Experiment results show Swin Transformer outperforms DeiT. Lastly, we propose the
Swiss Knife architecture and train with initial weight for 6 DOF pose estimation. Ex-
periment results show that ViT has great potential for local feature matching, which
can benefit the pose estimation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes related work.
Section 3 introduces the methods. Section 4 shows the experimental setup and Section
5 shows the results. The discussion and conclusion are in Section 6 and 7. In each
section, we follow the same order, introducing hierarchical localization first, followed by
the two subtasks, location recognition and 6 DOF pose estimation.
1
==PAGE:6==
2
Related work
The Coarse-to-fine hierarchical localization [1] method combines place recognition, re-
ranking and 6DOF pose estimation approaches. Figure 1 shows the pipeline of hierar-
chical localization. Place recognition finds a set of database images which are likely to
be close to the query image. These shortlisted images are then re-ranked based on local
features. The 6DOF pose estimation is leveraged when the most similar image is found
after re-ranking.
Figure 1: Hierarchical localization pipeline
2.1
Place recognition
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is often characterized as being able to recognize the
same place despite of significant changes in appearance and viewpoint. As image match-
ing and retrieval are key ingredients of place recognition methods, several papers pro-
posed image representation using deep representation learning methods to improve the
performance.
NetVLAD NetVLAD[2] is a CNN which uses a differentiable VLAD layer to encode
an image into a global image descriptor. The VLAD layer is placed at the final feature
map of a backbone for image classification and performs pooling of the features. The
network has been trained on Google Time Machine data based on a triplet ranking
loss.
This paper proposes improved image representation using GPS and geometric
information as a form of weakly supervision.
GeM GeM[3] is a pooling layer based on a generalized-mean that has learnable
parameters. Both max and average pooling are its special cases. The pooling parameter
pk can be manually set or learned since this operation is differentiable and can be part
of the back-propagation. GeM can be applied to any fully-connected CNN, while their
fully-connected layers are discarded. The network has been trained on several datasets
with reconstructed 3D models in a unsupervised manner based on a contrastive loss.
DELG DELG[4], standing for DEep Local and Global features, is a unified model
that combines GeM for global features and attentive selection for local features. Global
features can be used in the first stage of retrieval system, while local features can then
2
==PAGE:7==
be deployed to re-rank top results. The entire network can be trained end-to-end using
image-level labels and does not require any additional post-processing steps.
2.2
Local feature matching/Re-ranking
Before the age of deep learning, many renowned works in the traditional hand-crafted
local features have achieved good performances. SIFT[5] and ORB[6] are arguably the
most successful hand-crafted local features and are widely adopted in many 3D com-
puter vision tasks. The performance on large viewpoint and illumination changes of
local features can be significantly improved with learning-based methods. The near-
est neighbor search is usually used as a post-processing step to match the dense de-
scriptors. SuperPoint[7] builds upon MagicPoint which is one of the most successful
learning based local features and proposes a self-supervised training method through
homographic adaptation. SuperGlue proposes a learning-based approach for local fea-
ture matching.
D2NET[8] is a describe-and-detect approach to sparse local feature
detection and description.
Superpoint SuperPoint[7] is a self-supervised framework for training interest point
detectors and descriptors. There are totally three steps in this self-supervised approach.
(a) A trained detector Magicpoint is trained on synthetic data. MagicPoint performs
better than classical interest point detectors on the synthetic data, but it misses many
potential interest point locations. (b) Homographic Adaptation is implemented to solve
such issue. It warps the input image multiple times to help an interest point detector
see the scene from many different viewpoints and scales. The detector SuperPoint is
generalized by Homographic Adaptation in conjunction with the MagicPoint detector. It
is more repeatable. (c) Combine SuperPoint with a descriptor subnetwork for highlevel
semantic tasks such as image matching. This work demonstrates that it is possible to
transfer knowledge from a synthetic dataset onto real-world images and sparse interest
point detection and description can be cast as a single, efficient CNN.
Superglue SuperGlue[9] proposes a learning based approach for local feature match-
ing. SuperGlue accepts two sets of interest points with their descriptors as input and
learns their matches with a graph neural network (GNN), which is a general form of
Transformers. Since the priors in feature matching can be learned with a data-driven
approach, SuperGlue achieves impressive performance and sets the new state of the art
in local feature matching. However, being a detector-dependent method, it has the fun-
damental drawback of being unable to detect repeatable interest points in indistinctive
regions. The attention range in SuperGlue is also limited to the detected interest points
only.
D2NET D2NET[8] is a CNN which takes an image as input, and outputs a set of
feature detection over the image, as well as a descriptor for each pixel in the image.
The feature is extracted by the VGG16[10] pretrained on ImageNet[11] and truncated
after the conv4 3 layer. The local descriptors correspond to the depth dimension of the
3
==PAGE:8==
tensor output by the network, and the detections correspond to those pixels which have
a local maximum in one of their feature maps. The network is trained in a supervised
manner on correspondences obtained from the MegaDepth dataset. After evaluating the
performance of D2NET on image matching, 3D reconstruction and visual localization,
the results shows that such method is robust on localization under challenging conditions
such as day-night changes and indoor scenes.
2.3
6DOF pose estimation
State-of-the-art approaches to 6 degree of freedom (DOF) pose localization commonly
rely on correspondences between 2D pixel positions and 3D points in the scene. Such
a formulation estimates the camera pose using a Perspective-n-Point (PnP)[12] solver
inside a RANSAC[13] loop. These 2D-3D correspondences are traditionally computed
by matching local image features.
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks are
leveraged to extract such features for matching and filtering.
PixLoc PixLoc[14] localizes by aligning query and reference images according to
the known 3D structure of the scene. PixLoc extracts multilevel features with pixelwise
confidences for query and reference images.
The Levenberg-Marquardt optimization
then aligns corresponding features according to the 3D points, guided by the confidence,
from the coarse to the fine level. PixLoc learns to ignore dynamic objects and repeated
patterns.
2.4
Transformer
The transformer[15] was introduced for machine translation. With self-attention and
fully connected layers, it achieves an attractive trade-off between efficiency and perfor-
mance. In NLP fields, it has provided state-of-the-art performance for several tasks.
Since it was introduced to vision field, many attempts have been devoted to take the
place of convolutional neural networks models for different tasks.
Vision Transformer Vision transformer[16] (ViT) first experiment with applying
a standard Transformer directly to images, with the fewest possible modifications. It
achieves excellent results compared to CNN. The input image of ViT is first decomposed
into 16 × 16 patches. Each patch is projected into tokens and an extra learnable class
token is added, whose corresponding output token serves as a global representation of
the image.
Then a learnable 1-D positional encoding vector is added to each token
and the token sequences is used as the input to the transformer.
The transformer
encoder module contains multi-head attention block and MLP block. This work shows
the possibility of ViT to solve computer vision tasks.
DeiT Data-efficient image Transformers(DeiT)[17] is a full Transformer architecture
that does not use any convolution operations. They don’t require very large amount of
data to be trained because of its novel distillation procedure. Its core is to introduce this
distillation method into ViT training, which is a teacher-student training strategy, and
4
==PAGE:9==
propose token-based distillation, which plays the same role as the class token. After pre-
trained on Imagenet, DeiT are also competitive when transferred to different downstream
tasks such as fine-grained classification.
Swin Transformer Swin Transformer[18] is a hierachical Transformer whose rep-
resentation is computed with shifted windows. Swin Transformer achieves the state-of-
the-art performance on various vision tasks like object detection, semantic segmentation,
significantly surpassing previous best methods. The self-attention module limit the com-
putation to patch-sized local windows and compute in two consecutive layers because
of the shifted windows. This procedure enables Swin Transformer to achieve greated
efficiency. Another contribution of this model is that the number of tokens is reduced
by patch merging layers so that the network has a deeper structure and a hierarchical
representation.
2.5
Dataset
This section describes benchmark datasets. These datasets present different challenges.
2.5.1
Hierarchical localization
Aachen Day-Night version 1.1[19] dataset focuses on localizing night-time images
against a 3D model built from day-time imagery. The dataset is usually used for pose
estimation based on image feature matching and represents a scenario where images are
taken with hand-held camera, because the night-time images are taken with a mobile
phone.
2.5.2
Place recognition
RetrievalSFM120k[20] dataset is obtained by applying structure-from-motion and
3D reconstruction to 120k large unlabelled image collections. This dataset is used for
image retrieval task. The positive images are selected such that enough 3D points are
co-observed with the query, while negative images come from different 3D models.
ROxford5k and RParis6k[21] are revisited version of Oxford5k and Paris6k dataset.
Based on the original Oxford5k and Paris6k dataset (5,062 and 6,392 images respec-
tively), the label of the images are re-annotated from (positive, junk, negative) to (easy,
hard, unclear, negative). These two datasets are intended for the evaluation of place
recognition. During the evaluation, three different setups of difficulty(Easy, Medium
and Hard) are defined by treating labels (easy, hard, unclear) as positive or negative, or
ignoring them:
• Easy (E): Easy images are treated as positive, while Hard and Unclear are ignored
• Medium (M): Easy and Hard images are treated as positive, while Unclear are
ignored.
5
==PAGE:10==
• Hard (H): Hard images are treated as positive, while Easy and Unclear are ignored.
2.5.3
Pose estimation
MegaDepth[22] consists of 1 million images of 196 different outdoor scenes.
The
dataset offer extra information like sparse reconstruction from COLMAP and depth
maps computed from multi-view stereo. MegaDepth dataset is usually used for fea-
ture matching and the key challenge is matching under extreme veiwpoint changes and
repetitive patterns.
2.6
Metric learning
To solve hierarchical localization related problem, metric learning[23] is to learn some
sort of similarity metric based on the extracted features from different images. The
model is trying not to separate images with a hyperplane, but rather reorganize the
input space, pull the similar images together in some form of a cluster while pushing
dissimilar images away. Contrastive loss[24] and triplet loss[25] are two classical methods
for this problem.
Contrastive Loss A contrastive loss aims to push representations of positive pairs
closer together, while representations of negative pairs are encouraged to have larger
distance.
Equation 1 is the base notation of contrastive loss, where dp denotes the
distance between positive pairs and mpos is a threshold greater than dp. (Note that
in many implementations, mpos is set to 0.) dn denotes the distance between negative
pairs which is larger than the threshold mneg. The theoretical downside of this method
is that the same distance threshold is applied to all pairs, even though there may be a
large variance in their similarities and dissimilarities.
Lcontrastive = [dp −mpos ]+ + [mneg −dn]+
(1)
Triplet Loss The triplet loss builds on the same idea but requires the positive
pair to be closer than a negative pair by a fixed margin given the same anchor. The
triplet margin loss attempts to make the anchor-positive distances (dap) smaller than
the anchor-negative distances (dan), by a predefined margin (m):
Ltriplet = [dap −dan + m]+
(2)
This theoretically places fewer restrictions on the embedding space, and allows the model
to account for variance in interclass dissimilarities.
6
==PAGE:11==
3
Methods
3.1
Preliminaries
3.1.1
Triangulation
Triangulation is the process of determining a point in 3D space given its projections
onto two, or more, images. Specifically we have a set of cameras, where we know the
internal and external calibration of all the cameras, and we want to find the position of
an object that is identified in all cameras. The basis of triangulation, as seen in Figure
3, is that the back projected line of each observed 2D points, qi, forms a constraint on
the position of the 3D point, Q. Ideally, the projected line of the pair of matching points
(p1, p2) will intersect in 3D. In fact, due to inevitable noise, the computation of the 3D
point Q is an optimization problem. This problem can be solved by linear algorithm.
Figure 2: triangulation
3.1.2
Structure from motion
Structure-from-motion (SfM)[26] involves recovering the 3-D structure of a stationary
scene from a series of images, which are obtained from different viewpoints by esti-
mating the camera motions corresponding to these images. There are a few steps that
collectively form SfM:
• Feature Matching and Outlier rejection using RANSAC: This step is to build
geometry relation between two images through feature matching and refine the
matches by rejecting outline correspondence.
• Estimating Fundamental Matrix: The fundamental matrix, denoted by F, is a 3×3
matrix that relates the corresponding set of points in two images from different
views (or stereo images). To estimate the fundamental matrix, we can set up a
homogeneous linear system and solve with 8 points.
7
==PAGE:12==
• Estimating Essential Matrix from Fundamental Matrix: Essential matrix E is
another 3×3 matrix, but with some additional properties that relates the corre-
sponding points assuming that the cameras obeys the pinhole model. Specifically,
E = KT FK, where K is the camera intrinsic matrix.
• Estimate Camera Pose from Essential Matrix: The camera pose consists of 6
degrees-of-freedom (DOF) Rotation (Roll, Pitch, Yaw) and Translation (X, Y, Z)
of the camera with respect to the world. Given an essential matrix, the rotation
and translation between the two cameras can be derived[? ].
• Triangulation: mentioned above in Section 3.1.1.
• Perspective-n-Point: This step is to minimize the reprojection error so that we
can refine the camera pose with a set of n 3D points and their 2D projections.
• Bundle Adjustment: Once all the camera poses and 3D points are computed,
bundle adjustment is utilized to refine the poses and 3D points together.
There are several open source SfM toolbox, e.g., COLMAP[26], Kapture1 and so on.
3.1.3
Transformer
We briefly introduce the transformer module in ViT model. The Transformer encoder
in ViT is shown in Figure 3. As a sequence to sequence module, the input is a sequence
of tokens which is flattened image patches, while the output is the same dimension
as the input. The Transformer encoder consists of alternating layers of multiheaded
self-attention (MSA) and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) blocks. The key component of
transformer is the attention layer.
Attention The input vectors for an attention layer are conventionally named query,
key and value. Formally, the attention layer is denoted as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V.
(3)
where Q is the query vector, K is the key vector, V is the value vector, dk is the
dimension of K. MSA is a module which runs through an self-attention mechanism
several times in parallel. The independent attention outputs are then concatenated and
linearly transformed into the expected dimension.
1https://github.com/naver/kapture
8
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: transformer architecture
3.2
Hierarchical localization
We leverage the public hierarchical localization pipeline which follows a coarse-to-fine
manner and achieves state-of-the-art performance on several localization challenges with
its Superglue matching algorithm. The hierarchical localization pipeline is consisted of
the following steps:
1. Extract and store local features for all database and query images
2. Build a reference 3D SfM model
• Find covisible database images by matching global features, with place recog-
nition or a prior SfM model
• Match these database pairs
• Triangulate a new SfM model with COLMAP
3. Find database images relevant to each query, using place recognition
4. Match the query images
5. Run the localization
6. Visualize and debug
3.3
Place recognition
The place recognition problem can be solved by using image retrieval algorithm, as they
involve a nearest neighbor search of compact global descriptors or cross-matching of
local descriptors[27]. Both CNN and ViT models can produce a feature map which is
normally with dense dimensions. To generate a compact representation of each image,
different pooling methods are implemented. For CNN feature map, GeM can transfer
dense feature map into a single layer global descriptor. For ViT, cls tokens are utilized
9
==PAGE:14==
as the image-level descriptor. Image retrieval is performed by Euclidean search over
database descriptors with respect to the query descriptor. This can be done with the
inner product evaluation of ℓ2 normalized vectors, which is GPU friendly.
3.3.1
GeM
Given an input image, the output of popular CNNs for generic object recognition tasks
like AlexNet[28], ResNet[29] is a 3D tensor X of W × H × K dimensions, while their
fully-connected layer are discarded. Generalized-mean pooling is a pooling layer that
takes X as an input and produces a vector f as an output of the pooling process. The
result is given by
f(g) =
h
f(g)
1
. . . f(g)
k
. . . f(g)
K
i⊤
, f(g)
k
=

1
|Xk|
X
x∈Xk
xpk


1
pk
(4)
Pooling methods global max pooling and average pooling are special cases of GeM
pooling given in 4, i.e., max pooling when pk −→∞and average pooling for pk = 1. The
feature vector now is K dimension and represents per feature map by a single value.
In this way, this kind of representation of feature is compact and flexible. The pooling
parameter pk can be manually set or learned because the equation is differentiable so
that it can be finetuned during the back-propagation. The corresponding derivatives
are given by
∂fk
∂xi
=
1
|Xk|f1−pk
k
xipk −1
(5)
∂fk
∂pk
= fk
p2
k
 
log
|Xk|
P
x∈Xk xpk + pk
P
x∈Xk xpk log x
P
x∈Xk xpk
!
.
(6)
3.3.2
Class (CLS) token
Similar to BERT’s[30] class token, a learnable embedding is prepended to the sequence
of embedded patches. As a sequence to sequence model, vision transformer outputs the
same dimension tokens as the input. The corresponding output class token is served as
the image representation. As Figure 4 shows, after the CLS token is added and trained
through vision transformer, it is used for metric learning for image retrieval as a global
descriptor of image. In [? ], different pooling methods are implemented and compared
and the results show that CLS token outperforms other pooling method including GeM.
3.3.3
Siamese learning and loss function
A siamese architecture is adopted for the training. Figure 4 shows the whole structure
of the model. There are two branches, which share the same parameters. The training
input consists of image pairs (i, j) and labels Y (i, j) ∈{0, 1} indicating whether a pair
10
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4: Pipeline of ViT model with a Siamese architecture for image retrieval.
is non-matching (label 0) or matching (label 1). Contrastive loss is utilized to evaluate
matching and non-matching pairs. The loss function is defined as
L(i, j) =



1
2∥f(i) −f(j)∥2,
if Y (i, j) = 1
1
2(max{0, τ −∥f(i) −f(j)∥})2,
if Y (i, j) = 0
(7)
where f(i) denotes the global descriptor of image i, and τ is a margin parameter. The
network is trained with a large number of training pairs. Each training and validation
tuple contains 1 query, 1 positive and 5 negative images. In [3], it mentions that the
contrastive loss generalizes better and converges at higher performance that the triplet
loss.
3.4
6-DOF Localization
The 6-DOF localization is based on the pair of matched keypoints which is detected by
local feature matching algorithm. It can be divided into two types, one is detector-based
local feature matching, the other is detector-free local feature matching. The former al-
gorithm starts with detecting keypoints and the feature of the keypoints is taken as the
local feature of the image. SIFT and ORB are the most successful hand-crafted local
features and are widely adopted in many 3D computer vision tasks. The performance
on large viewpoint and illumination changes of local features can be greatly improved
with deep-learning-based methods. SuperPoint is a robust local feature detector and
works well with SuperGlue, which is a learning-based approach for local feature match-
ing. Detector-free methods skip the feature detector phase and directly produce dense
descriptors or dense feature matches. LoFTR[31] is a hierarchical matching algorithm.
With a pair of images as input, LoFTR can first predict coarse matches and then fine-
tune into fine matches. The output of the model is the pairs of matched keypoints on
the images.
11
==PAGE:16==
3.4.1
Superpoint and Superglue
The SuperPoint model has a single, shared VGG-style encoder to process and reduce the
input image dimensionality. As the Figure 5 shows, after the encoder, the architecture
splits into two branches, which learn their own weights according to their specific tasks.
The upper branch is for interest point detection and the lower one is for interest point
description. The interest point detector branch computes X ∈RHc×Wc×65 and outputs
a tensor sized RH×W . The interest point descriptor head computes D ∈RHc×Wc×D and
outputs a tensor sized RH×W×D. The final loss is the sum of two intermediate losses:
one for the interest point detector and one for the descriptor.
Figure 5: Superpoint architecture
As Figure 6 shows, SuperGlue is consisted of two major components: the attentional
graph neural network, and the optimal matching layer.
The first component uses a
keypoint encoder to map local features which are made up of keypoint positions p and
their visual descriptors d into a single vector, and then uses alternating self- and cross-
attention layers (repeated L times) to create more powerful representations f, that are
taken as matching descriptors. The optimal matching layer creates an M by N score
matrix, which is the pairwise score as the similarity of matching descriptors:
Si,j =< fA
i , fB
j >, ∀(i, j) ∈A × B
(8)
where< ·, · > is the inner product. Then the matrix is augmented with dustbins so that
unmatched keypoints are explicitly assigned to it. The optimal partial assignment is
found by using the Sinkhorn algorithm (for T iterations). SuperGlue is trained in a su-
pervised manner from ground truth matches M= {(i, j)} ⊂A×B. These ground truth
is calculated from relative information including poses and depth maps or homographies.
3.4.2
LoFTR
As Figure 7 shows, Local Feature TRansformer (LoFTR) architecture has four compo-
nents.
12
==PAGE:17==
Figure 6: Superglue architecture
Figure 7: LoFTR architecture
Local Feature Extraction Given the image pair IA and IB, a ResNet-18 is used to
extract multi-level feature from them.
˜F A and ˜F B denote the coarse-level feature at
1

8 of the original image dimension, and ˆF A and ˆF B the fine-level feature at 1

2 of the
original image dimension.
Local Feature Transformer (LoFTR) Module The coarse feature maps are flat-
tened to 1-D vectors and an extra position encoding is added. The features are fed to
the LoFTR module, which has Nc self-attention and cross-attention layers. The output
is the transformed features ˜F A
tr and ˜F B
tr .
Coarse-level Matches There are two types of matching methods can be applied, either
with an optimal transport layer, which is similar in SuperGlue, or with a dual-softmax
operator. The matching score matrix can be calclulated as S (i, j) = 1
τ · ⟨˜F A
tr(i), ˜F B
tr (j)⟩.
When matching with dual-softmax, the matching probability Pc can be calculated on
both dimensions and select the mutual nearest neighbor.
Pc(i, j) = softmax (S (i, ·))j · softmax (S (·, j))i
(9)
13
==PAGE:18==
Coarse-to-Fine Module For every coarse match (˜i, ˜j), its corresponding position (ˆi, ˆj)
at fine-level feature maps is located first. Then two sets of local windows whose size
is w × w are cropped. After feeding the two window sized feature maps to the smaller
LoFTR module, the outputs are transferred feature maps ˆF A
tr

ˆˆı

and ˆF B
tr

ˆˆȷ

. A heat
map representing the matching probability of each pixel in the neighbourhood of ˆj with
ˆi is produced based on ˆF A
tr

ˆˆı

and ˆF B
tr

ˆˆȷ

. Finally, the fine-level matches (ˆi, ˆj
′) are
computed based on the expectation over the distribution.
Supervision The loss consists of both coarse level and fine level: L = Lc + Lf. The
loss function for the coarse-level is the negative log-likelihood loss over the confidence
matrix. The training supervision is similar to SuperGlue by using camera poses and
depth maps to compute the ground truth labels. The fine-level loss is ℓ2 loss.
3.5
Swiss knife
3.5.1
Motivation
The motivation of researching in this direction is that vision transformer is capable
of multiple vision tasks. Currently there’s no application of ViT to feature matching,
making it worth the effort to try and see the performance of ViT on these tasks. There
are some limitations of ViT, for example, the input of ViT is of low resolution (224 ×
224), which might not be suitable for fine-level matching/accurate pose estimation. The
second is that the pre-training of ViT is expensive as it requires large training datasets.
With these drawbacks in mind, we still want to explore the feasibility of applying ViT
for coarse matching.
3.5.2
Architecture
We propose a ’Swiss knife’ architecture for hierarchical localization that can simultane-
ously extract global feature and local feature, dealing with place recognition and 6 DOF
pose estimation respectively. Figure 8 shows an overview of ’Swiss knife’ architecture.
14
==PAGE:19==
Figure 8: Swiss knife architecture
Following the backbone of the LoFTR as described in Section 3.4.2, which is a
ResNet-18 model, we leverage a modified ViT with randomly initialized weights. The
output of the backbone includes a CLS token and other tokens. The CLS tokens, as the
global descriptor of the images, can be used for place recognition. We replace the existed
coarse feature by the non-CLS tokens and the fine-level feature are still extracted by
the ResNet-18 backbone. The Coarse-Level Local Feature Transform, Matching module
and Coarse-to-Fine module are the same as those of original LoFTR.
15
==PAGE:20==
4
Experimental setup
4.1
Hierarchical Localization
We reproduce the process of applying LoFTR in pose estimation tasks on Aachen Day-
Night version 1.1 dataset by following the open source pipeline (Hierarchical Localization
(hloc)2). Since this LoFTR-hloc pipeline is not open source and the hloc toolbox con-
tains keypoints-detector feature extraction method, we follow the implementation details
published on the Long-Term Visual Localization benchmark3. By following the steps in
Section 3.2, the whole pose estimation implementation is divided into several stages.
Feature extraction The Aachen Day-Night version 1.1 dataset includes two sets of
images, one is for query and the other is for database. Before feeding all images to
the feature extraction module, the images are resized with a scale that can keep the
longer side to 1600 pixels. Since the LoFTR coarse matching module will base on 1/8
of the original sized image, the shorter side of the image should be divisible by 8. The
input of the image is processed into grayscale. The backbone of LoFTR can extract
coarse-level and fine-level feature map. Both feature maps will be saved in order to save
the computation time.
Build a reference 3D SfM model This stage only leverage the database images.
Firstly, instead of matching all images exhaustively, we exploit the existing SIFT model
to find which image pairs are the most covisible. We first convert the SIFT model from
the NVM to the COLMAP format, and then do a covisiblity search, selecting the top
20 most covisibile neighbors for each image. The covisiblity list is stored in a text file.
Secondly, we only implement the coarse-level LoFTR matching module at this stage.
Compared to fine-matching, keypoints produced by coarse matching are strictly repeat-
able across images. The errors are reduced by the triangulation process and a high image
resolution. To improve the efficiency and accuracy of the computation, detector-based
algorithm will limit the number of keypoints, for example SuperPoints, producing at
most 4096 points for each image. For LoFTR, the total matches are uncertain and the
keypoints cannot be controlled directly by LoFTR, so we leverage another filter to limit
the number. For each match, we set an interval [smax −0.1, smax], smax is the max
matching score, to extract matches with higher matching score so that the keypoints
will be reduced indirectly. Thirdly, since LoFTR is a detector free algorithm, we take
an extra step to register the pair of keypoints to each image, which is similar to how
keypoints detector algorithm save keypoints information. Finally, we triangulate the
sparse 3D point cloud given the matches and the reference poses stored in the SIFT
COLMAP model.
Place recognition This stage requires both query images and database images set.
We extract global descriptors with NetVLAD and find for each query image the k most
similar database images. A larger k improves the robustness of the localization for dif-
2https://github.com/cvg/Hierarchical-Localization
3https://www.visuallocalization.net/benchmark/
16
==PAGE:21==
ficult queries but makes the matching more expensive. Using k = 10 −20 is generally a
good tradeoff but k = 50 gives the best results for the Aachen Day-Night dataset.
Match the query images For this stage, we use both coarse matching and fine match-
ing module from LoFTR, which contributes to the high localization accuracy.
The
fine matching module of LoFTR predicts sub-pixel only on one image, default on the
database image. From Figure 7, the coarse match (ˆi, ˆj) is transferred to (ˆi, ˆj
′) by the
fine-matching module.
The transformation from ˆj to ˆj
′ is sub-pixel prediction.
We
apply this sub-pixel prediction strategy either on database images or query images.
Pose estimation We register the keypoints to the query image feature file. Then we
perform pose estimation using the precomputed retrieval and matches. It takes around
40 hours to go through the whole pipeline with LoFTR model by using Tesla V100
with 32 GB memory. It requires nearly 900GB memory usage to store the process of
implementation, including feature map, 3D models, keypoint lists, matching details and
so on.
4.2
Place recognition
4.2.1
Fine-tuning vision transformer for place recognition
For the place recognition experiments, we build our implementation on top of the public
code associated with the work[3]. We follow the same procedure. All models are fine-
tuned using SFM120k dataset and evaluated on the revisited benchmarks of the Oxford
and Paris datasets.
Because in[32] it shows that vision transformer based model (DeiT) can achieve com-
petitive performance on image retrieval tasks. We pick Swin Transformer, which is the
state-of-the-art for different vision tasks, to implement place recognition.
The input images are first resized to have the same width and height. Corresponding to
the input size of our models, we fine-tune the models with image sizes of 224×224. Each
batch consists of 5 tuples of(1 anchor, 1 positive and 5 negatives). For each epoch, 2000
positive pairs and 22,000 negative candidates (using hard-negative mining) are selected.
We follow the default training parameters: the models are optimized by Adam with the
learning rate of 5 × 10−7 and weight decay of 10−6. The margin of contrastive loss is
set to β = 0.85. The models are finetuned for 100 epochs. Fine-tuning of transformer
models for one epoch takes around 2hours on a single Tesla V100 GPU with 32 GB
memory. For evaluation, all the query and database images are resized into the same
resolution as used during the finetuning stage.
4.2.2
Ablations
We provide a comparison between different degrees of supervision corresponding to off-
the-shelf feature extracted from ViT models and fine-tuning a transformer model with
metric learning.
17
==PAGE:22==
4.3
Swiss knife
The backbone of the Swiss knife is a modified ViT. The setup is as follows. The input
image is of size 640 × 640 in grayscale. The embedding dimension is 256 with 4 heads.
The patch size is 8 × 8. The output size is 80 × 80 × 256, which is the same size as the
coarse feature extracted by the original LoFTR. The model is trained and validate on the
MegaDepth dataset for outdoor pose estimation. We do some data preparation before
training, e.g., remove scenes used as test sets in the Image Matching Challenge, remove
scenes with low-quality depth maps, split each scene into 3 sub-scenes with the overlap
score4 in ranges [0.1, 0.3], [0.3, 0.5], [0.5, 0.7], as in [8]. The validation set contains the
validation set used in the Image Matching challenge and 1500 randomly chosen images
from each sub-scenes. The remaining training set consist of 368 sub-scenes. We train
Swiss knife for 3 epochs with a initial linear learning rate 1×10−3. The batch size is set
to 1. Each epoch takes 16 hours on a single node Tesla V100 with 32 GB of memory.
After each epoch, we evaluate the testing set by Area Under Curve (AUC) of pose error
at thresholds 5°, 10°, 20° respectively.
To compare the performance with the original LoFTR, we also train one epoch on
LoFTR with the same setup.
Then we evaluate the performance of off-the-shelf global feature on place recognition,
which is the CLS token output by ’Swiss knife’.
4The overlap score is the ratio of triangulated keypoints that are visible in the two images
18
==PAGE:23==
5
Results
5.1
Hierarchical localization-LoFTR
Metrics To evaluate the performance of hierarchical localization on Aachen dataset, we
measure the pose accuracy between the estimated pose and the ground truth, like in [1].
The pose error contains the position error and the orientation error. The position error
is measured as the Euclidean distance between estimated and ground truth position.
The orientation error is computed from the estimated and ground truth matrix. Three
pose accuracy intervals are defined by varying the thresholds: High-precision (0.25m,
2°), medium-precision (0.5m, 5°) and coarse-precision (5m, 10°).
One thing we want to mention is that the sub-pixel prediction on different image sets
can largely influence the accuracy of pose estimation results. As we first implement sub-
pixel prediction on database images, we find there are fewer matches than pure LoFTR
matching as Figure 9 shown. More results are available at Appendix A.
Figure 9: The upper pair of images shows the result of Sub-pixel prediction on
database images; The bottom pair of images shows the result of LoFTR
matching
This is because the query matching step in Hloc is 3D-2D matching and the 3D point
cloud is built by the 2D points extracted from the coarse matching (2D-2D matches).
19
==PAGE:24==
As Figure 10 shows, if the predicted keypoints in database images are in sub-pixel
style, which means an extra offset and refinement to the coarse matching prediction, the
keypoints may fail to get the corresponding 3D points, which are triangluated by the
coarse matching prediction. That’s why this strategy causes less matches. Less matches
may lead to low accuracy on pose estimation. While we implement sub-pixel prediction
on query images, the matches boost, because of the high registration to the 3D points.
Base on this strategy, we improve the pose estimation results on the Aachen dataset.
The results is shown in Table 1.
Aachen Day-Night v1.1
sub-pixel strategy
day
night
(0.25m, 2°) / (0.5m, 5°) / (5m, 10°)
LoFTR @ 840 pixel
database images
29.1 / 37.0 / 47.3
31.4 / 39.3 / 45.5
LoFTR @ 840 pixel
query images
67.5 / 86.8 / 98.5
65.1 / 74.5 / 98.8
Table 1: result of different sub-pixel strategy
Figure 10: Sub-pixel prediction on database images
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 11: Sub-pixel prediction on query images
We use 840 pixel size (LoFTR is trained on Megadepth with 840 pixels) and 1600
pixel size (original image resolution) image to calculate the pose estimation. As Table 2
shows, LoFTR performs better with higher resolution input. Compared with the state-
of-the-art, SuperPoint and SuperGlue outperforms LoFTR-DS a small margin. More
results are available at Appendix B.
Aachen Day-Night
Day
Night
(0.25m, 2°) / (0.5m, 5°) / (5m, 10°)
LoFTR (840 pixel images)
67.5 / 86.8 / 98.5
68.4 / 86.7 / 99.0
LoFTR (1600 pixel images)
86.0 / 94.7 / 98.4
81.6 / 90.8 / 99.0
SP+SG (1024-pixel images)
89.7 / 95.8 / 98.7
87.8 / 94.9 / 100.0
Aachen Day-Night v1.1
Day
Night
LoFTR (840 pixel images)
67.5 / 86.8 / 98.5
65.1 / 74.5 / 98.8
LoFTR (1600 pixel images)
86.0 / 94.7 / 98.4
70.2 / 88.5 / 99.0
SP+SG (1600-pixel images)
89.8 / 96.1 / 99.4
77.0 / 90.6 / 100.0
Table 2: Visual localization evaluation on the Aachen Day-Night benchmark v1.1.
The matching config of LoFTR is dual-softmax.
5.1.1
Ablation study
To fully understand how fine-matching improves the performance of LoFTR, we evaluate
the hierarchical localization pipeline with only coarse matching. As Table 3 shows, fine-
matching outperforms coarse matching to a large margin, even at the easiest level (5m,
10°). Coarse matching performs better on night dataset than day.
21
==PAGE:26==
Aachen Day-Night v1.1
day
night
LoFTR coarse-matching
47.3 / 51.0 / 57.4
51.8 / 71.2 / 84.3
LoFTR fine-matching
86.0 / 94.7 / 98.4
70.2 / 88.5 / 99.0
Table 3: Ablation study
5.2
Place recognition
Metrics We evaluate the finetuned model with mean average precision (mAP) on ROx-
ford5k and RParis6k dataset. mAP is computed as the area under the precision-recall
curve for a query. Precision is defined as the ratio of retrieved positive images to the
total number retrieved. Recall is defined as the ratio of the number of retrieved positive
images to the total number of positive images in the corpus. An ideal precision-recall
curve has precision 1 over all recall levels and this corresponds to an average precision
of 1.
model
ROxford
Rparis
Source
M
H
M
H
DeiT-S
30.76
10.04
63.41
37.85
My training
DeiT-S
32.7
11.4
63.6
37.8
Table 3 in paper [32]
Table 4: Reproduction of related work
In Table 4, we first reproduce the result of image retrieval with DeiT backbone and
then train two Swin Transformer Models, Swin-T and Swin-B, for image retrieval by
using metric learning. All the models are fed with the images of the same size (224×224)
and loaded with the pre-trained weights. Since there’s no CLS token in the architecture
of Swin Transformer, we take the output of the global average pooling layer as the global
feature.
Table 5 shows the comparison between DeiT and Swin transformer. It can be seen
that Swin-T outperforms DeiT-S on ROxford dataset, yet it fails to exceed the perfor-
mance of DeiT-S with both contrastive learning and an extra regularized layer. But
given the same component (contrastive learning), it performs better than DeiT on both
datasets as shown in line 1 and 4. DeiT-B and Swin-B are two big models that has 87
and 88 million parameters respectively. Comparing these two, Swin-B performs better
in three columns, ROxford M, Rparis M and Rparis H, even that DeiT-B has more
components.
22
==PAGE:27==
model
Pooling
components
#dim
ROxford
Rparis
Param
M
H
M
H
DeiT-S
CLS
contrastive
learning
384
32.7
11.4
63.6
37.8
22M
DeiT-S
CLS
contrastive
learning&regularized
384
34
11.5
66.1
40.2
22M
DeiT-B
CLS
contrastive
learning&regularized
768
39.5
17.4
67.5
43.6
87M
Swin-T
Global avg
contrastive
learning
768
38.13
17.45
65.5
40.08
28M
Swin-B
Global avg
contrastive
learning
1024
42.43
16.93
69.91
43.73
88M
Table 5: The result of DeiT models in the first three rows are copied from the paper
Training Vision Transformers for Image Retrieval[32].
Swin-T is trained
with 100 epochs while Swin-B with 30 epochs due to the long training time.
Figure 12: Training and validation loss of Swin-T on SFM120k
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 13: Evaluation the performance of Swin-T on ROxford and RParis
Figure 12 shows the training and validation loss of Swin-T model start to converge
after 50 epochs, but haven’t fully converged after 100 epochs.
We present the mean Average Precision[33] (mAP) performance for the Medium and
Hard splits of the revisited Oxford (ROxford5k) and Paris (RParis6k) benchmarks in
Figure 12. The subgraphs in the top show the mAP of ROxford5k while the bottom
ones are of RParis6k dataset. It can be seen that both mAP-medium and mAP-hard
for ROxford5k keep increasing and fluctuate during the finetuning, while mAP-medium
and mAP-hard for RParis6k converge after 30 epochs and mAPM starts to overfit after
50 epochs. In Figure 14 and 15, we train 40 more epochs and the training loss and
validation loss converge after 130 epochs.
The evaluation results on ROxford5k are
improved and achieved mAPM at 38.87 and mAPH at 18.71.
Figure 14: The whole training and validation loss of Swin-T(140 epochs)
24
==PAGE:29==
Figure 15: Evaluation the performance of Swin-T (140 epochs) on ROxford and
RParis
5.2.1
Ablation study
We provide a comparison between different degrees of supervision corresponding to off-
the-shelf features and metric learning in Table 6. We observe that finetuning with metric
learning substantially improves performance over off-the-shelf features.
model
components
#dim
ROxford
Rparis
M
H
M
H
Swin-T
off the shelf
768
24.69
6.98
59.95
34.22
Swin-T
contrastive learning
768
38.13
17.45
65.5
40.08
Table 6: Ablation study
5.3
Swiss knife
Metrics We evaluate the testing set by AUC of pose error at thresholds 5°, 10° and 20°
respectively. AUC (Area Under Curve) is the area under the ROC curve. ROC curve
plots TPR (True Positive Rate) versus FPR (False Positive Rate) at different thresh-
olds. The value of AUC ranges from 0 to 1, the larger value, the better performance.
The pose error is the maximum of the angular errors in rotation and translation. Rela-
tive poses(rotation and translation) are obtained from essential matrix estimation with
25
==PAGE:30==
RANSAC.
Table 7 shows the AUC (Area Under curve) of local feature matching. The result of
Swiss knife model is in the first 3 lines and self-trained LoFTR at line 4. The latter
two results are from LoFTR paper. AUC@5, 10, 20 represents AUC of pose error at
thresholds 5°, 10°, 20° respectively. Result shows that the first epoch of LoFTR already
outperforms Swiss knife to a large margin even at its third epoch. The LoFTR paper
with 30 epochs presents the best AUC.
Model
Epoch
AUC@5
AUC@10
AUC@20
Swiss knife
1
12.0
21.3
32.5
Swiss knife
2
16.7
27.6
39.8
Swiss knife
3
19.6
31.3
44.1
LoFTR
1
34.2
49.7
63.2
LoFTR paper
30
52.8
69.2
81.2
superpoint+superglue
N/A
42.2
61.2
76.0
Table 7: Evaluation on MegaDepth for outdoor pose estimation. The results in first
4 rows are trained with initial weight. The last two rows are from [31]
In Figure 16, we show some examples of how Swiss Knife perform on validation set.
We notice that such conditions like scaling, occlusion and different angles can limit the
number of matching. More results are available at Appendix CD.
Figure 16: Visualization examples on validation sets
The evaluation of Swiss knife model on place recognition task is shown in Table
8. It can be seen that mAP is much lower after 3 epochs than DeiT-S pretrained on
ImageNet.
26
==PAGE:31==
model
#input
components
#dim
ROxford
Rparis
Pre-trained
M
H
M
H
Swiss knife
640
off-the shelf
256
2.52
0.99
5.54
2.71
MegaDepth
DeiT-S
224
off-the shelf
384
20.3
5.6
50.2
26.3
ImageNet
Table 8: Evaluation on place recognition
6
Discussion
6.1
Hierarchical Localization
After the reproduction of LoFTR on hierarchical localization, we notice two things.
To build 3D model, the author sacrifices the fine feature matching keypoints, instead
the coase-level matching keypoints are used. This gives more duplicate points across
different images. The 3D model is built from the 200 pixel-wise features. The advantage
is there are more duplicate 3D points making it easier to match than fine-matched
keypoints. while the draw back is that sub-pixel prediction/fine feature matching can
only be applied to query images. One possible solution is to run sub-pixel prediction on
both query and database images. The most important task in hierarchical localization
is pose estimation because different matching methods/keypoint descriptors will affect
the accuracy to a large extent. The weakness of place recognition can be amended by a
longer candidate list, but with longer running time. In our reproduction, we use NetVlad
with candidate list of size 50 which is recommended by the author of the hloc toolbox.
6.2
Place recognition
In the subtask of place recognition, we find that pre-training is important. From the
result in Table 8, the model pretrained on ImageNet shows much better performance
than ours that is pretrained on MegaDepth.
In [34], they pretrained the model on
ImageNet and Google Landmarks v2[35] dataset respectively and result shows that the
one pretrained on Google dataset is around 10% higher than the ones on ImageNet.
Because the Google dataset is designed for image retrieval tasks. It can be concluded
that the size and type of the pre-training set matters a lot. With larger size and more
suitable type of pretraining dataset, it’s possible to improve the performance of the
model.
6.3
Local feature matching
Due to the heavy computation of LoFTR training, we can’t continue the training of
the Swiss Knife on local feature matching and evaluate the model on relative pose
estimation. Inspired by the self and cross attention based matching module from Su-
perGlue, LoFTR can predict dense matches between images and more matches than
27
==PAGE:32==
SuperPoint+SuperGlue. Though LoFTR is a detector-free method, it is actually im-
plicit detector based. Given an image I of (H, W) size, the coarse feature map is in
(H/8, W/8) size and 256 in depth. Each vector in coarse feature map along with the
grid serve as the descriptor of the keypoint. The grid is created before coarse match-
ing, and it is of same size as the coarse feature map Fc. Then the grid is resized to
(H, W), which is the original resolution of the image. Thus points of the grid are lo-
cated every 8 pixels on the image. Each point on the grid is the potential keypoints
with its position(8i, 8j) in the image and its feature vector Fc(i, j). After a round of
coarse matching, matching pairs with low confidence are ignored. The process of coarse
matching is a detector-like method to filter and match the potential keypoints. Finally,
fine-level matching fine-tune the matching more accurately.
6.4
ResNet vs Vision Transformer
Apart from the models we trained, we also visualize the feature map of ResNet and
Transformer. Figure 17 shows the attention map of the last attention layer.
Figure 17: Attention heatmap
Figure 18 shows the first 12 layers of feature maps of Swiss Knife model. Figure 19
shows the first 12 layers of feature maps of LoFTR coarse feature. It can be seen that
the feature maps from Swiss Knife have clearer boundaries with respect to the shape of
the building. So it stores more information of the boundaries. This coincide with the
fact that in the first attention map in Figure 17, the outline of the building has been
highlighted.
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 18: Swiss knife feature map, with the size of (80,80,256)
Figure 19: LoFTR coarse feature map, with the size of (80,80,256)
29
==PAGE:34==
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we dive deep into the problem of hierarchical localization and two of its
subtasks, place recognition and 6 DOF pose estimation.
We study the state-of-the-art model LoFTR for hierarchical localization and reproduced
the trick of fine matching. We trained Swin-T for place recognition and compare the
results with DeiT which is state-of-the-art. We propose a novel architecture, the Swiss
Knife, which uses Vision Transformer to replace the coarse feature extraction module of
LoFTR and evaluate its performance. Experiments show vision transformer has great
potential for hierarchical localization. In place recognition, Swin-T outperforms state-
of-the-art. In 6 DOF pose estimation, the Swiss Knife model hasn’t show much strength
yet with only 3 epochs of training and under one training setup. If given more time,
it would be interesting to train more on the Swiss Knife model, see how it converges
and validate its performance. The whole pipeline of hierarchical localization takes much
time to train, it’s worth the effort to optimize the process by reducing the training
time of vision transformer, merging some steps in the pipeline, or finetuning a suitable
pretrained model under the premise of maintaining the performance. Another idea for
future work is to add a Vision Transformer at the bottleneck of ResNet.
30
==PAGE:35==
Appendix A.
Hierarchical Localization examples with query sub-pixel predictions.
31
==PAGE:36==
32
==PAGE:37==
33
==PAGE:38==
Appendix B.
Hierarchical Localization examples with database sub-pixel predictions.
34
==PAGE:39==
35
==PAGE:40==
Appendix C.
Validation results of LoFTR training.
36
==PAGE:41==
37
==PAGE:42==
38
==PAGE:43==
Appendix D.
Validation results of Swiss Knife training.
39
==PAGE:44==
40
==PAGE:45==
41
==PAGE:46==
42
==PAGE:47==
References
[1] Carl Toft, Will Maddern, Akihiko Torii, Lars Hammarstrand, Erik Stenborg, Daniel
Safari, Masatoshi Okutomi, Marc Pollefeys, Josef Sivic, Tomas Pajdla, et al. Long-
term visual localization revisited.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2020.
[2] Relja Arandjelovic, Petr Gronat, Akihiko Torii, Tomas Pajdla, and Josef Sivic.
Netvlad: Cnn architecture for weakly supervised place recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 5297–
5307, 2016.
[3] Filip Radenovi´c, Giorgos Tolias, and Ondˇrej Chum. Fine-tuning cnn image retrieval
with no human annotation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 41(7):1655–1668, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2846566.
[4] Bingyi Cao, Andre Araujo, and Jack Sim. Unifying deep local and global features
for image search. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 726–743.
Springer, 2020.
[5] David G Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Interna-
tional journal of computer vision, 60(2):91–110, 2004.
[6] Ethan Rublee, Vincent Rabaud, Kurt Konolige, and Gary Bradski. Orb: An ef-
ficient alternative to sift or surf. In 2011 International conference on computer
vision, pages 2564–2571. Ieee, 2011.
[7] Daniel DeTone, Tomasz Malisiewicz, and Andrew Rabinovich. Superpoint: Self-
supervised interest point detection and description. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pages 224–236,
2018.
[8] Mihai Dusmanu, Ignacio Rocco, Tomas Pajdla, Marc Pollefeys, Josef Sivic, Aki-
hiko Torii, and Torsten Sattler. D2-net: A trainable cnn for joint description and
detection of local features. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 8092–8101, 2019.
[9] Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Daniel DeTone, Tomasz Malisiewicz, and Andrew Rabinovich.
Superglue: Learning feature matching with graph neural networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
4938–4947, 2020.
[10] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
==PAGE:48==
[11] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean
Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al.
Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International journal of computer
vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
[12] Vincent Lepetit, Francesc Moreno-Noguer, and Pascal Fua. Epnp: An accurate o
(n) solution to the pnp problem. International journal of computer vision, 81(2):
155–166, 2009.
[13] Martin A Fischler and Robert C Bolles. Random sample consensus: a paradigm
for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography.
Communications of the ACM, 24(6):381–395, 1981.
[14] Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Ajaykumar Unagar, Mans Larsson, Hugo Germain, Carl Toft,
Viktor Larsson, Marc Pollefeys, Vincent Lepetit, Lars Hammarstrand, Fredrik
Kahl, et al. Back to the feature: Learning robust camera localization from pix-
els to pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 3247–3257, 2021.
[15] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez,  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[16] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xi-
aohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg
Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
[17] Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, Francisco Massa, Alexandre
Sablayrolles, and Herv´e J´egou. Training data-efficient image transformers & distil-
lation through attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
10347–10357. PMLR, 2021.
[18] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin,
and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted
windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 10012–10022, 2021.
[19] Torsten Sattler, Will Maddern, Carl Toft, Akihiko Torii, Lars Hammarstrand, Erik
Stenborg, Daniel Safari, Masatoshi Okutomi, Marc Pollefeys, Josef Sivic, et al.
Benchmarking 6dof outdoor visual localization in changing conditions.
In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
8601–8610, 2018.
==PAGE:49==
[20] Filip Radenovi´c, Giorgos Tolias, and Ondˇrej Chum. Cnn image retrieval learns
from bow: Unsupervised fine-tuning with hard examples. In European conference
on computer vision, pages 3–20. Springer, 2016.
[21] Filip Radenovi´c, Ahmet Iscen, Giorgos Tolias, Yannis Avrithis, and Ondˇrej Chum.
Revisiting oxford and paris: Large-scale image retrieval benchmarking. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
5706–5715, 2018.
[22] Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. Megadepth: Learning single-view depth prediction
from internet photos. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 2041–2050, 2018.
[23] Kevin Musgrave, Serge Belongie, and Ser-Nam Lim. A metric learning reality check.
In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 681–699. Springer, 2020.
[24] Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learn-
ing an invariant mapping. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), volume 2, pages 1735–1742. IEEE,
2006.
[25] Kilian Q Weinberger and Lawrence K Saul.
Distance metric learning for large
margin nearest neighbor classification. Journal of machine learning research, 10
(2), 2009.
[26] Johannes L Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-from-motion revisited.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 4104–4113, 2016.
[27] Sourav Garg, Tobias Fischer, and Michael Milford. Where is your place, visual
place recognition? arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06443, 2021.
[28] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 25, 2012.
[29] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[30] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[31] Jiaming Sun, Zehong Shen, Yuang Wang, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Loftr:
Detector-free local feature matching with transformers.
In Proceedings of the
==PAGE:50==
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 8922–
8931, 2021.
[32] Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Natalia Neverova, Ivan Laptev, and Herv´e J´egou. Training
vision transformers for image retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05644, 2021.
[33] James Philbin, Ondrej Chum, Michael Isard, Josef Sivic, and Andrew Zisserman.
Object retrieval with large vocabularies and fast spatial matching. In 2007 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2007.
[34] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herv´e J´egou, Julien Mairal, Piotr
Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 9650–9660, 2021.
[35] Tobias Weyand, Andre Araujo, Bingyi Cao, and Jack Sim.
Google landmarks
dataset v2-a large-scale benchmark for instance-level recognition and retrieval. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 2575–2584, 2020.
