==PAGE:1==
Digital
twins
of
building
services
using
Modelica and sensor data
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Eleni Bitsiou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The objective of this project is the investigation of the thermal and energy performance of a
new non­residential building and the examination and proposal of potential improvements.
More specifically, the examined building is the Frederiksberg Skole, which was a recently
built school during the study. The building was actually used as a school only for a few
years, and it had sensors integrated both in the heating and ventilation system. The indoor
environment was also monitored, and indoor temperature and CO2 measurements were
available, among others. In the context of this study, a model was created to receive
useful data about the building, which was either missing or not accurate. This model was
created in IDA ICE (IDA Indoor Climate and Energy), which is a simulation tool for the
assessment of the building’s performance. The results of the simulation of the model
in IDA ICE were registered and compared with the data provided by the sensors. Then
some parameters in the model were changed in order to investigate certain scenarios.
The results were used to justify assumptions made during the development of the IDA
ICE model. Moreover, a grey­box model of a classroom was developed in the Dymola
environment, where modelling and simulation of systems is possible with the use of the
Modelica modelling language. The Dymola model is exported as an FMU (Functional
Mock­up Unit). The FMU was then used as an input to an open source python tool,
namely ModestPy, to estimate the unknown parameters. The created model was further
modified to investigate potential improvements.
ii
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulfilment of the requirements of the degree of Master
of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The workload of
the project corresponds to 30 ECTS points and it was conducted within a period of five
months.
I would like to thank Christian Anker Hviid and Kevin Michael Smith for their guidance and
for providing very useful insights. I would also like to thank my family and Valantis for their
endless support.
Eleni Bitsiou ­ s202230
Signature
June, 2022
Date
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Eleni Bitsiou, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Author
Christian Anker Hviid, Associate Professor, DTU
Supervisor
Kevin Michael Smith, Researcher, DTU
Supervisor
iv
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and problem description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Report structure outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the art
7
2.1
Fault detection and diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Grey­box models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
IDA ICE models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Parameter estimation and ModestPy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Case study
15
3.1
Building’s description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Heating system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Ventilation system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Theory
21
4.1
Heat balance of a classroom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Occupancy and CO2 emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
DTU solar radiation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
IDA ICE
25
5.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Dymola model and ModestPy
43
6.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusions
59
8
Suggestions for future work
61
Bibliography
63
A Appendix
65
A.1 Floor plans showing the installed radiators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.2 List of radiators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3 Maximum ventilation air flow rate and occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.4 Layers of the building’s elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.5 Facade drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.6 Roof and location of the roof windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.7 Floor plans with the location and the names of the doors . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
v
==PAGE:8==
A.8 Floor plans with the location and the names of the windows . . . . . . . . . 79
A.9 Dimensions of the external doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.10 Dimensions of the external windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
vi
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and problem description
The district heating system is one of the preferred systems used to provide heating to
domestic and non­domestic buildings. One of the many reasons that district heating is
preferred is the environmental benefit. In contrast to other heating systems, renewable
energy sources are used, among others, to provide heating. In figure 1.1, the fuel com­
position for the production of district heating from 1990 to 2014 is depicted. It is illustrated
that the amount of biomass (renewable energy) used for district heating production has
increased from around 20% to more than 45% from 1990 to 2014. Denmark is one of
the countries with a large production of district heating and around 64% of the Danish
households are using it according to the Danish Energy Agency. A comparison of the per­
centages of citizens of several European countries, which used district heating in 2013,
can be made based on figure 1.2. It is observed that a higher number of people from
Denmark, Latvia, and Estonia used district heating in 2013.
Figure 1.1: Fuel composition for the production of district heating from 1990 to 2014 in
Denmark [1]
A strategy usually followed when installing a district heating system is the heat exchange
between the supply and the exhaust. This method is optimizing the effectiveness of the
heating system and is resulting in lower energy consumption. One main drawback of the
district heating system is that the calculated performance deviates from the actual per­
formance in some cases. This deviation is often caused by faults in the district heating
substations. More specifically, these faults could be the outcome of construction, compo­
nent, or operational failure [2]. The faults occurring during the use stage of the building
are not easily detected, resulting in a system with lower performance. For instance, these
faults may lead to different supply and return temperatures than the ones estimated.
In non­residential buildings, the installation and use of a mechanical ventilation system
is very common, especially in countries like Denmark with low average temperatures for
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Percentage of citizens supplied by district heating in Europe in 2013 [1]
many months every year. The mechanical ventilation is used to provide fresh outdoor air
in the building and exhaust the polluted indoor air. The control of the designed ventilation
system can be different from one case to another. The ventilation system can be designed
so as to provide fresh air continuously into the building and exhaust the indoor air (CAV
system). The air temperature of the supplied air varies depending on the desired tem­
perature of the indoor environment. Additionally, there is the Variable Air Volume (VAV)
system. The activation of the VAV system and the air flow rate provided by the VAV can
be based on, for instance, the amount of CO2, the indoor temperature, or the level of hu­
midity. This means that when the amount of CO2 exceeds the setpoint, the temperature
falls below the setpoint, or the humidity level increases above the setpoint, the mechanical
ventilation is activated.
The outdoor air supplied by the ventilation system is heated during the colder months
of the year. Many methods have been developed with the advancement of technology
and are used to heat the air supplied by the ventilation system. One of the most com­
mon methods is heat recovery. To be more precise, the supplied air is heated by the
exhaust air through heat exchange. The temperature of the exhausted air is decreased
as a consequence of the heat exchange between the supply and the exhaust. If the sup­
plied air does not reach the setpoint of the indoor temperature, then it is further heated
by a heating coil. Around 2015, the percentage of European residential buildings that
have a mechanical ventilation heat recovery system installed is shown in figure 1.3. It is
observed that the number of residential buildings with a mechanical ventilation heat re­
covery system installed is significantly small. Around 60% of the buildings did not have
a mechanical ventilation system installed in Europe until around 2015. Other methods to
heat the outdoor air are the rotary wheel heat exchanger and the use of a ground loop.
The knowledge acquired by the advances in technology regarding the mechanical venti­
lation systems is used to design and install a ventilation system that will meet the require­
ments of the regulations and keep the satisfaction of the users at a high level in the newly
constructed buildings. In reality, there are many cases where the ventilation system is
not performing as it was designed for. Errors are leading to a lower performance of the
ventilation system. These errors can be the result of many reasons. Faults made during
the construction phase of the building are a very common cause of the failure of the me­
2
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: Percentage of residential buildings with a mechanical ventilation heat recovery
system [3]
chanical ventilation of a new building. Another possible cause is the delay or absence of
maintenance in the case of older buildings.
Another main factor, which is affecting the performance of the mechanical ventilation and
the heating system, is the users of the building. It is frequently the case that the users
of the building do not exhibit the behaviour that is expected from the engineers that de­
signed the heating and ventilation system. One example is that there can be more people
in a room than the maximum number estimated in the design phase. In this case, the
maximum supply of air with the mechanical ventilation system will not be sufficient. In
these circumstances, people often tend to open the windows to let additional fresh air into
the room, which leads to a higher energy consumption to heat the room during the cold
months of the year.
The aforementioned problems led many researchers to focus on developing fault detec­
tion strategies [4], [5]. In addition, sensors are installed in the heating and ventilation
systems of a great number of non­residential buildings to monitor the supply and return
temperatures and the flow of the systems. Furthermore, other significant parameters like
indoor temperature, CO2 concentration, and occupancy are monitored. As a result, all
this data is available and easy to collect in a large number of buildings. The gathered
information can be used to create a model in order to investigate what the fault is in the
system or what improvements can be made to increase the performance of the system.
1.2
Problem aim
The arising research questions that gave motivation for the initiation of this project are the
following:
• Is it possible to develop a model that can detect what causes the faulty behavior
identified by sensors integrated into the building?
• Could the model be used to investigate potential improvements regarding the heat­
ing system?
• Is it possible to increase the simplicity of the model to the extent that other users
can easily apply it to their cases?
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Scope
In the context of this project, the heat balance of a typical room in the examined building
was investigated. To be more precise, the heat provided for the heating of the room,
the heat gains and losses caused by the mechanical ventilation, the heat produced by
the occupants, the heat produced by the solar radiation during the daytime, and the heat
gains and losses through the external envelope of the building and the internal elements
(walls, floors, etc.) were examined. A grey box model of the classroom was created
in the environment of Dymola with the use of the Modelica language. In the grey box
model, all the main heat gains and losses of the room were taken into consideration. A
white box model was created in IDA ICE and the information provided by that was used
to improve the grey box model created in Dymola. Unknown parameters of the grey box
model were estimated with the use of ModestPy. The model that was developed in IDA
ICE was modified and simulated so as to check different scenarios and their effects on
the performance of the building, as well as the possibility to improve the heating and
ventilation systems with the modifications. Moreover, the model created in Dymola was
used to examine the possibility of lowering the supplied temperature of the heating system
while keeping the mass flow rate at its maximum value.
It was not the aim of this project to develop a model that represents the whole heating
and ventilation system. Moreover, there are some parameters that were not examined
in this project. For example, the pressure drop from the substation to the radiator of the
room was not estimated. Failures resulting from other parts of the heating and ventilation
system, which would affect the supply and exhaust of heat and air in the examined room,
were also outside of the scope of this project and, therefore, were not investigated. A time
frame of two week was chosen to perform the parameter estimation. These two weeks
were the first two weeks of February, during which the outside temperatures were low and
the heating system was activated.
1.4
Report structure outline
In this subsection, the structure of the report is presented. In the beginning, a general
description of the work conducted in this field so far, the presentation of the case study
and the theory attempt to gradually introduce the reader to the examined project. The
next chapters offer all the necessary details of the methodology applied, and the obtained
results are presented in detail and discussed. Lastly, the conclusions drawn and the
suggestions for future work are presented.
The chosen structure of the report is the following:
• Introduction: In this chapter, the background, the problem description, the aim, and
the scope of the project are discussed.
• State of the art: The work conducted by other researchers in the scientific fields
that are closely related to this particular project is registered in this section.
• Case study: In the context of this chapter, the studied case is described in detail.
More specifically, details of the school and its ventilation and heating systems are
provided.
• Theory: In this chapter, all the relevant information (e.g. equations) needed to
explain the theory of the specific project is presented.
• IDA ICE: In this part, a detailed description of the methodology applied to develop
the model of the school in IDA ICE is made. Moreover, the results of the simulation
4
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:13==
of the developed model are registered and thoroughly discussed.
• Dymola model and ModestPy: In this section, the methodology followed to de­
velop the model in Dymola and perform the parameter estimation with the use of
ModestPy is explained. Additionally, the process followed to investigate the possi­
bility of lowering the supply temperature at maximum mass flow rate is described.
Furthermore, all the results are listed and discussed.
• Conclusions and Suggestions for future work: Taking into consideration all the
work conducted in the context of this project, the conclusions are drawn.
• Conclusions and Suggestions for future work: In the final chapter, suggestions
for future work and research are proposed.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:15==
2
State of the art
In this chapter, research and developed techniques related to the context of this project
are thoroughly presented. More specifically, fault detection and diagnosis techniques
that are investigated by researchers to enhance the heating and ventilation systems of
the buildings are discussed. Furthermore, the main features of the grey box models are
described. Research focused in the combined use of IDA ICE and grey box method for
the modeling of a system is also presented. Lastly, the parameter estimation methods,
which are used, among others, for the estimation of the unknown parameters of the grey
box models, are listed. Especially ModestPy, which is the selected parameter estimation
tool in the context of this study, is described in detail.
2.1
Fault detection and diagnosis
These days, optimized technologies related to the heating and ventilation system of new
buildings exist. The reason for this is the increasing need to lower energy demand and op­
timize the environmental performance of buildings. Despite all the efforts, there are many
cases where the actual performance of the building is not the one that was calculated in
the design phase. The main reason that led to that result is that some faults appear in the
use phase of the building and remain undetected leading to higher energy consumption.
There are more and more techniques being developed in order to handle this problem.
One of the techniques that was initially applied was the installation of sensors. Several
newly built buildings have supply and return temperature as well as flow sensors that exist
in the heating system and are used to continuously measure and register data relating
to these parameters. Furthermore, there are sensors installed in the different areas of
the building measuring the indoor temperature, the level of CO2 and other parameters.
Although these sensors provide a quick and easy way to detect that there is a fault in the
system, they do not offer any information that helps in the investigation of the cause. In
addition, faults in sensors are occurring, leading to inaccurate and misleading results and
data. Thus, many researchers are focusing on developing fault detection and diagnostic
techniques that are not based on the results of the sensors.
One of the techniques for fault detection and diagnostics regarding district heating for
online use is presented by Nathan Zimmerman et al. who investigated the district heating
network of Skultuna, Sweden. The authors created a physical model with the use of the
Modelica programming language, representing the district heating network of Skultuna.
Then they used the physical model and the data resulting from the sensors to find if there
were any residuals. In addition, they decide to use Bayesian networks to examine the
possibility that there is a leak in the network or a faulty sensor. They were able to examine
this with the use of the Bayesian networks and the residuals resulting from the comparison
of the physical model with the data of the sensors. [6]
Lucile Sarran et al. followed a similar method to detect and diagnose the fault in the
hydronic floor heating system of the examined residence. The authors proposed an auto­
mated fault detection and diagnosis technique, which is mainly based on the creation of
a grey box model. The already available data from the existing sensors of the apartment
was used in the grey box model to decrease the unknown parameters. The model was
created in Dymola with the use of the Modelica Buildings library. The main difference
from the previously presented study is that the authors preferred to use ModestPy for the
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
7
==PAGE:16==
parameter estimation. In this case study, the unknown parameters were the flows, flow
coefficients, heat fluxes, and return temperatures in each room’s floor heating loop. In
ModestPy, a genetic algorithm was used to estimate the unknown parameters with the
use of an iterative process. [4]
On the other hand, Felix Theusch et al. recommended the use of cluster and regression
analysis with two key performance indicators for failure detection in the district heating
system. The methodology that the authors presented is depicted in figure 2.1 [7]
Figure 2.1: Cluster and regression analysis with two key performance indicators [7]
2.2
Grey­box models
In this section, the three types of models widely used for parameter estimation are going
to be presented. To be more precise, the three types are white box, black box, and grey
box models, and their advantages and disadvantages are going to be listed in order to
specify why the grey­box modelling is mostly preferred for energy simulations of buildings.
The white box models are very detailed models with which it is possible to examine the
non­linear behaviour of the system [8]. The white box model is a preferred solution for
a thorough examination of the system, when all the needed data is already known and
available. But a skilled tester is required to develop the detailed models, and hence this
procedure is costly [9]. Many scientists also state that the white box models fail to recog­
nise unreasonable data (e.g. deviation from the true value) [8], [10], while others suggest
that the results are accurate due to the great amount of data and the holistic examination of
the system [11]. Moreover, although the preparation of the model is very time­consuming,
it is easy and quick to locate and solve errors that hinder the simulation [10], [11].
On the other hand, the black box models have a lower engineering cost and their prepara­
tion requires less domain knowledge. In addition, the models are characterized by great
adaptability because no particular changes are required with the input of new data. One
important advantage of black box models is that errors resulting from imperfect measure­
ments, approximation errors, or not considered inputs are taken into account. On the
contrary, data of high quality is needed to build a black box model. Furthermore, only a
small number of inputs can be tested with the developed black box model. One of the
disadvantages that establish the black box model as a rather unsuitable model for energy
simulations of buildings is the fact that the parameters of the functions that define the
relationship between the system inputs and the system outputs do not have any physical
meaning.[8], [11], [12], [13]
The grey box model could be described as a combination of the two already mentioned
types of models. A grey box model typically consists of a set of a continuous­time stochas­
tic differential equations and a set of equations measured in discrete time [8]. The follow­
ing equations are presented to describe more clearly the grey box model. The equation
2.1 includes a drift and a diffusion function, which correspond to well­known physical
8
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:17==
parameters and a stochastic term, respectively [14], [15]. Equation 2.2 is used for the
calculation of the output variables.
dx(t) = f(X(t), u(t), d(t), t)dt + g(x(t), u(t), d(t), t)dω(t)
(2.1)
Where x is the system vector, ω is a standard Wiener process, and f and g are the drift
and diffusion functions.
yk = h(x(tk)) + uk,
uk N(0, Rv)
(2.2)
Where h is the observation function and uk is the observation noise.
Some additional characteristics of the grey box models are that these models have fewer
unknown parameters, lower predictive accuracy, and their interpretation is easier than
black box models [11]. To sum up, it is not necessary to have all the detailed sets of
data that are needed to develop a white box model when creating a grey box model. In
addition, uncertainties (noise) are also taken into account in the grey box model. These
two main aspects are the basic reason that the grey box models are preferred and used
by many scientists to perform energy simulations of buildings. An overview of the main
characteristics of the white box, the black box, and the grey box models is illustrated in
figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Main characteristics of white box, black box and grey box models [14]
The grey box model will be created in Dymola (Dynamic Modelling Laboratory), which is
a tool used for modeling and simulation of integrated and complex systems [16]. Dymola
is used for many different types of projects. To be more precise, Dymola is used, among
others, in the scientific fields of aerospace, robotics, automotive and energy. The model
will be developed in the environment of Dymola with the use of the Modelica Buildings
Library.
Modelica is an object­oriented, declarative, multi­domain modelling language for the mod­
elling of complicated systems [17]. Component­oriented modelling is one of the main rea­
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
9
==PAGE:18==
sons that this programming language is widely used. This aspect increases the simplicity
of the models and facilitates the sharing of information among the different users. Mod­
elica Buildings Library is an open access library. This library is used to create models
and perform dynamic simulations in the research fields of buildings, district energy, and
control systems [18].
2.3
IDA ICE models
IDA ICE (IDA Indoor Climate and Energy) is a simulation tool often used for the estimation
of building performance and was created by a Swedish company named EQUA. The
models created in IDA ICE are used to calculate the energy consumption and aspects
related to the indoor climate of the assessed building. In several studies, the information
received from the IDA ICE model is used as an input in the model created in the Dymola
environment.
In one of the aforementioned studies, the simulation of a large­scale district energy system
is attempted. The researchers chose to develop a Modelica model of the heating network
in Dymola, a model of the building and the substation in IDA ICE, and the energy supply
system in TRNSYS. The simulation of a complex system is achieved with the exchange of
data between the different models. More specifically, the substation model developed in
IDA ICE has as an input the supply temperature from the heating network and as an output
the return temperature and the mass flow. The heating network created in Dymola has as
inputs the supply temperature of the water from the energy supply system and the mass
flow of each substation and as an output the supply temperature for each substation.
The energy supply system has as inputs the network return temperature and the total
mass flow from Dymola and as an output the water that is supplied to the network. The
exchange of data is depicted in figure 5.1.[19]
Figure 2.3: Simulation of a large­scale district energy system [19]
In another study, a model is created in IDA ICE and is used for virtual experiments testing
different scenarios. The resulting data is used to define some of the unknown parame­
ters in the examined low­order stochastic grey box models (first and second order mod­
els). The examined grey box models are developed based on the resistance­capacitance
10
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:19==
method, the usage of which is a good technique when examining the thermal behaviour.
The authors reach the conclusion that the information received from IDA ICE enhances
the analysis.[20]
2.4
Parameter estimation and ModestPy
Parameter estimation is frequently used to estimate the values of the unknown parameters
of the grey box model. There is a significant number of methodologies for parameter
estimation, which have many applications. Some popular methodologies are:
• Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE): The values of the parameters are the ones
that maximize the likelihood that the results of the examined model are similar to
the observed data. [21].
• Method of moments: The parameters of a probability distribution model are esti­
mated by matching the moments of the dataset with those of the candidate model
[22].
• Quantile matching: A linear combination of a set of random variables that matches
the distribution of a target random value is discovered with the use of this technique
[23].
• Least squares method: Parameter values that minimize the sum of the squares of
the residuals are investigated with this method [24].
• Bayesian methods A large group of methods belong to this category. In the context
of these methods, already existing knowledge is used, data is gathered, and then
posterior knowledge is used to update the results [24].
In the building sector, a tool whose popularity is continuously rising, is an open­source
python tool named ModestPy. ModestPy is frequently used to define the unknown pa­
rameters resulting from a grey box model and is used for the parameter estimation in
models compliant with Functional Mock­up Interface (FMI). Many researchers choose this
tool when investigating models describing the functions of a building [4], [25], [26]. FMI
is a standard used for exchanging dynamical simulation models between different tools
in a standardized format. The FMI was initially developed by MODELISAR and offers the
possibility to use the models from different tools and combine the information they provide
to receive the desired outcome. The final result is to achieve an interaction between the
different programs used.
A component that implements the FMI standard is called the Functional Mock­up Unit
(FMU). An FMU is a zipped file containing an xml file, which is a description of interface
data, and the implementation in source or binary form [27].There is a very extensive list of
tools that are compliant with the FMI standard. Some of them are Matlab Simulink, Mod­
elon Impact, OpenModelica, and Dymola [28]. In the context of this study, the model was
developed in the Dymola environment with the use of the Modelica modeling language.
The models created in Dymola can be exported as an FMU and inserted into ModestPy for
parameter estimation. The values of the inputs, outputs, and known parameters defined
in the model created in Dymola should also be inserted in ModestPy. Moreover, the user
should define a guess value as well as the upper and lower boundaries of the unknown
parameters that ModestPy will estimate. The results of ModestPy are the estimated val­
ues of the unknown parameters, the validation of the assigned values to the outputs of the
model developed in Dymola, and the error occurring from the deviation of the calculated
results from the estimated results. Figure 2.4 illustrates a graphical depiction describing
the method that is going to be applied.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Graphical depiction of the applied methodology
Regarding parameter estimation, the methods used in ModestPy are:
• Genetic algorithm: In the context of this method, a natural selection is made where
the fittest individuals are selected for reproduction in order to produce offspring of
the next generation [29].
• Pattern search: This method is a very efficient way to search for a string within an­
other string [30].
• Truncated Newton method: Large non­linear optimization problems can be handled
by the truncated Newton method. In this method, iterations are conducted, and
for each iteration, an iterative algorithm is activated that approximately solves the
Newton equations. The iterative process ends before the solution to the Newton
equations is obtained. [31]
• L­BFGS­B (Quasi Newton method): L­BFGS­B is a limited­memory algorithm used
for large­scale optimization problems with simply bounded variables. The method
focuses on minimizing a non­linear function of n variables. [32]
• Sequential least squares: A problem of quadratic programming is generated at ev­
ery iteration with the use of this method. The result of this problem is used for the
selection of the next search direction. This is accomplished by approximating the
computationally extensive full Hessian matrix using the quasi­Newton method. [33]
All the algorithms used in ModestPy share a common functionality relating to the es­
timation of errors (error.py). To be more precise, the mean­square error and the total
normalized mean­square error are calculated with the use of the formulas 2.3 and 2.4,
respectively:
MSEtot =
∑
i
∑N
t=1( ˆY t
i −Y t
i )2
N
(2.3)
NMSEtot =
∑
i
MSEi
¯Y 2
i
(2.4)
Where ˆY t
i is the measured value of variable i at time step t, Y t
i is the simulated value of
variable i at time step t, ¯Yi is the mean measured value of variable i, N is the number of
time steps, and MSEi is the mean­square error of variable i. [34]
12
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:21==
The resulting mean­square error should be as low as possible. Low values of mean­
square error are translated as more accurate results regarding the values of the investi­
gated parameters. In this study, the target is to reach a value of 0.1 for the mean­square
error.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:23==
3
Case study
In the context of this chapter, the examined building is presented. In the first part, details of
the main building’s characteristics like, for example, the location, the orientation, and the
number of floors of the school are listed. Moreover, the heating and ventilation systems
of the school are presented and extensively described. More specifically, a schematic
presentation for both the heating and the ventilation systems and a further explanation of
the operation of each system are given. In addition, the sensors, which are implemented
in each system and whose data is used for this project, are presented. Additional data
that was provided by the building’s documentation and was used in the modelling phase
of this specific project is given. Lastly, missing data that introduced challenges to the
modelling of the studied building is also presented.
3.1
Building’s description
Frederiksberg Skole is a recently built school located in Sorø, Denmark. The construction
process was completed at the beginning of 2017. This non­domestic building is charac­
terized as a low­energy building ”Lavenergiklasse 2015” according to the Danish Building
Regulations (BR15) [35]. The school consists of two floors and one underground floor.
On the first floor, the majority of the rooms are used as classrooms. On the ground floor,
the offices, the kitchen, the cafe, and rooms used for various creative activities, such as
the laboratory and the nature workshop, are located. The underground space consists
mainly of technical rooms. The building is divided into two main parts. The main differ­
ence between these two parts of the building is that the longest facade of one is facing the
south and the longest facade of the other is facing the north. In this study, the southern
part of the building was examined. The school is presented in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: View of the school [36]
The performance of the building is very important since it is newly built and many mea­
sures have been taken to improve its performance. Hence, sensors were installed not
only in the heating and the ventilation systems but also in the areas of the different rooms.
The data from the sensors can be used to detect faulty behavior or monitor the perfor­
mance. Schneider was selected for the installation of the sensors and the gathering of
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
15
==PAGE:24==
the data. Schneider is a multinational company that was founded in Paris. This company
offers solutions that focus and prioritize efficiency and sustainability. The heating con­
sumption registered in the meters was considered very high and was in contrast with the
one estimated in the design phase. Therefore, the development of a grey box model was
considered necessary to facilitate the investigation of a possible fault in the system.
3.2
Heating system
The heat is supplied to the building with a district heating system. The central district
heating substation provides the heating for both the heating and the ventilation system and
is located on the underground floor. The supply provided by the substation is distributed
to the heating of the southern and northern parts of the building and to the heating of the
supply air of the ventilation system of the southern part and northern part of the building.
The substation and its distribution system are presented in figure 3.2. The continuous line
and dotted line represent the supply and the return, respectively.
Figure 3.2: The district heating substation of Frederiksberg school
An overview of the heating system for the southern part of the school is depicted in figure
3.3. In figure 3.3, the diagram of the supply temperature­outside temperature is presented.
The sensors established in the heating system are also presented in this figure. To be
more precise, the supply temperature (TF01), the return temperature before (TR01) and
after (TR02) the heat exchange and the valve opening (MVV01) are monitored. The open­
ing of the valve is controlled by the indoor temperature measured by the sensor TF01. The
values that are blue and green represent the measured temperatures and the setpoints,
respectively. The measurements that are registered by the sensors are very frequent.
These measurements are taken at least every 15 minutes. There was not available data
for TR02 and TF01, despite the fact that they are monitored.
The supply of the heating system rises to each floor and then is distributed from the cen­
tral unit to each radiator in sequence. The fluid is returned to the substation in the same
sequence. The floor plan of the first floor of the northern part of the school with the place­
ment of the radiators and the pipe placement for the heating is presented in figure 3.4.
Information regarding the flow through each radiator and the pressure drop of the fluid
passing through each radiator is not known. Moreover, details relating to the pipes, for
example, the dimensions or the material that they are made of, are also unknown.
16
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Heating system
Among the data provided relating to the heating system is also the setpoint temperature,
below which the heating system is activated. A different setpoint is set for the operating
and non­operating hours of the school. An example of three different rooms is depicted in
figure 3.5, where the setpoints of the temperature of three different rooms are shown. It is
observed that the setpoint temperature is 17 ◦C during the non­operational time periods
for every room, while during the operational time the temperature setpoint rises to 21­22
◦C. Figure 3.5 provides an overview of the sensors that control the temperature and the
CO2 level of every room in the school that is designed to be occupied. In this figure,
the three depicted rooms (U1.04, U1.08 and U1.09) are located on the first floor of the
southern part of the building.
Among the provided data, the location of the radiators is known from the floor plans that
the mechanical engineers delivered. The floor plans of the ground floor and the first floor
of the southern part of the building depicting the location of the radiators are presented in
figures A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A.1, respectively. In these floor plans, the names of the
radiators are also depicted. The names of the radiators depicted in the floor plan are listed
in the building’s documentation. The documentation that is related to the radiators is given
in figure A.3 in Appendix A.2. In this document, information about the width and length,
the mass flow, and the power of every type of radiator is provided. In the same document,
the supply and return temperatures at maximum power of the radiators are also given.
The radiator exponent N was unknown and, thus, it was assumed to be around 1.28 for
each radiator.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4: Heating delivery to the first floor of the northern part of the building
3.3
Ventilation system
The ventilation of the building is controlled by the CO2 levels and by the presence of peo­
ple. The ventilation system is activated when the concentration of CO2 increases above
the defined setpoint and the presence of people is detected in the area. Furthermore,
the mechanical ventilation system can be activated from 8:00 to 17:00 every weekday. In
figure 3.5, the setpoint of CO2 is defined to be 300ppm for the rooms U1.04, U1.08, and
U1.09. The schematic view of the ventilation system is presented in figure 3.6. In figure
3.6, it is shown that the valve opens and the required supply of air is provided when the
presence of people is detected. The outside air is heated up with heat exchange between
the supplied and the exhausted air. If the temperature of the supplied air has not reached
the temperature setpoint, then the supplied air is further heated with the use of the district
heating.
In figures 3.5 and 3.6, the sensors providing data regarding the ventilation system are
illustrated. To be more specific, among other things, information that is given by the sen­
sors is:
• the amount of CO2 (CO201),
• the valve opening relating to the supply of air (SMI01),
• the presence of people (PIR01),
• the valve opening associated with the heating of supplied air (MVV01),
• the pressure of the air supplied to each room (PTI01),
• the pressure of the air exhausted from each room (PTU01),
• the temperature of the air supplied to each room (TI01), and
• the temperature of the air exhausted from each room (TU01).
The data that was received and used in this project is the valve opening relating to the
supply of air (SMI01), the presence of people (PIR01), the amount of CO2, and the tem­
perature exhausted from each room (TU01), which is actually the indoor temperature.
18
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:27==
In the case of the ventilation, important information was found in the documentation.
Among the data provided by the documentation, the effectiveness of the heat recovery
of the ventilation system is given. Furthermore, the maximum amount of supplied and
exhausted air for every room in the building is also provided. The maximum supplied and
exhausted air from each room provided by the documentation is presented in table A.1
in Appendix A.3. These maximum values were used in the development of the models
in both IDA ICE and Dymola. In the documentation, the maximum number of people that
is expected to be in each room is presented. This number was estimated in the design
phase of the building and is also registered in table A.1 in Appendix A.3. One important
parameter that is unknown is the actual number of people that are in each room and the
time period that they remain in the room on a daily basis. The number of people in the
interior areas of the school was estimated based on assumptions. The methodology used
to estimate the number of occupants is presented in the following chapters.
Figure 3.5: Overview of the sensors that control the temperature and the CO2 levels in
the different internal areas of the school
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Schematic view of the ventilation system
20
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:29==
4
Theory
This chapter is divided into three sections. In the first section, the heat balance used in
the context of this study is described. In the second section, the methodology used to
estimate the number of people in each room is thoroughly explained. In the last section,
the DTU model used for the estimation of the direct normal and diffuse horizontal radiation
is presented.
4.1
Heat balance of a classroom
In this project, the main focus was laid on the formation of a heat balance for each class­
room, aiming to create a model which represented the real conditions as much as possible.
Equation 4.1 shows the heat balance with all the parameters that are considered in the
models.
Qh + Qocc + Qeq + Qlight + Qsol + Qenv = Qvent + Qwin + Qbr
(4.1)
Where:
Qh is the heat gain from heating the room in W,
Qocc is the heat produced from the occupants in W,
Qeq is the heat gains from the equipment in W,
Qlight is the heat gains from the lighting in W,
Qsol is the heat from solar radiation (direct and diffuse) in W,
Qenv is the heat gains or losses through the building’s evnelope in W,
Qvent is the lost from the gains or losses caused by the ventilation in W,
Qwin is the heat gains or losses from the windows and openings in W and
Qbr is the thermal gains or losses caused by the thermal bridges of the envelope.
In this case, the rooms were heated with the use of radiators. The heat resulting from
the radiators can be calculated with the use of equation 4.2. Moreover, the formula from
which the LMTD value is derived is depicted in equation 4.3.
Qh = U·A·LMTD
(4.2)
Where:
U is the heat transfer coefficient in W/m2K,
A is the area of the room and
LMTD is the logarithmic mean temperature difference in K.
LMTD =
Ts −TR
ln( Ts−Ti
TR−Ti )
(4.3)
Where:
Ts is the supply temperature in ◦C,
TR is the return temperature in ◦C and
Ti is the operative temperature in ◦C.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
21
==PAGE:30==
The heat produced by the occupants can be calculated as illustrated in figure 4.4. In
equation 4.4, it was assumed that the body was in a condition of thermal balance and,
therefore, the heat storage of the human body was 0. In the following equation, the losses
presented refer to the losses from the human body to the surrounding environment.
Qocc = M −W = R + C + K + E + Res
(4.4)
Where:
M is the metabolic heat production in W,
W is the physical (mechanical) work in W,
R is the radiant heat loss in W,
C is the convective heat loss in W,
K is the conduction heat loss in W,
E is the evaporative heat loss from skin in W and
Res is the heat loss from respiration (convection and evaporation) in W.
The heat gains or losses from the envelope, the windows, and other openings can be
estimated from the equation 4.5.
Q = U·A·∆T
(4.5)
Where ∆T is the temperature difference in K.
4.2
Occupancy and CO2 emissions
Information regarding the CO2 emissions was received from the sensors existing in the
school. Because of that, the CO2 levels in each room were known. It is not the same
case with regard to occupancy. It was unknown how many individuals visited each room
and how long they remained in each room every day. Hence, equation 4.6 was used to
roughly estimate the number of occupants in the room. Equation 4.6 is characterized as a
build­up equation used in the cases where the occupant enters a room with a background
concentration of CO2 of 400 ppm and the amount of CO2 is building up from that point.
The air change rate was calculated with the use of equation 4.7.
∆C = x·G
n·V ·(1 −e−n·t)
(4.6)
Where:
∆C is the increase in concentration of CO2 in ppm,
x is the number of people,
G is the CO2 production per person in ml/h,
n is air change rate in h−1,
V is volume of the room in m3 and
t is the time passed until the examined point in h.
n = Qv
V
(4.7)
Where Qv is the air flow in m3/h.
22
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:31==
The build­up equation 4.6 is derived from the differential equation 4.8, which is used to
define the concentration changes of a pollutant during a time difference dt. This equation
also considers the parameters of filtration and sorption.
V ·dC(t) = G·dt + Cv·Qv·dt −C(t)·Qv·dt −C(t)·Qr·E·dt −C(t)·Qs·dt
(4.8)
Where:
V is the volume of the room,
dC(t) is the change in the concentration,
G is the productions rate,
dt is the time step,
Cv is the concentration outside,
Qv is the supply and return air flow,
C(t) is the indoor concentration,
Qr is air flow through the filter,
E is the filter efficiency and
Qs is the air flow into the wall.
4.3
DTU solar radiation model
The DTU solar radiation model can be used to estimate the horizontal diffuse irradiance
when the horizontal global radiation is known. The diffuse irradiance is calculated as
shown in equation 4.9. In addition, equation 4.10 is used to calculate the clearness index.
kT = 0.00 −0.29 :
Gd
G = −0.60921·k3
T + 1.9982·k2
T −0.2787·kT + 1
kT = 0.29 −0.72 :
Gd
G = 3.99·k3
T −7.1469·k2
T + 2.3996·kT + 0.746
kT = 0.72 −0.80 :
Gd
G = 288.63·k4
T −625.26·k3
T + 448.06·k2
T −105.84kT
kT = 0.80 −1.20 :
Gd
G = 65.89·k4
T −210.69·k3
T + 222.91·k2
T −77.203kT
(4.9)
Where:
kT is the clearness index,
Gd is the diffuse irradiance on the horizontal surface in W/m2 and
G is the total irradiance on the horizontal surface in W/m2
kT = G
G0
(4.10)
Where G0 is the extraterrestrial irradiance on the horizontal surface in W/m2
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:33==
5
IDA ICE
In this part, a detailed description of the methodology applied to develop the IDA ICE
model is given. Furthermore, the results of the simulation of the model are presented and
discussed. In addition, a comparison between the data received from the sensors and the
outputs of the model is made. In the context of the results section, specific parameters
were changed in the IDA ICE model and the outcomes of the changes are investigated.
5.1
Methodology
IDA ICE is, as already mentioned, a simulation tool for the estimation of the energy con­
sumption and parameters of the indoor climate of buildings. This tool was used to develop
a model of the school, which is examined in this research. To be more accurate, only the
southern part of the building was modeled in IDA ICE in order to simplify the model and
avoid having high computational complexity. The floor plan of the modeled part of the
building and the 3D view of the IDA ICE model are depicted in figure 5.1. The floor plans
of the southern part of the building are presented in figures 5.2 and 5.3. In table 5.1 the
U­value and the thickness of the external walls, slabs, and roof are presented. Although
it is documented that all the external walls have the same U­value, the sequence of lay­
ers and the materials used are different. To create the IDA ICE model, though, it was
assumed that the external walls are made of the same materials.
Figure 5.1: The modeled part of the building and its 3D view in IDA ICE
On the first floor of the southern part of the building, which consists mainly of classrooms,
there are several protruding windows. The parts of the external wall where the protruding
windows are constructed have larger thermal bridges than the rest of the external wall.
Hence, these windows could not be ignored when developing the IDA ICE model. The pro­
truding windows are depicted in figure 5.4. The U­value and the thickness of the external
walls, floor, and roof of the protruding window are given in table 5.1. The documenta­
tion provides information regarding the U­values of the external elements surrounding the
protruding windows. The thermal transmittance of the elements that are surrounding the
protruding windows is greater than that of the rest of the external elements. This means
that more heat is transferred from the interior to the exterior during the cold periods. The
layers of the external walls, the floor, and the roof, as well as the layers of the internal
walls and floors, are presented in tables A.2, A.3, A.4, A.5, A.6, A.7, A.8, A.9 and A.10
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
25
==PAGE:34==
in Appendix A.4. In these tables, the thickness, the thermal conductivity, the density, and
the specific heat of the layers are registered. This data was used to create the model in
IDA ICE.
In addition, the U­value and g­value of the windows are illustrated in table 5.2. In table
5.2, the shading factor Fc of the windows is also presented. Low Fc values correspond to
shading systems of higher effectiveness [37]. The low shading factor of some windows is
due to the fact that a metal solar shading is placed in front of these windows. The drawings
of the facades are presented in figures A.4, A.5, A.6, and A.7 in Appendix A.5. In these
figures, the facades are shown both with and without the metal solar shading. The north­
facing facade of the southern part of the building does not have metal solar shading. In
the case of windows with a low shading factor, the g­value given is the outcome of the
multiplication of the g­value of the window with the multiplier of g­value caused by the
shading.
The information presented in tables 5.1 and 5.2 is mainly taken from the documentation
of the mechanical engineers, to whom the school project was assigned. Regarding the
windows, it was assumed that it was possible to open the windows when the temperature
exceeded 25 ◦C. The opening of the windows is possible during the time period in which
the school is open. To be more specific, the opening schedule of the windows is presented
in figure 5.5. Moreover, it was assumed that it was not possible to open the roof windows.
The roof and the location of the roof windows are presented in figure A.8 in Appendix A.6.
Furthermore, the dimensions and the location of the windows and doors were provided by
the documentation. To be more precise, the floor plans with the location and the names of
the doors and windows are given. The width and height of the doors and windows were
also given. The floor plans of the ground and first floor with the location and names of the
doors are presented in figures A.9 and A.10 in Appendix A.7. On the ground floor, there
are many glass doors with a height of 3 m. The location of the glass doors is shown in
figure A.11 in Appendix A.8. The floor plan of the first floor with the locations and names
of the windows is presented in figure A.12 in Appendix A.8. The width and the height of
the external doors of the ground and first floor are presented in tables A.11 and A.12 in
Appendix A.9. The width and the height of the openable and fixed windows on the first
floor are given in tables A.13 and A.14 in Appendix A.10, respectively.
Table 5.1: U­values and thicknesses of the building’s elements
Element
U­value
d
W/m2K
m
External walls
0.11
0.317
Roof
0.08
0.63
External floor
0.07
0.59
Slab towards ground
0.08
0.485
External walls (Karnap)
0.24
0.25
External floor (Karnap)
0.24
0.25
Roof (Karnap)
0.24
0.25
26
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.2: Floor plan of the first floor
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.3: Floor plan of the ground floor
The school is built in Sorø. Hence, information relating to the weather was received by
the weather station that is located between Skælskør and Sorø. This weather station
28
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:37==
measures the outdoor temperature and solar radiation. The solar radiation was used to
estimate the direct normal and diffuse horizontal radiation with the use of the DTU solar
radiation model. The measurements of 2021 were used in IDA ICE to simulate a period
of one year. The year of 2021 was chosen because data from the sensors for the whole
year was available. Therefore, a comparison of the results received from the simulation
of the model in IDA ICE with the measurements received from the sensors was possible.
Figure 5.4: Protruding windows
Table 5.2: U­values, g­values and Fc values of the windows
Window
U­value
g­value
Fc
W/m2K
­
­
Windows with shading
1
0.158
0.22
Windows without shading
1
0.4
0.8
Roof windows
1
0.63
1
The heating of each room is controlled by the temperature of the indoor air in IDA ICE. If the
temperature of the room is below the setpoint, the heating is activated. The minimum and
maximum temperatures are 21­22 ◦C and 25 ◦C during the opening hours of the school,
respectively. The minimum temperature is different during the night and was defined to be
17 ◦C in the model. It was assumed that rooms are heated from 8:00 to 17:00 every day.
The heating curve already presented in figure 3.3 was also used in the IDA ICE model.
The location, the size of the radiators and their power are provided by the documentation.
The known data for each radiator was used in the IDA ICE model. In addition, the supply
temperature at maximum power and the return temperature at maximum power are 55
and 25 ◦C, respectively. These temperatures are also defined in the documentation. The
exponent n of the radiators was assumed to be 1.28.
Regarding the ventilation system, a Variable Air Volume (VAV) system controlled by CO2
emissions is used for every room. The ventilation system was modelled so as to consider
the heat exchanged between the supply and the exhaust air with an effectiveness of 0.83.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.5: The opening schedule of the windows
If the temperature has not reached the required minimum temperature after the heat ex­
change, then the supplied air is further heated by the district heating. In the model, the
minimum and maximum acceptable levels of CO2 were defined as 400 and 410 ppm, re­
spectively. This means that when the amount of CO2 is above 410 ppm, the mechanical
ventilation system is activated. It was assumed that the ventilation system can be acti­
vated during the whole day if the CO2 emissions exceed the maximum acceptable level.
This is in contrast with the real conditions, where the ventilation system is closed after
17:00 every weekday. This assumption was based on the fact that it is difficult to verify
that a room will not be occupied after a certain time limit. Moreover, the assumed control
of the ventilation system is considered an improvement that will enhance the performance
of the ventilation system.
In the IDA ICE model, the heat gains from the lighting and the equipment were estimated
using the data obtained from the electricity meters of the school. More specifically, the
data on the electricity consumed in one year was taken into account. The measurements
were registered every thirty minutes and were given in kWh. Average values of the amount
of electricity consumed during the opening and closing hours of the school were calculated
with the use of this data. Each electricity meter registers the electricity consumed by not
only one room but several rooms. The amount of electricity that is distributed to each
room is, thus, not specified. The average values of the electricity consumed during the
the opening and closing hours, which were calculated based on the measurements taken
by the electricity meter, were distributed to the corresponding rooms based on the area
of the rooms as shown in equation 5.1.
Q = q·A
Atot
·1000
(5.1)
Where:
30
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:39==
Q is the averaged value of electricity consumption of the room in W,
q is the averaged value of electricity consumption of the rooms, of
which the consumption is measured by the specific meter in kWh,
A is the area of the room in m and
Atot is the summed area of the rooms, of which the consumption is
measured by the specific meter in m.
For example, the lighting and the equipment schedule of a classroom is presented in
figure 5.6. In figure 5.6, it is shown that the consumption of electricity is decreased by
half during the non­occupational period. It is also shown that during the weekends the
consumption is half of the maximum consumption.
Figure 5.6: The lighting and the equipment schedule
The number of occupants was roughly estimated with the use of the build­up equation
4.6. In the context of this study, it was assumed that the occupants are in the rooms from
eight o’clock in the morning to five o’clock in the evening during weekdays. In addition, it
was assumed that the occupants leave the room during the break that takes place from
twelve to one o’clock in the midday. Moreover, the absence of a few students during
the occupancy hours was not considered in this project. It was assumed that all the
students in a class are present every weekday. Some of the main assumptions made for
the development of the IDA ICE model are presented in table 5.3.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 5.3: Main assumptions made for the creation of IDA ICE model
Aspect
Assumption
Heating
The maximum power of each radiator is the same as the one
documented by the engineers.
The heating is active every day from 8:00 to 17:00.
Ventilation
The maximum ventilation flow rate is the same as the one do­
cumented by the engineers.
Mechanical ventilation is activated when CO2 exceeds the set­
point.
The windows can be opened if indoor temperature exceeds the
setpoint.
Envelope
All the external walls are made of the same sequence of layers.
The infiltration rate is 1 l/sm2 at pressure difference of 50 Pa.
A shading factor of 0.22 is resulting to a more than 50% decre­
ase of the g­value.
Occupancy
The same number of pupils is present every weekday from 8:00
to 17:00 in the school
5.2
Results and discussion
In this section, the results of the simulation of the IDA ICE model are illustrated and dis­
cussed. The results of the IDA ICE model examined in this part are the indoor temper­
ature, the CO2 emissions, the supply and return temperature of the heating system, the
annual energy consumption for heating the building, and the heat balance of the building’s
rooms. Moreover, the results of the IDA ICE model and the data received from the sen­
sors are compared. In addition, the change of certain parameters in the IDA ICE model
is investigated, and the outcomes of the simulation are discussed. More specifically, two
scenarios were examined in order to justify some of the assumptions made during the
development of the IDA ICE model. The investigation of these scenarios was conducted
in order to justify two assumptions. One assumption was that the occupants open the win­
dows when the indoor temperature is too high, causing discomfort. The other assumption
was that the ventilation system can be activated throughout the whole day, if the level of
CO2 exceeds the setpoint. In the main scenario, it is possible to open the windows during
the occupancy hours if the temperature exceeds the 25 ◦C and the ventilation system can
be activated during the whole day. This scenario is referred to as the ”Baseline scenario”
in this section. In the first scenario, called ”Scenario 1”, the difference with the Baseline
scenario is that the windows are always closed. In the second scenario, called ”Scenario
2”, the operation of the ventilation system differs from that of the Baseline scenario. In
Scenario 2, the ventilation system can be activated only during the opening hours of the
school.
5.2.1
Indoor Temperature
In this subsection, the results of the simulation of the model regarding the operative tem­
perature are presented. The southern part of the school, which was examined in the
context of this study, consists of many rooms. Four classrooms located on the first floor
of the school are chosen, and their results are compared with the results of the sensors
32
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:41==
that are established in these classrooms. The facades of the selected classrooms have
different orientations. Classroom U1.01 has one facade facing south and one facing east.
Classroom U1.03 has only one south­facing facade. U1.04 has two facades, one facing
south and one facing west, while U1.11 has one facing east and one facing north facade.
In figure 5.7, the operative temperature of these classrooms, resulting both from the IDA
ICE model and the data derived from the sensors, is illustrated. All the diagrams depict
the indoor temperature of the classrooms over the period of one year.
Figure 5.7: The operative temperature of classrooms U1.01, U1.03, U1.04 and U1.11
resulting from IDA ICE model and from the data of the sensors
It is observed that the indoor temperature estimated with the IDA ICE model is higher
than the temperature measured by the sensors. One possible reason is that the number
of occupants used in IDA ICE is fixed and estimated based on CO2 emissions and the
area of each classroom. In 2021, the number of students attending the classes can not be
precisely estimated due to COVID­19, but it can safely be assumed that there were often
absent students. The reduction in the number of occupants leads to fewer heat gains.
The decrease in heat gains is resulting in lower indoor temperatures. It is also observed
that the temperature rises for a short period of time during July in all these cases. Further
investigation of the data of the sensors relating to CO2 emissions and indoor temperature
showed that during that period the school was closed. Moreover, figures 5.8 and 5.9
illustrate the differences between the Baseline scenario and Scenario 1 and Scenario 2,
respectively. Two classrooms, namely U1.04 and U1.11, were randomly chosen so as to
make the comparison.
Taking into consideration figure 5.8, it is more than obvious that the indoor temperature
increases if the windows cannot be opened. As a result, the temperature was very high
for the greatest part of the year, which means that the discomfort level was also high for
the greatest part of the year. Moreover, the results of the Baseline scenario are closer to
the data obtained from the sensors in comparison with the results of Scenario 1. Thus,
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.8: Operative temperature of classrooms U1.04 and U1.11 resulting from Baseline
scenario and Scenario 1
Figure 5.9: Operative temperature of classrooms U1.04 and U1.11 resulting from Baseline
scenario and Scenario 2
it is considered safe to assume that the occupants can open the windows if the indoor
temperature is causing discomfort. It is not the same case when examining the second
34
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:43==
scenario. The observation of figure 5.9 leads to the result that there is not a notable
difference between the indoor temperature of the Baseline scenario and Scenario 2. The
assumption that the ventilation system can be activated the whole day cannot be verified
when considering the indoor temperature.
5.2.2
CO2 emissions
In this section, the CO2 emissions registered by the sensors and the ones that resulted
from the simulation of the IDA ICE model are examined and compared. The data received
from the sensors is presented in figure 5.10. In this figure, the four classrooms selected in
the previous section are examined. A period of one year was also examined in this case.
It is observed that in the first months of the year, the school was closed and the amount
of CO2 was mostly around 500 ppm. It is also obvious that there were occupants in the
rooms during May and June, while the rooms were unoccupied during July. The amount
of CO2 appears to be high in the last months of the year, indicating that the school was
open during the weekdays. Moreover, it is noted that the level of CO2 often rose to 2000
ppm during the last months of the year in classrooms U1.03 and U1.04. This was an
unexpected outcome, since the school was newly built during the study. Another fact is
that the amount of CO2 was around 800­1200 ppm most of the time during May and June.
These values were taken into consideration when estimating the number of occupants for
each room.
Figure 5.10: The CO2 emissions received by the sensors for classrooms U1.01, U1.03,
U1.04 and U1.11
The amount of CO2 emissions estimated with use of the IDA ICE model is presented in
figure 5.11. It was assumed that the occupants were every weekday in the classrooms and
the school was closed during the weekends and holidays. The CO2 decrease during the
summer period was caused by the opening of the windows. Furthermore, a comparison
is made between the results of the Baseline scenario and Scenario 2 in relation to CO2
emissions. In figure 5.12 the amount of CO2 emissions of the same classrooms resulting
from Scenario 2 is presented. It is observed that the emissions are higher in Scenario
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
35
==PAGE:44==
2 compared to the ones of the Baseline scenario. The maximum amount of CO2 in the
indoor air is around 900 ppm and 1600 ppm for each classroom in the Baseline scenario
and Scenario 2, respectively. It is also observed that the CO2 decreases to almost 600
ppm during the evenings, which is above the 500 ppm that was the level of CO2 measured
by the sensors. The level of CO2 estimated with Scenario 2 was considered too high and,
thus, it was assumed that the ventilation could be activated throughout the whole day if
the level of CO2 was above the setpoint.
Figure 5.11: The CO2 emissions of classrooms U1.01, U1.03, U1.04 and U1.11 estimated
with the use of the IDA ICE model
Figure 5.12: The CO2 emissions of classrooms U1.01, U1.03, U1.04 and U1.11 resulting
from Scenario 2
36
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:45==
5.2.3
Supply and Return temperature
The supply temperature to each zone as well as the return temperature from each zone
were estimated with the use of IDA ICE. In figures 5.13 and 5.14, the supply and return
temperatures are depicted.
Figure 5.13: The supply temperature to each zone
Figure 5.14: The return temperature from each zone
It is highlighted that the supply to each radiator in a room was provided directly by the
substation. This was not the case in reality. The supply was provided to each radiator in
sequence. The modelling of the real supply and return system was not possible in IDA
ICE. The heat exchange between the supply and the return temperature was also not
modelled in IDA ICE. In figure 5.13, it is shown that the supply temperature reached 65
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
37
==PAGE:46==
◦C in February and December. During the summer period, the supply temperature fell to
around 35 ◦C. The return temperature was between 22 and 24 ◦C in January, February
and December. Moreover, the return temperature ranged between 25 and 32 ◦C from the
middle of April until the end of October.
5.2.4
Annual energy consumption for heating
The rooms of the building were heated by both the radiators and the air supplied by the
ventilation system. The heat exchange between the supplied and returned air of the ven­
tilation system was conducted with an efficiency of 0.83. The exchanged heat resulted in
high heat recovery, which led to saving a considerable amount of energy, namely 167463
kWh. The energy consumed each month for the heating of the rooms is presented in
figure 5.15. In figure 5.15, zone heating refers to the heat produced by the radiators,
and AHU heating refers to the heating of the rooms from the warm air supplied by the
ventilation system. It is observed that the southern part of the school was heated mainly
during January, February and December. In February, March, and December the energy
consumed by the ventilation system for the heating was greater than that used by the ra­
diators. The energy consumed annually for the heating of the northern part of the school
was very low according to the outputs of IDA ICE. Moreover, it is noted that the highest
heating consumption resulting from the radiators was the one of January as shown in
figure 5.15.
The energy consumption of the school was monitored and the registered values were
among the known parameters in the context of this study. The energy consumed from
27/02/2020 until 22/08/2021 is depicted in figure 5.16. The energy consumed for heating
and ventilation of the southern and northern parts of the building as well as the energy
consumed for providing warm water to the building is illustrated in figure 5.16. The QM01,
QM02, QM03, QM04, QM05, and QM06 correspond to a specific part of the energy con­
sumption of the building. QM06 corresponds to the heating of the southern part of the
building. Moreover, the total energy consumed for heating, ventilation and heating of the
water is presented in figure 5.17. These registered values show the total energy consump­
tion until the 3rd of September 2021. In figure 5.17, the total consumption of electricity
until the 3rd of September 2021 is also presented.
Figure 5.15: Annual energy consumption
38
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.16: Energy consumption for heating, ventilation and warm water
It is observed from figure 5.16 that the annual energy consumed for heating the southern
part of the building was around 500 MWh, as QM06 represents the energy consumed for
heating of the southern part the school. This value is more than 490 times larger than
the value that resulted from the simulation of the IDA ICE model. The extremely large
difference in energy consumption indicates that there is a fault in the heating system.
Furthermore, the heating of the southern part of the building (Varme Syd) is presented
to be 2557.63 MWh in figure 5.17. This verifies that the QM06 is depicting the energy
consumption for heating of the southern part of the building in figure 5.16. This is not
valid and, for this reason, these monitored values were not considered in this project.
5.2.5
Heat balance
A detailed examination of the heat balance is very important in order to accurately develop
a grey box model. The main gains and losses of a room should be identified and con­
sidered in the grey box model. Therefore, the heat balance of a classroom is examined
in this section. Classroom U1.03 was selected and the heat balance resulting from the
simulation of the model in IDA ICE is presented in figure 5.18. A thorough examination of
figure 5.18 shows that the main heat gains are an outcome of the heat produced by the
occupants, while the main heat losses are a result of the heat removed by the ventilation
system. In addition, it is observed that a small contribution to the heat gains during the
heating season results from the heating of the classroom with the use of district heat­
ing. It is also observed that there is a small amount of heat loss through the envelope
of the school during the whole year. These parameters, which have a major effect on
the heat balance, were considered in the creation of the grey box model in the Dymola
environment.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.17: List of meters that monitor the energy consumption
The credibility of the information relating to the heat balance is high considering that many
aspects were included and considered in the model. These aspects are, among others:
• the effects of the adjacency with other spaces,
• the orientation of the facades,
• the infiltration through the envelope of the building, and
• the heat that is transferred through the envelop.
A researcher developing a simple grey box model without the use of a white box model
would not have data and details about these aspects and how they affect the heat balance.
The data of the white box model facilitates a focused investigation of the critical heat gains
and losses.
40
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.18: The heat balance of classroom U1.03
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:51==
6
Dymola model and ModestPy
In this chapter, the methodology used to create the grey box model in the environment of
Dymola with the use of the Modelica language is presented and described. Furthermore,
the method followed to estimate the values of the unknown parameters with the use of
ModestPy is also explained. Firstly, the data obtained from the simulation with IDA ICE is
used for the parameter estimation and the results are presented. Then data that is moni­
tored from the sensors established in the examined classroom is used for the parameter
estimation with ModestPy. The results are presented and compared with the ones that
are based on data from IDA ICE. Lastly, the possibility of lowering the supply tempera­
ture while keeping the mass flow rate constant at its maximum has been examined. The
results are registered and discussed.
6.1
Methodology
In the context of this study, a grey box model was created in the Dymola environment
with the use of the Modelica language. The libraries used to develop the model were
the Modelica Buildings Library and Modelica Standard Library. In this case, a typical
classroom was modeled in Dymola instead of the whole southern part of the building.
The creation of the model was based on the model created by Krzysztof Arendt et al.
[34]. The model was developed so that all the major heat gains and losses could be
included and examined. The main heat gains and heat losses of a typical classroom of
the examined school, as already discussed, are the heat produced by the occupants, the
heat gains or losses caused by the mechanical ventilation of the room, the gains resulting
from heating the room, and the heat gains or losses through the envelope. The heat gains
from solar radiation are also considered, although they are not significant in the studied
case, because these gains are often among the main heat gains of buildings with a facade
facing the south.
The classroom that was used as a basis to create the model is U1.03, which is located on
the first floor of the southern part of the building and has one facade facing to the south.
Moreover, the classroom has only one radiator that is used to heat the indoor space.
The developed model of the classroom is presented in figure 6.1. In the model, all the
important parameters that have a considerable effect on the heat balance of the room
were included. Regarding the heating system, the opening of the valve was controlled.
The control is based on the air temperature of the room and the temperature setpoint. The
return temperature was measured by a sensor and considered an output of the grey box
model, while the supply temperature was an input. The radiator component was taken by
the Modelica Building Library, in which it is referred to as RadiatorEN442_2. The model
of the radiator is presented in figure 6.2.
The ventilation of the room was also controlled by the amount of CO2 in the room, as
shown in figure 6.1. The heat produced by the ventilation system is calculated with the
use of equation 6.1.
Q = cp·ρ·V ·∆T
(6.1)
Where:
cp is the specific heat capacity of air in J/kgK,
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
43
==PAGE:52==
ρ is the density of air in kg/m3,
V is the flow rate of the supplied air in m3/s and
∆T is temperature difference between the supplied air and the indoor air in K.
If the temperature of the outdoor air increases above the setpoint, which is 22 ◦C in this
case, then the temperature of the supplied air is the same as the temperature of the
outdoor air.
Figure 6.1: The model of a typical classroom of the school
In regard to the occupants, both the heat gains and the CO2 generated by the occupants
were estimated in the model. More specifically, the metabolic heat produced by a single
person was estimated based on the indoor temperature as shown in figure 6.1. This value
was multiplied with the number of occupants, and the outcome was the amount of heat
gain produced by them. The amount of CO2 generated by the users of the classroom
was calculated with the use of the equation 4.8 presented in chapter 4. The air infiltrating
the room from the outside environment was added to the amount of air supplied by the
44
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:53==
mechanical ventilation system in order to calculate the CO2 production. In addition, the
heat gains and losses resulting from the heat transferred through the external envelope
were considered in the model. Moreover, the resistance of the internal elements, such as
internal walls and floors, as well as the capacity of these internal elements were consid­
ered in the model. The heat produced by solar radiation was another parameter included
in the model.
The FMU of this model was created and used for the parameter estimation with ModestPy.
Data regarding the inputs (blue arrows), outputs (white arrows) and the known parameters
of the Dymola model was also used for the process of parameter estimation. An assump­
tion was made regarding the value of each unknown parameter that was estimated with
ModestPy. In addition, the upper and lower boundaries of the unknown parameters were
defined. In tables 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4, the inputs, the outputs, and the known and un­
known parameters are listed. In tables 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3, the names and the unit of the
inputs, the outputs and the known parameters are presented. In addition, the source from
which data is obtained is depicted. In these tables, a short description of each aspect is
also provided. The assumed values of the examined parameters as well as the chosen
upper and lower boundaries are illustrated in table 6.4. In table 6.1, it is mentioned that
the number of occupants was calculated. This calculation was based on the amount of
CO2. It was assumed that the occupants remained in the class from 8:00 to 17:00 every
weekday, while they had a break between 12:00 and 13:00, which is in accordance with
the assumption made in the development of the IDA ICE model.
Figure 6.2: The model of the radiator
The initial guess values of the resistance of the external wall and of the internal elements
illustrated in table 6.4 were actually calculated based on equation 6.2. The resistance of
the external wall actually refers to the resistance of the external envelope of classroom
U1.03, namely the external wall, floor, roof, and windows. Despite that, the calculation
of the initial guess value was made considering only the external wall. The resistance of
the internal elements refers to the resistance of the internal walls and the internal floor.
The initial guess was calculated only with regard to the internal walls. The occupants’
heat generation effectiveness is mainly a correction factor in order to accurately estimate
the metabolic heat produced by one occupant. The zone thermal mass factor (tmass) and
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 6.1: Inputs of the Dymola model
Input
Unit
Source
Description
solrad
W
Weather station
Heat from direct and diffuse radiation
Tout
◦C
Weather station
Outdoor temperature
occ
­
Calculated
Number of occupants
Tvestp
◦C
School data
Supplied air setpoint temperature
CO2_upper_limit
ppm
School data
Maximum amount of CO2 indoors
Tstp
K
School data
Heating setpoint temperature
Tsupply
K
IDA ICE
Supply temperature for heating
Table 6.2: Outputs of the Dymola model
Output
Unit
Source
Description
T
◦C
IDA ICE
Indoor temperature
co2
ppm
IDA ICE
Amount of CO2 indoors
Treturn
K
IDA ICE
Return temperature from the radiatior
Table 6.3: Known parameters of the Dymola model
Known parameter
Unit
Source
Description
TairInit
◦C
School data
Initial indoor air temperature
shgc
­
School data
Solar heat gain coefficient
CO2Init
ppm
School data
Initial amount of CO2 indoors
CO2n
ppm
School data
CO2 concentration at neutreal level
CO2pp
m3/h
Estimated
CO2 concentration per person
maxVent
m3/h
School data
Maximum ventilation flow rate
Vi
m3
School data
Volume of the classroom
Vinf
m3/h
Estimated
Infiltration rate
T_a_nominal
K
School data
Supply temperature at maximum power
T_b_nominal
K
School data
Return temperature at maximum power
maxHeat
W
School data
Maximum power
cp_nominal
J/kgK
IDA ICE
Specific heat capacity of water
m_flow_nominal
kg/s
IDA ICE
Mass flow rate at maximum power
the zone internal thermal mass factor (imass) are depicted in equation 6.3 and were used
to estimate the heat capacity of the indoor air of the classroom and the average heat
46
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:55==
capacity of the internal elements (walls, floors, etc.), respectively. The initial guess value
of the zone thermal mass factor was assumed to be around 5. The heat capacity of the
internal elements can also be calculated with the equation 6.4, which was used to estimate
the initial value of the zone internal thermal mass factor. An element usually consists of
a few layers that have different thermal capacities. Hence, equation 6.4 was modified so
as to estimate the thermal capacity of the building’s element considering all the different
layers existing in the element.
Rtotal =
n
∑
i=1
di
λi·Ai
(6.2)
Where:
di is the thickness of the material n in m,
λi is the thermal conductivity of the material n in W/mK and
Ai is the area of the material n in m2.
Cair = tmass·ρ·cp·V i
Cint = imass·ρ·cp·V i
(6.3)
Where:
ρ is the density of the air in kg/m3,
cp is the specific heat capacity of air in J/kgK and
Vi is the volume of the classroom in m3.
Cint =
n
∑
i=1
ρi·cpi·Vi
(6.4)
Table 6.4: Unknown parameters of the Dymola model
Unknown
Unit
Description
Assumed value
Minimum
Maximum
Rwall
K/W
Resistance of
the external
wall
0.61
0.01
5
RInt
K/W
Resistance of
the internal
elements
0.04
0.001
5
occheff
­
Occupant heat
generation
effectiveness
1
0.01
1
tmass
­
Zone thermal
mass factor
5
0.01
20
imass
­
Zone internal
thermal mass
factor
14
0.01
30
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
47
==PAGE:56==
The selected training period was the first two weeks of February 2021. The choice of this
period was based on the fact that it is in the winter season and heating of the indoor space
is required. The algorithm used for the parameter estimation is MODESTGA, which is a
genetic algorithm [38]. Furthermore, the number of generations was defined to be 100.
Moreover, the population and the tournament size were 60 and 7, respectively. The abso­
lute tolerance was defined to be 0.001. Lastly, 4 CPU cores were used for the estimation
of the parameters with ModestPy. The process followed for the parameter estimation was
iterative. The initial assumed values shown in table 6.4 were replaced with the new es­
timated ones and the parameter estimation was repeated. The iterative process ended
when the resulting values had insignificant differences in comparison to the previous ones.
ModestPy is not only used for the estimation of the unknown parameters but also for the
validation of the outputs of the Dymola model. This means that the values for the indoor
temperature, the amount of CO2 in the classroom, and the return temperature from the
radiator were validated with ModestPy.
The initially guessed values were replaced by the new values of the unknown parameters
resulting from the parameter estimation method. The Dymola model was further modified
in order to have as outputs only the amount of Co2 and the indoor temperature. This
change in the model was made so as to repeat the parameter estimation process with
data from the sensors established in the school. Data regarding the return temperature
was not available, and for this reason, it was not one of the outputs in the new model.
Repair activities and checks performed relating to the mechanical ventilation and heating
systems resulted in several restarts of the monitoring system. Hence, it was not possible
to retrieve data for the first two weeks of February 2022. Although information registered
during 2021 was available, it was preferred to use data from 2022, during which there
were no restrictions due to COVID­19 and, thus, it was considered more accurate. Data
from the 7th to the 20th of March 2022 was used, since there was no registered data
for the first two weeks of February. In addition, data relating to outdoor temperature and
radiation was updated by receiving data for March 2022 from the weather station, which
is between Skælskør and Sorø.
In the case of the parameter estimation using data from the school, the iterative method
used for the parameter estimation with data from IDA ICE was not followed. The purpose
of replacing the data resulting from IDA ICE with the school data was to check and com­
pare the results of the parameter estimation process. The most optimal results regarding
the unknown parameters resulting from the parameter estimation with data from IDA ICE
were used as guessed values of the unknown parameters in the parameter estimation
process with the use of school data. Moreover, the same algorithm, number of gener­
ations, population and tournament size, absolute tolerance, and number of CPU cores
were used.
In the information received from the school, the valve opening relating to the supply of air
(SMI01) and the presence of the people was included. Hence, an attempt was made to
change the model in order to include this information in it. The new model is depicted in
figure 6.3. In the new model, the valve opening was an input to the model (blue arrow). So
the ventilation rate was based on the school data instead of controlling the ventilation rate
based on the amount of CO2 calculated in the model. The parameter estimation process
used for the previous case is repeated.
Taking into consideration the results from IDA ICE, it was observed that the heating de­
mand was low. This fact leads to the consideration of the possibility that the heating
demand can still be satisfied with a lower supply temperature. Thus, it was attempted to
48
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.3: The new model that has as an input the control of the valve of the ventilation
system
lower the supply temperature while keeping the mass flow rate constant at its maximum
value. The maximum value of the mass flow rate can be calculated by equation 6.5.
m =
Q
cp·(T s −T r)
(6.5)
Where:
Q is the design power of the radiator in J,
cp is the specific heat capacity of water in J/kgK,
Ts is the supplied temperature in K and
Tr is the returned temperature in K.
The controller of the valve (PI) depicted in figure 6.1 was modified in order to keep the
valve always open and the mass flow constant. In addition, a fixed value for the supply
temperature was given. The examined time period was selected to be January of 2021.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
49
==PAGE:58==
The initial value of the fixed supply temperature was 55 ◦C, which is the supply temper­
ature at maximum power according to the documentation. The pressure drop through
the valve and the radiator is not known. Hence, it was assumed that the pressure drop
through the valve and the radiator was 1 and 0 bar, respectively.
The classroom was simulated in the Dymola environment, and in order to make that pos­
sible, the classroom was inserted as a component in a new model. In the new model,
the inputs were provided. The new model is depicted in figure 6.4. The heat gains from
the occupants and the heat losses from the exhausted air, which are the major heat gains
and losses, were not considered in the new Dymola model. The model was simulated and
the results were registered. More specifically, the heating consumption was examined.
Then the process was repeated with a lower temperature by 5 ◦C, namely 50 ◦C. The
iterative process ended when the supply temperature was lowered to 35 ◦C. The heating
consumption of the classroom that was calculated with IDA ICE was used to check if it
was possible to lower the supply temperature and still satisfy the heating demand.
Figure 6.4: The model created to check the possibility of lower supplied temperature
keeping the mass flow at its maximum value
The main assumptions made for the development of the Dymola model are the following:
• the nominal pressure drop of the valve, which controls the mass flow to the radiator
at full opening, is 1 bar,
• the fixed value of the pressure of the source is 3 bar,
• the pressure drop at nominal mass flow rate of the radiator is 0 bar,
50
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:59==
• the fixed value of the pressure of the sink is 2 bar,
• The exponent for heat transfer is 1.28, which is the same as the one assumed in
IDA ICE,
• the fraction of radiant heat transfer is 0.3 and
• the fraction of nominal mass flow rate where transition to turbulent occurs is 0.3.
These assumptions are related to the heating system of the room.
6.2
Results and discussion
In the context of this subsection, the results of the parameter estimation with ModestPy us­
ing data from IDA ICE and from the sensors of the school are registered and discussed.
Furthermore, a more precise estimation of the number of occupants of the examined
classroom is made in order to improve the parameter estimation outputs. The results
of the parameter estimation are compared and their similarities and differences are dis­
cussed. Moreover, the results of lowering the supply temperature while keeping the mass
flow rate at its maximum value are illustrated.
6.2.1
Parameter estimation with data from IDA ICE
The results of the parameter estimation process with the use of ModestPy are presented
in figures 6.5 and 6.6. In figure 6.5, it is observed that the resistance of the external wall
(Rwall) is significantly decreased from 0.61 K/W to around 0.12 K/W. This is justified by
the fact that the initial guess was estimated considering only the external wall, while this
value also depends on the resistance of the roof, the external floor and the windows. In
particular, the resistance of the window is significantly lower than that of the external walls.
Furthermore, the resistance of the internal elements (Rint) is also reduced from 0.04 W/K
to almost 0.002. This means that the Rint was also overestimated by considering only the
resistance of the internal walls. The reduction of the resistance can be due to the fact that
the internal walls have windows and doors, which have lower resistance than the wall
elements. In addition, the factor indicating the occupant heat generation effectiveness
(occheff) is declined from 1 to 0.7. This indicates that either the number of people in the
class was lower than the defined one or the actual metabolic rate is lower. The values
of the zone thermal mass factor (tmass) and the zone internal mass factor (imass) are very
different from the ones initially guessed. The final values show that the air capacity of
the indoor space is much higher than the capacity of the internal elements. The total
normalized mean­square error resulting from the parameter estimation process is around
0.17.
In figure 6.6, the validation of the outputs of the Dymola model is presented. The mea­
sured value (blue color) represents the measurements taken from IDA ICE, while the other
one (orange color) represents the output of the ModestPy. It is obvious that the amount
of CO2 indoors and the operative temperature of the classroom resulting from ModestPy
is more or less the same as the one resulting from the simulation with IDA ICE. To be
more precise, the amount of CO2 rises to around 850 ppm during the occupational hours
and decreases to 400 ppm during the non­occupational time period. The only difference
is that the amount of CO2 decreases to almost 650 ppm during the lunch break according
to the outputs of the simulation with IDA ICE, while it decreases to 400 ppm according to
ModestPy. In reality, the amount of CO2 would not be reduced so drastically. Moreover,
it is observed that the indoor temperature is not rising above 22 ◦C and dropping below
20 ◦C during the weekends, according to the estimation of ModestPy (orange colour).
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.5: Parameter estimation
Figure 6.6: Validation of the outputs
This indicates that certain heat gains and heat losses are disregarded. Lastly, the return
temperature from the radiator is slightly lower than the one estimated with IDA ICE.
6.2.2
Parameter estimation with data from the sensors
The results of the parameter estimation with the use of data from the sensor are illustrated
in figures 6.7 and 6.8. In figure 6.7, it is obvious that the values of the resistance of the
external wall, the resistance of the internal elements, and the zone thermal mass factor
52
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:61==
have a small difference with the guess values. The resistance of the internal elements
is reaching its minimum value, while the zone internal thermal mass factor is reaching its
maximum value. The occupant heat generation effectiveness is declined from around 0.7
to almost 0.3. Furthermore, the new total normalized mean­square error is 0.46.
Figure 6.7: Parameter estimation
Figure 6.8: Validation of the outputs
In figure 6.8, it is observed that the amount of CO2 is mainly above 400 ppm according
to the school data. The CO2 decay is leading to a concentration of CO2 that is around
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
53
==PAGE:62==
600 ppm during the non­occupational hours, according to the school data. In addition,
it is obvious that the ventilation system is turned off after 15:00 almost every weekday
during the examined time period. In addition, the ventilation is turned off after 14:00 on
Fridays. In the first week, it is obvious that the students actually leave the room before the
ventilation system is closed on Monday, Tuesday, and Friday, while in the second week,
the students are not there after 15:00 on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. It is observed
that some of the days there are people after 15:00 in the classroom, because the CO2
concentration is increasing after 15:00. The indoor temperature fluctuation over time is
almost as expected.
Taking into consideration the rapid decrease of the CO2 concentration resulting from the
validation that is based on the model created in Dymola, it can safely concluded that the
amount of CO2 in the room is affected only by the presence of the occupants. Further­
more, the fact that the excess of CO2, which can not be exhausted by the ventilation
system after 15:00, remains in the classroom and is slowly decaying, was not considered
in the equation that estimates the CO2 in the Dymola model. This is mainly the reason that
after the occupants leave at 17:00, according to the assumption made, the concentration
of CO2 returns to 400 ppm, which is the background concentration.
The significant difference between the measured and the monitored concentration of
CO2 led to further investigation. The model developed in the Dymola environment was
changed, as depicted in figure 6.3. The number of occupants was based on some as­
sumptions, which were based on the results presented in figure 6.8. These assumptions
were the following:
• There were 28 occupants from 8:00 to 15:00 during all weekdays, with the exception
of Friday in the classroom.
• There were 28 occupants from 8:00 to 14:00 on Fridays in the classroom.
• There were ten people present from 15:00 to 17:00 on Wednesday and Thursday
of the first week and on Tuesday and Thursday of the second week.
• The occupants did not leave the room during the occupational areas.
The same methodology used for the first parameter estimation with the use of school
data was applied in this case. To be more precise, the values of the unknown parameters
resulting from the final parameter estimation with the use of data from IDA ICE were
used as guess values for this parameter estimation. Additionally, the selected algorithm,
number of generations, population and tournament size, absolute tolerance, and number
of CPU cores were the same as well.
The results are presented in figures 6.9 and 6.10. The initial values of the unknown param­
eters were the optimal values that resulted from the parameter estimation with the data
from the IDA ICE model. In figure 6.9, it is observed that the resistance of the external
wall and the resistance of the internal elements remain almost the same. The occupant
heat generation effectiveness declines to almost 0. Moreover, the zone thermal mass
factor and the zone internal thermal mass factor decreases and increases, respectively.
The total normalized mean­squared error is 0.42. It seems that the corrections based on
the occupancy aspects and the data of the valve opening led to a slight decrease of the
error.
54
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.9: Parameter estimation
Figure 6.10: Validation of the outputs
6.2.3
Comparison of the results of the two methods
The optimal values of the unknown parameters resulting from the three parameter estima­
tion processes as well as the total normalized mean­squared error (NRMS) are presented
in table 6.5. In table 6.5, Case 1 refers to the parameter estimation with the results from
IDA ICE. Case 2 and 3 refer to the parameter estimation with the sensor data before
and after the change of the occupancy, respectively. The table was created in order to
facilitate the comparison of the results of these three cases.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
55
==PAGE:64==
Taking table 6.5 into consideration, it is obvious that the final values of the parameters
Rwall, RInt and tmass are not significantly different. Moreover, the value of occheff is re­
duced by a factor of 4 and by a factor of 2 from Case 1 to Case 2 and from Case 2 to
Case 3, respectively. The imass factor is greater than 30, when data from the sensors of
the school is used for the parameter estimation. The error is increased in Cases 2 and
3 almost by a factor of 4, when compared to Case 1. It is noted that there is a small
decrease of the error after the more precise estimation of the number of occupants and
the occupancy period. To be more specific, the error is decreased from 0.46 to 0.42. It
is expected that the use of an equation that considers and estimates the CO2 decay will
minimize the total normalized mean­squared error.
Table 6.5: the estimated values of the unknown parameters and the NRMS
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Rwall
0.12
0.13
0.12
Rint
0.002
0.001
0.001
occheff
0.71
0.29
0.06
tmass
19.59
20
17.42
imass
8.81
40
32.84
NRMS
0.17
0.46
0.42
The concentration of CO2 resulting from the data obtained from IDA ICE and the data
obtained from the sensors shows that the quality of the indoor air is better if the ventila­
tion system can be activated when the amount of CO2 rises. The predicted occupancy
time period during the design phase of the building may differ from the actual one. The
measurements of the sensors illustrate that the students arrived at the school and entered
a classroom with already polluted indoor air on certain days. This was caused because
the ventilation system could not be activated after a certain hour, despite the presence of
people in the classroom.
6.2.4
Lower supplied temperature
The heating demand, which is the output of the simulation with different supplied tem­
peratures than that of 55 ◦C, is depicted in figure 6.11. The heating demand that was
provided by the simulation of the model in IDA ICE is also presented in figure 6.11. It is
repeated that the main heat gains and losses were disregarded in the simulations of the
model developed in Dymola so as to estimate the maximum heat output from the radiator
when the flow is constant.
In figure 6.11, it is obvious that the supplied temperature can be lowered to 45 ◦C and
still fulfill the heating demand in the case that the mass flow is constant. In addition, the
highest observed values are the outcome of the heating from 8:00 to 17:00 during the
weekends. If it was not assumed that the classroom was heated during the weekend, the
heating demand on Mondays would be even higher compared to that observed during the
weekends. The lower supplied temperature at maximum mass flow corresponds to lower
return temperatures, which optimizes the production of heat and increases the efficiency
of the heating system.
56
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.11: The heating demand
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:67==
7
Conclusions
In the context of this study, the thermal and energy performance of a newly built school
were investigated. The southern part of the school was modeled in IDA ICE and the results
were compared with the data registered by the sensors in the school. The model was
modified so as to check two of the main assumptions that were made while developing
the model. These two assumptions were that the occupants could open the windows
when the temperature in the room was too high (above 25 ◦C), and that the ventilation
could be activated when the concentration of CO2 exceeded the setpoint.
One of the conclusions drawn based on the results of the simulation of the model in IDA
ICE was that the users open the windows if the temperature in the classroom is too high,
causing dissatisfaction. The indoor environment was improved in the case that the venti­
lation could be activated when the amount of CO2 exceeded the setpoint during the whole
day. Furthermore, the annual energy consumption estimated in IDA ICE was significantly
lower than that measured by the meters in the school. This leads to the conclusion that
there is definitely a fault in the heating system. Moreover, the information regarding the
heat balance of the classroom that was later modelled in Dymola was very crucial and
offered an understanding of the basic heat gains and losses of the studied room. The
main heat gains and losses were, according to the simulation, the heat gains from the
occupants and the heat removed by the ventilation system. Additionally, some heat gains
and losses that had a less important effect are the heat provided by the heating system
and the losses through the envelope.
A grey box model was created after the completion of the analysis of the IDA ICE results.
The model represents a classroom in the studied school. The model was structured so as
to consider all the possible heat gains and losses that could have a great effect on the heat
balance of the classroom. The output of the model was used for parameter estimation
with ModestPy. The first parameter estimation was performed with the use of data taken
from the simulation of the IDA ICE model. The process was repeated with the use of
data provided by the sensors that are established in the school. The final values of the
unknown parameters calculated with the parameter estimation based on data from IDA
ICE were used as the initial guess values of the unknown parameters for the parameter
estimation with the use of school data.
The total normalized mean­squared error of the parameter estimation with data from IDA
ICE was smaller than the one resulting from the parameter estimation with data from
the school. This is justified by the fact that the ventilation system is closed after 15:00
according to the school data and is not providing fresh air after that time even if there
are people in the room. This leads to the conclusion that it is very difficult to predict the
occupancy of a room and that it is better to have a ventilation system that is activated
during the whole day if the setpoint is exceeded. The observation of the results also
showed that the concentration of CO2 should not be based only on the presence of people.
In the case that the people are still present and the ventilation system is closed, the CO2
produced stays trapped in the room and is slowly decaying. This was not considered in
the Dymola model.
Lastly, an attempt was made to lower the supplied temperature at maximum mass flow
and check if the heating demand was still satisfied. Thus, the model developed in Dymola
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
59
==PAGE:68==
is modified and simulated. The results led to the conclusion that it is possible to lower the
supplied temperature by 10 ◦C.
60
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:69==
8
Suggestions for future work
The aim of the development of the classroom model in the environment of Dymola with
the use of the Modelica language was to facilitate the detection of faults in the heating
and the ventilation system. It is important to provide a model that a person that does
not have specialized knowledge of the buildings’ physics or the heating and ventilation
systems can easily use. To be more precise, the system was structured in such a way
that its outputs (white arrows) are acquired from the data monitored by the sensors. It is a
fact that several non­residential buildings have sensors measuring the indoor temperature
and the amount of CO2. This registered data can be used to detect if the heating or the
ventilation system is not operating properly. The next step is to convert the Python script
that contains the FMU as an object to a Jupyter Notebook. This is necessary in order to
share the model and its information with other people.
Another fact is that solar radiation did not have a major effect on the examined project.
The high effectiveness of the shading system led to low heat gains resulting from the
solar radiation. The same does not apply in all cases. There are buildings with facades
facing the south. If a south­facing facade has windows without a shading system, then
the heat gains will be significant and they will have a great effect on the heat balance of
the corresponding rooms. For this reason, the model can be improved by considering the
orientation of the facades of the examined room.
Another improvement to the model can be the optimization of the equation estimating the
concentration of CO2. The equation, which is used to estimate the amount of CO2 in
the current model, is based on the occupancy of the room. When the occupants leave
the classroom, the CO2 rapidly returns to the setpoint. This is not the case in reality.
The amount of CO2 depends both on the occupants and the ventilation flow rate. If the
ventilation system is closed and the occupants leave the indoor space after the ventilation
system is closed, then the additional CO2 produced by the occupants will remain trapped
and slowly decay.
There was certain data that was assumed when modelling the heating system of the
school. More specifically, the pressure drop through the valve or the radiator, the mass
flow through the system, and the sizes and material of the pipes of the heating system
were unknown. Moreover, the pressure drop from the substation to the examined radiator
was also not known. It is very important to detect that there is a fault in the heating system,
but it is also very crucial to know the pressure drops of the different components and the
mass flow rate of the examined system so as to precisely detect where the fault is. The
precise calculation of the total pressure drop from the substation to the examined radiator
will increase the quality and accuracy of the results. Furthermore, the use of a white box
model to estimate the mass flow rate could give a solution in the case that there is no
available data from the sensors.
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Danish Energy Agency. Regulation and planning of district heating in Denmark.
URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/contents/material/file/regulation_and_
planning_of_district_heating_in_denmark.pdf (visited on 06/20/2022).
[2]
Henrik Gadd and Sven Werner. “Achieving low return temperatures from district
heating substations”. In: Applied Energy 136 (2014), pp. 59–67.
[3]
Claus Händel. Residential Ventilation­Needs, Trends and Expectations. URL: https:
//www.rehva.eu/rehva- journal/chapter/residential- ventilation- needs- trends- and-
expectations (visited on 06/20/2022).
[4]
Lucile Sarran et al. Grey­Box Modelling and Virtual Sensors Enabling Continuous
Commissioning of Hydronic Floor Heating. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=4027424 (visited on 02/15/2022).
[5]
Simone Buffa et al. “Advanced Control and Fault Detection Strategies for District
Heating and Cooling Systems­A Review”. In: (2021).
[6]
Nathan Zimmerman, Erik Dahlquist, and Konstantinos Kyprianidis. “Towards On­
line Fault Detection and Diagnostics in District Heating Systems”. In: Energy Pro­
cedia 105 (2017), pp. 1960–1966.
[7]
Felix Theusch et al. “Fault Detection and Condition Monitoring in District Heating
Using Smart Meter Data”. In: Proceedings of the European Conference of the PHM
Society 2021 6 (2021).
[8]
Niels Rode Kristensen, Henrik Madsen, and Sten Bay Jørgensen. “Parameter esti­
mation in stochastic grey­box models”. In: Automatica 40 (2004), pp. 225–237.
[9]
Mohd. Ehmer Khan and Farmeena Khan. “A Comparative Study of White Box, Black
Box and Grey Box Testing Techniques”. In: International Journal of Advanced Com­
puter Science and Applications 3 (2012), pp. 12–15.
[10]
James Lee. White­Box Testing: Pros and Cons. URL: https://www.seguetech.com/
white-box-testing-pros-cons/ (visited on 02/17/2022).
[11]
Yanfei Li et al. “Grey­box modeling and application for building energy simulations
­ A critical review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 146 (2021),
pp. 111–174.
[12]
Krishna Prasad. Advantages and Disadvantages of Black Box and White Box Test­
ing. URL: http://creativetesters678.blogspot.com/2008/07/advantages-and-disadvantages-
of-black.html (visited on 02/17/2022).
[13]
Peng Zhang. Industrial control system simulation routines. Elsevier, 2010.
[14]
Christian Ankerstjerne Thilker et al. “Model Predictive Control Based on Stochastic
Gre­Box Models”. In: Towards Energy and Smart Homes (2021), pp. 329–380.
[15]
Marcel Macarulla et al. “Modelling indoor air carbon dioxide concentration using
grey­box models”. In: Building and Environment 117 (2017), pp. 146–153.
[16]
DYMOLA Systems Engineering. URL: https://www.3ds.com/products- services/
catia/products/dymola/ (visited on 02/21/2022).
[17]
Modelica. URL: https://codelani.com/languages/modelica.html (visited on 02/21/2022).
[18]
Modelica Buildings Library. URL: https://simulationresearch.lbl.gov/modelica/ (vis­
ited on 02/21/2022).
[19]
Peter Nageler et al. “Co­simulation Workflow for the Dynamic Modelling and Sim­
ulation of Large­scale District Energy Systems”. In: 16th IBPSA International Con­
ference (2019).
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
63
==PAGE:72==
[20]
Xingji Yu and Laurent Georges. “Influence of Data Pre­Processing Techniques and
Data Quality for Low­Order Stochastic Grey­Box Models of Residential Buildings”.
In: BuildSIM­Nordic 2020 (2020).
[21]
Beginner’s Guide to Maximum Likelihood Estimation. URL: https://www.aptech.
com/blog/beginners-guide-to-maximum-likelihood-estimation-in-gauss/ (visited on
02/17/2022).
[22]
Srikanta Mishra and Akhil Datta­Gupta. “Distributions and Models Thereof”. In: Ap­
plied Statistical Modeling and Data Analytics (2018), pp. 31–67.
[23]
Shanshan Qin and Yuehua Wu. “General matching quantiles M­estimation”. In:
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 147 (2020).
[24]
Stephanie Glen. Parameter estimation. URL: https://www.statisticshowto.com/
parameter-estimation/ (visited on 02/18/2022).
[25]
Enrico Ghidoni. “Optimization of low­temperature heating systems using hydraulic
simulation and data analysis”. In: (2021).
[26]
Mario Padilla Carrión. “Mathematical Modelling of Building Thermal behavior as an
input to End­User Communication Interface”. In: (2021).
[27]
Hubertus Tummescheit. Introduction to FMI. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=DfludIklmJg (visited on 02/18/2022).
[28]
FMI. Tools. URL: https://fmi-standard.org/tools/ (visited on 02/18/2022).
[29]
Vijini Mallawaarachchi. Introduction to Genetic Algorithms­Including Example Code.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-genetic-algorithms-including-
example-code-e396e98d8bf3 (visited on 02/18/2022).
[30]
Pattern Search­KMP Algorithm. URL: https://www.interviewbit.com/blog/kmp-
algorithm-pattern-search/ (visited on 02/18/2022).
[31]
Stephen Nash. A survey of truncated­Newton methods. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/introduction-to-genetic-algorithms-including-example-code-e396e98d8bf3 (visited
on 02/18/2022).
[32]
Ciyou Zhu et al. “Algorithm 778: L­BFGS­B: Fortran Subroutines for Large­Scale
Bound­Constrained Optimization”. In: ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software
23 (1997), pp. 550–560.
[33]
Xin­She Yang. Engineering Mathematics with Examples and Applications. Elsevier,
2017.
[34]
Krzysztof Arendt et al. “An Open­Source Python Tool for Parameter Estimation in
Functional Mock­up units”. In: Proceedings of the 1st American Modelica Conder­
ence (2018).
[35]
RUM. Frederiksberg skole. URL: https://www.rum.as/projekter/ny-frederiksberg-
skole-rum (visited on 05/20/2022).
[36]
Frederiksberg skole. URL: https://frb-skole.aula.dk/ (visited on 05/20/2022).
[37]
Moreland City Council. Sunshading. URL: https : / / www . moreland . vic . gov . au /
globalassets/areas/esd/imap-2-1-sunshading-v3c-moreland.pdf (visited on 05/24/2022).
[38]
Krzysztof Arendt. modestga. URL: https://github.com/krzysztofarendt/modestga
(visited on 06/13/2022).
64
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:73==
A
Appendix
A.1
Floor plans showing the installed radiators
Figure A.1: The location of the radiators on the ground floor
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.2: The location of the radiators on the first floor
66
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:75==
A.2
List of radiators
Figure A.3: The list of the radiators
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
67
==PAGE:76==
A.3
Maximum ventilation air flow rate and occupancy
Table A.1: The maximum number of occupants and the maximum amount of supplied and
exhausted air
Room
Supplied air
Exhausted air
Number of people
m3/h
m3/h
­
V.0.01­V.0.02
120
120
4
V.0.03, V.0.05, V.0.09,
V.0.14­V.0.15,
V.0.20­V.0.21
112
112
0
V.0.04
948
948
31
V.0.06
1020
1020
31
V.0.07, V.0.12­V.0.13
1692
1692
77
V.0.08
0
0
0
V.0.10
39.99
39.99
0
V.0.11
947.9
947.9
31
V.0.16
947.9
947.9
31
U.1.01
951
951
31
U.1.02
951
951
31
U.1.03
951
951
31
U.1.04
951
951
31
U.1.05­U.1.07, U.1.0.13­
U.1.017
248
216
0
U.1.08
1160
1160
62
U.1.09­U.1.10, U.1.12
2728
2726
132
U.1.11
1160
1160
62
68
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:77==
A.4
Layers of the building’s elements
Table A.2: The layers of the external wall from inside to outside
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.01
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 1
0.3
0.034
20
750
Gypsum
0.007
0.22
970
1090
Table A.3: The layers of the roof from bottom to top
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.03
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 2
0.4
0.035
20
750
Gypsum
0.2
0.22
970
1090
Table A.4: The layers of the slab towards ground from top to bottom
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.017
0.22
970
1090
Concrete
0.062
1.7
2300
880
Insulation 3
0.006
0.04
20
750
Insulation 1
0.4
0.034
20
750
Table A.5: The layers of the internal wall
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.025
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 1
0.095
0.034
20
750
Gypsum
0.025
0.22
970
1090
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
69
==PAGE:78==
Table A.6: The layers of the external floor from top to bottom
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.004
0.22
970
1090
Concrete
0.095
1.7
2300
880
Insulation 3
0.006
0.04
20
750
Insulation 1
0.2
0.034
20
750
Gypsum
0.009
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 1
0.25
0.034
20
750
Gypsum
0.026
0.22
970
1090
Table A.7: The layers of the internal slab from top to bottom
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.004
0.22
970
1090
Concrete
0.095
1.7
2300
880
Insulation 3
0.006
0.04
20
750
Table A.8: The layers of the external wall (Karnap) from inside to outside
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Wood
0.021
0.14
500
2300
Wood
0.007
0.14
500
2300
Insulation 4
0.195
0.053
20
750
Air
0.006
0.11
1.2
1006
Gypsum
0.021
0.22
970
1090
70
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:79==
Table A.9: The layers of the external floor (Karnap) from top to bottom
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.024
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 4
0.195
0.053
20
750
Air
0.025
0.11
1.2
1006
Gypsum
0.006
0.22
970
1090
Table A.10: The layers of the external roof (Karnap) from top to bottom
Layer
Thickness
Thermal conductivity
Density
Specific heat
m
W/mK
kg/m3
J/kgK
Gypsum
0.075
0.22
970
1090
Insulation 1
0.1
0.034
20
750
Insulation 4
0.045
0.053
20
750
Wood
0.03
0.14
500
2300
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
71
==PAGE:80==
A.5
Facade drawings
Figure A.4: West­facing facade of the southern part of the building
72
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.5: East­facing facade of the southern part of the building
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.6: South­facing facade of the southern part of the building
74
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.7: North­facing facade of the southern part of the building
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
75
==PAGE:84==
A.6
Roof and location of the roof windows
Figure A.8: The roof and the location of the roof windows
76
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:85==
A.7
Floor plans with the location and the names of the doors
Figure A.9: The floor plan of the ground floor with the location and the names of the doors
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.10: The floor plan of the first floor with the location and the names of the doors
78
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:87==
A.8
Floor plans with the location and the names of the
windows
Figure A.11: The floor plan of the ground floor with the location and the names of the
windows
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.12: The floor plan of the first floor with the location and the names of the windows
80
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:89==
A.9
Dimensions of the external doors
Table A.11: The dimensions of the external doors of the ground floor
Name
Width
Height
m
m
U.D.023
1.01
2.30
U.D.024
1.01
2.30
U.D.025
1.01
2.30
U.D.026
1.01
2.30
U.D.027
1.01
2.30
U.D.028
1.01
2.30
U.D.029
1.01
2.30
U.DD.008
1.81
2.30
U.DD.009
1.81
2.30
U.DD.010
1.81
2.30
U.DD.011
2.01
2.30
Table A.12: The dimensions of the external doors of the first floor
Name
Width
Height
m
m
U.D.112
1.01
2.30
U.DD.103
1.81
2.30
U.DD.104
1.81
2.30
U.DD.105
1.81
2.30
U.DD.106
1.81
2.30
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
81
==PAGE:90==
A.10
Dimensions of the external windows
Table A.13: The dimensions of the openable windows of the first floor
Name
Width
Height
m
m
U.OV.124
0.75
1.55
U.OV.125
0.95
0.81
U.OV.126
0.75
1.55
U.OV.127
0.75
1.55
U.OV.128
0.75
1.55
U.OV.129
0.75
1.55
U.OV.130
0.75
1.55
U.OV.131
0.95
0.81
U.OV.132
0.75
1.55
U.OV.133
0.75
1.55
U.OV.134
0.75
1.55
U.OV.135
0.95
0.81
U.OV.136
0.75
1.55
U.OV.137
0.75
1.55
U.OV.138
0.75
1.55
U.OV.139
0.95
1.55
U.OV.140
O.75
1.55
U.OV.141
O.75
1.55
U.OV.142
O.75
1.55
U.OV.143
O.75
1.55
U.OV.144
O.75
1.55
U.OV.145
O.95
0.81
U.OV.146
O.75
1.55
U.OV.147
O.75
1.55
82
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
==PAGE:91==
Table A.14: The dimensions of the fixed windows of the first floor
Name
Width
Height
m
m
U.FV.128
1.05
1.55
U.FV.129
0.95
1.80
U.FV.130
0.95
1.00
U.FV.131
1.05
1.55
U.FV.132
1.05
1.55
U.FV.133
1.05
1.55
U.FV.134
1.05
1.55
U.FV.135
0.95
1.00
U.FV.136
0.95
1.80
U.FV.137
1.05
1.55
U.FV.138
0.95
1.00
U.FV.139
0.95
1.80
U.FV.140
1.05
1.55
U.FV.141
1.05
1.55
U.FV.142
1.05
1.55
U.FV.143
1.05
1.55
U.FV.144
0.95
1.00
U.FV.145
0.95
1.80
U.FV.146
1.05
1.55
U.FV.147
1.05
1.55
U.FV.148
1.05
1.55
U.FV.149
0.95
1.80
U.FV.151
0.95
1.05
U.FV.152
1.05
1.55
Digital twins of building services using Modelica and sensor data
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
