==PAGE:1==
MasSpec­BERT:
Disease
prediction
from
plasma proteomics using Natural Language
Processing
Master Thesis
DTU Health technology
Department of Bioinformatics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Lan­
guage Processing
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Enric Cristòbal Cóppulo
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Bioinformatics, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the The Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Protein Research, at Simon Rasmussen’s group, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, probability
theory and machine learning.
Enric Cristòbal Cóppulo ­ s202562
Signature
Date
ii
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
24th June 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The incidence rates of ALD (Alcohol­related Liver Disease) are rising, and it has already
become the leading indication for liver transplantation. The slow and asymptomatic dis­
ease progression, and the invasive nature of liver biopsy, make the diagnosis of ALD at
an early stage very challenging. Therefore, there is a need for non­invasive diagnostic
strategies. These strategies are primarily based on the liver’s significant effect on the
plasma proteome.
Mass spectrometry (MS)­based proteomics excels in identifying and quantifying protein
presence in biological and clinical samples. Furthermore, previous studies have shown
promising results in analyzing MS data for chronic liver disease detection. Nevertheless,
current pipelines are very dependent on expert curation and other present limitations.
Here, we propose using the BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans­
formers) model to process raw MS data for ALD prediction. The innovative approach
aims to remove the current elaborate data processing pipelines. As a result of this project,
MasSpec­BERT has been developed, a software tool implementing the whole workflow
for applying the BERT model to raw MS data. Although still far from satisfactory, the find­
ing of promising results during this project validates further research in the field facilitated
by this new tool. Moreover, we also believe this software could, in the future, be applied
to any disease related to the plasma proteome
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Alcohol Liver Disease (ALD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Mass spectrometry data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
AI and Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Origins of BERT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Materials and methods
30
2.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.2
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.3
BERT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
2.4
Code: MasSpec­BERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3
Results
52
3.1
BERT train
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2
BERT fine­tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4
Discussion
64
4.1
BERT performance on raw MS data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.2
Computing limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5
Conclusion
69
5.1
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A appendix
77
A.1 Peak filter effect on sequence length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 BERT train loss figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
A.3 Informative scan detection after BERT training for group differentiation . . . 85
A.4 Dimensionality reduction of BERT embeddings to 2D space . . . . . . . . . 88
A.5 Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
iv
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Simplest structure of an ANN with two hidden layers. Information will al­
ways flow from input layer where data is fed to the model until it reached
the output layer, that can be of variable length.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Visualization of the training procedure for deep learning methods. a) rep­
resents the 3D visualitzation of the loss function in the parameter space
(from [35]). b) represents the weight optimization process for one weigth
in 2D.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.3
Simple visualization of RNN with the folded (left) and unfolded (right) rep­
resentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Simple representation of BiRNN architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.5
Evolution from RNN models to LSTM cells. On the right, all processes with
the forget, input and output gates are shown. From [46] . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.6
Different architectures of RNNs. From [47]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.7
One­to­One simple relation Catalan­English translation. . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.8
Complex relation Catalan­English translation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.9
Foundation of the attention mechanism. Figure from [51]. . . . . . . . . . . 17
1.10 Attention weights matrix on machine translation from English to French in
the original paper where attention mechanism was applied [50]. . . . . . . . 19
1.11 Attention weights matrix on machine translation from Catalan to English for
our own example.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
1.12 The Transformer­model architecture. From [54].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
1.13 Detailed representation of Scaled Dot­Product Attention (left) and Multi­
Head Attention (right). From [54]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
1.14 Exemplification of architecture for the BERT training in MasSpec­BERT. . . 28
1.15 Exemplification of architecture for the BERT fine­tuning in MasSpec­BERT.
29
2.1
Class distribution for the different features available for classification within
the GALA dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2
Distribution of number of scans per sample in the GALA dataset. . . . . . . 32
2.3
Example of MS1 mass spectrum with few peaks from the data used in this
project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.4
Example of a noisy MS1 mass spectrum from the data used in this project.
34
2.5
Variational Autoencoder representation for 2D matrix input. In this image,
encoder and decoder consist in a FFNN, but the concept could also be
applied with CNN architecture. Adapted from [62]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.6
Schematic representation of CNN AlexNet architecture as defined From [63]. 38
2.7
Worflow within MasSpec­BERT from the GALA dataset to the obtainment
of results for each part.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.1
Training and validation loss for main BERT model trained. . . . . . . . . . . 54
3.2
Overfitting model token guess in unseen data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.3
Overfitting model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in
unseen dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.4
Main model token guess in unseen data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.5
Main model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in un­
seen dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
v
==PAGE:8==
3.6
BERT half model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in
unseen dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3.7
Mean of embeddings over healthy individuals and individuals with ALD for
the first 10 highest peaks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
3.8
Difference of the mean of embeddings between healthy individuals and
individuals with ALD for the first token, or highest peak.
. . . . . . . . . . . 60
3.9
Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most in­
formative scans during the fine­tuning phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.10 Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most in­
formative scans during the fine­tuning phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.11 Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most in­
formative scans during the fine­tuning phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
3.12 Confusion matrix for the binary classification of samples in healthy individ­
uals and individuals with ALD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
vi
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
1.1
Original BERT model parameters as defined in [59]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
1.2
Hyperparameters for the training of BERT models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1
Caption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.2
Language parameters and data size for the main BERT model training in
the project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.1
Batch running times for different parameter combinations of BERT model
in Computerome with NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU card.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2
Total running times for MasSpec­BERT in Computerome for BERT small
with vocabulary size of 10000 and peak filter of 10%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In the recent years there has been a big increase in incidence rates of chronic liver dis­
eases among the population. The slow and asymptomatic progression of many liver dis­
eases, and the invasive nature of liver biopsy, make the diagnosis at an early stage very
challenging. This pushed the need for noninvasive diagnostic strategies.
As a secretory organ, the liver is greatly involved in the secretion of blood plasma pro­
teins. Therefore, the malfunctioning of the liver is likely to affect the plasma proteome.
Mass spectrometry (MS)­based proteomics is the most widely used technique for plasma
proteome analysis in biological and clinical samples. But current pipelines require ex­
pert knowledge and involvement along the way, and have limited capacity for detecting
low­abundant proteins that are potential novel disease biomarkers.
The application of Artificial Intelligence in a wide variety of fields has exploded in the
recent years. Deep learning models are able to process raw data and find informative
features for a variety of tasks. A prominent field that has experienced great achievements
lately is the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). In short, NLP is based on the
understanding of the grammar and context of natural language, such as English. The most
widely­known applications of NLP are language translation, chatbots and email filters for
spam. The foundation of these models is found in the processing of sequential data, such
as the words in natural language. Raw MS data is a specific type of sequential data,
and can be transformed to fit this ”language” appearance required for NLP. Thus, in this
project a BERT model, a very recent NLP model created by Google, will be developed
to process raw MS data. MasSpec­BERT, the software tool resulting from this project,
aims to transform mass spectra to machine­readable data format and extract disease­
relevant information directly from raw MS data. Skipping this way the middle steps of
protein identification and protein quantification
1.1
Alcohol Liver Disease (ALD)
The incidence of chronic liver diseases in the population has been a severe healthcare
problem in recent years. The liver is a central secretory organ performing a wide range
of essential biological functions. Since all the blood leaving the stomach and intestines
passes through the liver, its main functions involve detoxification of the organism and reg­
ulation of metabolism. The liver regulates most chemical levels in the blood, balancing and
producing different metabolites and carrying away waste products. So far, no alternative
can compensate for the long­term absence of liver functions. Although some functions
can be handled by liver dialysis in the short­term, liver transplantation is currently the only
option when liver failure happens.
In most types of chronic liver disease, fibrosis occurs, which is a pathological wound
healing process leading to the formation of excessive amounts of scar tissue. Advanced
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
1
==PAGE:12==
liver fibrosis can ultimately result in cirrhosis or liver failure, where the scar tissue prevents
the liver from working correctly, ultimately leading to life­threatening complications.
1.1.1
Detection methods for liver abnormalities
A biopsy is the standard procedure for diagnoses and severity staging of liver fibrosis. This
invasive procedure can lead to severe complications such as intrahepatic bleeding. Fur­
thermore, liver biopsy is associated with inter­observer variability and sampling bias, due
to the limited sample size given the potential heterogeneous spatial distribution of liver fi­
brosis [1, 2]. Such an aggressive procedure renders liver biopsy unsuitable for population
screening purpose or repeated measurements to assess disease progression. Therefore,
to improve liver­related healthcare, the field urgently needs non­invasive techniques for
diagnosing these conditions at an early stage.
To overcome invasive procedures, in this project, we focus on the involvement of the liver
in the secretion of blood plasma proteins. Given the secretory nature of the liver, it is likely
that the plasma proteome can reflect and help screen liver disease [1, 3, 4]. The impor­
tance of plasma proteomics concerning liver disease is evident in the numerous proteomic
biomarkers currently used. In addition, a recent study shows the systematic relation be­
tween molecular changes in the malfunctioning liver at the RNA level to modifications in
both the liver and plasma protein levels [5].
If there is a technique that excels in the analysis of proteins present in biological and
clinical samples systematically, it is mass spectrometry (MS)­based proteomics. This
analytical technique has recently been experiencing continuous innovations in all aspects
of the technological workflow and has greatly extended its use in biomedical and clinical
research.
One of the main reasons for this is its potential for the unbiased disease­related biomarker
discovery and study of disease mechanisms. Amongst other things, it enables a high
specificity in identifying and quantifying hundreds to thousands of proteins present in bi­
ological or clinical samples. [6]. This technique will be explained in more detail in 1.2.
1.1.2
Liver diseases and mass­spec biomarkers
Non­alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and alcohol­related liver disease (ALD) are two
of the most common chronic liver diseases. Numerous proteomics studies have been
performed to study NAFLD, and recently ALD.
There have been sustained research efforts over the past decade focusing on the identi­
fication of relevant candidate proteomic biomarkers for NAFLD using this MS­based pro­
teomics [5], and now for ALD, too. However, the currently existing non­invasive biomark­
ers have limited accuracy in the early stages of the disease. This limitation hinders the
opportunity to prevent further disease development by early detection and intervention.
1.1.3
ALD
ALD (Alcoholic Liver Disease) is a chronic liver disease driven by harmful drinking of
alcohol. When harmful drinking becomes chronic, it frequently leads to the replacement of
2
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:13==
healthy tissue by scar tissue, known as cirrhosis, making the liver permanently damaged.
As of May 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) reports that “3 million deaths
every year result from harmful use of alcohol. And this represents 5.3% of all deaths
worldwide”. 44.4% of these alcohol­related deaths are caused by liver cirrhosis. A number
that increases to 61.6% when only considering Europe. [7]. ALD is one of the most
common diseases leading to liver­related death and has become the leading cause of
liver transplantation. [8, 9, 10].
In a high proportion of patients, progression of ALD is very slow and asymptomatic. As
the disease advances, different types of histological lesions drive progressive fibrosis. As
ALD patients do not express any clinical symptoms or abnormalities, with current meth­
ods, approximately 75% of the diagnoses are done when decompensated cirrhosis has
occurred, by when it is too late for pharmaceutical treatment of alcohol use disorders [11].
Therefore, a procedure that can aid early detection of abnormalities would enable to slow
or prevent disease progression.
Considering the lack of research in the field, which has a very high potential, a recent study
analyzed paired liver and plasma samples in a cohort of ALD using MS­based proteomics.
This study identified biomarker panels that may allow easy and minimally invasive screen­
ing of patients with risk characteristics. They hypothesized that “Characterization of liver
and plasma proteome dynamics across the full spectrum of disease could provide new
biological insights into disease mechanisms and provide insights into new therapeutic
options.” [4].
The specifics of the study will be specified later in Section 2 as the same plasma pro­
teomics and clinical data will be used in this project. However, the discovery made in
their study that “both liver and plasma proteomes undergo extensive remodelling during
ALD” [4], shows the capacity of MS­based proteomics to infer the presence of ALD.
1.2
Mass spectrometry data
Proteins are known to be useful for biomarker discovery since they tend to be both the
effectors of disease and the targets of treatments. MS­based proteomics has enabled
quantifying tens of thousands of different proteins in a biological or clinical sample in a
single assay. [12, 13].
Although mass spectrometry is a very old and studied technique that has been around
since the beginning of the 20th century, it has not always been possible to use this tech­
nique for proteome analysis.
Mass spectrometry is a technology that measures the mass­over­charge ratio (m/z) of the
analytes present in a sample. The concept is that when analytes are converted into ions,
these ions go through an electromagnetic field, which applies a force 1 acting on them
differently depending on their mass and charge (shown in Equations 1.1 and 1.2). Finally,
1Following the Lorentz force formula when applying an electromagnetic field to a point charge
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
3
==PAGE:14==
a detector measures the m/z of all the ions present and records their signal.
⃗F = Q( ⃗E + ⃗v × ⃗B)
(1.1)
(m/Q)⃗a = ⃗E + ⃗v × ⃗B
(1.2)
This process produces what is known as a mass spectrum. The abundance of each ion
is shown as the height of the peak in that ion’s unique mass­over­charge ratio. With mass
spectrum it is possible to determine the structure and chemical properties of the molecules
analyzed and amino acid sequence in the case of a peptide or protein.
1.2.1
MS­based proteomics
The first step for this technology to work, is to convert the molecules in the sample to
gas­phase ions. This way, the ions can be transferred into a high vacuum system where
the electromagnetic field is applied. The lack of proper techniques to generate ions from
protein samples, without significant loss of their molecular integrity, prevented MS to be
applied for proteins or peptides. Nevertheless, in the 1980s this problem was solved,
allowing a proper ionization of proteins, and thus, meaning the beginning of MS­based
proteomics [14, 15].
The predominant method in the field is the so­called ‘bottom­up’ (or shotgun) proteomics.
The method consists of a protein denaturation step by detergent and high­temperature
followed by enzymatic digestion [16, 17], where the proteins are cleaved into peptides in
a site­specific manner. Afterwards, this resulting complex mixture of peptides is separated
and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to a mass spectrometer (LC­MS) online.
With the liquid chromatography, peptides elute in an increasing order of hydrophobicity
and are then ionized and analyzed by the mass spectrometer [18].
The spectra obtained from the mass spectrometer are known as MS1 scans where all
incoming ions are analyzed. Moreover, there is another type of spectrum known as tan­
dem MS/MS scans or MS2 scans. These go one step further and analyze the molecular
structure of a protein or peptide ion. The precursor protein or peptide ion is isolated by
a mass filter and dissociated into fragments, getting a new m/z and intensity relation of
the fragment ions. The fragments generated by each peptide ion are characteristic for
its amino acid sequence and constitute very specific information to locate the peptide in
a sequence database [19, 20]. That is so because protein identification relies on exper­
imental MS/MS spectra matching to theoretical MS/MS spectra database containing in
silico or experimentally generated peptide fragmentation patterns.
Identified peptides are then mapped back to proteins, which are assembled into protein
groups on the “Occam’s razor” principle in which non­unique peptides are assigned to the
protein that has the most existing evidence.
Bottom­up proteomics allows the high­throughput analysis of intact proteins or peptides
4
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:15==
according to retention time, mass­over­charge value and fragmentation patterns providing
a wide spectral data information for proteome analysis [21, 22, 23].
Although very efficient, large­scale MS­based plasma proteome analysis also presents
several challenges. The high dynamic range of protein abundance present in the plasma,
makes the detection of the low­abundant proteins challenging, as the protein concentra­
tions in the blood plasma cover 10­12 orders of magnitude [24]. In addition, the in­silico or
experimentally generated spectral libraries used for the peptide identification come with
several limitations. Many post­translational modifications (PTM) are typically not included
in the standard search due to high computational demand, unless there is a special focus
on a specific type of PTM. In addition, individual specific protein variants such as single
amino acid variants which are typically not included in the human reference proteome are
overlooked. Partly contributed by these, half of the MS2 spectra are not assigned to any
peptides. In addition, experimentally generated spectral libraries are highly dependent on
the LC­MS setup and often are resource consuming and not every laboratory is equipped
with the necessary instruments to do so.
These challenges associated with the current MS­based plasma proteomics workflow are
critical for the slow adaptation of this technique into clinical practice [25]. And that is why
there has lately been an increasing effort in the scientific community to standarize the
workflows involved in the identification and quantification of MS data.
The need for efficient data­processing methods able to extract and analyze the raw spec­
trum data, made the scientific community consider the fast­evolving field of deep learning
for the task. The objective of this step is to avoid the requirement of expert knowledge for
the curation and analysis of data within complex data processing pipelines. Instead, dif­
ferent approaches have succeeded already in demonstrating the ability of deep learning
to learn discriminative features directly from raw MS data [4, 26, 27, 28].
1.3
AI and Deep Learning
1.3.1
Field origins
It is usually agreed that the computer science field and all concepts related to Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) originate from the pioneering idea that Alan
M. Turing had in 1950 when arguing “Can machines think?” [29]. Although this famous
mathematician and computer scientist did not mention any of these concepts when pub­
lishing his work, it revolutionized the scientific community giving rise to terms such as
artificial intelligence (1956) [30], machine learning (1959) [31], and many others that kept
developing this complex field.
Artificial intelligence can be defined as the ability of machines (or computers) to perform
certain tasks that require intelligence as showed by humans. Thus, it appeared with the
aim of imitating the problem­solving skills of humans. One of its main branches is machine
learning, that focuses specifically on imitating the way humans learn by using the data
and algorithms provided to the machine. Using statistical methods, these algorithms are
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
5
==PAGE:16==
trained to improve their “learning”, or their accuracy, when making predictions from the
data provided. As the name suggests, machine learning is about “teaching a machine to
learn”, and therefore it requires for human intervention. This process is known as feature
engineering, where the set of features fed to the machine is determined and transformed
by humans. A very known example in the field is the one involving the Fisher’s Iris data
set. It consists of samples from three species of the plant Iris (Iris setosa, Iris virginica
and Iris versicolor), and the machine is asked to learn to predict the species when given
four features, being length and width of sepals and petals [32].
1.3.2
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
The next development in the field was deep learning, a sub­field of machine learning
where the feature extraction process is automated, and therefore most of the manual hu­
man intervention is not required anymore. This allows the use of unstructured datasets in
its raw form where the algorithm is capable of automatically extracting relevant features
from the input data. Often these features are even superior to those identified by hu­
mans. In addition, deep learning algorithms do not necessarily require a labeled data set,
meaning that the computer is not informed of the label for each sample, but instead when
processing the data, it is capable of distinguishing different categories just from the data
itself. This field enabled progress in more complex tasks such as autonomous vehicles,
computer vision and natural language processing.
1.3.3
Deep Learning in MS­based proteomics
The ability of deep learning models to process raw data and identify any patterns or its
most informative features, fits perfectly with the requirements for MS­based proteomics.
In its essence, MS data can be considered sequential data, meaning that the different
datapoints follow a specific order either on time, space or any other dimension. After all,
MS data is a group of peaks with different intensities for corresponding m/z ratios over the
retention time.
A field within deep learning that succeeds in the processing of sequential data is Natural
Language Processing (NLP). Most of the advances in the field have been done, as the
name indicates, for the natural language. Understanding natural language as the human
language, e.g. English or Danish. In short, NLP aims to infer the grammar and context of
a language to be able to ”understand” it. Plenty of examples can be given, the most known
are the language translation, speech reognition, etc. Once the model has a structure for
the language, further prediction tasks more related to the classical machine learning can
be done, such as spam email classification or sentiment analysis, among others.
Although high focus is in the natural language, any kind of sequential data can presumably
be also used within the NLP field. These models are able to process raw data and infer a
structure to make different kind of predictions.
Therefore, in this project, the application of the BERT model, one of the most powerful NLP
models, is applied to MS­based proteomics data. BERT is divided in two steps: the first
6
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:17==
one is known as BERT training where we will create a BERT model able to ”understand”
the language found in the MS spectra. Once the BERT model has an informative structure
from the language, the second part known as BERT tuning will in our case aim is to use
it to predict ALD disease from this type of data. In a way, we see this problem as if all
spectra talked the same language, but some of these spectra from the individuals with
ALD, are telling us that the sample presents the disease. We just need to create a model
able to understand it.
1.4
Origins of BERT
1.4.1
Towards Natural Language Processing
Both Natural Language Processing (NLP) and the BERT model (Bidirectional Encoder
Representation from Transformers) are built on top of many different revolutionary ideas
in the field of deep learning and ANNs. To build a BERT model from scratch and not treat
it as black­box for our data, it is crucial to have a great understanding of the model. And
to do that, it is required to fully understand those preceding ideas that led to its creation.
NLP can be defined as the ability of machines or computer algorithms to understand
natural language. To do so, the algorithm must have some kind of understanding of the
grammar and context of the language and thus, it is not a task that a feed­forwards neural
network (FFNN), probably the simplest architecture in deep learning, can perform.
The origins of NLP are placed with sequential models. These are models that work with
sequences, which can be defined as a list of datapoints that have a particular order, usually
in time, e.g. the weather, the price of a stock or the language itself with the ordered series
of words. Meaning that one datapoint depends on the previous ones. As most of the tasks
that have propelled the evolution of the NLP field have been focused on natural language,
most of the following examples will consider the input to be language sentences made by
words.
In the classical FFNN each input that is fed into the network is completely independent.
This means that there is no order or no awareness of context introduced to the model.
Therefore, a new type of architecture had to be defined to work with this kind of data.
The aim is then to allow the models to understand the context by incorporating these
dependencies between datapoints.
The key milestones for the creation of BERT that will be introduced are (Bi)RNNs and
LSTMs →Encoder­Decoder architecture →Attention mechanism →Transformers →
BERT model.
However, a first introduction to the beginnings of deep learning will also be added for
completeness.
ANNs
The best known application of deep learning is using artificial neural networks (ANNs),
whose architecture is inspired by the neural networks found in the biological brain [33,
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
7
==PAGE:18==
34].
ANNs can be defined as a directed, weighted graph formed by node layers. The data
fed into the input layer passes through different intermediate layers, known as hidden
layers, until it reaches the output layer. The basic structure is that each node of a layer is
connected to the nodes of the next layer using a linear transformation with an associated
weight and bias. And then a non­linear function is applied to these linear relation.
The main types of ANNs are Feed­forward Neural Networks (FFNNs), Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). For simplicity and to un­
derstand the basic concepts, the structure of the FFNN, the most common and simple
type of ANN, will be explained.
Figure 1.1: Simplest structure of an ANN with two hidden layers. Information will always
flow from input layer where data is fed to the model until it reached the output layer, that
can be of variable length.
Considering the case shown in Figure 1.1 with an input ⃗x = [x1, ..., xD] D­dimensional,
and output ⃗y = [y1, ..., yK] K dimensional, the result after the linear transformation for the
first layer would be computed as:
a(1)
j
=
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(1.3)
,where w(1)
ji and w(1)
j0 are the weights and biases in the first activation layer, respectively.
But this formula can be further simplified by including the bias into the weights vector as
a parameter, giving:
a(1)
j
=
D
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
(1.4)
where aj are known as ”activations”. And each of them is then transformed using a dif­
8
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:19==
ferentiable, nonlinear activation function h, giving the output for that node z:
z(1)
j
= h1(a(1)
j )
(1.5)
where h1 is the non­linear function in the first layer. Usually, being a sigmoid function with
a specified threshold value, that will determine whether the node is activated, passing the
data to the next layer of the network, or not.
zk = σ(ak)
(1.6)
σ(a) =
1
1 + exp(−a)
(1.7)
All these formulas can be then used to express the output of an FFNN with L layers as:
yj = hL(
K
∑
i=0
w(L)
ji z(L−1)
i
)
(1.8)
z(l)
j
= hl(
M
∑
i=0
w(l)
ji z(l−1)
i
), for l = 2, ..., L −1
(1.9)
z(1)
j
= h1(
D
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi)
(1.10)
And so the output yk is simply the result of the application of nonlinear functions to the
linear combination of the input variables x with a controlled vector w of adjustable param­
eters. To avoid going into detail with the training procedure, we will just mention the three
key steps that allow this model to learn:
• A prediction process to learn: It is needed to define a goal for the predictions of our
model to achieve from the input data.
• An error function: A function that allows the evaluation of the predictions of the
model, and that the model aims to minimize.
• An optimization process: A process to allow the model to fit better to the datapoints
by adjusting the weights to improve the predictions based on the error function.
The objective during the training process of the models in deep learning is to find the
minimum for the defined error loss function. Therefore, the different parameters are opti­
mized to get closer to the point in the parameter space where this minimum is found. As
a minimum then, it is needed to get to the point where the derivative of this differentiable
error loss function with respect to the different parameters is 0.
∇E(⃗w) = 0
(1.11)
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
9
==PAGE:20==
When one refers to gradient is simply the slope of the loss function with respect to each
parameter. And back­propagation is the differentiation algorithm for calculating these
gradients for the different weights in the neural network. Finally, the optimization of these
parameters is mostly done with the optimization algorithm. The main idea for this algo­
rithm is to stochastically move through the error function in the direction of the gradient
using the learning rate as the steps or “jump size” in the parameter space. This process
is mathematically shown in function 1.12, and can be graphically visualized in Figure 1.2.
⃗
w(τ+1) =
⃗
w(τ) −η∇E( ⃗
w(τ))
(1.12)
Figure 1.2: Visualization of the training procedure for deep learning methods. a) repre­
sents the 3D visualitzation of the loss function in the parameter space (from [35]). b)
represents the weight optimization process for one weigth in 2D.
The algorithm thus will keep repeating the evaluation and optimization process as long as
it is required, constantly updating the weights until a previously defined threshold is found
(either error value, accuracy in the prediction or time limit).
The concept of ”deep” in deep learning comes from the fact that many layers can be added
to our model, making it a “deep” network.
RNNs
The first approach in the field of deep learning towards the processing of sequential data
was Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) in 1986 [36]. The basic idea of RNNs is that the
input is passed sequentially to the neural network in a way that the output after processing
the first element (or word) of the sequence is part of the input for the second element. This
happens through the entire sequence in such a way that when the last output is obtained, it
contains information of all the inputs of the sequence that have been passed sequentially.
It has a very basic architecture similar to FFNN, but in this case there are also connections
over time, or over the different elements of the input sequence. Therefore, these models
can not only be made deep in the FFNN itself, but also in the ”time dimension”. That is why
it is usually said that RNNs have this idea of “memory” as they keep or store information
of previous inputs to generate the new outputs of the sequence.
10
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:21==
Figure 1.3: Simple visualization of RNN with the folded (left) and unfolded (right) repre­
sentation.
This architecture could be applied to long sequences of variable length thanks to a previ­
ous idea in the field of machine learning and statistical models: the sharing of parameters
across different parts of the model. This simply means that the neural network with the
same parameters will be applied to each and all the sequence elements of the input. If
this was not the case and we trained applying different parameters for each element of
the input, it would be impossible to generalize to sequence lengths not seen during the
training, as well as the fact that different positions and different sequence lengths would
have different statistical strengths.
Thus, if we had to simplify the idea of RNNs with a formula would be the following:
⃗h(t) = f(⃗h(t−1), ⃗x(t); ⃗θ)
(1.13)
where h is what is called the hidden state, x is the input at the time point t, θ are the
parameters of our network and f is a non­linear activation function. The hidden state
simply represents the information from the past that will be included to the next element
as part of the input. And the activation function f may be as simple as a sigmoid function,
or as complex as an LSTM unit, as will be introduced later.
Therefore, there is a very visible dependency between the state of the system from the
state the system had before as well as the current input of the sequence. From a prob­
abilistic point of view, an RNN is learning a probability distribution over a sequence by
being trained to predict the next element in a sequence from the information of the previ­
ous elements. And the outputs can be expressed as:
⃗yt = g(⃗ht; ⃗θ)
(1.14)
, g being another non­linear activation function.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
11
==PAGE:22==
Bidirectional RNNs
However, RNNs only capture information from the past and the present input, having a
causal nature. Nevertheless, in many cases, and especially natural language, the output
depends on the whole input sentence. Thus, it is needed to consider both past and fu­
ture when processing the present state. Some very clear examples in NLP itself are in
handwritten language [37, 38] or speech recognition [39, 40].
In these cases, by just getting the previous words, it might be very difficult to predict how
the sentence follows. But when also passing the future content of the sentence, a much
clearer idea is obtained. A very simple example could be with the following text sequence:
“I am __”. If this sentence was passed to an RNN and it was asked to predict the next
word, it would be almost impossible for the model to predict it correctly. And that is simply
because the model would not have any knowledge of context in the sentence. Whereas
if it was asked to predict the blank space in the following sentence: “I am __, I really need
some food.”, allowing the model to get context knowledge, it would clearly get a better
understanding of the whole sentence and make better predictions. This also has had a
great impact in the field of Bioinformatics for protein analysis where keeping information
of all amino acids around the currently processed amino acid improved performance in
the field [41, 42, 43].
This gave rise to Bidirectional RNNs [44] (1997), that as the name suggests is simply the
application of an RNN that moves forward through the sequence (from beginning of the
sequence to the end), as well as an RNN that moves backwards (from end to beginning).
The architecture is shown in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: Simple representation of BiRNN architecture.
RNN issues
(Bi)RNNs meant a great advance for many different fields working with sequential data,
but they presented two problems that required the development of new architectures.
12
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:23==
One of the main issues is that the input to these models can be of any length, allowing to
input a very long sequence. RNNs do not perform well when handling long sequences, as
by the time they are analyzing the end of the input, they have already forgotten the input
information processed at the beginning, a phenomenon known as short­term memory or
memory loss. This is driven by a common problem that RNNs tend to run into when the
sequence/network is too long, known as vanishing/exploding gradients.
In RNNs, due to the recurrent application of the same network to the different inputs, the
multiplicative gradients propagated over many steps of the sequence tend to vanish or
explode depending on whether the value of the weights is lower than 1 or higher than 1,
respectively. As shown in the following formulas, the recurrent application of the same
network, makes that the last element to be expressed as a multiplicative application of
the network on the first element.
x(n) = W nx(0)
(1.15)
, where x(i) ∈RD and W ∈RDxD.
The application of the chain rule when applying backpropagation has the same effect on
the gradients in the opposite direction, And when the gradient is too small, the updating
of the weight parameters stops, specially at the beginning of the network. Meaning that
the algorithm is no longer able to learn.
On the other hand, exploding gradients occur when the gradient is too large, creating an
unstable model.
W nx(0) →



0
; W < 1
∞
; W > 1
=⇒∂W nx(0)
∂W
→



0
; W < 1
∞
; W > 1
(1.16)
The vanishing gradients, which is usually the case for most RNNs make these models
unable to learn the long­range dependencies across time steps. Earlier elements in the
sequence will not have a high involvement in the model, even though they play a crucial
role to the context.
Moreover, the other main problem of RNNs is that they are very slow to train since they
require their input to be sequentially processed by the model. This sequential nature is
limiting the capacity to parallelize, and therefore it is not possible to speed them up by
applying GPU technology.
LSTM
The solution to address the first problem regarding the vanishing and exploding gradients
was found by using Leaky Recurrent units. This simply means that a constant “alpha”
was added to regulate the amount of information that is remembered at every step, by
weighting the connection from one time­step to the other. This later transformed into the
Gated Recurrent Networks, where the “alpha” value became a new parameter that was
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
13
==PAGE:24==
changing differently at each time­step. This new way of processing the sequence was
allowing the model to predict what to remember and what to forget by using the alpha
parameter acting as a gate. From this type of models, LSTM (Long Short­Term Memory)
[45] (1997) is the most used Gated Neural Network.
In short, LSTM shares the same structure as the RNNs, but changes the classical neural
network that combines the previous hidden state and the current input, for the LSTM cell.
Thus, now each LSTM cell will not only return the hidden state for each input element
(known as short­term memory), but also the cell state (known as long­term memory) where
all the information from the whole sentence is flowing. This LSTM cell consists of three
parts, known as gates, that decide which relevant information goes through the model:
• Forget gate: Determines what information is to be remembered or can be forgot­
ten. It outputs a value between 0 and 1 where 0 means that information is to be
completely forgotten and 1 all information is to be kept.
• Input gate: Where it gets new information from the current input and decides which
information is to be stored in the cell state.
• Output gate: Passing the updated information to the next timestamps, again de­
ciding what information is in the output, or the hidden state for this timestamp.
That is why with this cell state vector, each LSTM cell can decide to read information from
it, write new information to it, or completely reset the cell.
Figure 1.5: Evolution from RNN models to LSTM cells. On the right, all processes with
the forget, input and output gates are shown. From [46]
All in all, LSTMs are an improvement of RNNs where the effect of vanishing/exploding
gradients is reduced, as these LSTM units allow the gradients to also flow unchanged.
But LSTMs do not completely remove the issue, amnd although less often, vanishing/ex­
ploding gradients can still happen for long sequences. This means that these structures
still might show a bad performance when the length of the sequence is increased. Fur­
thermore, and most importantly, as they are even more complex than the RNNs and still
need the sequential input, they are even slower to train than RNNs.
14
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:25==
Encoder­Decoder / Sequence­to­Sequence models
In RNNs and LSTMs, for each input, a hidden state is generated when processed through
the network. This hidden state can either be included as output of the model, or simply
passed to the next element of the input, keeping it as a hidden state. This is what gave
rise to the different architectures of the RNNs:
Figure 1.6: Different architectures of RNNs. From [47]
Thus, RNNs can easily map sequences to sequences whenever the alignment between
the input and output size or the required architecture of the model is fixed and known.
However, it is not clear how to apply an RNN to problems where the input and the output
sequences have different lengths with complicated and non­monotonic relationship. [48].
For example, when doing machine translation (translating from one language to another)
there is no need for the input and output to be the same length, although sometimes that
can also be the case. In addition, the relations between input words to predict output
words can also change.
For instance, when translating from English to Catalan, the following sentence would have
a direct relation word by word, shown in Figure 1.7.
Figure 1.7: One­to­One simple relation Catalan­English translation.
But in the same task and not getting a much longer sentence, the relations might get a lot
more complicated and not following the same structure at all, shown in Figure 1.8.
Figure 1.8: Complex relation Catalan­English translation.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
15
==PAGE:26==
And therefore, usually models with these tasks are found in the architecture of Encoder­
Decoder or Sequence­to­Sequence models.
The original idea behind this novel network architecture was to use a sequential network
to encode a variable length input sequence into a fixed­length vector representation. This
vector is obtained after processing the whole input sequentially and keeping the last hid­
den state as the so­called summary vector ⃗c. This vector ⃗c will contain all the input infor­
mation into a reduced dimensionality space. This new reduced space is usually referred
to latent space and the idea is that similar data entries, should be placed close to each
other by the encoder.
On the other hand, the decoder would be another network to decode this summary vector
of fixed length into a variable­length sequence again as output. This process is done by
predicting the output sequence using the previous hidden state from the output sequence,
the previous output element, and also the context vector from the encoder. So now, the
hidden state for each output element will be defined as:
⃗h(t) = f(⃗h(t−1), y(t−1),⃗c)
(1.17)
And the conditional distribution for the next element is
p(yt|yt−1, ..., y1,⃗c) = g(⃗h(t), y(t−1),⃗c)
(1.18)
, where f and g are again activation functions.
Therefore, the decoder defines a probability over the whole translation y by decomposing
the joint probability into ordered conditionals:
p(⃗y) =
T
∏
t=1
p(yt|yt−1, ..., y1,⃗c)
(1.19)
This idea was firstly proposed in 2014 by two works published very close to each other.
The first time this idea was proposed with the simplest RNN architecture with an spe­
cialized hidden activation function resembling LSTM cells, it was called encoder­decoder
[49]. While the second work presented shortly after using LSTMs called the architecture
sequence­to­sequence models [48].
These two architectures broke the state­of­the art in the field of machine translation, being
the sequence­to­sequence model a bit better with the application of LSTMs.
However, the choice of the dimensionality of this latent space where all our data needs
to be compressed was quickly realized as a potential issue of this architecture. If the
dimension of the output of the encoder, or the final hidden state, is forced to be very low
to summarize the long sequence, this might lead to a big loss of information. Therefore,
when asking the decoder to decode the information from this single vector containing a
16
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:27==
lossy compression of our encoded input, it performs poorly.
Attention
The encoder­decoder architecture still showed a poor performance when the length of the
input sequence was increased.
The solution to overcome the processing of long sentences was found by including long­
term relationships between the input elements, meaning that during the decoding, all the
inputs were considered equally. This concept was introduced in 2014 for machine trans­
lation and was referred to attention[50]. This concept completely changed the view of
NLP and sequence models.
The original approach kept the previous idea of using an RNN (a BiRNN in this case) to
encode the different inputs into the hidden states. But in this case, it was not forced to
pack all the sentence information into a fixed­length vector, but all the sequence of hidden
states was kept as they would all be later used by the decoder.
Figure 1.9: Foundation of the attention mechanism. Figure from [51].
To keep the proper notation from the original paper, we will refer to these hidden states
as annotations, that will be defined as hj. The simple reason for that is that as a BiRNN is
applied, the hidden states are composed by the concatenation of forward and backward
hidden states.
hj = [ ⃗hT
j ,
⃗
hT
j ]
(1.20)
And now, it is important to see that our conditional probability for the output given the
previous outputs and the whole input is defined by:
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
17
==PAGE:28==
p(yi|yi−1, ..., y1, ⃗x) = g(yi−1, si, ci)
(1.21)
where si is the hidden state from the current output, that comes defined by
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci)
(1.22)
And the relevant thing to notice here is that now the probability for each target vector is
conditioned on a distinct context vector ci.
This context vector depends on the sequence of hidden states or annotations in a way
that each annotation will be weighted for each time step and position by a new set of
parameters αij. And then the context vector is computed as a weighted sum of these
hidden states hi:
ci =
Tx
∑
j=1
αijhj
(1.23)
where the weight αij of each annotation hj is computed by
αij =
exp(eij)
∑Tx
k=1 exp(eik)
(1.24)
where
eij = a(si−1, hj)
(1.25)
Is what they called “alignment model”, which scores how well the inputs around a position
j and the output at position i match.
These so­called attention weights are modeled by a feedforward neural network a, jointly
trained with all the other components. Therefore, our model is also learning from our
inputs where the relevant information is found in the different relations of the inputs.
So the approach can be understood as the fact that αij is the probability that a target
word yi is translated from an input word xj, or the importance that the annotation hj for
that input with respect to the previous hidden state in the output, si−1 has in deciding the
next state si and therefore predicting the output yi. And at each step this is done for all the
words in the input, meaning that the context vector ci contains the expected annotation
over all the annotations from the input with the different probabilities αi,j.
All in all, what this model is doing is giving to the decoder not just the hidden states of
each input element/word, but also the relevance or attention that should be paid to each of
all the input elements for the prediction of the next output. Besides, this solves the issue
of forcing the encoder to pack all the information from the input in a fixed­length vector.
Instead, when applying attention, the information is stored in the sequence of annotations,
and it is the decoder that selectively retrieves the data from the inputs that it considers
18
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:29==
more informative for that specific output.
Therefore, attention improved even more the issue of long­term memory loss as all inputs
are always considered for the predictions. Also, the definition weights allowed to visualize
which words from the input the model was paying attention to when predicting each word
on the translation output. Giving as a result very visual figures as the ones shown below:
Figure 1.10: Attention weights matrix on machine translation from English to French in
the original paper where attention mechanism was applied [50].
Therefore, with attention, the example used before for translation from English to Catalan
would look very clear for the direct relations (left matrix), but would start detecting complex
relations on the other example (right matrix)2.
Figure 1.11: Attention weights matrix on machine translation from Catalan to English for
our own example.
Embedding of words
Before going into detail with the final revolution within NLP before the BERT model, it is
important to understand how computers can process words. It is clear that computers are
2Example used to show idea behind attention concept. No computing process is behind the obtainment
of these matrices. It is clear that a perfect identity matrix as the one shown for the first example would never
be obtained.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
19
==PAGE:30==
not able to process raw words as humans do, but instead it is required to convert these
into numbers or vectors. From now on, we will refer to words as tokens.
Many different approaches were tried where tokens were treated as atomic units, meaning
by simply representing each token as an index in a defined vocabulary. But this represen­
tation had different issues such as the fact that there was no notion of similarity between
tokens, or the fact that relations between tokens of the model could lead to misunder­
standings by our model, e.g. if we represent the word telephone by the index 1 and apple
by 2, does it mean that apple is “twice” a telephone?
That is why in 2013 a novel architecture to compute vector representations of words was
introduced, currently known as Word2vec. This was obtained by training networks on
very large datasets to create these meaningful representations. Therefore, the model
maps words into a space where words similar in meaning are physically closer to each
other, using a very similar process to the encoding explained in 1.4.1. This process can
be referred as embedding, and this space where the words are represented is called
“embedding space” [52].
This is such a revolution as it was also found that a somehow new algebra could be defined
inside this new space in a way that not only similar words will tend to be close to each other,
but also simple algebraic operations can be performed on the vectors keeping sense of
the words. For instance, if the operation vector(“King”) ­ vector(“Man”) + vector(”Woman”)
is performed, it results in a vector that is closest to the vector representation of the word
Queen [53].
Transformers
The idea of attention was first applied to the existing models of RNNs or LSTMs using the
Encoder­Decoder architecture. However, a big revolution in the field of sequential models
and NLP occurred in 2017 with the appearance of Transformers. The presentation of this
new revolutionary architecture in the paper “Attention is all you need” by Google, showed
that actually there is no need to include any recurrent network such as RNNs or LSTMs
in the architecture to work with sequential data. Instead, just using the concept behind
attention is enough to understand the global dependencies between input and output.
And this finally completely fixed the problem with previous approaches having long­term
memory issues.
Moreover, a problem that has not been mentioned until now is the long training time of the
previous architectures. And Transformers were such a revolution as they also fixed this
issue thanks to a very smart idea known as positional encoding for the indexing of words.
This new procedure allowed words to be processed all simultaneously and therefore the
powerful parallelization allowed by GPUs could be used, having a huge effect on the
reduction of training time [54].
From a general point of view, the Transformer keeps using the encoder­decoder struc­
ture, but now these rely only on attention and self­attention mechanisms. Self­attention
20
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:31==
is simply the application of the attention mechanism but relating different positions of the
same sequence to itself. This concept had already been successfully used in different
language tasks few years before [55, 56, 57, 58].
Figure 1.12: The Transformer­model architecture. From [54].
Still considering the case for machine translation, these two structures have a clear sep­
aration of tasks that could be defined as:
• Encoder: What is the grammar and context of our language?
• Decoder: How do our two languages relate?
Before specifying in detail the different parts defining each structure, we will define all the
principles that play a role in this innovative and powerful architecture.
Scaled Dot­Product Attention
This is the term used for the particular attention applied in Transformers. The idea is still
the same as the original attention, which is to get the relevance of information between the
elements of two sequences, but the approach is changed. This attention function is based
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
21
==PAGE:32==
on generating three different vectors for each token in the input sentence, being the query
(or Q) vector, the key (or K) vector, and the value (or V) vector. These vectors are obtained
by the application of three independent neural networks with learnable parameters to each
token on the input sentence. Before going into detail, the scaled­dot attention formula is
shown below, and each part will be explained step by step:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
V
(1.26)
For now, let’s just consider the Q and K vectors, which in the formula are being multiplied
by the dot­product. The objective for the networks generating them is to find relevant rep­
resentations of the different words in a new abstract space, to predict relations between
the input words. And here one needs to remember the idea of embedding of words ex­
plained shortly before in section 1.4.1, where similar words are expected to be mapped
to similar positions in this new abstract space. If one had to define the objective of these
two vectors in a simplified language would be as:
• Query vector (Q vector): Generates a vector to describe the interesting properties
that this token is “looking for”.
• Key vector (K vector): Identifies the properties that characterize each token.
Therefore, what this process is doing when multiplying both is to see how similar the
directions of these two vectors are, and therefore how well the original words relate to
each other. The higher the value, the more related the two vectors are.
Besides, this is then scaled by dk, being the dimension of these two vectors. That is
because in the original paper it was “suspected that for large values of dk, the dot products
grow large in magnitude, pushing the softmax function into regions where it has extremely
small gradients.” [54]. So then taking the Q vector for each word, this process will be
repeated for each one of them, by multiplying by the key vector and thus getting the
relation for all the other words.
Therefore, the part of the formula mentioned so far:
a = softmax
(QKT
√dk
)
(1.27)
Could be considered as the attention weights, where the softmax function ensures these
values to be in the range between 0 and 1.
Finally, these attention weights are then multiplied with the V vector so the output from
this attention mechanism will be computed as a weighted sum of the values, where the
weight assigned to each value is composed by a compatibility function of the query with
the corresponding key. Again, keeping context of each word with respect to all the other
words in the sentence.
22
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:33==
And so now we have a way that allows to relate words that might be distant but have a
high relation when using the attention mechanism.
Figure 1.13: Detailed representation of Scaled Dot­Product Attention (left) and Multi­Head
Attention (right). From [54].
Multi­Head Attention
An issue with language is that it is not static and thus for every word we can have an
attention vector that captures different contextual relationships between different words in
the sentence. It was said before that while processing a word, attention enables the model
to focus on other words in the input that are closely related to that word. But to enable
it to handle more nuances about the intent and semantics of the sentence, Transformers
include multiple attention scores for each word giving rise to the multi­head attention.
Therefore, the model is projecting the different vectors a particular number of times with
different, learned linear projections, giving the Transformer greater power to encode mul­
tiple relationships and nuances for each word. Multi­head attention allows the model to
jointly attend to information from different representation subspaces at different positions.
And these are then concatenated and once again projected, resulting in the final values.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
(1.28)
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(1.29)
, where the projections are parameter matrices W Q
i
∈Rdmodel×dk, W K
i
∈Rdmodel×dk,
W V
i
∈Rdmodel×dv and W O ∈Rhdv×dmodel.
Positional Encoding
Another crucial element of this model is the procedure that allows the simultaneous pro­
cessing of all tokens in the sentence. As a sequence, it is always important to consider
the order of the tokens, as this might be crucial for the understanding of the sentence.
Before feeding it to the neural network, the Transformer adds the positional encoding into
the embedding of the words, storing the information about the word order in the data itself
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
23
==PAGE:34==
rather than the structure of the network. After training, the model it learns how to interpret
these positional encodings.
There are many choices of positional encodings, but in the Transformer it was decided to
use the sine and cosine functions with different frequencies:
PE(pos,2i) = sin(pos/100002i/dmodel)
(1.30)
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos(pos/100002i/dmodel)
(1.31)
, where pos is the position of the word in the sequence, dmodel is the length of the encoding
vector (same as the embedding vector) and i is the index value into this vector.
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers)
Google AI kept working on the Transformers architecture and in 2018 BERT was intro­
duced as a new language representation model. As the name indicates, the BERT model
solely uses the encoder part from the Transformer architecture. From its creation, this
model has dominated the NLP field and has excelled in many different language tasks
such as machine translation, text summarization and question answering [59]. The orig­
inal model of this potent architecture was trained on a word corpus of over 3.3 billion
words.
The main idea is that N different encoder blocks from the Transformer architecture will be
connected one after the other. The output embedding from one encoder, is fed into the
next one sequentially, until the last output is reached. This is similar to the idea of RNN,
but now all input tokens are processed in parallel. The objective of BERT is to get a full
understanding of the grammar and context of the language by producing very informative
embeddings for all the words in our vocabulary. Thus, it is important to understand that
the output of the BERT model is simply an embedding vector for each of the input tokens.
The BERT model architecture is dynamic and one could try with different sizes. But in the
original paper after some analysis, two optimal architectures were presented as well as
the best performing hyperparameters. Those are presented in the following tables:
Parameter
BERT base
BERT large
Number of layers (encoder blocks)
6
12
Embedding size
768
1024
Self­attention heads
6
12
Total parameters
110M
340 M
Table 1.1: Original BERT model parameters as defined in [59].
24
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:35==
Parameter
Value
Learning rate
1e­4
Adam β1
0.9
Adam β2
0.99
Dropout
0.1
Batchsize
256
Epochs
40
Activation function
GELU
Table 1.2: Hyperparameters for the training of BERT models.
For the BERT process of training some special tokens are required to be added apart from
the process of converting the words to tokens. BERT uses five special tokens: [CLS]
or classification token, [SEP] or separation token, [PAD] or padding token, [MASK] or
masking token, and [UNK] or unknown token.
• CLS and SEP token: These two are related to one of the training tasks introduced
later, but this should be seen as positional arguments. The CLS token denotes
the beginning of the sentences and aims to represent a compressed version of the
entire sentence. The SEP token denotes the ending of a sentence, or the separation
between differentiated parts in the sentence.
• PAD token: Used to maintain a uniform sentence length for each input to the model.
By definition this sentence length will be 512, shorter sentences being padded to
this length.
• MASK token: Used during the training process of the model. It acts as a placeholder
for a token that is not disclosed to the model.
• UNK token: Corresponding to all those tokens that are ”out­of­vocabulary” or ”un­
known” tokens for our model.
The special tokens are added as the first in the vocabulary, being passed to BERT model
as a numerical vector such as: [PAD] = [0], [UNK] = [1], [CLS] = [2], [SEP] = [3] and
[MASK] = [4].
The application of BERT is differentiated in two phases: BERT training and BERT fine­
tuning. During BERT training the only objective of the model is to learn informative embed­
dings for the tokens in the vocabulary. This is done in an unsupervised or semi­supervised
manner. BERT training could be understood as making the model understand the lan­
guage being used, for instance English in classic NLP applications.
While during the posterior BERT fine­tuning, task­specific data is used to fine­tune the
model to perform a specific task in a supervised manner. This second part could be
understood as, now that the model understands the language, train it to make some pre­
dictions from a more specific dataset. For instance, classify the sentiment of a movie
review as a good or a bad review. It will be seen later that for this second part, some
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
25
==PAGE:36==
extra architecture will need to be added on top of the BERT model.
BERT training
This is the first process of BERT and has as goal the training of our model to produce
these informative embeddings as good as possible. For this step to be successful, huge
datasets need to be used. Thus, huge datasets and huge models with many different
parameters, mean a very resource­demanding process. Training of BERTBASE using
the 3.3 bilion words in the word corpus, took 4 days on 4 Cloud TPUs in Pod configuration
(16 TPU chips in total) [59]. But this is also a big potential of BERT models, since this
long training step can be done by institutions with access to such demanding hardware,
and then the trained models can be shared with other users to apply to their problem with
the fine­tuning step.
BERT training is done using one unsupervised and one semi­supervised task:
Task 1: Masked Language Model (MLM):
This is the unsupervised task where some of the tokens from the input are masked ran­
domly using the [MASK] token. The goal for the model is to predict the token based on
the context around it. The final hidden vector of the BERT model, or embedding vector, is
fed into a softmax layer over all the vocabulary. In this way, the model will end up giving
a probability vector for each masked input, for this to be each of the possible tokens in
the vocabulary. This probability vector is then compared to the one­hot encoding vector
where only the correct token has a 1, and the error is backpropagated through the model.
Due to the nature of this process, a cross entropy error function is applied. Furthermore,
it is important to mention that the loss function is only calculated based on the predictions
on the masked input tokens. The ”Bidirectional” in the name of BERT comes from the fact
that this way of masking allows the model to get context from both sides of the word to
predict its content.
For the masking process, 15% of the tokens will be masked in each sentence at ran­
dom. However, this masking process is only done in the input during the training pro­
cess. Therefore, to mitigate the mismatch between the training and fine­tuning, not all
the ”masked” tokens will be replaced by a [MASK] token. The masking process follows a
specific structure that will also be exemplified using the sentence ”My house is very big.”
• 80% of the tokens will be replaced by the normal [MASK] token, i.e. ”My house is
very big” →”My house is [MASK] big.”
• 10% of the tokens will be replaced by a random token from the vocabulary, i.e. ”My
house is very big.” →”My house is cat big”
• The remaining 10% will remain unchanged, i.e. ”My house is very big” →”My house
is very big.”
This is included because ”The advantage of this procedure is that the Transformer encoder
does not know which words it will be asked to predict or which have been replaced by
26
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:37==
random words, so it is forced to keep a distributional contextual representation of every
input token.” [59]. Different masking rates were also tried during the original application
and this distribution was the best­performing.
Task 2: Next Sentence Prediction (NSP): Some downstream tasks where BERT is used,
such as Question Answering, are based on understanding relationship between two sen­
tences. Capturing these relation is not possible to be directly captured by language mod­
eling, unless some specific training task is included.
The idea here is to include two sentences in the same input, separated by the [SEP]
token, that will represent the end of the first sentence and beginning of the second one.
We will call these two sentences A and B. The information about the sentence every
token belongs to is encoded in an extra segment embedding. And this will notified to
the model by adding it to the token embedding and positional embedding. 50% of the
time during training the sentence B will be the actual next sentence following A, and will
be labeled as IsNext. While the rest of times B will just be a random sentence labeled
as NotNext. The information predicted by the model for this task will be based on the
embedding of the [CLS] token, that should predict either 1 when the sentence is actually
the next one, and 0 when not.
Here can be seen that the relevance of the [CLS] token is only found when relation be­
tween sentences is relevant. Otherwise, there are quite a few tasks that do not use this
training task, as will be our case in this project, and thus the [CLS] token can be disre­
garded.
A representation of the architecture and all the structures of the BERT model during train­
ing with different details is shown in Figure 1.14.
BERT fine­tuning
Once BERT is trained and has already achieved a great understanding of the language,
the application for a task­specific objective becomes the next step. BERT fine­tuning
is very task­specific and the approach will greatly depend on it. It can go from simple
sentiment analysis (classify movie reviews, detect mail spam, etc.), machine translation
(English to French), question answering (give an answer to the question passed to the
model), etc. Nonetheless, there are a few shared concepts among all of them that can be
introduced.
First of all, BERT fine­tuning is trained in a supervised manner. Therefore, the data used
for this should always be labeled. Secondly, BERT only outputs token embeddings, there­
fore, there is always the need for adding some layer or other architectures (FFNN, CNN,
etc.) that will be trained from scratch based on this supervised process. The input for
this new architecture will be the BERT embeddings, that can also be fed in many different
ways. As an example, some applications perform better when concatenating the last 4
hidden vectors coming from the last 4 encoders. What gives the name to this step is that
the weigths for the BERT model can also be fine­tuned to perform even better in the new
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 1.14: Exemplification of architecture for the BERT training in MasSpec­BERT.
task.
The name of fine­tuning comes from the fact that during this process, not only the weights
from the new architecture are optimized, but also the weights from inside the BERT model
as adjusted (or fine­tuned) for the model to even fit more to the specific task.
As a
metaphor, although BERT can understand English, if we ask questions about a specific
topic, with the fine­tuning part, we allow BERT to become an expert in that field. There­
fore, the idea for this method to achieve impressive results is to keep the backpropagation
through the whole model, including BERT.
One of the key advantages of BERT is this differentiation between BERT training and
BERT fine­tuning. This mainly allows to free most of the users of these models from
performing the resource­demanding process of training. The training process requires
28
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:39==
not only a huge amount of data to process, but also has a very demanding hardware
setup. Instead, when facilitating these already trained models, users just need to make a
small adaptation of the model to their problem by feeding task­specific data to it. A very
common process in the field known as transfer learning.
The same representation now for the BERT­fine­tuning step, simplifying the BERT model
as a box is shown in Figure 1.15.
Figure 1.15: Exemplification of architecture for the BERT fine­tuning in MasSpec­BERT.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
29
==PAGE:40==
2
Materials and methods
The main objective for this project is to develop a BERT model able to process raw mass
spectrometry data obtained from the plasma proteome. The aim for our MasSpec­BERT
model is to find informative signals directly from this raw data. And if it succeeds in that, we
believe it would allow the further application of classification methods for ALD prediction.
In many cases the process of the training of BERT where the model learns the structure
of the langauge is done by big institutions. However, for this case, there was no option to
obtain a pre­trained model. This is the case because, to our knowledge, no previous work
has been published for the application of the BERT model to MS­based proteomic data.
This meant that the whole pipeline involving both BERT training and BERT fine­tuning had
to be built completely from scratch. Furthermore, a process for the adaptation of the data
to make it a valid input for the model had to be constructed. Nevertheless, for this part
of the process, there was a published work in 2021 with promising results applying the
whole encoder­decoder Transformers architecture for the prediction of chemical structure
[60]. Thus, this gave us meaningful ideas of how the field had already treated this step.
All current NLP models are trained in an unsupervised manner, require of huge amounts
of data for the achievement of promising results.
2.1
Dataset
The dataset chosen for this project consists of the plasma proteomics data from 596 in­
dividuals from the Region of Southern Denmark. From these, there are two different
cohorts, one containing data for 137 that are controls, and thus healthy individuals, while
another containing data for 459 individuals with different stages of ALD, 360 of which had
biopsy­based histological assessment. All these plasma samples were analyzed using
the same MS­based proteomics workflow [4].
The two cohorts for the study population are:
• GALA­ALD (gut­and­liver axis­alcohol­related liver disease) , with n=459 individu­
als, is a diagnostic­test cohort of patients with a history of harmful drinking. They
represent asymptomatic ALD within the full spectrum of early stages of the disease,
as any individuals with known chronic liver disease and/or clear signs of decompen­
sated, late­stage disease were excluded.
• GALA­HP (gut­and­liver axis­healthy participants), a cross­sectional cohort of healthy
controls matched to GALA­ALD from the GALAXY Horizon 2020 consortium (liver­
galaxy.eu), with n=137 individuals
For the GALA­ALD cohort, liver histology assessment was done according to the NAFLD
activity­score­clinical research network (NAS­CRN) [61], which is the gold standard scor­
30
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:41==
ing system for ALD. The scoring was performed by the same pathologist, to avoid inter­
observer variability, blinded to clinical patient information.
Three histological features
were scored and staged:
• Fibrosis (F0­4): Staging the liver fibrosis according to the Kleiner score [61], being
F0, no fibrosis; F1, portal or periportal fibrosis only; F2, perisinusoidal fibrosis in
combination with portal or periportal fibrosis; F3, bridging fibrosis; and F4, cirrhosis.
• Inflammatory activity (I0­5): Obtained summing the lobular inflammation (0­3) and
the hepatocyte ballooning (0­2).
• Steatosis (S0­3): Referring to the abnormal retention of fat.
For the deep­learning­based classification, we considered significant fibrosis (≥F2), ad­
vanced fibrosis (≥F3), mild inflammatory activity (≥I2), and finally, any steatosis (≥S1).
Thus in this project, there will be 5 different binary classifications related to ALD. These
include the main classification of healthy individuals and individuals with ALD. But thanks
to the different scores and the classifications we made depending on these, we can also
compare, people with severe inflammation in the liver, people with significant fibrosis,
people with advanced fibrosis, and people with steatosis, from individuals with ALD not
showing these characteristics.
All this information is located in a csv file as a table format for each individual. From now
on, we will call individual and sample indistinguishably referring to the same concept.
For a proper behavior of classification tasks in machine learning and deep learning, it is
very important for the dataset to be balanced. That means that it is not desired for the
model to get biased simply by the fact that a specific class is over­represented in the
dataset. And actually, that was the case for our dataset, as can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Class distribution for the different features available for classification within
the GALA dataset.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
31
==PAGE:42==
To solve that, the classic over­representation from the minor class was applied, by taking
random samples of the minor class. This ensured that the same number of samples for
each class were fed through the network.
All this is metadata used for the labeling in the classification task (supervised learning)
when fine­tuning. The proper raw MS data that will be used to train our model is found in
the mass spectra.
2.1.1
Raw MS data preparation for BERT
In this project, we focus on only the MS1 scans so far, which record all peptides and their
intensity in the sample in a retention time­dependent manner. The main meaningful data
obtained from MS­based proteomics is the retention time 1, as well as the m/z ratio and
intensity for the different peaks. It is clear that MS data is sequential data, but we need
a clearly discrete data with limited length to feed to MasSpec­BERT. In other words, we
need all our spectra to ”speak” a common language, this being a list of high­resolution
mass spectral peaks.
All the mass spectra information was found in 596 pickle files, one for each patient. Each
one of these files consisted of a dataframe with a row for each scan. The number of scans
per individual was quite variable, as can be seen in Figure 2.2. This imbalance in the scan
count brought some complications for some of the computations that will be commented
later. Each row contained the retention time with the respective scan number, and the
mass­over­charge and intensity lists for all the peaks found in that spectrum. The lengths
of these lists were obviously variable between scans and between patients. Finally, for
this project, only MS1 scans were considered.
Figure 2.2: Distribution of number of scans per sample in the GALA dataset.
From a general point of view, some previous manual inspection had to be applied to this
dataset before its transformation. First of all, the proteomics data was acquired using
1Related to the hydrophobicity of the ions through the liquid chromatography process.
32
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:43==
MaxQuant.Live, a software that communicates with the mass spectrometer. Initial a few
MS1 scans (usually 10) are specifically ”designed” to estabish the communication be­
tween the software and the mass spectrometer, so that the machine is triggered to start
receiving commands from the software. Hence, these initial a few MS1 scans need to
be discarded from the study. Also, followed by each MS1 scan, there are two ”BoxCar”
scans, which is a variant of MS1 scan, designed to improve the signal of low­abundant
ions. Thse scans are also discarded from the study. And finally, scans that did not show
any peak before the m/z ratio of 900 would not be considered as this was found to be an
artefact in the machine.
The process applied for this MS data preparation was based on the idea previously found
in literature with promising results when feeding this type of data into Transformers [60].
One important feature of NLP models, is that there is a specific finite vocabulary that forms
the language of the model, e.g. all the English words. But for MS data, in many of the
scans the language would almost be a continuous R space, making the application of
BERT unfeasible. Therefore, we need to define some clear and unique tokens that will
form the vocabulary.
The variability in the nature of the spectra is shown in the two examples from the GALA
dataset in Figures 2.3 and Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.3: Example of MS1 mass spectrum with few peaks from the data used in this
project.
The process followed to discretize the data is done by applying data binning to the MS
graph. This process relies into the division of the graph in n bins, and taking the m/z ratio
and the intensity value of the peak found in that bin, if any. The vocabulary used then for
mass spectra is a series of integer numbers corresponding to the bin number where the
peaks are found. After manual inspection of spectra, these bins only needed to be placed
from the values of m/z ration of 299.9 to 1650.
One could argue that the binning process is not enough as it could run into issues with
having more than one peak in the same bin. That is why, it is required that we select a
rather high value for the number of bins, since this will clearly affect the precision of our
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 2.4: Example of a noisy MS1 mass spectrum from the data used in this project.
input data 2. Nonetheless, some scans are very noisy, meaning that they show a high
amount of peaks with a very low intensity background noise. To remove this noise and
allow the model to focus only on the most relevant peaks, ensuring also a better binning
process, an intensity­based peak filter was also applied when loading the data. The idea
behind it is to simply consider a percentage of the higher peaks in the scan 3. Removing
any kind of possible noise and only considering those peaks where most ions are found.
Here, we can already see that although the same binning process from the previous work
was applied, there is no prior guidance in the literature to decide on which way to go
for our specific type of data. That is why any idea that seemed reasonable to try, was
implemented and analyzed, considering the time­constraints.
The integration of the retention time and intensity had to follow different approaches. The
main reason for this is that again, both retention time and intensity are found in the R
space, with different properties.
Shown in Figure 2.3 and Figure 2.4, intensity values might go up to the order of 10e6,
10e7 or few even close to 10e9. Therefore, even though the intensity values, which have
a very high precision, were simplified to integers, introducing intensity would increase the
size of our vocabulary enormously. This would have a huge impact in the training time
of our model. Therefore, the found solution to indirectly include the peak intensity to our
data was to include the option to order the bin numbers by decreasing intensity. This
way, our sentences would start with the bin number for the highest peak going all the
way to the lowest one, or the last one allowed due to the sentence length. With this, we
hypothesized our model would be able to infer this ordering during training time as part of
the ”language”.
Finally, the retention time is somehow opposite, since it does not even reach the order of
100. Nevertheless, the precision on the low scale brings a new problem. Approximating
it to integers, to again avoid a huge increase in the vocabulary size, would make many
2In this project, the values of 10, 000 and 50, 000 will be used
3In this project will be 1.25%, 5% and 10%, for reasons explained later.
34
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:45==
different scans have the same retention time. And this would make the introduction of
this data to our model to be somehow useless. Therefore, the found solution was to
use the scan number (being always an integer) instead. This approach can definitely be
argued and further research would have to be done, but after all, the scan number is
somehow related to the retention time, or at least to the ordering of time dimension in our
experiments. One must consider that our vocabulary needs to be big enough to cover all
the scan numbers.
Now that all the data is ready, the inclusion of some special tokens, as any other NLP
model, was required. First of all, as mentioned in section 1.4.1, sometimes it is useful
to include a [CLS] token at the beginning of the sentence to use it for later classification
purposes. Thus, the option to include this token as the first token in the sentence was
included in our code 4 Moreover, for the inclusion of the scan number, this data would be
included at the beginning of the sentence, separated from the bin numbers by a [SEP]
token. With this we aimed for the model to infer by itself that this token in this specific po­
sition referred to the retention time. And finally the [MASK] token required for the Masked
LM (MLM) training task.
While some scans present a huge amount of peaks, others have far less. As BERT model
has typically a limited input size of 512 tokens, all sentences fed to the model must be
that long. Thus, shorter sequences will be applied a padding process by adding [PAD]
tokens at the end of the sentence until the sentence length is reached. In the case of
longer sequences exceeding this value, the extra tokens will be cropped.
All in all, when translated to the model vocabulary, either having the bins ordered or not,
the different scans will look like:
[CLS] 2361 [SEP] 1672 28012 478 42989 ... 65 [PAD] [PAD]
First, there would be the classification token if desired at the beginning. Afterwards, the
scan number (translated to 2361 in this case) would include information about the timing
of the scan, separated from the rest of the sentence by a [SEP] token. And finally the
different bin numbers would be found for that specific scan. These can be chosen to be
ordered or nor, meaning that 1672 can refer to the highest peak if ordering is done, or the
first found peak when not ordered. Finally, and for completeness on the example, [PAD]
tokens are added for the sentence to reach the required length sentence. There are some
cases where these are not necessary.
Below is attached an example of how all these parameters can be chosen in MasSpec­
BERT code.
4Not used in our approach after analysis, but kept in case needed for future applications.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
35
==PAGE:46==
1 dataset_translator
2
--num_bins 50000
#Number of bins for the binning process
3
--peak_filter 0.1
#Ratio for filtering of top peaks
4
--input_size 512
#Sentence length for the input
5
--CLS_token False
#Adding of [CLS] token beginning sentence
6
--desc_order True
#Ordering of bins by descending intensity
7
--ret_time False
#Adding retention time beginning sentence
Listing 2.1: Raw MS dataset translator to BERT input language commands
2.2
Models
Here resides the main purpose for this project, the development of a BERT model able to
process raw MS data.
The already mentioned published work on the processing of raw MS data through the
Transformer architecture (using both encoder and decoder) could only helped as a refer­
ence for the data preparation. Apart from that, two months before the end of the project
we came across the application of BERT to raw MS data using a very interesting approach
for the data feeding. But this was during the poster session of a scientific conference, and
no work of that application has been published yet for us to access it. Their approach
will be discussed later in section 4. But then although this could not be the only on­going
development of BERT for processing of raw MS data, MasSpec­BERT follows a different
system than this other on­going project, which is not focused on disease prediction, but
rather in chemical structure prediction.
The whole architecture had then to be developed from scratch. Besides, this uniqueness
makes the creation of a benchmark, or comparison with the state­of­the­art, very complex.
The application of a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) to the raw MS data was considered at
the beginning of the project. The aim of this part was for the VAE to analyze the fitness of
this architecture to this problem, and potentially act as a baseline or comparison to BERT.
Although the fitness of a VAE for the data could be discussed, an initial approach was
tried, and as such it will be shortly introduced in this project.
Before going into more detail for the two models used, there is a common procedure for
both. Both models try to get an informative representation, or embedding, of a given lower
dimensionality in a latent space. Obviously, the training procedure to achieve so is very
different for both models (different concepts, structures and even loss functions). But they
share that once they have been trained, the next objective is to be able to infer informative
signals from the embeddings to classify the inputs into the different classes.
2.2.1
Baseline model VAE
Without going into mathematical details, as this falls out of scope for this project, the VAE
could be considered as a very well developed and known model based on the Encoder­
Decoder architecture. The idea of this model is to compress our input data into a latent
space of lower dimensionality, that can then be reconstructed by using the decoder. The
36
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:47==
dimension constraint constitutes a bottleneck that forces the algorithm to summarize the
signal more efficiently. However, what VAE applies in comparison to encoders, is to force
a somehow organized latent space to ensure adequate properties of the latent represen­
tation. Data will be described in the latent space as a probability distribution, allowing the
generative nature of VAEs by sampling from the latent space.
Instead of mapping our input to a fixed vector, now VAEs have a vector for the mean and
standard deviation of the probability distribution of the latent space. And the generative
process is done by sampling from the probability distribution, introducing the stochastic
part by sampling from a normal distribution ϵ ∼N(0, 1). Then our sample z will come from
the process of doing z = µ + σϵ. This is what is known as the reparametrization trick.The
stochastic part is included in the process with the normal distribution, but there is no need
to train on that. The only part where backpropagation needs to run is on the mean and
standard deviation vectors, which are deterministic, defining the probability distribution
from which the samples are taken.
Finally, to ensure an organized probability distribution in the latent space, a new compo­
nent is added to the loss function. This component, known as KL divergence, ensures
that the probability distribution does not get too far from a normal distribution X ∼N(0, 1).
VAE also requires the input to be discretized in a way that all the inputs have the same
size. For our application and taking advantage of the already performed process of dis­
cretization, the same data transformation for BERT was used to input into VAE. Never­
theless, VAEs only accept numerical values, which means that any kind of special token
(being mainly [CLS] at the beginning of the sentence and [SEP] when including the scan
number) will not be added in this case, as it would simpy imply the repetition of the token
number for these tokens. Nonetheless, this is the case that occurs with [PAD] tokens that
get translated to token [2].
Figure 2.5: Variational Autoencoder representation for 2D matrix input. In this image,
encoder and decoder consist in a FFNN, but the concept could also be applied with CNN
architecture. Adapted from [62].
VAEs can either develop this dimensionality reduction by applying a FFNN (usually for 1D
datasets) or by applying CNNs (very useful for 2D datasets).
To quickly introduce the concept of CNNs, they were mainly introduced for the analysis of
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
37
==PAGE:48==
images. Their aim is to obtain abstract features of our images, that allow the network to
characterize these images more easily. It has been reached a status of abstraction where
specific parts of the network focus on finding edges, round shapes or many other abstract
things.
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of CNN AlexNet architecture as defined From [63].
This is done by moving a filter (or kernel) around the image and processing the data
within it. It is actually the parameters inside the kernel that are trained to produce useful
convolved features. This way the network will process all the data found in the image. Of
course, activation functions are also involved and when everything is trained, the model
creates feature maps that allow to find the location and strength of detected features in
the input. All this data is then used for further applications such as image classification
by feeding it to a FFNN. Or it can also be used to develop a dimensionality reduction of
an image.
Luckily, it is possible to arrange our data as an image, allowing the application of all these
concepts and therefore applying to our samples a VAE based on CNN architecture.
All the sample information is passed at once by treating all the scans for one sample
concatenated together, one on top of each other as an image. Each row of this image will
be a scan for the sample. And the content of this row will also be the bin number where
the peaks are found. However, in this case it will be applied without ordering the peaks.
Thus loosing this information. This way, what we are feeding to the model is a somehow
simplified vision of the scan, where we are just giving the bin numbers where the most
informative peaks are found. To ensure the input is found between 0 and 1 for the network
to process it, all scans in the input were divided by the vocabulary size .
So, once the image­shaped data is arranged for each sample, different layers of Conv2D
layer 5 are applied to our dataset. Each one of these layers are followed by a batch­
normalization, until the final feature maps are reached. Then these final representations
are fed into a linear layer, from which the mean and standard deviation of the probability
distribution will be learned, reaching the latent space. Afterwards, the opposite process
is done for the decoder to reconstruct and hopefully end up with the same ”image”.
5How a 2D convolutional layer is called
38
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:49==
In this process two different dimensionalities for the latent space were tested. First the
latent space was chosen to be 2D. It was expected this dimension to be too low for our
data to be informative enough. And that is why a higher dimension of 192 will be used.
This way it is more fair to compare with the 192D or 386D latent space from the BERT
embeddings.
For the first runnings of the training, MSE loss was applied as error function when compar­
ing the input and the output reconstructed by the decoder from the latent representation.
But since very poor results were obtained, a reference was found that the application of
logarithm to the MSE loss was recommended [64]. Furthermore, different sizes for the
kernel, stride, number of channels and learning rates were tried. Unfortunately all of them
showed a very poor performance.
2.2.2
VAE classification
Once a good VAE encoder has been trained, we have an effective network packing all
the data from each sample into a lower dimensional space. Therefore, it is very common
to use this lower dimension representation to perform classification tasks. Usually this
representation should have found some differences between the different classes, maybe
not obvious to the naked eye, but at least that a classification network is able to infer.
For that reason we applied that idea by applying a FFNN to our latent space with the
trained encoder in order to try to classify the patients based on the different scores speci­
fied before. So the idea is just to process all the data for each patient individually through
our trained encoder. Obtain the hopefully informative representation in the latent space,
and then train a new classification layer from scratch that will make this binary classifica­
tion.
As it is a binary classification, now the loss function is simply a binary cross entropy be­
tween the two classes under analysis. And this also allows the obtainment of the confusion
matrix as well as the different parameters such as precision, recall, F1 score and ROC
curve that characterize this type of classification tasks.
VAEs are in themselves a whole model where a lot of analysis should be made to reach
optimal predictions. It is important to mention that due to time contraints this process
was not possible to be fully perfected, as it is known that this could perfectly be seen as a
whole other master’s thesis. Probably a better way to introduce data into the mode should
be considered, as well as a develop a grid search for analyzing the different parameter
options, or even the loss function.
Effort was put into the development of this model and trying to get a good fit to the GALA
data. However, in front of the different complications and no improvement of the results,
the analysis of BERT was prioritized. Mainly, because VAE was just seen as a baseline
model and thus fell out of scope for this thesis. Few results of application of VAE for the
compression of data are quickly shown in Appendix A.5, as this falls out of the scope for
this project.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
39
==PAGE:50==
2.3
BERT
The development of MasSpec­BERT from scratch, involved many different decisions to
be taken as well as challenges found along the way. Here, some of the specificities for the
development will be introduced and justified. Later in the Results section 3, the analysis
for these different challenges will be presented.
To give a clear overview of the MasSpec­BERT tool, Figure 2.7 shows a workflow with
the data flow through the different steps. All boxes in the Figure represent the different
python scripts created for this tool. And although not shown to keep a simple and clear
vision, the three scripts shown at the bottom (Architectures, utils and data loader) are
constantly used in the other main scripts. This is the case because different functions are
repeatedly used along the workflow, and also the main scripts were aimed to be as simple
as possible for future users.
Figure 2.7: Worflow within MasSpec­BERT from the GALA dataset to the obtainment of
results for each part.
The name of the scripts are very representative. Starting from the beginning, Dataset
translator is in charge of converting raw MS data to our defined language, BERT train is
in charge of the training of BERT. The once the BERT model is obtained, the top branch
has the three different approaches used to analyze the performance of this model in the
understanding of the language. These will be introduced later. And BERT fine­tune is in
charge of the fine­tuning using the trained BERT model from previous step. Finally, Archi­
tectures contains all the model architectures used in the project, Utils the useful functions
used repeatedly along the different codes (training and evaluation loops, plotting, etc.),
and finally Data loader, contains the required functions for the preparation of data for the
training (masking, getting the padding masks, etc.), as well as creating the data loaders
for the model.
40
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:51==
2.3.1
BERT training
In this project, the training of BERT will be solely trained based on the LM masking task.
This task is based in the idea that random tokens of our inputs will be masked (by the
process explained in 1.4.1) and then the model will be asked to predict those from the
context learned during the training. This will give the model a great understanding of the
structure and context of the language that we have created for the scans. As if a word
from a normal sentence in English was removed, and we asked the model to predict it
based on the information around it.
There are different things to consider when training BERT using the masking task. From
the data preparation step, the sentences, one for each scan have a defined structure. But
these are not ready to be passed to our model as inputs for two reasons. BERT requires
the input to be of a fixed input size, which will usually be 512, and also masked. Thus, a
padding process is required for the shorter sentences, as well as a cropping process for
the too long sentences. And the masking of random tokens must be developed following
the process defined in [59].
The creation of our dataset will contain then 4 different tensors: input (with masked to­
kens and padding, if required), output (which is simply the original sentence padded, if
required), the padding mask, which will contain the padded positions, and the mask in­
dices, informing of which positions where masked.
So, first of all it is easy to simply pad the sentences by adding the ’[PAD]’ token at the end
of the sentence if needed until the input size is reached. These positions are not allowed
to be masked as they do not provide any information to the model. And these positions
where a [PAD] token occurs need to be saved and passed to the model, as no attention
mechanism should be applied to these when developing the training. Once we have the
sentences padded, we already have the target and the padding mask.
For the masking, the process is a bit more complex. First off, we need to know if our input
sentence has [CLS] token and/or scan number added. Because neither [CLS] token nor
[SEP] token can be used for masking. Also, it is important to know when the padding
starts, in case it does. Again, those positions are not to be considered. With that informa­
tion, it is possible to start the masking process through all the potential positions that can
be masked. From those, just the 15% will be masked, following the structure explained
before. 80% of which just by changing for [MASK] token, 10% changing for a random
value in the vocabulary and the rest left as it is.
Again, the masked positions need to be saved, as these will be the ones used for loss
calculation during the training. So basically, once our model has made their predictions,
we need to get the prediction and the real value only for the masked components.
One extra thing that realized after some overfitting (shown in Appendix A.2) was that the
dataset was too small for the amount of parameters the BERT model has. Therefore,
another parameter that was included was called ”data repetitions”. The only objective of
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
41
==PAGE:52==
this was to enlarge the dataset size by feeding into the BERT model more scans and thus
allow it to learn better the language. Repeating the sentences will not affect in any way
the training with any kind bias to the model thank to the random process used for the
masking. Thus, although we are passing the same ”sentences” or scans, different tokens
are being masked, and therefore the model keeps learning as if that was a new sentence.
Since BERT model is very big, meaning having a big amount of parameters, when using
low data repetitions (take 1 for reference), the amount of data is not enough for these
models to train without overfitting. If BERTbase has 110M parameters, out BERT small
will have around 27.5M parameters. And by making the analysis with 1 rep, if no padding
is considered 6, the same amount of masked elements was passed to the model.
A quick process through this analysis is that with 1 data repetition there are 380256 sen­
tences for the training. Considering that 90% of the time the size of these sentences is
reduced to 128, and only 15% is being masked, the model ends up 7.3M tokens masked.
Our BERT small has 27.5M parameters. This is the reason why we believe overfitting
occurs.
This made us introduce the data repetition parameter, that was defined to increase the
size of the dataset, by going through the dataset several times.
For the technicalities, all hyperparameters from the original paper were used [59]. The
learning rate is set to 1e−4, following an scheduler such that there is a learning rate warm­
up during the first 10,000 steps, where each step is equivalent to each batch. After that,
the learning rate starts a linear decrease until it reaches 0 at the end of the simulation.
Also, the optimizer used was the Adam optimizer with weight decay.
Although the official BERT has the two defined sizes introduced in section 1.4.1, to avoid
long runs or even memory issues from Computerome, smaller BERT models were used
in this project. These will be defined as BERT small, being 1/4 of the size of BERTBASE,
and BERT half, with the specific parameters shown in 2.1.
Parameter
BERT small
BERT half
Number of layers (encoder blocks)
3
6
Embedding size
192
384
Self­attention heads
3
6
Total parameters
27.5M
55M
Table 2.1: Caption
Processes to optimize training
During all our trainings, 70% of the data was used for training and 20% was used for
validation. An extra 10% of the data was always left as unseen by our model, so we could
later evaluate our model performance, by seeing how it predicted the masked inputs on
unseen scans.
6Which we know it is not the case.
42
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:53==
Even though smaller BERT models were used and the dataset size was not very big, the
first simulations the training process took a very long time and therefore some optimization
had to be performed.
After running a profiler, it was found that most of the time was used in passing the data
from the CPU to the GPU for the parallelization. It was tried to change the code so that
this step was done the less times as possible, but no significant improvement was found.
Although this step was done less times, it took more time for it to happen as more data
was being passed. Therefore it was disregarded.
Also mentioned in the original paper, to accelerate the training time, about the 90% training
is done with shorter sentences. At the beginning this was not applied, but that was a big
mistake, since the attention matrix grows following the square of the sentence length.
With this, the training time is already optimized a lot.
Another very useful application for accelerating was to change the vocabulary size due to
the change in size of the last layer after BERT to obtain the probabilities for each number
in the vocabulary. Going from 50000 to 10000 made a big difference in our model.
With the application of these two things the same simulation (20 epochs, 1 data repetition
and batchsize 16) went from around 1 week to 27 hours.
One other optimization process tried was the use of floating point reduction by the cuda
amp grad scaler. Without going into detail, this is a process very easy to apply to the code
where the floating point for the tensors is changed from a precision of 32 to 16. However,
for still unknown reasons, when doing so the weigths exploded and the training process
crashed.
Since the masking labels change for each scan, although we can use the batchsize for
processing the data through the BERT model, the calculation of the error has to be done
scan by scan considering the different masked indices.
Then, the model was trained using different language structures. An although the original
BERT paper suggests to do it for 40 epochs, we also tried different values for this due to
time­constraints but also due to findings that in our case this was too large.
Also an early stopping was applied in order to detect overfitting, as for the cases where
the datasize was too low, a quick overfitting occurred. This was placed in a way that if the
validation loss did not go lower for 5 epochs, the simulation would stop.
Below, the full parameter list required for running the BERT training part of MasSpec­
BERT is attached as how it should be specified in the command line.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
43
==PAGE:54==
1 BERT_train
2
--num_bins 50000
#Number of bins for the binning process
3
--BERT tokens 0.1
#Ratio for filtering of top peaks
4
--BERT_type BERT_small
#Size of BERT model
5
--case no_CLS_desc_no_rettime
#Tokens dataset to be used
6
--CLS_token False
#Adding of [CLS] token beginning sentence
7
--add_re_time False
#Adding retention time beginning sentence
8
--input size 512
#Sentence length for the input
9
--data_repetition 10
#Time going through the data
10
--n_epohcs 40
# Number of epochs to be trained
11
--batchsize 32
#Batchsize used
12
--limited_seq_len 128
#Shorter sentence length
13
--perc_epochs_shorter 0.9
#Ratio training time using shorter
sentence
Listing 2.2: BERT training commands
2.3.2
Dimensionality reduction BERT embedding to visualize latent space
One interesting thing that can be done with BERT embeddings once the model has been
trained, is to visualize the latent space. Obviously since we are using high dimensionality,
it is not possible to visualize the original embedding vector. However, there are plenty of
dimensionality reduction procedures that allow smart processes for reducing the dimen­
sions of vector representations to 2D and 3D, so these can be visualized, keeping the
variance in the data as much as possible. In this specific project, UMAP will be the one
used to visualize the BERT embeddings in a 2D space. For that the default parameters
found in umap.umap_ package from python will be used with the UMAP function.
2.3.3
BERT training performance analysis
Once the BERT model finishes the training process, apart from the classical train and
validation loss, there are other ways to analyze and evaluate the model performance.
This was the main focus of this project once the model was developed and some relevant
outputs were obtained.
This is a crucial step since reaching a status where the model learns to understand the
model, will greatly determine its performance in later tasks.
Masked word prediction
The easiest way to evaluate the training of the BERT model is to assess the prediction
rate of the masked words. For that purpose in mind and to keep this process as unbiased
as possible, the 10% remaining available data never seen by our model, was used to
evaluate the token prediction of the model.
This simple process made this unseen data follow the same process of masking as the
original BERT training. The output vector from the softmax layer at the end of BERT spec­
ifies the predicted token, being the one with the highest probability. Thus, this predicted
token was compared to the actual masked token to see the guessing performance of the
BERT model.
44
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:55==
After first runs, a somehow unexpected behavior of this guessing was found, as it was
seen that it was greatly biased. Meaning that many of the times, the BERT model pre­
dicted the exact same token. This is why also the list of predicted tokens by the model
was saved. Results from this analysis will be shown in section 3.
Informative scan detection
To go one step further in the analysis of the BERT model performance, a different ap­
proach was developed to see whether the model was able to find some differences in
the language between healthy individuals and individuals with ALD 7. The idea with this
approach is to go one layer of abstraction above and not just focus on the ability of the
model to predict the tokens, but its ability to find relevant features in the embeddings that
could help the further applied classification layer make accurate predictions.
For that matter, we need to dive deep in the output that is obtained from the BERT model.
Since it is wanted to compare individuals, there is a need to pass all the scans for each
sample sequentially in batches, and making the analysis of each sample individually. The
idea is to process all the information that BERT gets from one individual.
In terms of dimensionalities, each sample will have a total number of 832 scans, each of
these scans will be translated to a sentence of 512 tokens, and each of the tokens will
output a 192­dimensional vector after being processed by the BERT model. All this for
each sample, for a total number of 597 samples. Thus, it can be said that in the case of
study for this project, this would translate to a 4D matrix of size [597 x 832 x 512 x 192]
is produced. This translates to 48.827.990.016 components, or 48.8 billion. However,
again, to make the analysis unbiased, only the 10% unseen by the model will be used,
giving 4.9 billion components.
This amount makes impossible the processing of all this data and therefore, some ag­
gregating function needs to be applied. These can be many different: mean, max, mean
of specific components, etc. There is no real way of knowing the best approach and it
is mostly based on trial and error. As mentioned before, the common approach used for
biological data with promising results, is to apply the mean over the components of the
different embeddings for each sentence [42]. Meaning that all tokens are resumed into
one containing the information of all the sentence, or in our case, scan.
With this step, the amount of the output has been reduced to [597 x 840 x 192], considering
the two groups together. In reality, it would be two different 3D matrices of dumensions [#
healthy individuals x 840 x 192] and [# individuals with ALD x 840 x 192]. In both cases,
there is a 192D vector for each scan for each individual. Nonetheless, it is desired to
compare any relevant differences between groups. Thus, it is aimed to check whether the
model finds some shared characteristics within each group that help in the differentiation
of two groups. This being probably, specific scans where some proteins appear in one
that do not in the other. Hence, a further aggregation step had to be done, but now in the
7For simplicity, this analysis was only applied in the differentiation between healthy individuals and indi­
viduals with ALD, but this could easily be generalized to any other desired classification feature.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
45
==PAGE:56==
dimension of the samples for each group. So again, to consider all samples equally, the
mean for each dimension of the embeddigns for each of the scans was computed. This
way, we end up with two 3D matrices of size [840 x 192].
There is on special interest in analyzing the difference between these two matrices. This
interest being to see whether there are some scans that can be considered specially
informative, due to a general differentiation between healthy individuals and individuals
with ALD. If this information was found, it would be very useful for further tasks, not only
for the BERT fine­tuning with the classification layer, but also for the current tedious data
pipeline in use in the field. Mainly because this would mean that information from many
of the scans could be disregarded, and just focusing on some specific scans would be
enough.
Although it has been said that the common approach in the first step is to apply the mean
over all tokens, here three different approaches were done. And two of these also justify
the use of the main model with the parameters as it was done with high peak filter and
descending order. As it was mentioned, it is doubtful that just considering the main peak
for each scan, information indicating ALD presence could be found. Usually, these peaks
come from high abundant plasma proteins found in all individuals. However, what would
happen if not only the first peak was considered, but also the next 9 peaks. Could the
model find some meaningful representation if the embeddigns from the 10 main peaks
was considered? This was analyzed in this step, also applying the common approach of
the mean over all tokens, for completeness.
After all the analysis, a model with as much data as possible considering GPU’s memory
and time­constraints was trained. Considering both of these constraints a value of 20 data
repetitions was chosen, to allow the analysis of the model performance.
Since the preliminary training results did not show a clear language structure that fit best
our model, different factors drove the decision for the structure used in the main training.
First of all, it is important to remember that, although not always, it is common for the
signals showing the presence of disease to be orders of magnitude lower than the most
present proteins. Therefore, a very low peak filter such as 1.25% would potentially mean
the loss of these peaks, at least for some scans.
Furthermore, another important step to consider is the best approach to pack the infor­
mation found in the embedding. Although, the use of the full embeddings for all the 512
tokens for each sentence would be ideal from an information point of view, this is not an
scalable idea. In that sense, a very common approach shown to be successful in other
fields of NLP applied into biological data, is to apply the mean over the different com­
ponents of the tokens [42]. Meaning that with this process, the MasSpec­BERT output
would go from a 192D embedding for each of the 512 tokens, to a 192D vector for the
whole sentence. Thus, in order to avoid the introduction of lots of [PAD] tokens into our
sentences affecting the mean value, the option to apply a too low peak filter such as 1.25%
46
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:57==
was discarded.
However, higher peak filters are not the ideal approach either. Using these higher peak
filters, involves the cropping of some scans. Therefore, if no ordering with relation to the
intensity was done, there was the possibility of cropping some potential signal peaks at
higher m/z ratio values. It was decided then that the main training model would be done
with descending order of the peaks based on intensity and with a peak filter of 10%, to
ensure that very few or none of the scans included padding. Regarding the inclusion
of scan number, since its inclusion did not show any clear improvement in the analysis,
it was decided to keep the approach simple without scan number for now. And finally
a vocabulary size of 10000 tokens was chosen to make the training more time­efficient.
Thus, the main training was done with a language as follows:
Parameter
Value
CLS token
False
Descending order
True
Retention time
False
Peak filter
10%
vocabulary size
10000
Data repetitions
20
Table 2.2: Language parameters and data size for the main BERT model training in the
project.
And finally, there was another final fact that wanted to be tested and drove the decision
for one specific model for the main training. Applying the mean over all peaks, giving
the same relevance to all of them equivalently, could damage the whole idea of having
specific peaks corresponding to specific proteins, being crucial for the detection of ALD.
Sample scan analysis over time
The final approach for the analysis of the BERT training performance was to show the
evolution in time for the scans of one sample at a time along the latent space.
It is obvious that there is no option for the analysis of the original 192D latent space. Thus,
for this process, a dimensionality reduction of the latent space had to be done. For this
purpose, UMAP, a very known dimensionality reduction algorithm, was used. By default,
this algorithm reduces the dimensionality of the data to 2D, which is exactly what is needed
for our purpose. In few words, UMAP aims to keep clusters found in high­dimensional data
into a lower dimensional space. In our case means that if some scans for a sample end
up close in the latent space, this should be seen in the 2D representation.
In order to try to find some meaning to the number of neighbors, it was discussed in general
terms, as this is a very variable term, during how many scans the presence of a protein
would be spanned. This concept is known as peak width. Approximately, a common
peak width for proteins in MS­based proteomics is 15s. And the cycle time, or the time it
takes the mass­spectrometer to do a MS1 scan is of 2s. Therefore, we expect a protein
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
47
==PAGE:58==
to be present around 6­7 scans. IT is obvious that many different proteins are present at
every scan. However, the number of 7 neighbours will be used for the UMAP, to help in
the detection of main present proteins, which could be affecting our representations the
most.
2.3.4
BERT fine­tune
As the final step of MasSpec­BERT there is the fine­tuning of BERT. In general terms, for
this part the BERT model weights learned from the training have to be loaded in the model.
The difference is that now the last softmax layer going from the BERT embeddings to the
probability vector for the different tokens in the vocabulary was removed. Then, the input
for the new classifition architecture placed on top of the BERT model, would be a list of
length equal to the input size of BERT. And each element of this list is the embedding
vector for each of the tokens. These dimensionality of these vectors is determined by the
BERT embedding size selected during the training.
The main objective of this part was to allow the user the maximum flexibility possible for
the easy testing of many different options given how unknown this process is.
2.3.5
Class­parameters
The aim of this step is for the model to find informative features from the embeddings to
make different predictions related to ALD. As mentioned before, these predictions involve
the simplest one of whether an individual is healthy or has ALD, but we also aim for the
model to predict differences in the staging of the disease for the different parameters found
in the dataset (inflammation, kleiner type and steatosis). Therefore, this chacarcteristic will
also be added as part of the options for the fine­tuning for the user. This will condition the
creation of the dataset for the fine­tuning when retrieveing the metadata for the different
samples.
2.3.6
Scan or sample­level prediction
Also another thing to decide which kind of architecture should be placed on top of BERT
for developing the classification task, was if this prediction wanted to be done at the scan
or at the sample level.
What this means is that we could train our model to find relevant features within individual
scans for the predictions, or we could pass all the scans from one sample at once to the
model and therefore for the model to process all the information from that sample before
making a prediction.
For this decision it made sense to decide first whether it was desired to make predictions
of disease presence based on scan­level or base on sample­level.
2.3.7
FFNN vs CNN
In case the scan­based approach is done, the only possibility that MasSpec­BERT allows
is to use a FFNN. The user can choose the number of layers and the number of units by
the layers. The idea is that the
48
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:59==
When CNN is applied the idea is to pass all the information about the sample in a somehow
image structure where each row will be one scan. What is done is to pass the token
number as it was done for BERT.
Nevertheless, the number of scans present for each sample is not the same, some exper­
iments are longer than other, as shown in 2.1.1. This difference in scan number brings
an issue for the application of CNN, as these networks work with inputs having the same
dimension, it is not possible nor useful for the model to have a dynamic architecture.
The solution found for the discrepancies was to crop all scans to the length of the shortest
one so they had all the same size when included to the CNN architecture. This is indeed
a loss of information that should be further considered in future application. Nonetheless,
it is known that, in general, the scans at the beginning and at the end of an experiment do
not bring much information for the detection of biomarkers. Thus, we expect this approach
not to have a big effect on our results.
In the future, a better option to be considered without requiring any data cleaning before
the application of the model, would be to extend all samples to reach the maximum value
of scans found along the samples of the dataset. This would then require a masked
backpropagation for the cases where empty scans are included to avoid the last part of
the architecture to consider these last empty scans for the fitting.
Both the parameters for the architecture of the CNN and FFNN are dynamic and can be
chosen by the user when calling the command line 2.3 used when calling the BERT_finetune
code. These include kernel size, stride, number of channels for the CNN, as well as the
number of layers and units per each layer in the FFNN found after the CNN for the di­
mensionality reduction to 1 value for classification. And in the case of applying a FFNN
as classification architecture, the user is also allowed to choose the number of layers and
number of units for each of these in the command line.
2.3.8
Scan attention layer
Developing further the idea of which scans bring the relevant information for the detection
of differences between groups, the introduction of an attention layer able to detect the
most informative scans is introduced here.
Although differences can be detected between MS scans of healthy individuals and in­
dividuals with ALD, these are not apparent in all scans. It is clear, as biomarkers from
previous studies show, that the proteome changes between these two groups. But ob­
viously this is not a complete change, most of the proteins are still present in the same
amount. Therefore, it is a reality that for most of the scans, they will look the same for the
two types.
This was then the reasoning behind the idea of including an attention layer was applied
within the fine­tuning classification architecture. It is aimed with this layer to see if our
model is paying more attention to some specific scans for each individual. If there were
indeed some specific scans that help our model to correctly predict when an individual
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
49
==PAGE:60==
is healthy, we would expet the ”attention weights” for these scans for all or most healthy
patients to be relevant for our model. And the same principle would apply to those scans
that would help the model predict individuals with ALD. These two can be completely
different, and it is also perfectly reasonable to say that there is no golden scan that is
always crucial for all individuals. These variability, thus, requires the development of the
attention matrix such as it considers each scan for each patient indivdually. Obviously,
this then requires a longer training process to allow the architecture to find a structure.
This concept of attention should not be considered as complex as the ones explained
before in NLP. This is not the first time an approach like this is intended. A previous study
used a similar concept when working with protein sequences, also of variable length [65],
for immune repertoire classification.
The output of BERT after applying the mean over the embeddings over all tokens is
[#scans x embedding dimension], e.g. [#scans x 192]. It is seen that when the CNN
is selected as the classification architecture, the cropping process explained before will
ensure all individuals to have the same number of scans. Nonetheless, trying to allow the
maximum flexibility to MasSpec­BERT tool to ease the future research, it is also possible
to introduce into the architecture an attention matrix when applying a FFNN afterwards.
For each individual, there are different datapoints/scans with 192 input features to feed
to the next step of the network. All the information for each scan, for each individual
is reduced to a 192D vector. In this case, a simple attention layer based on a FFNN
could be applied before the classification network. The network will be formed by n linear
layers (chosen by the user) and n units per layer (also chosen by the user). Each one of
these layers had a SELU (Scaled Exponential Linear Unit) activation function [65]. The
way this becomes an attention layer is because once all the scans from an individual
have been processed, a softmax function will be applied after the attention layer. This
will give a weight to each of the scans present for the individual. And the embeddings
that are obtained from BERT will be multiplied by this softmax value before being fed
to the classification network. With this process, more attention (more importance within
the model) is given to specific scans when fitting for the optimization of the classification
process. Therefore, it is expected from the network that during training, it is able to learn
how to distribute the weights along the attention layer to use the most informative scans
for making the best predictions.
A minor comment to make for the visualization of this attention matrix along the dataset.
It is clear that our network is able to process equally each sample, no matter the number
of scans, since the network processes scans individually. However, due to the flexibility
mentioned above, when no cropping is done for the FFNN, the length of these weight
vectors will be different. This is not a problem from the architecture point of view. However,
for the representation as a 2D matrix showing the weigths for each scan for each sample,
the shorter scans are simply added some padding with 0 for the interest of plotting.
50
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:61==
Below, the full parameter list required for running the BERT fine­tuning part of MasSpec­
BERT is attached as how it should be specified in the command line.
1 BERT_finetune
2
--num_bins 50000
#Number of bins for the binning process
3
--BERT tokens 0.1
#Ratio for filtering of top peaks
4
--BERT_type BERT_small
#Size of BERT model
5
--case no_CLS_desc_no_rettime
#Tokens dataset to be used
6
--data_repetition 10
#Choosing the proper BERT model trained
7
--class_layer CNN
#Network used for classification (Liner or
CNN)
8
--att_matrix True
#Add attention matrix in architecture
9
--class_param kleiner
#Liver score used for classification
10
--kleiner_type advanced
#Significant or advanced (only when kleiner)
11
--n_epohcs 40
# Number of epochs to be trained
12
--batchsize 32
#Batchsize used
13
--lr
#Learning rate
14
--n_layers_attention 4
#Num layers attention network (if present)
15
--n_units_attention 64
#Num units per layer att net (if present)
16
--num_channels 4
#Num channels in CNN (if present)
17
--kernel_size 5
#Kernel size in CNN (if present)
18
--stride 2
#Stride in CNN (if present)
19
--n_units_linear_CNN 128
#Num units FFNN after CNN (if present)
20
--n_layers_linear 6
#Num layers FFNN (if present)
21
--n_units_linear 64
#Num units per layer FFNN (if present)
22
--write_interval 50
#Writing interval of results
Listing 2.3: BERT fine­tune code commands
2.4
Code: MasSpec­BERT
All this projet was developed in Computerome with Python version 3.9.7 and Pytorch
1.10.2, with torchtext v.0.11.2. For the BERT training and to take advantage of the valuable
parallelization, the GPU nodes were used. GPU nodes in Computerome have one NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GPU card. The CPU in the same GPU node would be the same as what
Computerome refers to Thin compute node, an Intel Xeon Gold 6230 @2.1GHz, with 40
cores and a total memory per node of 192GB.
The main packages installed in the environment defined in Computerome required for this
project are: umap­learn v0.5.3, seaborn v0.11.2 and pandas v1.4.1.
The code for MasSpec­BERT is publicly available in https://github.com/enricCristobal/
Mass_spec_NLP_MSc_thesis
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
51
==PAGE:62==
3
Results
This section contains the main results for the application of the MasSpec­BERT pipeline
to MS­data. The main focus will be on the part regarding BERT training and the model’s
performance when learning the language of raw MS­based proteomics data. Finally, a
small exemplification of the results that can be obtained using the BERT fine­tuning in­
cluded in the tool will be shown. Also, it is important to mention that because the main
focus of this project was firstly the development of the method, initial results on the perfor­
mance of our model were obtained, but there is still a long way to go. This will be longer
discussed in the next section 4.
3.1
BERT train
3.1.1
Time for model training
These models take a long time to train, especially in our case, where only one GPU card
could be used. In the next tables 3.1 and 3.2, an approximation of the running time for
different cases will be shown,
Three parameters determine the running time. Two of them affect on the running time
per batch, and one affects the total running time. The sizes of the BERT model and the
vocabulary will affect the batch time as more steps need to be taken for each batch. The
vocabulary size affects due to the last softmax linear layer defining the probability for each
token in the vocabulary. In addition, the data repetition parameter affects the total running
time as the number of batches increases.
Therefore, an approximate batch running time for each case will be shown, and the total
time obtained as an extension of these to the whole simulation. The batch time is extracted
from a visual inspection of the results file where this variable is given. Not all combinations
were tested due to time constraints and interests of the project, but this gives a clear
overview of the orders of magnitude and differences between cases.
Short batch time refers to the first 90% of the training where the sentence length is re­
duced, and long batch time refers to the other where the complete sentence of 512 tokens
is used.
BERT size
Vocabulary size
Peak filter
Short batch time
Long batch time
BERT small
10000
1.25%
≈82.5ms
≈289ms
BERT half
10000
1.25%
≈172ms
N/A
BERT small
10000
5%­10%
≈91ms
≈508ms
BERT small
50000
5%­10%
≈366ms
N/A
Table 3.1: Batch running times for different parameter combinations of BERT model in
Computerome with NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU card.
52
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:63==
The missing results shown as N/A are because for resource usage optimization, these
bigger models were already trained with the objective of being used if they showed a better
performance. Thus, they were trained with 15 data repetitions. However, the significant
increase in the batch time seen already for the shorter sentences made it non­viable for
the current setup and time constraints. Compared with values from other small BERT
models, these bigger models would have taken more than 3 weeks to train.
As an example, the total running time of a case for a BERT small model, with a vocabulary
size of 10000 and a peak filter of 10%, is chosen. The reason is that this is a case where
the batch running time for both parts of the training are known, and this model was trained
for different data repetitions. The total time shown in table 3.2 is considering 40 epochs,
as suggested by the original BERT paper [59].
Data repetitions
Approx. total time
1
≈17 hours
5
≈3 days 12 hours
15
≈10 days 23 hours
20
≈14 days 15 hours
50
Memory allocation error
Table 3.2: Total running times for MasSpec­BERT in Computerome for BERT small with
vocabulary size of 10000 and peak filter of 10%.
The case for 20 data repetitions was stopped since no significant improvement from 15
data repetitions in the loss was found. And the last case for a data repetition of 50 runs
into a memory allocation error in Computerome. This big model was already not expected
to be run for the whole simulation. Nevertheless, it was still aimed to see whether some
improvement was seen with such a huge dataset.
Since we could not obtain this data for 50 data repetitions, it can be discussed from the
fact that there was no difference between 15 and 20 data repetitions that this could be a
limit for the repetition of the same dataset for the model to keep learning. Showing the
need to increase the original dataset size.
3.1.2
Language structure choice
Although deep learning excels in processing raw data, NLP models are developed to un­
derstand the language they are being trained on. Any language has an intrinsic structure,
which is why NLP excels in many tasks related to natural language. In section 2, it was
presented the process for the creation of this new language from the MS data. Without
any doubt a crucial step for the good performance of MasSpec­BERT.
Therefore, the first step analyzed in the training of the BERT model was to detect the best
combination of different parameters for feeding data. To remember, these are the inclusion
or not the inclusion of CLS token and scan number with SEP token at the beginning of
the sentence, the descending ordering of bins by their intensity, the peak filter (strongly
related to the sentence length) and the size of our vocabulary.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
53
==PAGE:64==
The lack of previous studies in the area requires the evaluation of the best language
structure to fit the model by trying different combinations. The running times presented
above show the requirement to use small models to evaluate the best combination for the
language creation for the model. Therefore, most testing before going into bigger models
was done with a data repetition of 1.
As mentioned in 2, different problems with overfitting were found. The different loss figures
obtained during the process and the reasoning driving decisions from these can be found
in Appendix A.2.
Below in Figure 3.1, the training end evaluation loss evolution is shown along the 20
epochs used for the training. 1
Figure 3.1: Training and validation loss for main BERT model trained.
With this loss evolution, it is seen that there is some learning from the model. However, this
is not a good evolution as the decrease is not very big from the beginning of the simulation.
Nonetheless, this is a very big model and thus it makes sense that the training process
is low. Furthermore, the sudden increase in the loss for the last 2 epochs is merely a
consequence of the increase in the sentence length. Therefore, the increase of masking
elements per batch contributing to the loss.
3.1.3
BERT train performance analysis
Masked word prediction
This behaviour from the loss made us further investigate whether the BERT model was
learning the structure of the language. For this process, the comparison between one of
the first models trained with 1 data repetition, the main training used in this project, and
one final model with BERT half features will be made.
1The decision of 20 epochs to reduce the training time and because it had been experienced to start seeing
a plateau when close to that value, making the resource­demanding training of the last epochs somehow
useless for the model.
54
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:65==
Below in Figures 3.2, the token guessing, meaning the token the model predicts for the
different masked elements, is shown. On the other hand, Figure 3.3 shows from all these
guesses only the correct ones. Moreover, the guessing percentage of the model among
all the masked elements is included in the figure.
Figure 3.2: Overfitting model token guess in unseen data.
For this first overfitting model, very poor performance and a biased prediction of one spe­
cific token (bin 2694) is found. In addition, the model can choose from 10000 different to­
kens in this process. Then, in this case, random guessing would bring to 0.01% guessing
percentage. Showing that this poorly performing model is very close to random guessing.
However, the same process was performed using this project’s main BERT model, which
was trained in a much bigger dataset and did not show overfitting during the training
process.
Figure 3.4 shows that the main model keeps having a highly biased prediction, in this case
for the bin number 2067. Nevertheless, it is also relevant to notice that the percentage
of correct predictions has greatly increased this time. The overfitting model had a very
low 0.07% guessing percentage, showing that almost no masked token was guessed.
This is not the case shown in Figure 3.5, where this percentage goes much higher, up
to 10.941%. A value that goes up to almost 13% for a BERT half model trained at the
end of this project.This percentage was confirmed with several runs. The results of this
model are shown in Figure 3.6. This model followed the same language structure as the
main model (descending order, no scan number and 10000 tokens as the vocabulary
size) with a dataset with 25 repetitions. The token guess figure for this case also showed
biased guessing towards token 386. However, this time the guessing times were low­
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure 3.3: Overfitting model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in
unseen dataset.
Figure 3.4: Main model token guess in unseen data.
ered to 434325, around a 50% lower than the previous case. This also clearly shows an
improvement in the guessing process.
56
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:67==
Figure 3.5: Main model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in unseen
dataset.
Finally, although not possible to include in the report, the visual inspection of the list for
the number of guesses for each token was done. And a clear bias towards the tokens at
the beginning was found. Few of the last tokens were guessed with considerable values,
around 20000, which means a 5% with respect to the highest guess. This also indicates
the tendency of mass scans to have more peaks at the lowest m/z ratios.
This last model is the most extensive model trained in this project. As a comment, this
model did not reach the end of the training because it was assumed the simulation would
take too long. Nevertheless, the updated model weights were saved at each epoch re­
cursively in case the validation loss was improved. It was programmed to be running
for 12 days, and when that time was reached, it was killed by Computerome. This model
reached the best validation loss seen in the project, showing that, indeed, it kept improving
the model performance a bit2.
For all cases, it is clear that the main predicted token is among the most correctly guessed
tokens for obvious reasons. In addition, it is definitely agreed that this is not a good per­
formance for an NLP model. Nevertheless, one cannot obviate the increasing guessing
percentage for the biggest models. Considering the current limitations of data size, size
of the model and specificity of the used data, a 10.5% and a 13% of correct guessing in a
vocabulary size of 10000 tokens for unseen data, we consider this performance remark­
2No further analysis could be done with this model as the training was finished a few days before the end
of the project
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 3.6: BERT half model correct token guess and correct guessing percentage in
unseen dataset.
able. Furthermore, it shows that, on the one hand, there is a long way to go, but on the
other hand, the model is learning part of the language. Especially the fact that increasing
model size and data size systematically brings model improvement.
Regarding the model bias, it is still unknown why the model had such a biased prediction
for those bin numbers. Also, it is interesting that the models show bias towards a different
bin, although trained in the same data. However, although quite unlikely, it is hypothesized
that these are a very present bins in the different scans given to the model. This could
be the peaks related to highly present proteins in humans. This suggests that further
analysis of the dataset should be done, and the removal of some of these highly present
peaks should be considered, as they do not bring any relevant information to the model.
However, this might also indicate a limitation of the model, focusing all the attention on
specific proteins, which might not be where the presence of disease can be found.
Scan detection
The comparison of information within scans between the two groups was done to ana­
lyze whether this minor language understanding was enough to find some differences
between healthy and non­healthy individuals. It is aimed to find a tendency among all the
individuals in each group for some specific scans that differentiate them.
Below, in Figure 3.7, the mean value over all samples per embedding dimension per scan
for the two groups of healthy individuals and individuals with ALD is found, respectively.
The objective was to find specific scans where a generalized difference between groups
58
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:69==
Figure 3.7: Mean of embeddings over healthy individuals and individuals with ALD for the
first 10 highest peaks.
could be found. This would mean that some specific scans are more informative and
allow further differentiation between groups. This information could be beneficial for the
following BERT fine­tuning process and the current manual data pipeline. This could
mean the reduction of manual analysis to a specific number of scans.
This section will show only the results where the mean was applied to the output em­
beddings over all the tokens. To clarify, remember that when processed through BERT,
each sentence would give a [#tokens x embedding dimension] vector, usually [512x192].
Aggregation functions are applied to pack this information and allow further analysis. The
case shown here is the mean of each embedding dimension over all tokens. This aggre­
gation reduces the dimensionality to [1 x 192], allowing its visualization. In Appendix A.3,
very similar plots are obtained when just considering the embedding of the first and thus,
the main peak of the scan and the mean over the 10 highest peaks per scan are shown.
The desired output to detect informative scans would be to find clear horizontal lines with
a high absolute value in the rows (or scans) showing a clear difference between groups.
However, that is not the case, but instead, three blurry vertical lines are found in three
specific dimensions around 40, 64 and 82, very approximately.
The content of Figures 3.7 and 3.11 is at a high level of abstraction, and thus it is complex
to understand. They show that the 192D vectors in the latent space when the mean is
applied through all tokens and samples are very similar for both groups. However, there
are 3 specific dimensions in these spaces where the two groups behave differently.
The other interesting pattern of clear vertical lines is interpreted as the fact that vectors
for the samples of the same group probably have a very similar distribution in the latent
space for all scans.
Finally, also to mention that considering only the embedding of the first token or ten first
tokens(check A.3) also show similar results. The explanation for this could be that the
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 3.8: Difference of the mean of embeddings between healthy individuals and indi­
viduals with ALD for the first token, or highest peak.
projection of the scans into the latent space, mainly or even only, depends on the highest
peak.
All in all, these, unfortunately, shows poor performance of the current application of MasSpec­
BERT.
3.1.4
Sample scans analysis over time
The next and final approach to analyzing the BERT training performance is to analyze the
evolution in time for the different scans of one sample in the latent space. As specified in
the explanation of this process in Methods, the application of the dimensionality reduction
algorithm UMAP was used here.
Again, the objective was to find relevant differences between samples of different groups
when representing the scans individually.
As an example, Figures 3.9 and 3.10 show the dimensionality reduction for the different
scans for a healthy individual and an individual with ALD, respectively. The transparency
in the dots shows the evolution over time in these scans. The first scans will be more
transparent and keep evolving until no transparency is reached.
These and other Figures added in the Appendix A.4 show that, again, our main BERT
model cannot find a clear structure in the raw MS data. After all, this process could be
seen as similar to the previous one. In this case, we changed the approach using a
dimensionality reduction algorithm such as UMAP.
The component distribution analysis in the latent space included in the Supplementary
60
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:71==
Figure 3.9: Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most infor­
mative scans during the fine­tuning phase.
Figure 3.10: Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most infor­
mative scans during the fine­tuning phase.
data. The wide range for both components along both dimensions for the scans of every
sample (that can already be seen in the examples included here) shows that the use of
mean as an aggregation function is not a good option, as all samples will end up close to
the origin, being completely uninformative.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
61
==PAGE:72==
3.2
BERT fine­tuning
A poor performance in the training of BERT will translate to poor performance in fine­
tuning. It cannot be expected from a deep learning model to learn discriminative features
from a messy representation as our current latent space produced by BERT is. As a
simple metaphor, this process would be like asking a person who does not speak a word
of English or has minimal knowledge, to classify English emails as spam or not spam or
rate movies by reading movie reviews.
Nevertheless, the main aim of this project was to develop the entire pipeline of the BERT
model. Thus, while the different aspects of the training of BERT were running and being
analyzed, the part for BERT­finetuning was also developed.
The only aim of this section is to show all the results that are already programmed and
can be currently obtained from MasSpec­BERT.
The same idea of finding the most relevant scans by different visual analyses of the em­
beddings was applied during the fine­tuning phase of the BERT employing a neural net­
work. As explained before, the idea is to include a neural network within the classification
architecture that tries to find the scans that provide a better prediction to the model. The
parameters of this network are updated following the same backpropagation process as
the rest of the network.
Interestingly, although being aware of the poor data quality fed to the network, there seems
to be a structure in the scans used for binary classification. Or at least there are some
scans where the model did not pay much attention compared to the rest. A behaviour
shared among individuals.
Figure 3.11: Example of attention matrix that will be obtained when detecting most infor­
mative scans during the fine­tuning phase.
Finally, the traditional metrics to analyze the performance of a classification method were
also included. In Figure 3.12, the confusion matrix obtained for the classification of healthy
individuals and individuals with ALD is shown. Also, ROC curves were added for further
applications but not shown here for obvious reasons of poor performance.
62
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:73==
Figure 3.12: Confusion matrix for the binary classification of samples in healthy individuals
and individuals with ALD.
This confusion matrix shows that our classifier is entirely random or maybe even wrongly
biased towards the cases with ALD
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
63
==PAGE:74==
4
Discussion
4.1
BERT performance on raw MS data
The results obtained are currently not enough to say that our BERT model is able to
understand the language we have defined for MS data. Nonetheless, promising results
show that further research on this application should be made, as this could achieve the
final objective of getting a competent ALD detection method. As seen through the project,
many decisions have been made along the way, and different facts should be improved.
4.1.1
MS­data language structure and BERT training
Focusing on the choices for the creation of the MS language, we believe our approach
based on the technique proposed in [60] has shown to be adequate for our application.
Choosing to discretize the MS graphs is a necessary step, and the binning process seems
like the natural choice. Nevertheless, there are many steps where decisions had to be
made for the definition of the structure of the language.
Starting with the inclusion of the CLS token, this seems to be relevant in case the Next
Sentence Prediction (NSP) training task is included in our BERT training. To remember,
when NSP is added, the CLS token is used as a binary classification to determine from its
embedding whether the two sentences or scans added are consecutive or not. Therefore
CLS is used and learns structure during training. In this project, although it was considered
at the beginning, and it is worth trying in the future, we decided not to apply it in this first
approach. What made us disregard the NSP task was that two consecutive scans have a
very similar structure; thus, not much information is expected to be gained from it. In the
case NSP was developed and included in the training, the application of CLS token would
definitely be necessary. But in our case, where it has not been applied, the inclusion of
CLS token would only mean the loss of one potentially informative token. Mainly because
the loss function is just based on the masked tokens, and right now, we make no masking
on the special tokens, meaning that although included, they would not have any action
during the training, being completely useless.
Although used for some of the test training with one data repetition, the scan number and
the SEP token were not included in the main models. And the main reason here is that
since its application did not seem to boost the performance of our model, it was decided
to be removed to simplify the used language structure and better understand how our
models found structure in the data. Thus, although we believe the model could learn
that from the data, to try to lower the complexity and amount of variables added to our
method, it was decided to disregard these tokens in this first application. However, it is
an ingenious process to try and is already implemented in the code to test it quickly.
The choice of the descending ordering for the intensity is significantly related to the peak
filter and sentence length. It is known and has already been mentioned that differences
64
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:75==
between healthy people and individuals with ALD, or other potential diseases affecting
the plasma proteome, will probably not be in the most present proteins. These proteins,
leading to the highest peaks, are usually the naturally abundant found proteins in humans.
Therefore, it can be discussed that the ordering for intensity is not a desired feature.
Nevertheless, considering all the other elements during training where sentences were
cut to only 128 tokens, it was considered that keeping the information of the at least 128
highest peaks per scan would be enough to include peaks where differences between
groups could be found. The other way around, we would always have the problem of
whether some information from the end of the scan is cut. In fact, if we did not order the
sentences but decreased the peak percentage to prevent the scans from being cropped,
we would be in the same situation, only passing the most informative peaks. Although we
would pass them in the m/z ratio order in this case, we would be losing information from
the scans with fewer peaks present due to the high variability in the scans. 1.25% of peaks
from some of these scans could mean less than 128, including unnecessary padding. In
addition, no significant improvement was observed for one data repetition either.
For the peak filter, mention that this parameter is a trade­off between control over the
information included in our model and the introduction of padding. The lower the percent­
age, the clearer the peaks introduced to the model, and the less required the ordering
based on intensity is needed. However, the lower this value, the more information on
potential informative peaks is lost. Moreover, the higher is this value, if no ordering is
applied, the more data from the last part of the scan is lost. The values chosen in this
project are justified by the control over the length of the sentences. Still, cropping to 128
with the 1.25% looks quite extreme, as the number of tokens drops drastically for some
sentences. Higher peak filters would require longer sentences along with the full training,
but that seriously affects the training time since the attention matrices have a quadratic
growth with the sentence length. That is why the training with 10% peak filter and ordering
was chosen.
Finally, regarding the vocabulary size, this is merely a precision parameter. The higher
the vocabulary size, the more precision there is in detecting peaks, and the longer the
training time. Just as a reference, for the original BERT, the vocabulary size for the natural
language contained 30000 tokens [59]. Thus, the choice of values around 10000 and
50000 used in this project seem reasonable, or at least in the scale. But it could be
suggested in further research to decrease this number for further testing and increase it
when a better combination of other parameters is found.
Furthermore, it should also be remembered that in the data cohorts used, we do not only
have MS1 spectra but also MS2. The inclusion of these more specific scans that further
analyze precursors could also bring further improvement to the model. Nevertheless, it
could be necessary to include specific information to let the model know the differences
between MS1 and MS2 spectra. An idea that seems plausible and could be helpful for
the model is using the Next Sentence Prediction task during training for the model to learn
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
65
==PAGE:76==
which MS2 spectra are likely to come from a specific MS1 spectrum.
However, this is all hypothesized, and further research is required.
To also comment on the other on­going approach of BERT to learn raw MS data language
that was mentioned at the beginning of the section 2.2. This work is under development
by Roman Bushuiev and Tomás Pluskal from the Institute of Organic Chemistry and Bio­
chemistry AS and the Faculty of Information Technology CTU in Prague. Their interesting
approach to solve the data preparation step is to filter the scans beforehand to remove the
noise. This filter has five steps but it is mainly based on just considering trustworthy scans
and from these, the most abundant and not contaminated precursor ion peaks. Once they
have these scans, the core idea of NLP of having a defined vocabulary is forgotten. Their
input data is a 2D matrix Xin ∈Rn,2, being n the number of peaks in the scan. And the
two inserted dimensions are the raw m/z ratio and intensity of the remaining peaks after
the filtering. Afterwards, they just mask one peak per running through the architecture,
masking both m/z ratio and intensity. After going through the BERT architecture with the
same attention mechanisms as applied here, a linear layer is also added during the train­
ing process. The difference here compared to our approach is that their linear layer aims
to reconstruct these 2D matrix. And then the training is developed by backpropagating
the error of a mean squared error (MSE) only between the experimental masked peak
and the predicted peak. And a usual approach of minimization of the MSE with gradient
descent is applied. Although they showed some promising preliminary results, further
research needs to be done.
Their approach is definitely a good idea to also consider as it has a lot of potential. With
their system, once they filter the peaks, they are not losing any information from those
peaks remaining through a discretization process to fit the vocabulary idea. However,
this process also presents some drawbacks that need to be mentioned. As it happens
with our process there is a point where decisions with the data filtering need to be made.
And although once they include the data to BERT, it contains all the data from the filtered
scans, these have been filtered. Which means that if the filtering process is not properly
developed, relevant data, at least for the detection of disease presence, could be lost. It
might be that for their objective of chemical structure prediction, the threshold for the peak
filtering is different. In addition, their process is apparently just processing one masked
peak at a time, completely losing one of the revolutions of Transformer architecture with
the positional encoding.
4.1.2
BERT training performance
There are promising results regarding the capacity for BERT to find a structure in the
language. The continuous improvement in the token guessing percentage with growing
models, shows that this improvement could be continued with a more potent setup, prob­
ably even achieving great performances.
When talking about setup, this does not only refer to more computing power but also to the
66
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:77==
dataset’s characteristics. During this project, only data from the GALA dataset was used.
This dataset contains data for healthy patients, but it has been seen that it is highly biased
to ALD­related data with individuals presenting the disease. Therefore, the language we
teach the model is biased towards a specific disease. However, the training process
of BERT while learning the ”language” of the data is based on unsupervised learning.
This means that this model would perform better the more generalized and unbiased the
dataset is.
The data repetitions approach was made to allow more data to be trained on. In com­
parison with the original BERT paper, in terms of the dataset, trained on 3.3 billion words
for their application, our dataset was much smaller. Considering the ideal situation where
no padding occurs, the models using just one data repetition had 194M tokens. When
using 20 data repetitions, the value of 3.9 billion words is reached. But again, this would
be when no padding is present, and we have shown along with the project that this is not
the case. Besides, even though random masking is applied, it is quite probable that the
feeding to the network of the same sentences 20 times, some of them relatively short,
introduces even more bias to our training.
This is the reason why we believe that to reach better performance, the training process
should be performed with any MS­based proteomics data. Thus, we encourage future
applications to use any public database of MS­based proteomics for the training of BERT.
The data used throughout this project is the perfect example of a dataset to be used for the
specific disease prediction task in the fine­tuning part. But this step can only be applied
once BERT has already excelled in understanding this new language.
Regarding the model size, remember that the model primarily used in this project is 1/4 of
the size of the smallest BERT model proposed in the original paper [59]. When we tried to
run what was called BERT half, the possibility of reaching the end of the training with 40
epochs was not even considered due to the long training time with the current resources.
For the processes tried for some detection of variability directly from the BERT embed­
dings, it is clear that no meaningful results have been achieved. Unfortunately, this was
expected behaviour, considering that our current BERT model can only generate informa­
tive enough embeddings around 13% of the time. Besides, the application of aggregation
functions or dimensionality reduction algorithms during the process is always a risk of
losing valuable information. Further research is recommended once the token guessing
process has reached a higher percentage. This would at least indicate that the embed­
dings from BERT are mostly informative, and thus, the generated latent space has a
structure clear enough to start working with it.
It is aimed thus to keep working on this phase to enable the further application of BERT
with the fine­tuning, getting to the disease prediction step.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
67
==PAGE:78==
4.1.3
BERT fine­tune
The BERT fine­tuning phase can be seen as some simple classification network process
where the data used as input are abstract vectors in an informative latent space. If this
latent space is not informative, it cannot be expected from this network to be able to make
good predictions. That was exactly the case for this project, where the network gave
somewhat random prediction results. It is a crucial step in NLP for the development of
classification tasks, to ensure a very good understanding of the language. Since this is
not the case for this application yet, it was impossible to expect great performance in the
classification tasks.
About the attention matrix in BERT­finetuning, mention also the idea behind the incorpo­
ration of this attention layer in the architecture is that it could be applied in a way that just
the 10% most informative scans are used to make the predictions. Without any testing
on the matter, it would be suggested to do so after a few epochs. Mainly to ensure that
no relevant information is lost at the beginning of the fine­tuning due to the random initial­
ization. But this is a potent process to detect the most informative scans in the dataset,
which is worth analyzing in further detail.
The development of this part within MasSpec­BERT for the completeness of the process
allows future works with this tool to focus in the analysis and treat BERT as a black box if
they desire to do so. Nevertheless, the documentation for the code has been detailed to
ease future users’ understanding.
4.2
Computing limitations
Some limitation of Computerome is that since we could only use one GPU card at a time,
running into memory allocation errors at the beginning was quite common. Firstly that
was the case during training. It is true that when a solution to some of these issues was
found, we got rid of the memory allocation problems and accelerated the training time
considerably. But it is a reality that with this setup there is a limitation on the application
of bigger models and bigger unlabeled datasets. If bigger models want to be trained in a
realistic amount of time, more computing power must be used.
In addition, memory allocation problems were also found during the fine­tuning phase of
BERT when keeping the gradients for all the BERT model and running back­propagation
through the whole architecture. The only found solution for this issue so far is to freeze
the BERT weights and only backpropagate through the classification layer. Although this
is not a huge problem for in the current status of the project, it is clearly limiting our final
application. It is expected for the fine­tuning part to make small modifications on BERT
weights. However, further resources would be required in future applications to achieve
the impressive results BERT has achieved with natural language.
68
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:79==
5
Conclusion
ALD and other liver diseases have become a big healthcare issue. The current approach
for diagnosing and staging this disease based on liver biopsy urged the field to find other
non­invasive methods. The significant involvement of the liver in the plasma proteome
made MS­based proteomics a perfect fit for this task. Although the analysis of this data
has successfully been used for discovering meaningful biomarkers, it shows some clear
limitations. The main ones being the great dependency on expert knowledge for data
curation and the missing spectra in the spectral libraries for peptide identification. The
next step in the field to avoid this is the application of deep learning models, able to infer
informative features directly from the raw data.
This project has been a first step to approach the BERT model, a very promising applica­
tion of NLP, into the MS­based proteomics field. Raw MS data has been transformed into
a language that we aim our MasSpec­BERT to learn to understand. Many different deci­
sions and analyses have been made along the way. Many questions remain unanswered.
But we are confident that these models can find the signals present in this data. And al­
though our current results are far from a competitive application compared to the current
methods, MasSpec­BERT has shown potential. We believe that increasing the resources
in terms of data and model size could propel this model to much better performance.
In general terms, this project should be divided into two distinct objectives. Even though
it started as a project aimed at evaluating the performance of the BERT model for ALD
prediction, it turned out to be more technical than expected. Thus, many resources had
to go to method and software development.
The non­availability of published work on applications of the BERT model to raw MS data
made the process more complex. On top of that, BERT is a considerably new method,
and thus, there is still a lack of clear documentation for the application of BERT compared
to other models.
It is agreed that BERT is a complex model, and it builds up on top of many ideas in deep
learning. The fact that this new ”language” from raw MS data had to be created made
developing all the processes from scratch a requirement.
From that point of view, a significant advance in this innovative field has been achieved.
This master’s thesis has allowed the creation of MasSpec­BERT, an entire working pipeline
for applying BERT to raw MS data. And the development of the method will ease further
work in the field.
It is always a good idea to work with the methods and software in detail to allow flexibility
in the different steps of the process. But it is also a reality, specifically in the field of
Bioinformatics, that for many applications, it is not a requirement to fully understand the
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
69
==PAGE:80==
software running in the back to obtain great results. Therefore, this thesis also aimed
at creating a method that could be perfectly considered as a black­box for future users.
At least for those specific processes running in the back. Nonetheless, it also aims to
enhance curious minds to follow the process by including comprehensive documentation
along with the code.
The whole pipeline is already developed, and now it is just required to keep working with
it and try to improve the application at the different time steps in the pipeline.
5.1
Future perspectives
It is planned to keep investigating MasSpec­BERT in another Master’s thesis that has
already started. The aim for the new student is precisely to use the already developed
structure and deepen into different aspects of the method. Considering the found infor­
mation in this thesis as guidance, processes like data preparation, model training, and
analysis of the embeddings and the fine­tuning architectures must be further analyzed.
We believe that increasing the dataset size with general MS data examples and the in­
crease in computing power would be the key elements for further improvement in the
field.
, , any other disease related to the plasma proteome could be potentially detected using
the disease­specific data.
In the long way, and if the field keeps showing promising results, as with any other ap­
plication of BERT, the big training step could be performed once. When a good model
able to understand the MS language is obtained, introducing the task­specific data for a
particular disease, should allow the BERT fine­tuning phase to classify individuals with
any particular disease of interest related to the plasma proteome. Reaching that point,
would definitely be a revolution in the field of Bioinformatics and Healthcare.
Finally, the two related projects mentioned working with the processing of raw MS data
using NLP methods, show the current interest of the scientific community in this matter
and the believe in the possibility for powerful applications with this architecture. Thus, with
this project we aim to contribute to the research in this early field and keep encouraging
further investigation.
70
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Daniel Veyel et al. “Biomarker discovery for chronic liver diseases by multi­omics–a
preclinical case study”. In: Scientific reports 10.1 (2020), pp. 1–14.
[2]
Fernando Bril and Kenneth Cusi. “Management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a call to action”. In: Diabetes care 40.3 (2017),
pp. 419–430.
[3]
Lili Niu et al. “Plasma proteome profiling discovers novel proteins associated with
non­alcoholic fatty liver disease”. In: Molecular systems biology 15.3 (2019), e8793.
[4]
Lili Niu et al. “Noninvasive proteomic biomarkers for alcohol­related liver disease”.
In: Nature Medicine (2022), pp. 1–11.
[5]
Anca Lădaru et al. “Candidate proteomic biomarkers for non­alcoholic fatty liver dis­
ease (steatosis and non­alcoholic steatohepatitis) discovered with mass­spectrometry:
a systematic review”. In: Biomarkers 21.2 (2016), pp. 102–114.
[6]
Philipp E Geyer et al. “Revisiting biomarker discovery by plasma proteomics”. In:
Molecular systems biology 13.9 (2017), p. 942.
[7]
World Health Organization (WHO): Alcohol. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/alcohol. Accessed: 2022­05­09.
[8]
Jovan Julien et al. “Projected prevalence and mortality associated with alcohol­
related liver disease in the USA, 2019–40: a modelling study”. In: The Lancet Public
Health 5.6 (2020), e316–e323.
[9]
Laura Pimpin et al. “Burden of liver disease in Europe: epidemiology and analysis
of risk factors to identify prevention policies”. In: Journal of hepatology 69.3 (2018),
pp. 718–735.
[10]
Nick Sheron. “Alcohol and liver disease in Europe–Simple measures have the po­
tential to prevent tens of thousands of premature deaths”. In: Journal of Hepatology
64.4 (2016), pp. 957–967.
[11]
Emma Nilsson et al. “Clinical course and mortality by etiology of liver cirrhosis in
Sweden: a population based, long­term follow­up study of 1317 patients”. In: Ali­
mentary pharmacology & therapeutics 49.11 (2019), pp. 1421–1430.
[12]
Dorte B Bekker­Jensen et al. “An optimized shotgun strategy for the rapid gener­
ation of comprehensive human proteomes”. In: Cell systems 4.6 (2017), pp. 587–
599.
[13]
Florian Meier et al. “BoxCar acquisition method enables single­shot proteomics at a
depth of 10,000 proteins in 100 minutes”. In: Nature methods 15.6 (2018), pp. 440–
448.
[14]
John B Fenn et al. “Electrospray ionization for mass spectrometry of large biomolecules”.
In: Science 246.4926 (1989), pp. 64–71.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
71
==PAGE:82==
[15]
Michael Karas and Franz Hillenkamp. “Laser desorption ionization of proteins with
molecular masses exceeding 10,000 daltons”. In: Analytical chemistry 60.20 (1988),
pp. 2299–2301.
[16]
Andrew J Link et al. “Direct analysis of protein complexes using mass spectrometry”.
In: Nature biotechnology 17.7 (1999), pp. 676–682.
[17]
Yaoyang Zhang et al. “Protein analysis by shotgun/bottom­up proteomics”. In: Chem­
ical reviews 113.4 (2013), pp. 2343–2394.
[18]
Yuliya V Karpievitch et al. “Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry­based pro­
teomics: biological and technological aspects”. In: The annals of applied statistics
4.4 (2010), p. 1797.
[19]
Jimmy K Eng, Ashley L McCormack, and John R Yates. “An approach to correlate
tandem mass spectral data of peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein
database”. In: Journal of the american society for mass spectrometry 5.11 (1994),
pp. 976–989.
[20]
Matthias Mann and Matthias Wilm. “Error­tolerant identification of peptides in se­
quence databases by peptide sequence tags”. In: Analytical chemistry 66.24 (1994),
pp. 4390–4399.
[21]
Nils Krone et al. “Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) remains a pre­
eminent discovery tool in clinical steroid investigations even in the era of fast liq­
uid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS)”. In: The Journal of
steroid biochemistry and molecular biology 121.3­5 (2010), pp. 496–504.
[22]
Junmin Peng et al. “Evaluation of multidimensional chromatography coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC­ MS/MS) for large­scale protein analysis: the
yeast proteome”. In: Journal of proteome research 2.1 (2003), pp. 43–50.
[23]
Shisheng Wang et al. “MetaboGroup S: a group entropy­based web platform for
evaluating normalization methods in blood metabolomics data from maintenance
hemodialysis patients”. In: Analytical chemistry 90.18 (2018), pp. 11124–11130.
[24]
Vishalakshi Nanjappa et al. “Plasma Proteome Database as a resource for pro­
teomics research: 2014 update”. In: Nucleic acids research 42.D1 (2014), pp. D959–
D965.
[25]
Ruedi Aebersold and Matthias Mann. “Mass spectrometry­based proteomics”. In:
Nature 422.6928 (2003), pp. 198–207.
[26]
Hao Dong et al. “A Deep Learning­Based Tumor Classifier Directly Using MS Raw
Data”. In: Proteomics 20.21­22 (2020), p. 1900344.
[27]
Joris Cadow et al. “On the feasibility of deep learning applications using raw mass
spectrometry data”. In: Bioinformatics 37.Supplement_1 (2021), pp. i245–i253.
[28]
Shisheng Wang et al. “MSpectraAI: a powerful platform for deciphering proteome
profiling of multi­tumor mass spectrometry data by using deep neural networks”. In:
BMC bioinformatics 21.1 (2020), pp. 1–15.
[29]
A.M Turing. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence”. In: Mind 49 (1950), pp. 433–
460.
72
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:83==
[30]
Allen Newell and Herbert Simon. “The logic theory machine–A complex information
processing system”. In: IRE Transactions on information theory 2.3 (1956), pp. 61–
79.
[31]
AL Samuel. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers,￿IBM­
Res. 1959.
[32]
Ronald A Fisher. “The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems”. In:
Annals of eugenics 7.2 (1936), pp. 179–188.
[33]
Frederic B Fitch. “Warren S. McCulloch and Walter Pitts. A logical calculus of the
ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bulletin of mathematical biophysics, vol. 5 (1943),
pp. 115–133.” In: The Journal of Symbolic Logic 9.2 (1944), pp. 49–50.
[34]
Bernard Widrow and Marcian E Hoff. Adaptive switching circuits. Tech. rep. Stanford
Univ Ca Stanford Electronics Labs, 1960.
[35]
Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine
learning. Vol. 4. 4. Springer, 2006.
[36]
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. “Learning represen­
tations by back­propagating errors”. In: nature 323.6088 (1986), pp. 533–536.
[37]
Alex Graves et al. “A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwriting
recognition”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
31.5 (2008), pp. 855–868.
[38]
Frank Sehnke et al. “Parameter­exploring policy gradients”. In: Neural Networks
23.4 (2010), pp. 551–559.
[39]
Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Bidirectional LSTM
networks for improved phoneme classification and recognition”. In: International
conference on artificial neural networks. Springer. 2005, pp. 799–804.
[40]
Alex Graves, Abdel­rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Speech recognition
with deep recurrent neural networks”. In: 2013 IEEE international conference on
acoustics, speech and signal processing. Ieee. 2013, pp. 6645–6649.
[41]
John Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”. In:
Nature 596.7873 (2021), pp. 583–589.
[42]
Felix Teufel et al. “SignalP 6.0 predicts all five types of signal peptides using protein
language models”. In: Nature biotechnology (2022), pp. 1–3.
[43]
Pierre Baldi et al. “Exploiting the past and the future in protein secondary structure
prediction”. In: Bioinformatics 15.11 (1999), pp. 937–946.
[44]
Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. “Bidirectional recurrent neural networks”. In:
IEEE transactions on Signal Processing 45.11 (1997), pp. 2673–2681.
[45]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short­term memory”. In: Neural
computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780.
[46]
Simple RNN vs. GRU vs. LSTM: Difference Lies in More Flexible Control. Accessed:
2022­06­05.
[47]
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks. http://karpathy.
github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/. Accessed: 2022­06­07.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
73
==PAGE:84==
[48]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. “Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014).
[49]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder­decoder
for statistical machine translation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 (2014).
[50]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “On the properties of neural machine translation: Encoder­
decoder approaches”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259 (2014).
[51]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural machine trans­
lation by jointly learning to align and translate”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473
(2014).
[52]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[53]
Tomáš Mikolov, Wen­tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig. “Linguistic regularities in con­
tinuous space word representations”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 conference of
the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human
language technologies. 2013, pp. 746–751.
[54]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
[55]
Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata. “Long short­term memory­networks
for machine reading”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733 (2016).
[56]
Zhouhan Lin et al. “A structured self­attentive sentence embedding”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.03130 (2017).
[57]
Ankur P Parikh et al. “A decomposable attention model for natural language infer­
ence”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01933 (2016).
[58]
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. “A deep reinforced model for
abstractive summarization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304 (2017).
[59]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[60]
Aditya Divyakant Shrivastava et al. “MassGenie: A transformer­based deep learning
method for identifying small molecules from their mass spectra”. In: Biomolecules
11.12 (2021), p. 1793.
[61]
David E Kleiner et al. “Design and validation of a histological scoring system for
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease”. In: Hepatology 41.6 (2005), pp. 1313–1321.
[62]
Felix Pacheco. “Visualizing population structure on the danish cohort landscape
with VAEs, manuscript under preparation.” In: (2021).
[63]
Xiaobing Han et al. “Pre­trained alexnet architecture with pyramid pooling and su­
pervision for high spatial resolution remote sensing image scene classification”. In:
Remote Sensing 9.8 (2017), p. 848.
[64]
Ronald Yu. “A Tutorial on VAEs: From Bayes’ Rule to Lossless Compression”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10273 (2020).
74
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:85==
[65]
Michael Widrich et al. “Modern hopfield networks and attention for immune reper­
toire classification”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33
(2020), pp. 18832–18845.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
75
==PAGE:86==
76
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:87==
A
appendix
A.1
Peak filter effect on sequence length
The peak filter percentage has a clear effect on the sentence length. We refer to peak
filter as the percentage of highest peaks within the scan that are allowed to be part of the
sentence. The lower this peak filter, the less peaks from the scan are allowed to pass.
How the sentences are fed to the language models is crucial for it correct performance.
That is why, an analysis of the distribution of sentence length for all the scans of the study
was developed.
First off, we wanted to see how long the different sentences were when not applying any
filter. Meaning that in Figure A.1, the number of peaks found in all the scans considered
in this study can be seen.
Figure A.1: Sentence length when no peak filter is applied.
We see there is a great variance (the standard deviation is 1831.2 tokens). This shows
that along the study, different types of scans are found. There are some scans where a
great variety of peaks are found, while other scans where not so many peaks are placed
in the different bins. Although the mean is found at 5588 tokens, we have scans ranging
from around 500 peaks to scans with more than 12000 peaks.
Obviously, when a 10% filter is used, the distribution is the same, but the sentence length
will be reduced a 10%. Nevertheless, in Figure A.2, the mean of this distribution is 559.3,
higher than the default sentence length of BERT. What this means is that for more than
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
77
==PAGE:88==
half of the sentences, some part of the information from the scan would be lost, even
when using the default length of BERT for the whole training. Again, this might not be an
issue if we are passing the highest peaks at the beginning, meaning we order in relation
to intensity, but when not doing so, we are cropping most of the scans.
Figure A.2: Sentence length with peak filter of 10% used for the main BERT model of the
project.
This is why, although not shown here, the peak filter of 5% was also considered. As half
from the 10%, the mean would be now placed at 279. This is still a value too low if during
the 90% of the training the sentence length is shortened to 128. However, the loss of
information is lower and it was considered worth trying.
Nevertheless, to completely ensure that no peak information was lost from the scan when
fed to the model in the case of not ordering, the 1.25% peak filter was found to match very
good this requirement. As seen in Figure A.3, almost all the sentences contain less than
128 tokens.
Nonetheless, this comes with the drawback of feeding very short sentences to the model.
That is exactly why the analysis of different parameters combinations for the language
creation was done.
78
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.3: Sentence length with peak filter of 1.25% used for the unordered sentences.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
79
==PAGE:90==
A.2
BERT train loss figures
As mentioned in section 2 and 3, the training loss and validation loss for the different types
of model trained will be shown here.
In the captions the name of the different models are presented as they are processed by
MasSpec­BERT. (no) CLS means presence of the classification token. (no) desc refers
to the descending ordering of the bin numbers by intensity. (no) rettime is related to the
inclusion of scan number, aimed to be retention time at some point. The 0.0125, 0.05 or
0.1 found later refers to the peak filter. And finally the last numbers are the vocabulary
size used and the number of data repetitions used.
Figures A.4 and Figure A.5 show the results obtained before it was realized that too short
sentences were included in the training and thus, sentences with very few or even none
masked elements were used for the training. We believe that is the reason why training
these models with 3 data repetitions did not lead to overfitting. The reason being that
the model interpreted the loss in this sentences, null if no making occurred or very low
when few elements were masked, was indicating a great fit of our model. Those were
the reasons why a filter that just allowed the training on sentences that had at least 5
elements masked was applied.
Figure A.4: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 for 40 epochs when no lower masked sentences were noticed.
Figure A.5 was trained for such a long time because when the big plateau was found in
the first case, and before realizing of the masked problem, it was thought that it was due to
the decrease of the learning rate by the BERT scheduler. It was thought that this learning
rate was getting close to 0 to early, stopping the learning of the network, when this could
be even more optimized.
After that, the rest of the figures are all the tests made with the different parameters.
However, what we conclude is that with just 1 data repetition is not possible to infer the
best language structure. But the time­constraints did not allow to try all options for higher
data repetitions than 5, which also showed overfitting.
80
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.5: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 with longer running time when no lower masked sentences were noticed.
Figure A.6: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 for 40 epochs.
Figure A.7: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 with 5 data repetitions for 40 epochs.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
81
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.8: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS desc no rettime
0.05 10000 for 40 epochs.
Figure A.9: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS desc rettime 0.05
50000 with 5 data repetitions for 40 epochs.
Figure A.10: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 with 5 data repetitions for 40 epochs.
82
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.11: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc no rettime
0.0125 10000 for 40 epochs.
Figure A.12: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc no rettime
0.05 10000 for 40 epochs.
Figure A.13: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small no CLS no desc rettime
0.05 50000 with 5 data repetitions for 40 epochs.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.14: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small CLS no desc no rettime
0.5 10000 with 5 data repetitions for 40 epochs.
Figure A.15: Train and validation loss evolution for BERT small CLS no desc no rettime
0.05 10000 for 40 epochs.
84
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.16: Mean of embeddings over healthy individuals and individuals with ALD for
the first token, or highest peak.
A.3
Informative scan detection after BERT training for group
differentiation
.
When trying to detect differences between specific scans for enable the classification
of healthy individuals and individuals with ALD, different approaches were tried. Here is
added the analysis of this differentiation when only the embedding resulting from the high­
est peak, equivalent to the first token in the main model used in this project, is considered.
This can be found in Figures A.16 and A.29.
When done considering the first 10 highest peaks, again a very similar result is found as
seen in Figures A.31 and A.19.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
85
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.17: Difference of the mean of embeddings between healthy individuals and in­
dividuals with ALD for the first token, or highest peak.
Figure A.18: Mean of embeddings over healthy individuals and individuals with ALD for
the first 10 highest peaks.
86
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.19: Difference of the mean of embeddings between healthy individuals and in­
dividuals with ALD for the first token, or highest peak.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
87
==PAGE:98==
A.4
Dimensionality reduction of BERT embeddings to 2D
space
.
Here further results on the dimensionality reduction of BERT embeddings by scans
over time is showed for different types of individuals.
When saying with histological scores, it is individuals that went through a liver biopsy and
the three biopsy­based histological scores (fibrosis, inflammatory activity and steatosis)
were analyzed by an expert.
SIPHON is just a cohort acronym. Most of the patients in the SIPHON cohort have alco­
hol overuse history but were not qualified to take a liver biopsy based on liver stiffness
measurements, therefore for most of them there are no histological scores in the GALA
dataset.
Figure A.20: Projection of scan embeddings for SIPHON individual with histological
scores.
Figure A.21: Projection of scan embeddings for SIPHON individual with no histological
scores.
The cases shown from Figure A.25 on, apply the same principle, but the 192D embed­
dings for each scan were obtained applying the mean to only the first 10 tokens, equivalent
88
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.22: Projection of scan embeddings for ALD individual with no histological scores.
Figure A.23: Distributions of the scan embeddings among the two dimensions of the
reduced space for a healthy individual.
for the case of the main model of this project to the 10 highest peaks.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.24: Distributions of the scan embeddings among the two dimensions of the
reduced space for an individual with ALD.
Figure A.25: Projection of scan embeddings for healthy individual.
Figure A.26: Projection of scan embeddings for ALD individual with histological scores.
90
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.27: Projection of scan embeddings for ALD individual with no histological scores.
Figure A.28: Projection of scan embeddings for SIPHON individual with histological
scores.
Figure A.29: Projection of scan embeddings for SIPHON individual with no histological
scores.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
91
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.30: Distributions of the scan embeddings among the two dimensions of the
reduced space for a healthy individual.
Figure A.31: Distributions of the scan embeddings among the two dimensions of the
reduced space for an individual with ALD.
92
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:103==
A.5
Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
As a widely used dimensionality reduction architecture, VAE was chosen to process the
GALA dataset as a baseline. Below in Figure A.32, the training and validation loss for the
VAE model for two different learning rates is shown. This case is when the latent space
had a dimensionality of 192D, comparable to the embedding space in BERT. However, it
is very quickly seen that there is no fitness and the validation loss quickly increases.
Figure A.32: Training (with solid lines —) and validation loss (with dashed line ­ ­ ­) for the
VAE application to GALA data. Color code is used for different learning rates as shown
in the legend.
The other possible visualization from VAE is that allows to see the distribution of the dat­
apoints in the latent space. Usually, when working with a classification task, it is aimed
that this reduced dimensionality is capable of showing some differentiation between the
two classes, such as clustering datapoints from the same class together.
This is exactly what is shown in Figure A.33. In this case the latent space was forced to
be 2D, which is definitely a very low dimensionality for this data. This is shown by the total
lack of pattern by the different datapoints, where there is no differentiation at all between
classes.
Still, since it was developed, it is interesting to see the bad fitness the data has for this
architecture.
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
93
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.33: 2D latent space representation
94
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
==PAGE:105==
MasSpec­BERT: Disease prediction from plasma proteomics using Natural Language Processing
95
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
