==PAGE:1==
Nabil Halwany, s190732
MSc student at DTU Sustainable Energy
Optimal Sizing of BESS to Enable
Offshore Wind Farm Black Start
Operation
Master Thesis, June 2022
==PAGE:2==
Nabil Halwany, s190732
MSc student at DTU Sustainable Energy
Optimal Sizing of BESS to Enable
Offshore Wind Farm Black Start
Operation
Master Thesis, June 2022
==PAGE:3==
Optimal Sizing of BESS to Enable Offshore Wind Farm Black Start Operation
Author:
Nabil Halwany, s190732
MSc student at DTU Sustainable Energy
Supervisors:
Daniela Pagnani, Industrial PhD researcher (Ørsted)
Osazee Idehen, Senior Specialist HVDC (Ørsted)
Mattia Marinelli, Associate professor (DTU)
Mirko Ledro, Research Assistant (DTU)
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Division of Power and Energy Systems
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.windenergy.dtu.dk
Release date:
03-06-2022
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve the Master of
Science degree at the Technical University of Denmark. The report
represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©Nabil Halwany, DTU Wind and Energy Systems, 2022
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Wind and Energy Systems at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science in Engineering in Sustainable Energy - Study Line in Electric Energy
Systems. The MSc project was conducted in collaboration with Ørsted. The main goal of
the thesis is to determine the minimum size of the battery energy storage systems (BESSs)
to enable offshore wind farms to provide a black start service concerning the black start
technical requirements provided by the transmission system operators (TSOs).
The master thesis counts for 30 ECTS for the Master of Science in Sustainable Energy.
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to praise Allah the Almighty, the Most Gracious, and the
Most Merciful for His blessing given to me during my study and in completing this thesis.
I am grateful to my supervisors, Mattia Marinelli (Associate professor at DTU), Mirko
Ledro (Research Assistant at DTU), Daniela Pagnani (Industrial PhD researcher at Ørsted),
and Osazee Idehen (Senior Specialist HVDC at Ørsted), for giving me this opportunity
to do this project and always taking the time to discuss and giving me perfect feedback,
advice and supporting me during my thesis work.
Last but not least, my family. To my father, Mohammed, my mother Ilham, my brothers,
my wife’s family, and my friends, I am grateful for your support and praying for me to
succeed in my life.
Finally, my loving wife Salam, and our two kids Wisam and Yahia, I don’t have enough
words to express my gratitude. You are the best thing that happened to me. You are my
all, always and forever. I love you so much.
Heartfelt thanks.
Nabil
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
The goal of transitioning toward 100% renewable energy sources (RES) poses serious
challenges to the black start (BS) service in electric power systems due to the lack of
conventional BS units. To deal with this problem, offshore wind farms (OWFs) have the
potential to become a BS source. However, to become a BS provider, it is necessary to meet
some technical requirements such as the ability to accept block load, service availability,
the resilience of supply, and more [1]. Moreover, due to the variable power output of
the OWFs, it is challenging to meet all the requirements stand-alone without external
support. Therefore, with the fast development and decreasing cost, the battery energy
storage systems (BESSs) are now becoming a promising solution to support the OWFs to
overcome the BS requirements.
In order to determine the service needed for sizing the BESS for the BS problem, it is
necessary to understand the steps of using OWFs in the BS process. The BS problem for
an OWF as a BS source can be classified into four steps as follows [2]:
• Step 1: wind farm self-start capability.
• Step 2: energizing transformers and transmission lines.
• Step 3: starting up the large ancillary machine.
• Step 4: starting up generator unit.
Step 1, step 2 and step 3 are related to energization phase, which need a frequency and
voltage regulation service. Step 4 is related to the block loading phase and needs to smooth
the wind power output. Moreover, the literature highlights that sizing the BESS for step 4
gives satisfactory results for the previous steps too [3]. Therefore, this project focuses on
the optimal size of the BESS power rating for the block loading phase of the BS service.
In order to achieve this goal, a probabilistic method has been applied. A Weibull distribution
is considered to represent the wind generation behavior and estimate the BESS size following
the worst-case scenario. The worst-case scenario is determined using the cumulative density
function of the Weibull distribution, and it is defined as the wind power generation related
to the 10 % probability value. The value corresponding to this 10% is also defined as the
90% confidence level value in the project. Therefore, the BESS rated power size is found
by subtracting the wind power generation of the worst-case scenario to the block load
demand value required. The results show no need for the BESS for the block loading phase
for large OWFs. However, the BESS is still required for the energization phase.
In order to validate the results, Quasi-Dynamic simulation has been applied in Powerfactory
to simulate the variation of the wind farm output during the block loading phase of the
BS. The study cases have been chosen for different season days. Case 1 was for a one-day
simulation to validate the power and energy needed for the block load for at least 10 hours.
Case 2 was for three days of simulations to validate the resilience of supply for 72 hours.
In conclusion, the BESS optimal size for OWF to become a BS source depends on OWF
capacity size, block load size, and how to define the worst-case scenario, which is highly
dependent on the availability requirement.
ii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Limitations and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State-of-the-Art Review
4
2.1
Modern Large Offshore Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Technical Requirements for Black Start from Non-Traditional Resources . .
5
2.3
Battery Energy Storage System in Stationary Applications
. . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
BESS sizing methodology in Renewable Energy Systems . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Optimization Methodology
14
3.1
Probabilistic Method Applied to Power Rating Estimation . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Quasi-Dynamic Simulation model for Offshore Wind Farm Black Start . . .
23
3.3
Simulation model and system component in PF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results
25
4.1
Probabilistic Method Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Optimization Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Study Cases and Quasi-Dynamic Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Sensitivity Analysis
34
5.1
One Day Simulation for Different Block Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Three Days Simulation for 50 MW Block Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion and Future work
41
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iii
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
References
44
A The MATLAB Script for the Optimization Methodology
47
iv
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
The behavior of the power system network is becoming more complex due to the share
of renewable energy sources increasing. Thus the risk of a blackout in the modern power
system is increasing too. Massive blackouts such as North America in 2003, India in 2011,
and South Australia in 2016 led to severe social and economic losses[4],[5],[6]. Consequently,
shortening outage time and fast power system restoration time has become a hot topic.
As black start sources, the traditional power plants are characterized by a slow restoration
time. Therefore, an offshore wind farm (OWF) with battery energy storage systems (BESS)
can become an environmentally friendly black start source with a faster restoration time
than traditional sources. From that perspective, determining the optimal size of BESS to
enable the wind farm to operate as a black start source is necessary from both economic
and technical points of view [2], [3], [1].
This chapter gives an overview of the status of renewable energy sources in the near
future and the challenges that arise when replacing the conventional black start units with
renewable energy sources such as wind farms. It also gives an overview of the black start
in the power system restoration and its requirements and how the battery energy storage
system will help improve the modern power system’s resiliency.
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Status of Renewable Energy Sources
The share of renewable energy sources (RES) is increasing rapidly. As per the Paris
agreement, the RES will be the primary source in the future power system. In order to
reach net-zero emission in 2050, large OWFs have been developed, and conventional plants
will be decommissioned.
The lack of black start (BS) sources from conventional generators in the future led to
weak resiliency in the modern power system after the black-out. It made the industry to
think about the possibility of providing BS services from renewables, and in particular
with OWFs. Moreover, the large capacity of the OWFs shows an attractive solution as
renewable-based BS units.
Nowadays, there are no BS units from RES. It needs an extra help to satisfy all technical
requirments defined by transmission system operators (TSOs). Additionally, economic
feasibility is another factor that should be considered, which has not been proven yet [1],
[7].
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
1.1.2
Power System Restoration and Black Start
Once a black-out occurs, the power system restoration has three steps: black start, network
reconfiguration, and load restoration [2]. The black start is a process to restore the electrical
network from the shutdown to start supplying power without relying on the external grid.
Conventional power plants such as thermal power plants are now working as black start
sources, however with a long start-up time leading to a slow restoration process. Offshore
wind farms have the potential to become BS sources because of their large capacity and
short start-up time[7],[8],[9].
1.1.3
Battery Energy Storage Systems in Power System Applications
BESSs play a significant role in modern power systems. Power fluctuations caused by
renewable energy sources such as wind power result in serious concern about the reliability
and satisfactory operation of the power system. One solution to increase the reliability and
thus enhance the performance of the power system is to integrate the BESS into the power
system. Some of the services and applications that the BESS could provide are frequency
regulation, peak shaving, voltage stability, as well as black start. For renewable-base black
start sources such as wind farms, the BESS is an integral unit that assists self-starting
capability, makes smooth the power output, and energize the transmission lines and part
of the grid following a black-out [10],[11].
1.2
Problem Formulation
Battery energy storage systems (BESSs) are acquiring more and more popularity in power
applications, while their prices are getting more accessible in the market. The co-location
of a BESS in offshore wind farms (OWFs) could enable new services such as black start
(BS). This project will focus on establishing the optimal sizing of a BESS to enable the BS
operation of an offshore wind farm.
To achieve this goal, the following questions will be addressed during the project:
• How does the BESS help the OWFs become a BS source?
• What is the proper method to size the BESS for the BS service?
• What is the optimal size of the BESS to enable OWF to become a BS source?
In this project, the technical requirements inspired by the National Grid Electrical System
Operator(ESO) are as follow [9]:
• Provide continuous power to one or multiple block loads for ≥10 hours, each of them
of 20 MW.
• Energize itself and part of the grid in a no-load condition, to get the source ready to
provide power to the network.
• Service availability to providing BS service for ≥90% per year.
• The resilience of supply of the service (being ready to provide steady power to the
block load) for ≥72 hours.
• Maintain voltage and frequency suitability during the process.
2
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
1.3
Thesis Objective
The project main objective is to determine the minimum size of the BESS to enable the
offshore wind farms to provide a black start service concerning some of the technical
requirements related to BESS size.
1.4
Limitations and Assumptions
In this project, some limitations and assumptions have been take into consideration, these
are summarized below:
• The sizing method is based on the rating power of the BESS in MW.
• The size of the BESS is based on the worst-case scenario.
• The worst-case scenario in this project corresponds to the 90% confidence level value
( the probability of getting higher than or equal to this value is 90 %) see section 3.1.
• The optimal size of the BESS in this project has been estimated considering the
minimum technical requirements.
1.5
Thesis Outline
The report consists of 6 chapters, which content is outlined below:
• Chapter 2 presents an overview of the state-of-the-art. It describes modern offshore
wind farms, the BESS technology, the BESS sizing methods based on the provided
service, and a description of the black start problem. Moreover, it includes the
technical requirements related to the BESS sizing problem, preceded by a review of
relevant literature on the subjects.
• Chapter 3 first describes the applied probabilistic optimization method to estimate
the data to achieve the power rating size of the BESS in the worst-case scenario. Then
explain the model and system components and describes Quasi-Dynamic simulation
in Powerfactory.
• Chapter 4 first presents the results when applying the probabilistic optimization
method. Then presents the simulation results in powerfactory with different study
cases.
• Chapter 5 presents the sensitivity analysis for the data simulated in the previous
chapter. It discusses the final results, and compares them with what was obtained in
Chapter3.
• Chapter 6 conclude the thesis, summarizes the main results, answering to the
research questions, and point out some future works.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
STATE-OF-THE-ART REVIEW
The combination of the OWF with BESS can enhance the power system restoration time.
Starting with a brief introduction about the large offshore wind farms, the requirements
to utilize them as BS sources are described. Then an overview of the BESS and the
main optimization methods for sizing it for power system applications. The BS strategy
provided by OWF and BESS is reported. Finally, the methodology of sizing BESS for BS
is introduced.
2.1
Modern Large Offshore Wind Farms
A typical offshore wind farm consists of several wind turbines and other components such
as offshore substations and export cables, as can be seen in Figure 2.1. An offshore wind
farm is located in the sea and it could be a couple of wind turbines or more than hundreds
depending on the capacity needed. The wind turbine, which consists of a synchronous
generator that converts mechanical power into electric power, later transferred through
a cable to the offshore substation and then exported to the shore. There are several
advantages about building offshore wind farms, among them the average wind speed is
higher than onshore, and a wider free space in the sea [12].
Wind turbines are generally classified into four types, marked from A to D (sometimes
1 to 4). The oldest one is the type A which its generator connects directly to the grid ,
whereas the modern one is the type D which its generator connects to the grid by power
electronic full converter[12].
Figure 2.1. Typical offshore wind farm components [12]
4
==PAGE:13==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
Overall, offshore wind farms show the potential to be environmentally friendly black start
units in the future power system. Their large capacity and fast recovery time play a major
role in future energy system restoration strategie. The total installed capacity worldwide
in 2018 was 23 GW and is expected to reach 228 GW in 2030 and about 1000 GW in
2050 [1]. Nowadays, the largest offshore wind farm in the world is Hornsea Two in the
UK, owned by Ørsted. The project comprises 165x8 MW wind turbines with a combined
total capacity over 1.3 GW and spans an offshore area of 462 Km2. It provides energy to
approx. 1.3 million homes in the UK [13].
2.2
Technical Requirements for Black Start from
Non-Traditional Resources
The future integration of renewable energy sources as BS units is receiving high attention
at global and European levels. However, to become a BS provider, an offshore wind farm
should be able to meet some requirements. Currently, these requirements are applied
to conventional units and do not apply to offshore wind farms. Some TSOs, such as
the British TSO National Grid Electrical System Operator (ESO), extended the set of
requirements for new possible sources of BS [1].
These requirements are as follows:
• Self start capability: The BS unit should be able to energize itself after a blackout.
A typical offshore wind farm is usually designed with a grid-following converter, which
cannot start itself without relying on the grid. Therefore, there is a fundamental need
for a device such as BESS to help the offshore wind farm with self-start capability
[7].
• Service availability: The service availability means that the BS source should be
able to provide the BS service for a specific time determined by TSOs. ESO sets
the minimum required time to be available at 90 % of the year, which is the same
requirement currently active for conventional units [9],[14].
The availability problem is a severe concern for the offshore BS source, as their power
output highly depends on the wind variability. This problem can be solved by the
BESS.
• Block loading capability: The ability to accept continuous power demand . The
ESO sets the minimum block load to 20 MW [14].
•
Resiliency of supply: Based on the ESO, this requirement can be classified into
two type as follow [9]:
1. The BS service resiliency of supply for ≥10 h: the ability to deliver continuous
power for a block load of a minimum of 20 MW for at least 10 hours.
2. The BS auxiliary unit resiliency of supply for ≥72 h: the ability to deliver
or support continuously the output required for the BS service for at least 72
hours [14].
The requirements presented above are the one of main importance for the current
investigation. However, they are not the only ones, and the whole black start requirements
by ESO are gathered in table 2.1.
5
==PAGE:14==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
Table 2.1. List of BS requirements by ESO [7]
Category
Requirement
Self-start
Yes
Time to connect
≤2h h
Service availability
≥90 %
Voltage control
±10 %
Frequency control
47.5 Hz - 52 Hz
Block load
20 MW
BS service resiliency of supply
≥10 h
BS auxiliary unit resiliency of supply
≥72 h
Reactive capability
≥100 MVAr leading
Inertia value
≥800 MVA.s.
Sequential start-ups
≥3
Short-circuit level
240 MV A
√
3U KA (t < 80ms), and 10 MV A
√
3U
In this project, the concern of the BS requirements are mostly on the block loading
capability, service availability and resilience of supply.
2.3
Battery Energy Storage System in Stationary
Applications
Battery energy storage systems (BESSs) technology has been considered a great option
recently in the modern power system. Their advantages, such as scalability, fast response
time, and the ability to deliver power to the system, are making the BESS a suitable option
for providing many auxiliary services [7]. This section gives an overview of the technology
and possible services in the power system.
2.3.1
Operational Services from the BESS
The BESS can provide many services to the power system, such as power quality, voltage,
and frequency support. The significant services are summarized here below [15][11]:
• Power quality: this service uses the BESS as a backup system that enhances,
protects, and stabilizes the system against any disturbances such as loss of generators
which affect the quality of power delivered to the loads. Some manifestations of the
poor power quality resulting from the disturbance are frequency magnitude variation,
voltage magnitude variation, harmonics, and power fluctuations.
• Load following: this service results from the changes in load. Thus, the BESS
can track the variation of load due to its fast response and high power output and
maintain the system frequency stable.
• Reserve power: this application utilizes the BESS as reserve capacity that can be
called when an unexpected condition such as loss of generation or load occurs. Thus
the BESS aims to ensure the system stability by applying it as a spinning reserve of
the large generators.
• Electric power time shifting (arbitrage): this service aims to store electric
energy available during periods when prices are low and sell it at a later time when
the price is high.
6
==PAGE:15==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
• Renewable energy system support and regulation: the BESS can support the
Renewable energy sources and power system by smoothing their power output and
regulating the power system by maintaining the frequency and voltage of the grid
stable.
In the past decade, different types of BESS technology have been further developed for
power system applications such as lead-acid, Sodium–Sulfur(NaS),and Lithium-Ion (Li-ion).
The Li-ion battery is considered among the most growing battery nowadays. The main
feature of Li-Ion for power system applications are summarized as follows [10],[15]:
• Li-ion is considered the most significant potential for future development because of
its low maintenance, high efficiency, and long lifetime compared to the other BESS
type.
• It has overall high efficiency and life up to 3000 cycles at 80% depth of discharge.
• It is primarily utilized in distribution energy source systems such as electric vehicles.
• The Li-ion nowadays has a high cost compared to the other type of battery. However,
its price has decreased with the development of technology and it will decrease more
in the near future.
2.3.2
Offshore Wind Farm BS Strategy with BESS
The functionality of the BS phase using wind farm and BESS can be divided into four
steps as follow [2],[3],[16]:
1. Wind farm starting up.
2. Energizing of transformers and transmission lines.
3. Starting up the large ancillary machine.
4. Starting up generator unit.
The energizing of the transformers and transmission lines from no load to full load will
cause an overvoltage. Therefore, this step should be controlled by using a reactive power
compensation device to prevent the wind turbines from tripping off.
The BESS sizing problem to enable OWF to be a BS source was formulated as 3 sub-
problems as follows [2],[3]:
• Sub-problem 1: this problem deals with wind farm starting up. The wind turbines
need external power sources to start up due to a lack of self-starting ability. Thus,
BESS can work as a self-start unit and provide the active power load that the OWF
needs to start.
• Sub-problem 2: this problem deals with starting up a large ancillary machine.
In conventional power plants, the ancillary machines are usually double squirrel
induction machines which will cause a frequency and voltage deviation when starting
up. The voltage drop can be handled with a reactive power compensation device such
as a VAR device. The OWF equipped with BESS can recover the system frequency
very fast and thus ensure frequency stability during BS process.
• Sub-problem 3: this problem deals with starting up the generator unit. The
conventional power plant needs a steady power to start up from the shutdown state
7
==PAGE:16==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
in order to begin ready to provide power again. The BESS can operate as an energy
buffer that smooths the power output of the OWF to provide steady power to start
the generator unit.
The optimal size problem of BESS can be represented as follows:
PBESS = max {P1, P2, P3}
(2.1)
EBESS = E1 + E2 + E3
(2.2)
where :
P1 , P2 and P3 are the power needed for sub-problem 1,2 and 3.
E1, E2 and E3 are the capacity needed for sub-problem 1,2 and 3.
According to [2] and [3], the BESS power size for sub-problem 1 and 2 is smaller than the
power size for sub-problem 3. And the same for capacity, the capacity size for sub-problem
1 and 2 is smaller than the capacity size for sub-problem 3. Therefore, sizing the BESS
for the wind farm to be a black start unit can be represented by the capacity and power
needed for sub-problem 3.
The total wind farm capacity in [2] was approximately 50 MW consisting of 33x1.5 MW
wind turbines, and the target generator unit is 300 MW which needs a steady power of
15 MW. The results show that the power needed to start up the wind farm and the large
ancillary machine is 0.594 MW and 1.24 MW, respectively, While the power needed to
start up a 300 MW generator unit is 14.07 MW. It can be said that the size of BESS in
terms of power and capacity for step 4 of the BS process can dominate the size of BESS
for step 1,2 and 3.
2.4
BESS sizing methodology in Renewable Energy
Systems
Many methods are used to find the ideal size of the BESS. The optimal size could be found
through the usage of an economic indicator when the size minimizes the total investment
and operating costs, or a technical indicator when the size satisfies minimum technical
requirements regardless of the cost of the BESS [17],[18]. An overview about the different
methods and techniques to determine the optimal size of BESS is taken from [17], and
here summarized:
1. Probabilistic methods: The probabilistic methods are commonly used because it
is simple to apply when sizing the BESS with uncertainty, such as the problem related
to renewable energy sources (RES). One of the probabilistic methods is to estimate
the historical data of the RES with one of the typical distributions (for example
the Weibull distribution), and generate a large number of scenarios according to the
statistical behavior of random variables.
Generating a large number of synthesis scenarios have two advantages. The first
advantage is to reduce the errors caused by inaccurate forecasting. The second
8
==PAGE:17==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
advantage is that the scenarios generated have an equal probability distribution. The
BESS size can be estimated directly from the synthesis scenarios or use the scenarios
as input to another method. Some studies use the Probabilistic method to generate
scenarios and use them as input for a stochastic optimization problem [18]. Figure
2.2 shows a flowchart of the probabilistic methods for sizing the BESS for power
system applications.
Figure 2.2. Probabilistic method [17].
2. Analytical methods: This method has a wide range of services in power systems.
It is based on iteratively analyzing and evaluating the performance of the power
system using input data and parameters. The success criteria for sizing the BESS
in this method could be economic indicators such as net present value (NPV), or
technical indicators such as frequency or voltage of the system.
Reference [15] uses the analytical method for frequency control of micro-grid and the
optimal size of the BESS is achieved by the balance between generation and demand.
The flow chart in the figure 2.3 summarizes the method used to achieve the optimal
size of BESS with an objective function that minimizes the total cost and maintains
the frequency in the acceptable range. It can be noted here that the indicator for
success criteria is that if the micro-grid frequency satisfies the frequency condition
after balancing the generation and demand, then an optimal size and cost of BESS
are obtained.
9
==PAGE:18==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
Figure 2.3. Analytical method for frequency control for micro-grid [15].
3. Mathematical optimization methods: The applications of this method in power
systems are mostly in the electricity markets such as day ahead or intra-day markets
and optimize the daily performance of the system.
The BESS size can be formulated as a linear problem (LP) or mixed integer linear
problem (MILP)with an objective function minimizing the total cost of the battery
or maximizing the total profit of the system subject to some technical constraints
.these problems need a professional software consisting of optimization tools such as
MATLAB, JULIA, and GAMS that can find the optimal solution with respect to
the problem constraints [19].
4. Heuristic methods:This methods contains the method that are inspired from the
nurture such as Particle Swarm optimization (PSO) method or Genetic algorithm
(GA)[20].
Many studies have combined different methods to determine the size of BESS for many
different services utilized in the power system. Reference [21] used an analytical method
to optimally determine the size of the BESS that maximizes the profitability and increases
the lifetime of the battery. The indicator to success criteria was when the highest net
present value (NPV) was determined. The parameters needed are the power generation
price, BESS price, discount rate, battery degradation, and efficiency. The software used to
solve this problem is MATLAB.
10
==PAGE:19==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
Reference [18] used the probabilistic methods to find the optimal size of the BESS connected
to renewable energy sources (RES) and solve the optimization using the unit commitment
problem. The objectives of this study are to minimize the BESS total cost and maximize
the micro-grid profit under uncertainty. The parameters need to solve the problem are:
historical wind generation, historical demand profile, and electricity price. The idea is to
generate different wind generation scenarios with probability and feed them into the unit
commitment problem. The suggested software to solve this kind of optimization problem
is GAMS.
Reference [19] size the storage for the micro-grid based on the cost-benefit analysis by
implementing mix integer linear problem (MILP). The objective was to determine the
optimal size of the energy storage connected to the micro-grid that can store the exceeded
generation and shave the peak demand.
Reference [20] used a heuristic algorithm and simulation to size the energy storage for
an isolated grid with wind power. This problem is similar to the black start, the energy
storage designed for isolated operation with grid-based 100% renewable power generation
during the emergency period
Reference[22] used analytical method and particle swarm optimization to size the BESS
for frequency regulation in micro-grid. The objective of the problem is to minimize the
total cost of the battery while keeping the frequency in the acceptable range. The problem
formulation was solved in DIgSILENT Programming Language, and the simulation of the
micro-grid was in DIgSILENT PowerFactory.
reference [3]used the joint probability distribution and asymmetric copula function to size
the energy storage for the wind farm to be a black start unit. The energy storage services
in this study deal with frequency stability during the energizing process and smoothing
the power output during the starting up generator process. The optimization problem
formulation is based on the chance constraint programming model. The software used to
solve the problem is MATLAB.
Reference [2] used the same procedure, but the size of energy storage was mainly concern
in the last stage of the black start process (smoothing the power output during the start-up
generator process).
A feasibility study of applying storage to enable wind farm black start in local power
grid was introduced in[23]. A predictive control method implemented in [16] to size the
energy storage with the wind farm to deal with frequency regulation during the black start
process.
Table 2.2 summarize some of the services and methods that are used when sizing the BESS
in a modern power system.
11
==PAGE:20==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
Table 2.2. Overview of methods and services that used for sizing BESS in power system applications
Services
Method
Source
Frequency regulation and
Smoothing RWS output fluctuation in micro-grid
Heuristic method(PSO,Genetic algorithm)
Analytical method
[15][22][24][25]
Peak shaving and improve the reliability of micro-grid
Mathematical optimization methods(MILP,LP)
Analytical method
[19][26]
Maximize the total benefit of the micro-grid by energy saving
Mathematical optimization methods(MILP,LP)
Analytical method
[27][19]
Optimize the operation of micro-grid under uncertainty
Probabilistic methods
(Stochastic optimization problem)
[18]
Maximize the economic profit of RWS
Analytical method
[21]
Fulfill the production commitment
Analytical method
[28]
Isolated operation of the grid with 100% renewable
power generation during the emergency period
Heuristic method
(Genetic algorithm and simulation)
[20]
Minimize the operation cost of MG
Analytical method
with Genetic algorithm
[29]
Optimal scheduling and cost benefit analysis
Analytical method with
Dynamic Problem algorithm
[24]
Black start
Probabilistic method and
Chance constraint optimization
[2][3][16]
It can be seen that the probabilistic method was used for BESS sizing for any problem
dealing with wind uncertainty including the BS problem.
2.4.1
Black Start Problem
In general, to apply the BS service problem to BESS sizing, the key features to consider
are [2][3]:
1. The BS source should provide steady power output for a certain period of time to
block load.
2. Maintain system frequency as well as voltage stability.
The frequency and voltage drop problems occur when starting up the wind turbines and
large ancillary machines while smoothing the power output from the wind farm problem
is necessary for providing steady-state power output for the block load process. After
providing enough power to restore the frequency and voltage, the system is ready to provide
stable power to start up a non-black start generator unit.
2.4.2
BESS Sizing Method for Black Start
From 2.3.1 and 2.4.1 the black start problem for a wind farm and BESS as a black start
source can be represented by starting up a generator unit (step 4). Due to the stochastic
nature of the wind resources, a probabilistic method will be applied to estimate the size
of BESS to enable OWF to become a black start source under wind uncertainty. The
idea is to estimate the size in the worst case value with a confidence level up to 90%
by determining the boundary for the upper 90% of wind generation using the inverse
cumulative distribution function (ICDF). In other words with a 90% confidence level, the
chance of being wrong is 10 %.
12
==PAGE:21==
2. State-of-the-Art Review
2.5
Summary
This chapter exposes the concept of black start, detailing the main technical requirements
that constrain the BESS size for BS problem from the non-traditional sources. Then an
overview of the sizing methods used and possible services provided by the BESS in the
power system. A brief introduction about the BS strategy by OWF with BESS was given.
Finally, the method to size the BESS is briefly introduced, and more details about the
method will be described in chapter 3.
13
==PAGE:22==
3
OPTIMIZATION METHODOLOGY
Nowadays, OWF represents the fastest growing RES. It is already widely installed all
around the world. However, the BESS is necessary to enable the OWF as a BS source due
to its output variations. As a consequence, a probabilistic optimization method has been
applied to size the BESS under wind power output uncertainty. In order to estimate the
size using this method, historical data of the wind generation should be utilized as the
input. Then, the data should be estimated using one of the statistical distributions. In
this project, the current offshore wind generation capacity factor in Great Britain from
2014 to 2019 has been fitted to the Weibull distribution [30]. Then, in order to understand
the worst-case value and the concept of the confidence level, it is necessary to understand
the characteristics of the distribution and its functions. Therefore, a description of the
input and output parameters needed for the distribution’s functions and how utilized to
estimate the size of the BESS under a worst-case scenario is reported.
3.1
Probabilistic Method Applied to Power Rating
Estimation
This section applies the steps of the probabilistic method to estimate the BESS power
rating for the BS problem. The method’s input is the cumulative data representing the
historical offshore wind generation capacity factor for six years. The capacity factor of a
wind turbine is its average power output divided by its maximum power capability [31].
The reason to use the capacity factor data is to avoid confusion resulting from the amount
of electric power produced from individual wind turbines, therefore the OWF is treated as
a single wind turbine. Thus, estimating the worst-case generation value is for the whole
wind farm output. Then in order to calculate the generation value in MW, the resulting
wind generation capacity factor should be multiplied by the maximum rated capacity of
the OWF and subtracted from the block load to estimate the size of BESS.
The cumulative data are analyzed, then estimated by the statistical distribution that fits
the variation of the wind generation profile. In this project, the Weibull distribution has
been used to represent the behavior of the wind generation data. After that, the synthesis
data was randomly generated using the previous characteristics of the Weibull distribution
(the scale and shape parameters). More details about the synthesis data generation will
found in 3.1.3.
Finally, the boundary for the upper 90% of wind generation values has been determined
using the inverse cumulative distribution function (ICDF) to define the worst-case value.
This boundary is equivalent to the value at which the probability distribution’s cumulative
density function (CDF) equals 0.1. In other words, the probability of getting less than this
value is 10%, or the confidence level of getting higher than this value is 90%. In this case,
14
==PAGE:23==
3. Optimization Methodology
the method guarantees the availability of supplying power to the block load process 90%
of the time.
3.1.1
BESS Size Estimation Algorithm
Figure 3.1 shows the flowchart of the method applied to estimate the production of the wind
farm and the BESS size in the worst-case scenario. It starts by estimating the historical data
by Weibull distribution to capture the maximum likelihood values of the wind generation.
The synthesis data are then generated and fitted to the Weibull distribution to validate
the data estimation and reduce the errors. After the data estimation, the boundary value
has be calculated, and thus BESS size for the worst-case scenario has been executed.
Figure 3.1. Flowchart of the method applied to estimate the power rating size.
It is worth noticing that this method might be applied for different distributions, for
example, kernel or exponential distribution. It depends on how the time-series data are
distributed over a specific time.
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Optimization Methodology
The steps for BESS sizing method applied in this project can be summarized as follow:
1. Evaluate the time series historical data and choose the right distribution (Weibull in
this project).
2. Fit the historical data with the distribution.
3. Generate synthesis data that fit to the distribution characteristic used in previous
step .
4. Calculate the PDF,CDF, and ICDF for estimated data.
5. Set the boundary value in ICDF function equal to 0.1 (10% quantile) to estimate the
worst case generation value.
6. Estimate the BESS power rating size at the worst case using equation 3.7.
3.1.2
Data Estimation
The first step in this method is to analyze the historical data to see the distribution of
the wind production. The sample data size is 52608 data points corresponding to 6 years
Offshore current wind generation capacity factor in Great Britain with hourly resolution.
The fluctuation caused by the wind results in a variable wind generation profile, as reported
in figure 3.2. In order to deal with the generation profile mathematically and calculate
the confidence level for the power generated in the worst-case scenario, it is necessary to
represent the behavior of wind energy statistically using one of the statistic distributions.
The Weibull distribution is usually used when dealing with wind speed variation. However,
the use of the Weibull distribution in this method is because it was the most suiting for
the historical wind generation data acquired from the source [30].
Figure 3.2. Historical offshore current wind generation capacity factor in Great Britain from 2014
to 2019.
In order to fit the Weibull distribution to the cumulative wind generation data, a distribution
object is created. The distribution object takes the wind data as an input and generates
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Optimization Methodology
the Weibull distribution characterizes parameters (a the scale parameter and b the shape
parameter). The shape parameter describes the behavior of the wind generation, and
the scale parameter describes how the data are spread or the variability present in the
distribution. The distribution parameters are necessary to estimate the wind generation
parameters from the sample data that fit the Weibull distribution characteristic curve.
In order to evaluate the estimated parameters that fit the Weibull distribution and calculate
the boundary value (worst-case) that has a 10 percent probability to happen, the functions
PDF, CDF, and the ICDF are calculated.
The PDF for Weibull distribution is mathematically described as [32]
w(x, a, b) = b
a
x
a
b−1
e−(x/a)b
(3.1)
where :
• a is the scale parameter, in this case equal to 0.415 pu.
• b is the shape parameter, in this case equal to 1.6.
• x is the data set or the wind generation in pu.
Figure 3.3 shows the PDF curve for the historical wind generation data and the fit it PDF
Weibull distribution curve that is characterized by a= 0.415 pu and b= 1.6. it can be
seen that the errors outside the red curve are in the acceptable range, and the Weibull
distribution for this case is suitable for estimating the most likely wind generation values.
The errors can be reduced by generating synthesis data, as will see in section 3.1.3.
Figure 3.3. Data fitting by Weibull distribution.
The pdf returns the density of probability for each value estimated x (wind generation in
pu), thus to evaluate the probability for the wind generation parameters, the CDF and its
inverse ICDF are utilized.
The CDF for Weibull distribution is [32]:
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Optimization Methodology
p(x, a, b) =
Z x
0
ba−btb−1e−( x
b )
b
dt = 1 −e−( x
b )
b
(3.2)
The result p is the probability that a single observation from a Weibull distribution with
parameters a and b falls in the interval [0 x]. Figure 3.4 shows the CDF curve for the
historical data fit to the Weibull CDF curve. The probability of each estimated wind
generation data is represented in the Y-axis ranging from 0 to 1 and the x-axis represents
the wind generation in pu . In other words, the input of the CDF function is the Weibull
distribution parameters (a and b) and the wind generation parameters in pu ranging from
0 to 1, moreover, the output is the probability of getting each wind generation value or
less.
Figure 3.4. cumulative distribution function curves for the historical data fit to Weibull
distribution.
The confidence level for any scenario can be calculated using the CDF curve for a given
generation value as follows:
CDF(x) = p
(3.3)
and the confidence level :
confidence = 100 −p
(3.4)
where:
• x: The estimated wind generation value in pu.
• p: The probability of getting x or less than x.
The CDF function returns the probability using the wind generation as an input, thus,
in order to estimate the wind generation value for a specific confidence level using the
probability of getting each value as an input, the ICDF or the quantile function for the
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Optimization Methodology
Weibull distribution is utilized. The mathematical equation for the ICDF function for
Weibull distribution is [32]:
x = F −1(p, a, b) = −a[ln(1 −p)]1/b
(3.5)
The result x is the value where an observation from a Weibull distribution with parameters
a and b falls in the range [0 x] with probability p. In other words, x is the wind generation
value estimated resulting from the ICDF function. The inputs of the function are the
characteristics parameters a and b and the probability of getting each wind generation
value or less.
Figure 3.5 shows the ICDF curve for the Weibull distribution fit to the ICDF historical
data curve. It can be seen that, given the probability in the x-axis, the wind generation
value in pu can be extracted from the y-axis.
Figure 3.5. Inverse cumulative distribution function curves for the historical data fit to Weibull
distribution.
The worst-case generation value can be calculated using the ICDF curve for a given
probability as follows:
ICDF(p) = x
(3.6)
where:
• x: The estimated wind generation value for the worst-case in pu.
• p: The probability of getting x or less than x.
In order to summarize the inputs and the outputs of the probability functions used in the
method, a block diagram of the PDF, CDF, and ICDF functions are illustrated in figure 3.6.
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Optimization Methodology
It can be seen that the ICDF function can be used to calculate the wind generation value
that corresponds to a given probability. In other words, to estimate the 90% confidence
level value for wind generation, the 10% probability should be used in the ICDF function,
which will generate the wind generation value that has a probability of 10% to happen. In
this case, the upper 90% of the wind generation values have been determined ( confidence
level of 90%), and the availability of BS service 90% of the time is satisfied.
Figure 3.6. A block diagram of the input and output of the probability functions.
3.1.3
Synthesis Data Generation
There are two reasons for this step, the first reason is to reduce the errors when estimating
the wind generation profile with Weibull distribution. Moreover, the second reason is
generating scenarios with equal probability and thus reducing the errors when estimating
the worst-case value. The synthesis data are generated randomly using the Weibull two
parameters that characterize the historical data distribution’s shape and scale. Thus the
input of the random function is the Weibull distribution characteristics, the size of sample
data, and the number of scenarios. The function’s output is the wind power data fitting
the Weibull distribution.
The number of scenarios means how much the sample data will be iterated. Moreover, the
sample data size is the number of wind generation values. The function Random(Pd,S,N)
in MATLAB is utilized to generate the data, which returns a random variate from
probability distribution object.
20
==PAGE:29==
3. Optimization Methodology
The parameters that compose the function are:
• Pd is the historical data probability distribution object.
• S is the number of sample data.
• N is the number of synthesis wind data scenarios generated.
The number of scenarios plays an essential factor that affects the shape of the distribution.
Therefore, more scenario generation will fit better to the distribution, and thus the error
of estimating the worst-case value will be lower.
Figure 3.7 shows the effect of the number of scenarios on the shape of the probability
distribution of the data. It can be seen that 100 and 1000 scenarios data fit to the Weibull
distribution better than 1 or 10 scenarios. The 100 and 1000 scenarios have approximately
the same shapes. Therefore, the number of scenarios N has been chosen is equal to 100.
In order to generate a sample size equal to 6 years hourly resolution of wind generation
data with a number of scenarios equal to 100, the Random (Pd,52608,100) is used,
which will generate 52608x100 random variate fit to Weibull distribution.
Figure 3.7. Synthesis data generation fit to Weibull distribution for different scenarios.
Figure 3.8 shows the CDF and ICDF curves for the synthesis data generation fit it to the
Weibull distribution curves. It can be seen that the synthesis data fits well, and the errors
are smaller compared to the historical data in the previous section.
21
==PAGE:30==
3. Optimization Methodology
Figure 3.8. Cumulative distribution function (CDF) and the inverse cumulative distribution
function (ICDF) for synthesis data generation.
After generating the synthesis data, the same procedure was applied to estimate the
worst-case wind generation power at a 90% confidence level value by calculating the 10%
quantile value using ICDF function. The minimum wind generation obtained for the
historical data at the 90% confidence level is equal to 0.102 pu while the minimum value
obtained at the same confidence level for synthesis data is equal to 0.105 pu.
3.1.4
BESS Power Rating Estimation
The BESS power rating is calculated by taking the difference between the block load
demand and the estimated worst-case power generation.
The formula used to calculate the estimated BESS power rating size is as follows:
PBESS = Pblock −PWind
(3.7)
where:
• PBESS : BESS power rating at the worst case scenario.
• PWind : Wind generation at the worst case scenario.
• Pblock : Block load size (20 MW minimum requirement).
If the resulting power rate is a negative value ( PBattery ≤0) means the OWF output
exceed the block load demand required, and if it is a positive value (PBattery ≥0) means
the BESS will discharge the mismatch power. In this project, the focus is on the discharge
of power from the BESS. Therefore, if the BESS has a positive value in the worst-case wind
scenario means the wind farm capacity satisfy already the minimum block load required.
However, the BESS is still required for the previous phases(e.g., the energization phase) of
the BS process.
22
==PAGE:31==
3. Optimization Methodology
3.2
Quasi-Dynamic Simulation model for Offshore Wind
Farm Black Start
The Quasi Dynamic Simulation in Power Factory is for the execution of medium to long-
term simulations. The tool is particularly suitable for planning studies in which long-term
load and generation profiles are defined [33]. The idea of the Quasi dynamic simulation is
to calculate the power flow of the power system considering the time series generation (or
load) and thereby describe the system’s performance.
In order to validate the results obtained from the theoretical method, a Quasi-Dynamic
simulation in DIgSILENT PowerFactory v15.2 has been carried out to simulate the last
step of the black start process and estimate the battery energy storage system (BESS) size
for the worst-case scenario. A time characteristic was created inside the wind farm load
flow page, and the step size selected is a daily one-hour time resolution. The load was kept
to a constant 20 MW value, and the BESS will work as a reference machine to compensate
for the variation of wind farm generation.
Different study cases for different seasons have been chosen for the simulation. The optimal
BESS size is obtained when the BESS will compensate for the mismatched power between
the generation and demand and thus smooth the wind farm’s power output during the
block load process. The estimated size for the BESS was applied to the lowest generation
value of the wind farm generation for different season days. However, more details about
the simulation are in scetion 4.3.
3.3
Simulation model and system component in PF
Figure 3.9 shows the simulation model grid used in this project to simulate the black start
problem. The model is straightforward, it consists of a wind farm, BESS, and a load
connected to a 20 kV bus. The model was kept simple because the focus in this project is
to simulate the fluctuations of the wind farm output over time. The wind farm capacity is
400 MW, representing one-third of the largest wind farm project in the world (Hornsea 2)
in the UK implemented by Ørsted.
The wind farm in the simulation model works as one single wind turbine connected to the
20 KV bus through 0.4 KV-20 KV 400 MVA. The wind turbine model in PF is generic, and
it can be adjusted to represent the 400 MW wind farm by simply changing the parameters
of the elements inside from the basic data page.
The BESS model is also generic. It is a BESS 30 MVA connected to 10 KV bus voltage
level, and the model has been adjusted to 200 MVA. The BESS is connected to a 20 KV
bus through a 10 KV-20 KV 400 MVA three-phase system. The block load is a general
load type with an active power of 20 MW(minimum requirement) and zero reactive power.
The BESS works as a reference machine to reduce the fluctuations from wind turbine
generation.
23
==PAGE:32==
3. Optimization Methodology
Figure 3.9. The simulation model in PowerFactory used for simulating the last step of the black
start process.
3.4
Summary
This chapter concerns the probabilistic method applied to estimate the power rating size
of the BESS to enable OWF as a BS source. An overview of the inputs and outputs of
the algorithm applied is reported, with a description of the probability functions used
to estimate the worst-case scenario. The Quasi- dynamic simulation in PF is defined to
validate optimization methodology results by simulating the real data used. The system
component and the simulation grid used are defined. However, more details about the
optimization methodology results and the study cases of the simulation are reported in
chapter 4.
24
==PAGE:33==
4
RESULTS
In this chapter, the results for the probabilistic method are presented and discussed in
section 4.1. Moreover, the study cases and the quasi-dynamic simulation results are
presented and discussed in section 4.3.
4.1
Probabilistic Method Results
Tables 4.1 and 4.2 show the BESS size results for supplying 20 MW block load under
minimum wind power generation at a 90% confidence level (worst-case) for the historical
and synthesis data. Different OWF capacities have been used starting from 8 MW (single
wind turbine case) to 400 MW.
It can be seen that the OWF using the Weibull distribution to estimate the historical
data will not produce less than 0.102 pu at a 90% confidence level, While for the synthesis
data, the value is 0.105 pu. However, the difference between the estimated worst-case wind
power value for historical and synthesis data is very small (3e−4 pu), but this value will
affect the size in the case of large wind farm capacity, as seen in the case of 400 MW.
The BESS power size has been calculated using equation 3.7. The negative value represents
when the wind generation exceeds the block load demand, and the positive value means
the discharging power to the block load. When providing power to block load, the black
start problem is mainly related to the discharge power. Thus, the 400 MW can satisfy the
minimum block loading requirement without the need for a BESS at the 90% confidence
level.
It is worth mentioning here that the size of the BESS in terms of power and capacity
is essential for the last step of black start because the time range required is in hours.
However, it is not necessary for the energizing process because the problem is related to
frequency regulation and the time needed ranges between 20 seconds to minutes [16][2].
In addition, the minimum requirement provided by the British TSO (ESO) is delivering
continuous power to block load for at least 10 hours. Therefore, the energy capacity results
have been considered the minimum time required (10 hours) in calculating the energy
capacity size.
Table 4.1. Results for historical data estimation at 90% confidence level and 20 MW block load
Base capacity in MW
Wind generation pu
BESS power size in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
8
0.102
19.186
191.86
50
0.102
14.913
149.13
100
0.102
9.825
98.25
400
0.102
-20.700
0
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Results
Table 4.2. Results for synthesis data estimation at 90% confidence level and 20 MW block load
Base capacity in MW
Wind generation pu
BESS power size in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
8
0.105
19.156
191.56
50
0.105
14.728
147.28
100
0.105
9.443
94.43
400
0.105
-22.221
0
In order to know when the BESS needs to be discharged to support the 400 MW OWF in
the block load phase, the sensitivity analysis was applied for different block load sizes in
case of synthesis data estimation and 90% confidence level. The results are presented in
table 4.3. It can be seen that the BESS discharge when the block load size equal to 50
MW.
Table 4.3. Results for 400 MW OWF using synthesis data estimation at 90% confidence level and
different block loads
Wind generation pu
Block load in MW
BESS power size in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
0.105
30
-12.194
0
0.105
40
-2.183
0
0.105
50
7.819
78.19
0.105
60
17.816
178.16
According to [2], the power needed to start up a 50 MW wind farm is 0.594 MW. Therefore,
to obtain the power needed to start up a 400 MW capacity, the result for 50 MW has been
normalized to the 400 MW as follows:
Pstart = 400 ∗0.594
50
= 4.8 MW
(4.1)
Additionally, considering the power needed for starting up the large ancillary machine is
around 1.2 MW as reported in the same reference, the total power needed for the starting
up process before providing power to the block load is equal to 6 MW.
It can be observed that for large offshore wind farms such as 400 MW, the BESS is not
needed for providing power to block load of 20 MW, but still, need 6MW power rate for
energizing the wind farm and part of the grid.
4.2
Optimization Summary
The probabilistic optimization method results can be summarized as follows :
• The minimum block load for a large offshore wind farm depends on the estimated
wind generation in the worst-case scenario.
• For large offshore wind farms, the BESS is not needed for providing steady power to
the 20 MW block load but it cannot be avoided for the energization process.
• In the case of 400 MW offshore wind farm, the minimum block load when the BESS
need to discharge power is 50 MW.
• The BESS size for supplying steady power to 50 MW block load and 90 % confidence
level is 7.819 MW/78.19 MWh.
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Results
4.3
Study Cases and Quasi-Dynamic Simulation Results
In this section, study cases were selected from the historical data for different seasons in
2019 to simulated in PF using the quasi-dynamic tool to verify the results obtained from
the method applied. The study case results for one-day and three-days simulations are
presented with discussions. Then a summary of the results obtained is reported.
4.3.1
One-day simulation
The one-day simulation model is selected randomly for different seasons to verify the black
start requirement for the ability to deliver continuous power to a 20 MW block load for at
least 10 hours. The confidence level for the scenarios are calculated using equations 3.3
and 3.4.
The simulation results for the 400 MW wind farm base value are shown as follows:
• Winter day: The winter day is in 01-01-2019. Figure 4.1 shows the lowest wind
generation value is 0.349 pu, and the BESS power value is -119.503 MW. The
confidence level of getting higher than 0.349 is 47% of the time. The negative sign
in the BESS value means the OWF power output exceeds the block load demand,
thus, the BESS is not needed for this case.
• Summer day: The summer day is in 01-07-2019. Figure 4.2 shows the lowest wind
generation is 0.310 pu, and the BESS power value is -103.883 MW. The confidence
level of getting higher than 0.310 pu is a 53.45%. The negative sign in the BESS
value means the OWF power output exceeds the block load demand, thus, the BESS
is not needed for this case.
• Spring day: The spring day is in 01-04-2019. Figure 4.3 shows the lowest wind
generation value is 0.154 pu, and the BESS power value is -41.401 MW. The
confidence level The confidence level is 81.51% . The negative sign in the BESS
value means the OWF power output exceeds the block load demand, thus, the BESS
is not needed for this case.
• Autumn day: The Autumn day is in 01-10-2019. Figure 4.4 shows the lowest wind
generation value is 0.300 pu, and the BESS power value is -99.962 MW. The
confidence level The confidence level is 55.37%. The negative sign in the BESS
value means the OWF power output exceeds the block load demand, thus, the BESS
is not needed for this case.
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Results
Figure 4.1. Winter day on 01-01-2019.
Figure 4.2. Summer day on 01-07-2019
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Results
Figure 4.3. Spring day on 01-04-2019
Figure 4.4. Autumn day on 01-10-2019
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Results
4.3.2
Three-days simulation
This section chose three days in a row for the different seasons to simulate the black start
problem and satisfy the resilience requirements of being ready to supply a 20 MW block
load for 72 hours. The simulation results are as follows:
• Winter days: The winter days have been chosen from 07-01-2019 to 10-01-2019.
Figure 4.5 shows that the lowest wind generation value during the three days is
0.241 pu,and the BESS power value is -76.481 MW. The confidence level equal
to 65.79 %. The negative sign in the BESS value means the OWF power output
exceeds the block load demand, thus, the BESS is not needed for this case.
• Summer days: The Summer days have been chosen from 05-07-2019 to 09-07-2019.
Figure 4.6 shows that the lowest wind generation value is 0.207 pu, and the BESS
value power value is -62.841 MW. The confidence level for this case is 72.02%.
The negative sign in the BESS value means the OWF power output exceeds the
block load demand, thus, the BESS is not needed for this case.
• Spring days: The spring days have been chosen from 05-04-2019 to 08-04-2019.
Figure 4.7 shows that the lowest wind generation value is 0.126 pu, and the BESS
power value is -30.480 MW. The confidence level for this case is 86.21%. The
negative sign in the BESS value means the OWF power output exceeds the block
load demand, thus, the BESS is not needed for this case.
• Autumn days: The autumn days have been chosen from 09-10-2019 to 12-10-2019.
Figure 4.8 shows the lowest wind generation value is 0.026 pu, and the BESS power
value is 9.600 MW discharge power from the battery. The confidence level for this
case is 98.81 %.
Figure 4.5. Winter three days from 07-01-2019 to 10-01-2019
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Results
Figure 4.6. Summer three days from 05-07-2019 to 09-07-2019
Figure 4.7. Spring three days from 05-04-2019 to 08-04-2019
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Results
Figure 4.8. Autumn three days from 09-10-2019 to 12-10-2019
4.4
Simulation Results
Table 4.4 and table 4.5 show the results using the historical data for the simulation. It
can be seen that the highest worst-case wind generation value is always in the winter
season, and the lowest worst-case wind generation value is in spring and autumn. The
one-day simulation result shows that the BESS values are always negative with the highest
confidence level equal to 81.51% on a spring day. This means that the generation always
exceeds the 20 MW block load, verifying that for a 400 MW offshore wind farm the BESS
for the block loading requirement of a minimum of 20 MW is not needed.
In the three-day simulation, the results show that the only case when the BESS discharged
power for a 20 MW block load was in the autumn three days simulation. The confidence
level was higher than 98% with a power rate of 9.6 MW and capacity of 96 MW.
Generally, it can observe that the 400 MW OWF is already satisfying the minimum
requirement for the block loading phase of the BS with confidence levels up to 90% without
relying on the BESS.
Table 4.4. One-day simulation results for block size 20 MW.
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power size in MW
Confidence level
Winter
0.349
-119.503
47%
Summer
0.310
-103.883
53.45%
Spring
0.154
-41.401
81.51%
Autumn
0.300
-99.962
55.37%
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Results
Table 4.5. Three-day simulation results for block load size 20 MW.
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power size in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
Confidence level
Winter
0.241
-76.481
0
65.79%
Summer
0.207
-62.841
0
72.02%
Spring
0.126
-30.480
0
86.210%
Autumn
0.026
9.600
96.00
98.81%
4.5
Summary
In this chapter, the optimization results are reported, showing that for small OWF, the
BESS is essential to satisfy the minimum block load requirement. At the same time,
for large OWF, the BESS is not needed to deliver steady power to a 20 MW block load
(minimum requirement), but it is required when providing higher than the minimum
requirement. The quasi-dynamic for two study cases are presented, the first case is a
one-day simulation for different seasons, ensuring the ability to deliver a 20 MW block
load for at least 10 hours. Moreover, the second case is a three-day simulation for different
seasons, ensuring the ability to be ready to deliver the BS service.
33
==PAGE:42==
5
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
This chapter applies a sensitivity analysis to the quasi-dynamic simulation results. The
first reason is to simulate more cases and thus verify the simulation results. The second
reason is to verify the probabilistic optimization results reported in section 4.1.
The main factors affecting the BESS size are OWF capacity, confidence level, and block
load size. Moreover, the results show that the BESS is not needed for providing 20 MW in
the case of 400 MW OWF, but it is needed when the block load size is 50 MW. Therefore,
two new cases in quasi dynamic simulation have been investigated as a sensitivity analysis
to confirm that the BESS will discharge when the block load is equal to 50 MW, as reported
in section 4.1. The first case is a one-day simulation for different block loads ranging from
50 MW to 70 MW is presented in section 5.1. The second case is a three-days simulation
for a 50 MW block load is presented in section 5.2.
5.1
One Day Simulation for Different Block Load
In this section, another season days has been picked up for sensitivity analysis to capture
more generation values and confidence level scenarios, then a different block load of 50, 60,
and 70 will apply to see what is the highest discharge battery at the highest confidence
level. The simulation results are as follows:
• winter day: Figure 5.1 shows the lowest wind generation is equal to 0.119 pu. The
confidence level in is around 87.34%. The resulting BESS power rating for all the
block loads applied is positive, which means in this generation level, the BESS will
discharge power of at least 2.519 MW for a block load size of 50 MW and a maximum
of 22.519 MW for a block load size of 70 MW.
• Summer day: Figure 5.2 shows the lowest wind generation is equal to 0.175 with a
confidence level of around 77.81%. In this case, the BESS starts to discharge only
when the block load size is equal to 70MW.
• Spring day: Figure 5.3 shows the lowest wind generation is extremely low and equal
to 0.060 pu with a very high confidence level is around 95.57%. In this case, the
minimum power rating size is equal to 26.200 MW for a block load of 50 MW.
• Autumn day: Figure 5.4 the minimum wind generation is high and equal to 0.485
pu with a very low confidence level of around 27.75%. In this case, the wind farm
does not require a discharge from the BESS to cover all the block load demands.
34
==PAGE:43==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 5.1. Winter day on 31-12-2019.
Figure 5.2. Summer day on 18-07-2019.
35
==PAGE:44==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 5.3. Spring day on 28-04-2019.
Figure 5.4. Autumn day on 27-09-2019.
36
==PAGE:45==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
5.2
Three Days Simulation for 50 MW Block Load
In this section, another three days of simulations were applied to study the resilience of
supply for a block load size of 50 MW. The days have been chosen from 2018 to capture and
simulate as much as possible real values with a different confidence level. The simulation
results are as follows :
• Winter days: Figure 5.5 shows the minimum wind generation is 0.286 pu with a
confidence level up to 57.66%. In this scenario, the resulting BESS power rating is
negative, which means the wind farm does not require any discharge from the BESS
for the medium generation level.
• Summer days: figure 5.6 shows the minimum wind generation is 0.017 pu with an
extremely high confidence level of around 99.40%. For this scenario, the discharge
power needed is 43.280 MW for a block load of 50 MW.
• Spring days: Figure 5.7 shows the minimum wind generation is also very low and
equal to 0.042. The confidence level for this scenario is around 97.47%, and the
discharge power needed is 33.360 MW for a block load of 50 MW.
• Autumn days: Figure 5.8 shows the minimum wind generation is equal to 0.126 pu
with confidence level around 86.21%. In this scenario, the BESS will not discharge
any power for block load of 50 MW.
Figure 5.5. Winter three days from 01-12-2018 to 04-12-2018.
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 5.6. Summer three days from 23-07-2018 to 26-07-2018.
Figure 5.7. Spring three days from 06-05-2018 to 09-05-2018.
38
==PAGE:47==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 5.8. Autumn three days from 10-09-2018 to 13-09-2018.
5.3
Discussion
Tables 5.1,5.2, and 5.3 summaries the sensitivity analysis results from a one-day simulation
for different block loads. It can be seen that the 400 MW offshore wind farm can satisfy
the block loading requirement for all block load sizes with a wind generation value equal to
0.060 pu corresponding to a confidence level of more than 95%. In this case, the minimum
block load size is equal to 50 MW with a BESS size equal to 26.20 MW/ 262.00 MWh.
In the table 5.1 the winter one-day simulation shows that, for wind generation equal to
0.119 pu with a confidence level of 87.34% and block load of 50 MW, the BESS size is to
2.519 MW/25.19 MWh , which is enough for block load process. However, it is not enough
to energize the 400 MW wind farm and part of the grid that needs a power up to 6 MW
as reported in section 4.1. For block loads, 60 MW and 70 MW and a confidence level
of 87.34%, the power, and energy capacity are enough for the whole process of the black
start. However, they do not satisfy the availability requirements 90% of the time.
Table 5.1. One day simulation sensitivity analysis results for 50 MW block load size, the negative
sign represents that the BESS is not needed to discharge the power needed, and the
positive sign means the BESS is needed to support the OWF and discharge power to
the block load.
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power rating in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
confidence level
Winter
0.119
2.519
25.19
87.34%
Summer
0.175
-19.842
-198.42
79.81%
Spring
0.060
26.200
262.00
95.57%
Autumn
0.485
-144.057
-1440.57
27.75%
39
==PAGE:48==
5. Sensitivity Analysis
Table 5.2. One day simulation sensitivity analysis results for 60 MW block load size
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power rating in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
confidence level
Winter
0.119
12.519
125.19
87.34%
Summer
0.175
-9.842
-98.42
79.81%
Spring
0.060
36.199
361.99
95.57%
Autumn
0.485
-134.060
-1340.60
27.75%
Table 5.3. One day simulation sensitivity analysis results for 70 MW block load size
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power rating in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
confidence level
Winter
0.119
22.519
225.19
87.34%
Summer
0.175
0.158
1.58
79.81%
Spring
0.060
46.199
461.99
95.57%
Autumn
0.485
-124.063
-1240.63
27.75%
Table 5.4 shows the sensitivity analysis results for the three days simulation with a block
load of 50 MW. This simulation aims to verify the requirement of the resiliency of supply
for 72 hours. It can be seen that for wind generation equal to 0.042 pu with a confidence
level of more than 97 %, the 400 MW offshore wind farm can be able to provide a block
load of 50 MW with a BESS size equal to 33.360 MW/ 333.60 MWh. Moreover, for an
extremely low wind generation equal to 0.017 pu with confidence level more than 99% the
BESS size is equal to 43.280 MW/432.80 MWh.
Table 5.4. Three days simulation sensitivity analysis results for 50 MW block load size
Case
Wind generation pu
BESS power rating in MW
BESS capacity in MWh
confidence level
Winter
0.286
-64.245
-642.45
57.66%
Summer
0.017
43.280
432.80
99.40%
Spring
0.042
33.360
333.60
97.47%
Autumn
0.126
-0.561
-5.61
86.21%
In short, the 400 MW needs support from the BESS when the block load equal to 50 MW
minimum at wind generation value corresponds to a confidence level higher than 87%,
which confirms the results obtained from the optimization methodology.
5.4
Summary
In this chapter, the sensitivity analysis using quasi-dynamic simulations is presented. Two
cases are reported validating the need for the BESS for different block load sizes for the
large OWF. Moreover, the viability of providing the BS services for additional season days
has been investigated.
40
==PAGE:49==
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
6.1
Conclusion
This thesis focused on finding the optimal size of the BESS to enable the OWF to be a
BS source. Particularly, the main goal was to investigate the BESS that can support the
OWF to satisfy the technical requirement provided by the TSO in order to become a BS
provider in future power systems. This report reviews several optimization methods to size
the BESS in power system applications. Then the BS technical requirements that enable
OWF to participate in the BS services have been described. After that, a description of
the BS phase and steps in the power system restoration process was reported.
The probability method was applied to find the power rating of the BESS for the BS
service under wind generation uncertainty. To do so, the Weibull probability distribution
was applied to describe the cumulative wind generation data behavior, and estimate the
worst-case generation value to find both power and energy size for the BS service. The
analysis was carried out assuming the worst-case generation value corresponds to the power
value with probability to happen at 10 %. In other words, the risk of getting less than the
worst-case value is below 10%, and therefore this power value is defined as 90% confidence
level in this project. Finally, the quasi dynamic simulation model of the BS process verified
the results obtained from the optimization methodology.
The research questions listed in section 1.2 are here answered one by one.
• How does the BESS help the offshore wind farms become a black start
source? First, in order to understand how the BESS helps the OWF to become a BS
source, it is necessary to understand what is the BS and what are the requirements
to become a black start provider. The BS is a process of restoring the electrical
network after a blackout without relying on the external grid. To become a BS
provider, the OWF must be able to meet some requirements provided by the TSO,
which requirements have been presented and explained in Section 2.2. The BESS
plays a fundamental role to support the OWF to provide these requirements. The
services the BESS should provide are as follow:
1. The OWF cannot energize itself after the blackout, therefore, BESS must provide
enough power to the OWF for self-start capability.
2. BESS should help the OWF to energize part of the grid component, such as
ancillary machines.
3. The BESS should support the OWF in satisfying the service availability
requirement (based on the British TSO (ESO) the service should be available
for at least 90% of the time).
4. The OWF should be able to accept a block load size of 20 MW (minimum
requirement for the ESO). Therefore, the BESS must provide enough power to
41
==PAGE:50==
6. Conclusion and Future work
smooth the power output of the OWF during the block load process.
5. The BESS should be able to support the OWF to continuously deliver power to
the block load for minimum 10 hours (based on ESO).
6. The BESS must support the OWF to overcome the resiliency of supply for 72
hours (the ability to maintain the output required for providing block load for
at least 72 hours based on ESO).
• What is the proper method to size the BESS for the black start service?
The proper method to size the BESS depends on the services needed for the BS
problem. The sizing of the BESS can generally be divided into two sub-problem as
follow :
1. frequency regulation problem caused by the energization of the ancillary
machines.
2. smoothing the wind farm’s power output when providing power to the block
load.
The frequency regulation problem could be solved using analytical methods and
simulations. A deeper investigation about optimization methods for sizing the BESS
for different services is explained in section 2.4. This project was focused on the
second sub-problem, and solved using a probabilistic method. The probabilistic
method was chosen for two main reasons. First, a blackout event is hardly predictable,
and barely impossible to foresee when it will occur. Second, due to the wind power
output variation, it is necessary to represent the wind generation profile by one of the
statistical distributions and thus estimate the worst generation value. Therefore, the
BESS sizing should be based on the worst-case generation value. In this project, the
Weibull distribution was applied to represent the historical offshore wind generation
for Great Britain from 2014 to 2019.
• What is the optimal size of the BESS to enable OWF to become a BS
source? The sizing problem of the BESS for BS can be represented by smoothing
the power output of the OWF during the block load phase, as explained in detail in
section 2.3.1. The results show that the optimal size of the BESS for supporting the
OWF for the BS problem, particularly in the block loading phase, depends on two
main factors, which are:
1. OWF capacity. In fact, large OWF can satisfy the minimum availability and
block loading requirement without the need of BESS. However, the BESS is
still needed for other requirements, such as energizing the wind turbines and
part of the grid.
2. the worst-case generation value, which depends on the availability requirements
provided by the TSOs.
In conclusion, the optimal size of the BESS for BS problem based on renewable
sources relies on the services that the BESS should provide, and on the technical
requirements that the TSO requries from the BS provider.
6.2
Future work
This section proposes some topics for further research.
42
==PAGE:51==
6. Conclusion and Future work
• Optimal sizing of the BESS to enable the OWFs to participate in the BS
market: The BS market for renewable power plants as a BS source is not clear
yet. However, to participate in the BS market with OWF and BESS as BS sources,
an offering strategy under uncertainty should be implemented to reduce the risk of
paying penalties under failure to provide the service.
Therefore, a stochastic offering strategy problem that can calculate the size of BESS
for the black start market could be implemented, taking into account the size of the
OWF capacity and the size of block load that should provide to maximize the revenue
under low risk for failure. Therefore, the method applied in this thesis could be used
to generate the input wind generation scenarios for the optimization problem.
• Economical feasibility study for sizing the BESS to enable the OWF
black start source:
In this project, technical indicators for sizing the BESS were
considered (the technical requirements). However, the BESS size can also be obtained
by taking into account economic indicators, such as calculating the net present value
(NPV). Eventual parameters that could be considered in the problem are:
1. The wind power output.
2. The BESS power output needed.
3. The block load size.
4. The revenue by selling the power to the market.
5. The capital cost of the wind farm and the BESS.
6. The operation and maintenance cost (O&M) of the wind and the BESS.
• Sizing the BESS to enable OWF to provide other ancillary services during
BS: As described in the project, the BS problem can be divided into two phases,
the energization phase, and the block loading phase. In the organization phase,
it is necessary to regulate the voltage and frequency. Therefore, another service
from BESS should provide during the whole BS process. In this thesis, the BESS
service was focused only on smoothing the power output of the OWF during the
block loading phase. In future work, it is interesting to solve the problem for another
service such as frequency and voltage regulation services during the BS service.
• Optimal capacity size of the BESS for smoothing the power output of the
OWF during the BS operation: In this project, the focus was to size the BESS
power rating in MW needed to smooth the OWF output power for BS operation.
However, for future work, simulating the net discharge energy in MWh needed when
providing power to the block load phase will reduce the total cost of the BESS.
• Optimizing BESS size to meet requirements for multiple services:
Implementing an optimization problem for multiple services as frequency response,
inertia reserve, arbitrage, BS, etc. However, this is a complicated problem it could
be a PhD thesis.
43
==PAGE:52==
REFERENCES
[1]
Daniela Pagnani, Frede Blaabjerg, Claus Leth Bak, Filipe Miguel Faria Da Silva,
Łukasz H. Kocewiak, and Jesper Hjerrild. Offshore wind farm black start service
integration. review and outlook of ongoing research. Energies, 13(23):6286, 2020.
ISSN 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en13236286.
[2]
Weipeng Liu and Yutian Liu. Energy storage sizing by copula modelling joint
distribution for wind farm to be black-start source. IET Renewable Power Generation,
13(11):1882–1890, 2019. ISSN 17521424, 17521416. doi: 10.1049/iet-rpg.2018.6154.
[3]
Weipeng Liu, Yutian Liu, and Chunyi Wang. Energy storage sizing based on
asymmetric copula for wind farm to be black-start source. In Proceedings at IEEE
Sustainable Power and Energy Conference: Energy Transition and Energy Internet,
pages 479–484, 2020. doi: 10.1109/iSPEC50848.2020.9351112.
[4]
Final report on the august 14, 2003 black out in the united states and canada: Causes
and recommendations. ENERDY.GOV, 2003. URL https://www.energy.gov/
sites/default/files/oeprod/DocumentsandMedia/BlackoutFinal-Web.pdf.
[5]
On the grid disturbance on 30th july 2012 and grid disturbance on 31st july 2012.
CERC, 2012. URL
https://cercind.gov.in/2012/orders/Final_Report_Grid_Disturbance.pdf.
[6]
Investigation report into south australia’s 2016 state-wide blackout. Australia
Goverment, 2018. URL
https://www.aer.gov.au/wholesale-markets/compliance-reporting/
investigation-report-into-south-australias-2016-state-wide-blackout.
[7]
Daniela Pagnani, Lukasz Kocewiak, Jesper Hjerrild, Frede Blaabjerg, and Claus Leth
Bak. Challenges and solutions in integrating black start into offshore wind farms.
19th Wind Integration Workshop, 2020.
[8]
Sanjay K. Chaudhary, Remus Teodorescu, Jan R. Svensson, Lukasz H. Kocewiak,
Philip Johnson, and Bertil Berggren. Black start service from offshore wind power
plant using ibess. In Proceedings at IEEE Conference Powertech 2021 - Madrid, page
9494851, 2021. doi: 10.1109/PowerTech46648.2021.9494851.
[9]
P.S. Gryning Bertil Berggren Łukasz H. Kocewiak Jan R.Svensson Mikkel. Delivery
of frequency support and black start services from wind power combined with battery
energy storage. 2020.
[10] Divya K Chandrashekhara and Jacob Østergaard. Battery energy storage technology
for power systems-an overview. Electric Power Systems Research, 79(4):511–520,
2009. ISSN 18732046, 03787796. doi: 10.1016/j.epsr.2008.09.017.
44
==PAGE:53==
References
[11] Handbook on battery energy storage system. ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK, 2018.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.22617/TCS189791-2.
[12] Georgios Nikitas, Subhamoy Bhattacharya, and Nathan Vimalan. 16 - wind energy.
In Trevor M. Letcher, editor, Future Energy (Third Edition), pages 331–355. Elsevier,
third edition edition, 2020. ISBN 978-0-08-102886-5. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102886-5.00016-5. URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780081028865000165.
[13] Hornsea two. Ørsted, 2022. URL
https://hornseaprojects.co.uk/hornsea-project-two/about-the-project#
honsea-project-two-timeline-2022.
[14] Daniela Pagnam, Lukasz Hubert Kocewiak, Jesper Hjerrild, Frede Blaabjerg, and
Claus Leth Bak. Overview of black start provision by offshore wind farms. In
Proceedings at IECON (Industrial Electronics Conference), 2020-:1892–1898, 2020.
ISSN 25771647, 1553572x. doi: 10.1109/IECON43393.2020.9254743.
[15] Thongchart Kerdpho. Optimization of Battery Energy Storage Systems for
Microgrids. 2016.
[16] Weipeng Liu and Yutian Liu. Hierarchical model predictive control of wind farm with
energy storage system for frequency regulation during black-start. International
Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 119:105893, 2020. ISSN 18793517,
01420615. doi: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2020.105893.
[17] Yuqing Yang, Stephen Bremner, Chris Menictas, and Merlinde Kay. Battery energy
storage system size determination in renewable energy systems: A review. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 91:109–125, 2018. ISSN 18790690, 13640321. doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.047.
[18] Mohammed Atta Abdulgalil, Muhammad Khalid, and Fahad Alismail. Optimal
sizing of battery energy storage for a grid-connected microgrid subjected to wind
uncertainties. Energies, 12(12):2412, 2019. ISSN 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en12122412.
[19] S. X. Chen, H. B. Gooi, and M. Q. Wang. Sizing of energy storage for microgrids.
Ieee Transactions on Smart Grid, 3(1):142–151, 2012. ISSN 19493061, 19493053. doi:
10.1109/TSG.2011.2160745.
[20] Yi Luo, Lin Shi, and Guangyu Tu. Optimal sizing and control strategy of isolated grid
with wind power and energy storage system. Energy Conversion and Management,
80:407–415, 2014. ISSN 18792227, 01968904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2014.01.061.
[21] Hunyoung Shin and Jin Hur. Optimal energy storage sizing with battery
augmentation for renewable-plus-storage power plants. IEEE Access, 8:
187730–187743, 2020. ISSN 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3031197.
[22] Thongchart Kerdphol, Yaser Qudaih, and Yasunori Mitani. Battery energy storage
system size optimization in microgrid using particle swarm optimization. IEEE PES
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe, 2015-(January):7028895,
2014. ISSN 21654824, 21654816. doi: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2014.7028895.
45
==PAGE:54==
References
[23] Liqing Liu, Jian Wu, Zengqiang Mi, and Chaoyang Sun. A feasibility study of
applying storage-based wind farm as black-start power source in local power grid.
2016 International Conference on Smart Grid and Clean Energy Technologies,
ICSGCE 2016, pages 257–261, 2016. ISSN 26880857, 26880849. doi:
10.1109/ICSGCE.2016.7876065.
[24] Tu A. Nguyen, Mariesa L. Crow, and Andrew Curtis Elmore. Optimal sizing of a
vanadium redox battery system for microgrid systems. IEEE Transactions on
Sustainable Energy, 6(3):7079529, 2015. ISSN 19493037, 19493029. doi:
10.1109/TSTE.2015.2404780.
[25] Mohammad Reza Aghamohammadi and Hajar Abdolahinia. A new approach for
optimal sizing of battery energy storage system for primary frequency control of
islanded microgrid. International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems,
54:325–333, 2014. ISSN 18793517, 01420615. doi: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2013.07.005.
[26] Avirup Maulik and Debapriya Das. Determination of optimal size of battery energy
storage system for a renewable power based microgrid. 2020 IEEE 17th India
Council International Conference, INDICON 2020, page 9342575, 2020. ISSN
2325940x, 23259418. doi: 10.1109/INDICON49873.2020.9342575.
[27] Rasoul Garmabdari, Mojtaba Moghimi, Fuwen Yang, Junwei Lu, Hui Li, and Zilong
Yang. Optimisation of battery energy storage capacity for a grid-tied renewable
microgrid. 2017 Ieee Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia: Smart Grid for
Smart Community, Isgt-asia 2017, pages 1–6, 2017. ISSN 23788534, 23788542. doi:
10.1109/ISGT-Asia.2017.8378391.
[28] Iman Naziri Moghaddam, Badrul H. Chowdhury, and Saeed Mohajeryami. Predictive
operation and optimal sizing of battery energy storage with high wind energy
penetration. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 65(8):6686–6695, 2018.
ISSN 15579948, 02780046. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2017.2774732.
[29] Juan P. Fossati, Ainhoa Galarza, Ander Martín-Villate, and Luis Fontán. A method
for optimal sizing energy storage systems for microgrids. Renewable Energy, 77:
539–549, 2015. ISSN 18790682, 09601481. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2014.12.039.
[30] Renewables.ninja pv and wind profiles.
https://data.open-power-system-data.org/ninja_pv_wind_profiles.
[31] Wind energy fact-sheet. Center for sustainable systems, University of Michigan, 2020.
URL https://css.umich.edu/factsheets/wind-energy-factsheet#:~:
text=The20capacity20factor20of20a,201420and20201820was204125.
[32] Weibull distribution in matlab.
https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/weibull-distribution.html.
[33] Quasi-dynamic simulation.
https://www.digsilent.de/en/quasi-dynamic-simulation.html.
46
==PAGE:55==
A
THE MATLAB SCRIPT FOR THE
OPTIMIZATION METHODOLOGY
The MATLAB script for estimating the BESS size for the historical and synthesis data are
bellow :
Figure A.1. The MATLAB script for the method applied.
47
==PAGE:56==
A. The MATLAB Script for the Optimization Methodology
Figure A.2. The MATLAB script for the method applied.
48
==PAGE:57==
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Division of Power and Energy Systems
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
