==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Sustainable energy, Energy Savings
Modelling natural ventilation in dynamic
building simulation tools
From a collaboration between:
Candidate:
Lorenzo Borrelli (s200193)
Supervisors:
Jakub Kolarik (DTU)
Kevin Michael Smith (DTU)
Lucile Sarran (VELUX)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone: +45 45 25 19 60
https://construct.dtu.dk
VELUX Group
Ådalsvej 99
2970 Hørsholm
Denmark
Phone: +45 45164000
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Building energy simulation tools (BES) are fundamental in designing buildings as
they consider the natural ventilation (NV) flow, which simplifies the prediction and
prevention of potential indoor climate problems related to airflow in buildings. This
project builds a cross-comparison on how the BES tools (BSim, IDA ICE, IES VE and
VELUX EIC) work in different scenarios, emphasising the issue of overestimating or
underestimating the airflow. The comparison is built upon a scientific and consultant
approach while simulating the effects of NV (single-sided, cross-sided, stack effect
and combined), considering single and multi-zone models. In addition, a review of
the user interfaces for each software has been made.
The scientific approach explains which are the most impactful inputs and how they
affect NV in the different BES tools.
This analysis shows that outdoor weather
conditions, pressure coeﬀicients and wind correction factors significantly impact the
airflow rate by varying the pressure difference. The temperature provides the basal
airflow rate for any NV effect, and the wind sensibly increases the airflow rate in any
scenarios and software except for single-sided ventilation in IDA ICE and IES VE
(MacroFlo without turbulence).
The consultant approach quantifies the underestimation or overestimation of the air-
flow by comparing the tools with IDA ICE for missing measurement tests. BSim
generally overestimates the airflow rates in single-sided and stack effects by 50% and
30% respectively, while cross-sided and combined are underestimated by around 30%.
IES VE (MacroFlo with turbulence) overestimates by around 30% the airflow rate in
single-sided. The other scenarios do not present remarkable differences.
Concerning the user interface, BSim, IES VE and IDA ICE need a certain level of
expertise but provide the user with a high level of completeness and transparency,
while VELUX EIC is the most straightforward concerning usability but presents a
deficiency of completeness and transparency.
The overall conclusion is that BES tools need a certain level of expertise, and consul-
tants should be aware of using them. IES VE and IDA ICE seem the most accurate
for completeness, but all the tools considered do not present remarkable differences
except in a few scenarios.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been like a journey, full of emotions, tough moments and achievements.
I am really thankful for the choice made of picking this topic and for collaborating
with VELUX.
I would like to thank my supervisors Jakub Kolarik, Kevin Michael Smith and Lucile
Sarran for their support, guidance, and creating insightful discussions throughout the
project. Without their help, this project would not be resulting in such great work.
A particular thank is going to the company VELUX for welcoming me during this
thesis and particularly to the DEIC department.
I am so grateful to my family, my friends and everyone who assisted me and supported
me during this experience in Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Acronyms and abbreviations:
Aeff
Effective Area Opening [m2]
ACH
Air change per hour
BES
Building energy simulation
BSim
Building Simulation
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
COP
Conference of the Parties
Cp
Pressure coeﬀicients
DRY
Design Reference Year
DS
Danish Standards
ELA
Effective Leakage Area
IAQ
Indoor Air Quality
IDA ICE
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy
IDA BETA
IDA ICE beta 5
IES VE
Integrated Environmental Solutions Virtual Environment
IES WT
IES VE simulated in MacroFlo with Wind turbulence
IES NOWT
IES VE simulated in MacroFlo with No Wind turbulence
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
MBE
Mean Bias Error
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
NMBE
Normalized Mean Bias Error
NRMSE
Normalized Root Mean Square Error
NV
Natural ventilation
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
VELUX EIC VELUX Energy and Indoor Climate
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Natural Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
A collaboration between DTU and VELUX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
7
2.1
The Importance of Natural Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Physical laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Indoor and Outdoor Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1.1
Thermal Buoyancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1.2
Wind Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1.3
Total Outdoor Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Airflow through Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Pressure Coeﬀicients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Building Energy Simulation Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
An Overview of the Studies on Estimating Performance of Natural Ven-
tilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Geometry, building textures and loads of the model . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
The main contributions to natural ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1.1
Created Weather file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1.2
Danish Design Reference Year Weather File . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.2.1.3
Weather choice and explanation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Pressure coeﬀicients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Other relevant Inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Venti-
lation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
BSim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1.1
Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1.2
Flow through large openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.2
IDA ICE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2.1
Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.2.2
Flow through large openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.3
VELUX EIC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.4
IES-VE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.4.1
Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.4.2
Flow through large openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.5
Comparison between the software for the inputs
. . . . . . . .
42
4
Results
43
4.1
Scientific Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1
Infiltration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1.1
Constant Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1.2
Wind-driven Infiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.2
Flow through Large Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.2.1
Single-sided . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.2.2
Cross-sided Ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.2.3
Stack effect ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.2.4
Combined ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Consultant approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Single-zone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.2
Multi-zone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3
User interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion of results
65
5.1
General Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Limitations of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3
Further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Conclusion
69
Conclusion
69
Appendices
71
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
Appendix A
Appendix
73
A.1 Weather file DRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Pressure coeﬀicients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.3 Constant infiltration weather DRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.4 Wind driven infiltration weather DRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.5 Flow through Large Openings weather DRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Almost three decades have passed since the first United Nations Climate Change Con-
ference, where the aim was to restrain global warming. Since the last century, the
world’s climate has been shifting, and especially throughout the last three decades,
the temperatures have increased significantly. As stated in summary for policymaker
IPCC of 2018, ”Human activities are estimated to have caused approximately 1.0°C
of global warming above pre-industrial levels, with a likely range of 0.8°C to 1.2°C.
Global warming is likely to reach 1.5°C between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to in-
crease at the current rate” and ”Estimated anthropogenic global warming is currently
increasing at 0.2°C per decade due to past and ongoing emissions” [1]. As mentioned
before, the rise in mean global temperature can be acknowledged and seen in Figure
1.1.
Figure 1.1. Mean Global average surface temperature, figure adopted from Climate.gov [2]
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
During COP 21, the attending countries agreed to contain the temperature increase
of 2 °C by 2050, also known as the Paris agreement [3]. This goal changed at COP
26 [4] last year in Glasgow, where the conference’s main objective was to revisit the
Paris agreement [3] and lead to further constraining the global warming limit from 2
°C to 1.5 °C. As a result, global warming is a problem that nowadays affects every-
body. Global warming precedes several events such as the increase in catastrophic
events such as flooding, hurricanes, the increase in drought, the rise of sea level, and
the rise in temperatures [5].
Global warming leads to multiple side effects in everyday life of everybody, so engi-
neers and scientists have to find solutions to this problem. Overheating is one of the
problems that civil and energy engineers struggle to fight while fulfilling the require-
ments for the indoor climate in both working places and dwellings [6]. Depending on
the climate zone and considering the ventilation side, from an energy-saving perspec-
tive, if natural ventilation potentials are high in a temperate climate, and natural
ventilation can provide acceptable comfort throughout the whole year just in limited
areas of the globe, this is not possible in other areas where mechanical ventilation
becomes necessary [7]. Nowadays, for this reason, combining mechanical ventilation
with natural ventilation is becoming more popular, originating in a hybrid ventilation
system. Hybrid ventilation systems exploit natural ventilation, introducing airflow
at outdoor conditions in buildings to save energy consumption while providing the
required indoor comfort. Besides its energy-saving potential, natural ventilation is a
powerful way of providing fresh air in indoor environments, abating pollutants, and
removing heat and moisture from indoor environments.
Thanks to the attractiveness of its potential more applications of natural ventilation
in different types of buildings need to be developed in both oﬀices and dwellings. In
particular, from a design perspective is particularly challenging not to overestimate
or underestimate its potential.
1.1
Natural Ventilation
Natural Ventilation (NV) is not a modern technique; ancient Persians and Egyptians
used curved-roof vents and stone carvers to control the level of indoor dust to reduce
the risk of getting respiratory diseases [8]. Nowadays, it is used all over the world.
Natural History Museum represents a prestigious example located in London. The
architects designed the built form to encourage airflow through each building space
by using two ventilation towers at the back of the building to induce airflow through
stack ventilation. We can see how this potential can be exploited even in extreme
conditions, such as igloos (Figure 1.3), where the compact structure has been venti-
lated to provide breathing air through small holes in the structure (a cold sink and
an airhole) [9]. As a result, the limited size of openings and compact structure can
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Natural Ventilation
3
reduce heat losses. An example in the animal kingdom is termites’ nests (Figure 1.2)
that allow automatic ventilation to control internal temperature, gas exchange, and
moisture [9].
Figure 1.2. Termite nests structure [9]
Figure 1.3. Igloos structure with air ducts [9]
Pressure differences between inside and outside regulate natural ventilation. This
difference can be due to wind conditions and differences between inside and outside
conditions, such as temperature, which leads to different natural ventilation phenom-
ena. The possible effects that can take place in a building are single-sided, cross-sided,
and stack ventilation (or buoyancy-driven). These different types of ventilation differ
from the layout of the building considered. An overview of the possible NV effects is
introduced below and shown in Figure 1.4:
• Single-sided: all the openings, windows, or doors are located in the same exter-
nal face, one or more than one.
• Cross-sided: all the openings positions’ are on more than one external surface.
• Stack ventilation: based on the buoyancy effect, a pressure difference occurs by
having vertical distances between inlet and outlet openings.
Natural ventilation has the potential to combat overheating in different climates, but
considerable eﬀiciency can be utilized in temperate climates with the cooperation of
solar shading and other systems to prevent the access of external heat gains [7], as the
outdoor air offers cooling potential most of the year. However, accurately simulating
natural ventilation in buildings is currently challenging. For example, complex ven-
tilation behaviour is not well represented in building simulation programs when the
BES is not assisted by a CFD analysis [11]. Consequently, building engineers often
incorrectly estimate ventilative cooling potential when designing buildings, leading
to widespread overheating. This issue is particularly dominant in newly constructed
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.4. Different types of natural ventilation [10]
buildings due to high insulation levels.
As stated by Heiselberg, the issues concerning the early stage of the design process
are exploiting natural ventilation for indoor air quality (IAQ) and natural cooling.
Therefore, engineers have to be aware of the limitations and possibilities during the
designing process [12]. Engineers have to apply an iterative process where a first
design has to be proven to meet energy requirements, air quality and comfort targets.
Otherwise, the building has to be redesigned [12]. The underestimation or overestima-
tion of the airflow may lead to problems. In detail, overestimating the airflow rates
leads to overheated buildings and reduced thermal comfort, while underestimating
the airflow rate may lead to excess cooling power entering the building, reducing the
thermal comfort [13].
==PAGE:17==
1.2 A collaboration between DTU and VELUX
5
1.2
A collaboration between DTU and VELUX
This thesis derives from a collaboration between DTU Construct Department and
VELUX, where the primary purpose has to develop more profound knowledge regard-
ing natural ventilation in dwellings. VELUX is a company founded in 1941, whose
name is a combination of VE (ventilation) and LUX (light). The company’s purpose
is ”Creating well-being for people and planet by transforming spaces using daylight
and fresh air” [14]. Achieving carbon-free is placing the company in the front row
as one of the first companies and as a pioneer to face global warming. The main
product, the roof window, provides a height gap between façade windows and roof
windows, enabling the buoyancy effect in indoor environments. Due to the thermal
stratification, this effect allows the air movement to be driven by the temperature
difference.
VELUX is working on several projects that allow showing the mechanism, function-
ing, and eﬀiciency of this effect in providing indoor comfort, such as in Maison Air et
Lumière, Figure 1.5 [15]. The project’s main goal was to integrate energy and indoor
comfort within the design. This dwelling represents the practical solution of providing
a hybrid ventilation system, a combination of HVAC with a more sustainable solution,
natural ventilation. Natural ventilation through the use of the VELUX automatic
controls (VELUX ACTIVE) for openings such as night cooling or just openings when
the weather conditions allow saving energy by avoiding the use of air conditioning.
This collaboration leads to the relevant matter of avoiding underestimation and overes-
timation of natural ventilation potentials. In particular, the overestimation is desired
to be avoided because it drives engineers to design a building that, in reality, cannot
provide the expected airflow rate. For this reason, this thesis aims to provide deep
knowledge and let engineers be aware of how the different aspects of building energy
simulation may affect the outcome of an energy simulation and the differences the use
of other software may involve. Projects might be focused more on the aspects that
profoundly affect the result, for example, to reduce ”the performance gap”, that is,
the difference between the effective energy use and the expected energy use simulated
in the design stage [16].
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.5. Positive energy: Maison Air et Lumière [15]
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art:
Natural Ventilation
This chapter will focus on the importance of NV, the theory that governs natural
ventilation, in particular the physical laws, and how the different programs imple-
ment it through empirical and semi-empirical models. The wind resource and the
specific components/inputs for determining the airflow are presented in this chapter.
Natural ventilation is when airflow movement occurs through the building envelope
in different modes, which can happen through leakages and operable windows.
2.1
The Importance of Natural Ventilation
Natural ventilation can be a powerful solution (if correctly used) primarily to save
energy in old, renovated, and new buildings and to provide fresh air in buildings to
ensure the required indoor environment comfort. The most popular uses are reducing
the concentration of the contaminants in indoor environments and cooling. Natural
ventilation uses the natural forces of wind and buoyancy effect to introduce air and
distribute it in buildings. There has to be a close relationship between the architec-
ture, and the air circulation system to be effective [9]. Particular attention has to be
placed on the different climates to estimate the realistic potentials of NV [17].
From the energy-saving perspective, if the climate is not offering enough natural ven-
tilation forces to provide the needed cooling energy through the year for too warm
temperatures during the cooling season, a necessary and eﬀicient compromise is to
combine it with mechanical ventilation, implementing in this way the hybrid ventila-
tion systems. The hybrid ventilation systems can be defined as systems that switch
between natural and mechanical forces with the aim of better performance in indoor
environments reducing the energy consumption [18]. There are three main primary
different types of hybrid ventilation systems [18]:
==PAGE:20==
8
2 State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
• Alternating natural and mechanical ventilation (or mixed-mode [19]): switch-
ing between the systems through control strategies, for example, mechanical
ventilation during occupancy hour and natural ventilation for night cooling.
• Fan assisted natural ventilation: mechanical fan ventilation can assist the oper-
able windows.
• Stack and wind supported mechanical ventilation: natural driving forces provide
most of the pressure needed by the mechanical ventilation system.
An example of the hybrid ventilation systems can be seen in Figure 2.1; NV ensures
an opportunity to make better use of energy consumption for HVAC utilising free
natural cooling as much as possible [20]. Hybrid ventilation systems are a valuable
solution to reduce the energy demand in buildings [21], but natural ventilation has
to be exploited rightly, in particular for the mixed model. The big challenge is that
hybrid systems can be easily applied in modern buildings. However, people who live
in these houses have to be aware of how to correctly use these systems (for the mixed
mode), particularly natural ventilation to prevent overheating during the warmer
days of the year while saving energy, such as night cooling.
Incorrect use of NV
can lead to a higher consumption to remove the excess heat entered into the house
or ventilating too much, increasing the heating demand.
However, correct use of
mixed-mode systems can lead to saving energy over the year of approximately 14%
on average each year [22]. Possible solutions are automating the openings through
sensors and controls that may help the user to accomplish effective solutions.
Figure 2.1. Hybrid Ventilation system, adopted from DEIC basic book [21]
The acceptable thermal comfort range for naturally ventilated buildings is more ex-
tensive than for buildings with HVAC systems. ASHRAE Standard 55 [23] has imple-
mented the acceptable thermal comfort to an adaptive one for naturally ventilated
buildings, which allows increasing indoor temperatures as outdoor temperature in-
creases. Consequently, adopting adaptive thermal comfort as a standard is beneficial
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Importance of Natural Ventilation
9
because it will enable not to be restrained by limits in maximum indoor temperature
that will not allow using natural ventilation [24]. Natural ventilation can be a satis-
factory solution in temperate and continental climate zone according to the Köppen-
Geiger climate classification system that can be seen in Figure 2.2 [25]. Looking at
the classification of Europe, almost all of Europe has a temperate climate. However,
significant differences in the average outdoor temperature occur; as stated by Chen,
natural ventilation can be a beneficial improvement. For example, a study conducted
by Chen regarding the assessment of the amount of energy-saving potentials using
natural ventilation hours as an indicator calculated considering the outdoor condi-
tions as a parameter can give an estimation of the capabilities of NV without the use
of building energy simulation tools to quantify, for example, NV can be exploited in
Nordic countries for slightly more than 2000 h per year (2360 h Oslo, 2459h Copen-
hagen), while in the south, in warmer climates, it can be used much more (Valencia
4534h, Athens 4942h) [17].
Figure 2.2. Koppen-Geiger climate type map of Europe. [25]
A deep understanding of the user in handling the airflow rate through openings (oper-
able windows and doors) or infiltration (leaks in a building) is needed to maximize the
exploitation of the outdoor condition. For example, can ensure background ventila-
tion by using dampers (or ventilation flaps) connected to the windows to allow a lim-
ited airflow. Regarding the airflow through large openings, the three different effects
of natural ventilation (single-sided, cross-sided, and stack effect) can be activated by
opening different combinations of windows. To allow this, with the high automation
possible nowadays, the automatic control, like the one provided by VELUX, VELUX
ACTIVE, can automatically open the windows when needed considering both the
indoor and outdoor conditions allowing to exploit natural ventilation potentials.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
2.2
Physical laws
This section will introduce the main natural ventilation effects, equations, central
default values, and coeﬀicients adopted by the different software will be presented to
provide a more precise overview of the differences.
2.2.1
Indoor and Outdoor Pressure
Natural ventilation is driven by the pressure difference between indoor and outdoor
conditions through an opening and a leakage that occurs when different conditions
between indoor and outdoor are present. While the outdoor pressure is dependent
on wind pressure and temperature (thermal buoyancy), the indoor pressure is only
dependent on the indoor condition, thermal buoyancy. The two different factors will
be presented individually to understand the dependency from the boundary conditions
better.
2.2.1.1
Thermal Buoyancy
The thermal buoyancy effect is provided when air density differences occur between
zones. Given the assumption of constant air density, the equation below calculates
the pressure, where the subscript 0 stands for values measured at the reference level
(usually ground/floor):
P = P0 −ρ0gH
(2.1)
Where:
• P is the pressure [Pa]
• P0 is the initial pressure at the reference level [Pa]
• ρ0 is the air density at the reference level [kg/m3]
• H is the height above reference level [m]
Given the formula above used to calculate the pressure, the pressure difference be-
tween an opening at the height z is calculated in the following way:
∆Pt = Pout0 −Pin0 −gz(ρout −ρin)
(2.2)
Where:
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Physical laws
11
• ∆Pt is the pressure difference across an opening due to thermal buoyancy [Pa]
• Pout0 is the outdoor pressure at the reference level [Pa]
• Pin0 is the indoor pressure at the reference level [Pa]
• ρout is the outdoor air density [kg/m3]
• ρin is the indoor air density [kg/m3]
• z is the height of the opening[m]
Assuming the air as an incompressible gas, the equation of state gives the following
relation:
ρout −ρin
ρin
= Tout −Tin
Tout
(2.3)
Where the additional variables are:
• Tout is the outdoor air temperature [K]
• Tin is the indoor air temperature [K]
So the pressure difference for an opening placed at the height z, can be rewritten as
function of the temperature difference:
∆Pt = Pout0 −Pin0 −ρingz
Tout −Tin
Tout

(2.4)
2.2.1.2
Wind Pressure
The wind pressure on the external volume of the building is proportional to air density,
wind speed and direction that, combined with building/opening orientations, wind
exposures, and terrain type, generate wind pressures. The pressure coeﬀicients result
from studies from on situ measurements, wind tunnel measurements and CFD analy-
ses. The equation for the wind pressure (pw) is calculated with the following equation:
Pw = 1
2Cpρv2
(2.5)
Where:
• Pw is the wind pressure [Pa]
• ρ is the outside air density [kg/m3]
==PAGE:24==
12
2 State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
• v is the wind speed at the height where the calculation of the wind pressure is
needed [m/s]
• Cp is the pressure coeﬀicient [-]
The wind speed is calculated with Equation 2.6, exposure type (sheltered, semi-
exposed or exposed) and façade orientation. The terms K and α are the wind cor-
rection factors influenced by the terrain type (countryside, suburbs/urban, city). At
the same time, u is the wind speed measured at the reference height (href) of 10 m,
and h is the height where the pressure-driven is calculated.
v = uK
 h
href
α
(2.6)
Where:
• v is the wind speed [m/s]
• u is the wind speed at the reference height (10m) [m/s]
• K is the wind profile coeﬀicient [-]
• h is the height [m]
• href is the reference height (usually 10 m) [m]
• α is the wind profile exponent [-]
So the resulting pressure difference driven by the wind pressure (∆Pw) can be calcu-
lated as:
∆Pw = Pw −Pin
(2.7)
Where:
• ∆Pw is the pressure difference driven by the wind pressure [Pa]
• Pw is the wind pressure calculated with equation 2.5 [Pa]
• Pin is the indoor pressure [Pa]
2.2.1.3
Total Outdoor Pressure
As a result the combined effect of the wind pressure with the thermal buoyancy re-
sults in the following equation:
∆P = ∆Pw + ∆Pt
(2.8)
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Physical laws
13
2.2.2
Airflow through Openings
Given the theory related to the pressure calculation and how to calculate the pressure
difference on buildings’ façade, the calculation of the airflow rate through openings is
classified based on the size of the openings. Natural ventilation is defined in two ways:
infiltration and airflow through large openings. These two procedures are calculated
differently; the infiltration is calculated through the power law equation, while the
airflow through large openings through the orifice flow equation [26].
While just the equations will be introduced with the main contributors, in the section
related to each software, the differences with values and inputs will be explained more
in detail.
The power law equation is presented below:
Q = C (∆P)n
(2.9)
Where:
• Q: mass flow rate through opening [kg/s]
• ∆P: pressure difference [Pa]
• C: power law coeﬀicient [-]
• n: power law exponent, between 0.5 and 1 depending on the type of flow from
turbulent to fully laminar [-]
The orifice equation is shown below:
Q = CdA 2
r2
ρ∆P
(2.10)
Where:
• Q: mass flow rate through opening [kg/s]
• Cd: discharge coeﬀicient usually 0.65 [-]
• A: opening area [m2]
• ∆P: pressure difference [Pa]
• ρ: air density [kg/m3]
==PAGE:26==
14
2 State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
2.3
Pressure Coeﬀicients
One of the main aspects of natural ventilation is the pressure coeﬀicients [Cp]. Their
impact on the airflow leads to substantially different results, so a particular focus is
needed. The pressure coeﬀicients and their relevance have been studied to best eval-
uate air infiltration and ventilation. They are results of either on situ measurements,
CFD or wind tunnel measurement analyses. Their primary purpose is to represent
the effects of windward and leeward in simulations. In other words, they intensify or
reduce the effect of wind speed according to the wind direction based on the building
position, layout and height.
Pressure coeﬀicients are needed to express the effects related to the windward pres-
sure and the leeward effect. Extremely relevant is the study of pressure coeﬀicient
because it leads to getting into the indoor environment more or less airflow that, as a
consequence, leads to different subsequential effects, shown in Figure 2.3. For exam-
ple, some differences will be related to the resulting buoyancy and cross effect inside
the building.
Figure 2.3. Wind pressures on buildings due to wind.cite the real one [25]
2.4
Building Energy Simulation Software
BES is a commonly used tool to analyse building performances. It allows running
simulations throughout the year using various inputs to estimate mainly energy con-
sumption and thermal comfort.
BES provides a valuable tool for measuring the
actual energy demands for buildings leading to an energy savings of approximately
17.8-27.2%, and provides a strategy for estimating the changes in energy demands
related to future climate change. For example, it should be expected to see a decrease
in the heating demand due to global warming and an increase in the cooling demand.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 An Overview of the Studies on Estimating Performance of Natural Ventilation
15
The possibility of changing the weather file can help to estimate long term and various
scenarios [27].
Furthermore, because of the freedom in simulating, some sensitivity analyses can be
carried out to optimise the building functionalities. BES is a physics-based mathe-
matical model that allows the detailed calculation of a building’s energy performance
and occupant thermal comfort under various inputs such as weather, building geom-
etry, internal loads, HVAC systems, operational schedules, and simulation-specific
parameters. [28]. As a result, this thesis will show the divergence between the differ-
ent programs used.
The different BES analysed in this study are IDA ICE, VELUX Energy and Indoor
Climate Visualizer (VELUX EIC), BSim, and IES Virtual Environment (IES VE), as
they are being used extensively worldwide by energy engineer consultants. VELUX
EIC is a software-based IDA ICE developed by EQUA for the homonymous company.
While IDA ICE and BSim are used mainly in Scandic countries, IES VE is commonly
used in other countries worldwide. All the building energy simulation programs con-
sidered except VELUX EIC, which is an IDA ICE program based, are included in the
report that provides a comparison of the features and capabilities of twenty major
building energy simulation programs [29].
2.5
An Overview of the Studies on Estimating
Performance of Natural Ventilation
Although not many studies comparing the building energy simulation (BES) programs
have been carried out, in his study on calibrating building energy simulation tools,
Chong [28] expresses the sources of uncertainties related to inputs, model solvers
and observations results. The analysis will focus on the differences in inputs and
models used, excluding the results of the observations. One of the few comparisons
is presented by Magni [30] where different software are compared (EnergyPlus 9.3,
TRNSYS 18, IDA ICE 4.8, Modelica and others); some of the exciting outcomes from
this research is the difference in the solver setting (calculation time steps, constant
in TRNSYS 18 and EnergyPlus, while variable in the others), and how the different
tools react to the outdoor conditions. The Source of inspiration is the approach used
by Magni in using the statistical indices like mean bias error and root mean square
error.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 State of the Art: Natural Ventilation
2.6
Problem Formulation
Previously studies regarding a comparison between software simulating natural ven-
tilation have not been deepened enough. As described in section 2.1, natural ven-
tilation has a relevant position in energy savings, so for this reason describing and
understanding how the different software is simulating and quantifying the effect of
natural ventilation is fundamental. Companies like VELUX struggle in assisting the
designing of buildings in providing the required indoor comfort because natural ven-
tilation can be easily overestimated, leading to problems of overheating.
For this reason, this thesis takes place as a study of natural ventilation both from a
scientific perspective, where the physical laws that govern natural ventilation in each
component, both infiltration (airflow through leaks) and flow through large openings.
Then the consultant approach will be analysed to try to see how a consultant could
behave while simulating in the design phase. Finally, a qualitative and quantitative
evaluation of the software will be presented to show how the user interface and what
it may lead to a user’s choice.
The research questions that have been the base from where the thesis started and the
reason for the development of the project are:
• Which BES tools are worth the investigation, and to who directs the analysis?
• How can different BES simulate natural ventilation and find which outcomes
and benefits can provide while fulfilling the building requirements?
• Which different inputs regarding the parameters and the empirical model the
different software use lead to?
• Can the software usability and interface be beneficial or controversial to its
extensive use from a designing perspective? Which can be evaluated the best
from a different perspective, such as usability, layout, and user interface?
• How can we assess the reliability of different tools analysed in assessing natural
ventilation, based on the airflow models considered, and which simplification has
been applied in the simulation software programs?
The project aim can be summed up by rephrasing the definition provided by Trucano
[31]:
• Validation: The process of determining the degree to which a model accurately
represents the real world from the perspective of the intended uses of the model.
Although this definition is contemplated as a comparison with the real world, this
thesis will compare the results taking into consideration the differences at every level,
from the differences in inputs going through the solving process and empyrical/semi-
empyrical models used to the output.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter will focus on explaining the details regarding the process of the study
case, the schematical approach shown in Figure 3.1, and the main aspects needed
to be taken into consideration to show the effects of natural ventilation. Firstly, an
overall description of the process will be provided, followed by a more detailed de-
scription of the assumptions, tools and relevant inputs used to approach the study
in each related section. In order to evaluate how different software simulates natural
ventilation, a severe structure has been followed to build a cross-comparison between
the software from a scientific approach, consultant approach and user interface.
Figure 3.1. Schematic approach of the study case
The starting and pillar part of the project is the ”Literature Research”, which has
been fundamental to building the structure of this project and setting the goals and
research objectives of this project. The ”Background knowledge on NV” focused on
studying the theory behind the scientific laws that govern the airflow movements
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methodology
and the past research studies related to comparing building energy simulation soft-
ware and evaluating natural ventilation benefits and potentials and its application
in buildings (oﬀice or dwelling). The ”BES tools understanding” has been crucial
for the first glance at the capability of the different tools‘ user interface and from a
simulation perspective to understand how the airflow simulation has been developed
in the various BES tools for each scenario analysed.
After building the pillars and defining the milestones of the project, the ”Model def-
inition and simulation” is considering the whole process connected to making the
models and determining the inputs (most relevant inputs are described below in the
related sections). Two models have been analysed for this study, a single zone and a
multi-zone model. Both the models have the same size and inputs according to the
possibilities provided by the different BES tools. An internal floor with an opening
has been added to create the multi-zone. Overall, the models have three façade win-
dows (east, west and south-facing) and a roof window (south-facing). The natural
ventilation effects object of the investigation are:
• Infiltration: studied with no windows opened;
• Single-sided: opening of the south-facing façade window;
• Cross-sided: opening synchronically the two façade windows facing west and
east;
• Stack effect (or buoyancy): opening synchronically the east-facing façade win-
dows and the roof window facing south;
• Combined: opening synchronically the two façade windows facing west and east
with the roof window.
While simulating both models, two different climate weather files with different as-
sumptions and time frames (Section 3.2.1) have been used. One was created to enlarge
the effects related to the airflow movement between indoor and outdoor environments
for the scientific approach. The other uses actual climate data to analyse the consul-
tant approach to evaluate the differences in a more realistic scenario through different
indicators.
The whole process leads to showing the results of the project in the different ap-
proaches (”Scientific approach”, ”Consultant approach”, and ”User interface”), with
related outcomes, discussion of the results and further discussions and possible imple-
mentations with the limitations the project had faced. The different approaches are:
• Scientific approach: Analysing the main effects of the inputs and the resulting
airflow through the created weather file in different scenarios.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Geometry, building textures and loads of the model
19
• Consultant approach: Studying the differences using a real climate weather file
that outstands from the different types of natural ventilation effects between
and within the same software through several indicators.
• User interface: Comparing the different software user interfaces on parameters
such as transparency, usability, effectiveness, and completeness from a qualita-
tive point of view.
3.1
Geometry, building textures and loads of the
model
The characteristics of the buildings are adopted in all the software to make the differ-
ent software comparable. The building object of the analysis has the exact external
dimensions as the multi-zone. Figure 3.2 represents a 3D graphical representation
in IDA ICE of both the models. The difference between the models stands in the
presence of an internal floor with a hole (representing the stairwell) added to simulate
airflows in the multi-zone model at the base roof’s height.
Heat gains have been minimised to reduce the simulation weight and uncertainties.
The natural ventilation buoyancy effect is based on temperature, so having heat gains
can give different results in different BES. Removing them can limit the presence of
uncertainties while carrying out the analyses of the results. Due to this, no equipment,
lights and occupancy schedule have been used, except in VELUX EIC, where just one
person has been included during the opening schedule. Otherwise, the VELUX active
control was not opening the windows. This situation has also been created because
the indoor temperature should be affected by only the outdoor conditions and airflow
to analyse the natural ventilation effectively.
Figure 3.2. Single zone and multizone 3D representation in IDA ICE
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methodology
The percentage of the window opening is calculated according to the limit provided by
automatic windows. As described on VELUX EIC software and the user guide, there
are some limitations both for façade (see Figure 3.3) and roof windows on the open-
able area. The pivoting roof windows have a limit of 30° opening between frame and
sash, while the openable windows considered in the project (dimensions=1.4m*1.2m)
have an operable angle of 20° [32]. Because of these limitations, the percentage of
the openable window applied in the simulation is 23.3 % for façade windows and 26.1
% for the roof window to each software to allow a proper cross-comparison. The
openings are operable every day from 18:00 to 21:00. The standard inputs related to
the dimensions and main inputs for all the software are presented below in Table 3.1:
Figure 3.3. Window sizing calculation adopted from VELUX EIC user guide [32]
Table 3.1. Inputs overview common to all the software
System unit
Value
Building length
m
6
Building width
m
3.6
Internal floor area
m2
21.6
Height
m
3
Roof pitch
°
45
Façade Window
m
1.4x1.2
Roof Window
m
0.78x1.178
External wall thickness
m
0.3
Roof thickness
m
0.5
External floor thickness
m
0.5
Suspended floor thickness
m
0.15
Window
type
double pane
Façade Window frame
% Area
30
Roof Window frame
% Area
39
Opening schedule
hours
18-21
Opening Area Façade (% of total)
%
23.33%
Opening Area roof window (% of total)
%
26.12%
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The main contributions to natural ventilation
21
3.2
The main contributions to natural ventilation
This section will analyse the choice in detail regarding the main aspects that con-
tribute to natural ventilation.
3.2.1
Weather data
The outdoor conditions are highly relevant for assessing and evaluating natural ven-
tilation. These analyses adopt two different weather climate files because of the high
dependency on climate file data inputs for evaluating natural ventilation. One has
been created to intensify the effect of natural ventilation by isolating and forcing
natural ventilation in extreme conditions. The other one is DRY 2013 (Design Refer-
ence Year 2001-2010) [33], which is an aggregation result of data analysis of the first
decade of the third millennium. It also became mandatory while designing and sizing
buildings in Denmark in 2015.
Using the created weather file helps intensify only the effect of natural ventilation
while avoiding the interference of inputs from the climate file that can change the NV
effects. For example, the external gains from solar radiation may increase the indoor
temperature, which can vary the stack-effect airflow or outdoor air density, leading
to a difference in the outside pressure. As a result, the pressure difference will change,
showing, for example, a change in the infiltration rate.
Summing up, the created weather file is used to analyse the effect of natural venti-
lation under different weather conditions, particularly wind speed and direction and
outdoor temperature. The DRY climate file has been chosen to show the difference
between the software in the more common use of the programs (consultant approach).
The related section below will describe each of these climate weather files. Because of
the central importance of the weather file, particular attention will go to explaining
in detail each of the inputs of the weather file that may influence this case study:
• Atmospheric pressure at sea level (hPa), relevant for calculating the outdoor
pressure at different heights of the building for evaluating the airflow through
cracks or large openings;
• Wind direction (°), 0° indicates wind from the north, 90 ° indicates wind from
the east, etc. Relevant because different wind angles lead to the use of different
pressure coeﬀicients values that influence the airflow;
• Wind speed (m/s), the intensity of the wind speed, some software, for example,
IDA ICE split that in a vectorial way in x and y components;
• Dry bulb temperature (°C), outdoor air temperature, extremely relevant because
of the direct influence on the air density;
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methodology
• Humidity (%), air humidity, influencing as well the outside air density and so
indirectly the airflow as well;
3.2.1.1
Created Weather file
The first climate weather file has been created to evaluate best the comparison be-
tween the BES tools following some assumptions like maintaining just the wind and
temperature effects and eliminating or keeping constants other inputs data through-
out the whole year:
• Solar radiation components have been set to 0 to avoid solar gains.
• Relative humidity has been set to 79%, representing the yearly average humidity
in Denmark.
• The outside air pressure has been kept constant to 101325 Pa.
While the previous parameters have been kept constant throughout the year, temper-
ature, wind direction and speed keep changing, allowing us to consider any possible
outdoor combination in the ranges defined below. These conditions have been chosen
to evaluate natural ventilation based on the main aspects related. As a result, some
assumptions in the climate weather file have been considered to reduce the number
of combinations and analyse only the worthy causes:
• Temperature range: [-15 °C, 40 °C], the offset is 5 °C.
• Wind speed range: [0 m/s, 15 m/s], the offset is 3 m/s.
• Wind directions: [0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, 180°]
The weather file structure can be seen in the figures below, where we can appreciate
the format of the weather file. The climate weather file has been built to have one
combination each day given the parameters variation for temperature, wind speed
and direction. At each temperature considered, the wind speed and direction were
modified before rotating the wind speed with an offset of 45° from 0°(towards south)
to 180° (towards north) and then raised the wind speed by 3 m/s until the wind
speed reach a value of 15 m/s, Figure 3.5. After that, the temperature was set to 5
°C degrees higher. The process has been iterated till reaching a value of 40°C from a
starting temperature of -15 °C. Figure 3.4 represents the rate of wind speed with the
rotation of the direction at each temperature.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The main contributions to natural ventilation
23
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Timestamp [hours]
0
40
80
120
160
200
Wind direction [°]
Wind direction
Wind speed
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Wind speed
Figure 3.4. Variation of the wind speed and direction at a certain temperature
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Timestamp [hours]
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
T outdoor [°C]
T outdoor
Wind speed
5
0
5
10
15
Wind speed [m/s]
Figure 3.5. Yearly profile of the variation of outdoor temperature and wind speed
3.2.1.2
Danish Design Reference Year Weather File
The second climate file used is the so-called ”Dansk Design Reference Year”, called
DRY 2001-2010; the climate data has been built on observations from climate stations
in 2001-2010. The DRY climate weather file is created from months selected in the
first decade of the 2000s, and the choice is made to best represent the climatology in
Denmark throughout the year.
3.2.1.3
Weather choice and explanation
The choice of the use of the weather data depends on the aim of the study. If for the
scientific approach, the created climate file has been used in its integrity (8760 hours)
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methodology
for infiltration and just for the opening hours three hours per day corresponding to the
time range between 18:00 and 21:00 to analyse the operable windows’ natural ventila-
tion’s effects. For the consultant approach, data analysis has been carried out before
choosing the days when to carry out more practical research using different indicators.
The consultant approach aims to give a more realistic view of the analysis. For this
reason, one summer day and one winter day have been chosen to understand the
differences within the software and to cross-compare the tools. An ordinary winter
day shows how the software may behave in conditions where significant differences
between indoor and outdoor occur, and a summer day where little difference between
indoor and outdoor occur. A probability data analysis regarding the temperature and
wind probability has been carried out as shown below in Figure 3.6 and 3.7 to pick the
winter and summer days. To carry out the analysis, for the summer period, just the
months of June, July and August have been considered, while for the winter period,
just the months of January, February, November and December have been chosen.
These choices are since these periods considered should be the most representative of
the warmest and coldest seasons.
((a)) Temperature
((b)) Wind speed
Figure 3.6. Winter period, temperature and wind speed distribution
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The main contributions to natural ventilation
25
((a)) Temperature
((b)) Wind speed
Figure 3.7. Summer period, temperature and wind speed distribution
This led to the choice of the 31st of January to represent the winter day and the 15th
of June for the summer day, considering just the condition that goes between the
hours considered of the day. The table 3.2 below represents the primary inputs that
will influence the study case:
Table 3.2. Summer and Winter day chosen characteristics: Outdoor conditions
Day
Month
hour
WindDir [°]
WindSpeed [m/s]
Tout [°C]
31
January
19
15
3.8
0.7
31
January
20
32
3.9
0.7
31
January
21
63
4.3
0.7
15
June
19
262
3.6
17.8
15
June
20
281
4.1
16.7
15
June
21
262
2.8
15.3
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methodology
3.2.2
Pressure coeﬀicients
Given the geometry of the building object of the analysis, two different cases of pres-
sure coeﬀicient values have been presented in Table 3.3. Case 1 is related to the
automatised pressure coeﬀicient values input by IDA ICE Beta 5 and VELUX EIC,
and Case 2 is associated with the default values for Bsim. IES VE’s pressure coeﬀi-
cients have been set as Case 2 because of the ratio of the façade sizes between 1.5 and
2. The pressure coeﬀicients used are presented below in Table 3.3, which shows the
values for sheltered buildings and the reason for the choice is in [34]. The differences
between the two cases are presented in Figure 3.8:
Table 3.3. Pressure coeﬀicients Sheltered
Azimuth
Software
Type of facade
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
315
Case 1
Long wall
0.2
0.05
-0.25
-0.3
-0.25
-0.3
-0.25
0.05
Case 1
Short wall
0.18
0.15
-0.3
-0.32
-0.2
-0.32
-0.3
0.15
Case 1
Long roof
0.06
-0.15
-0.23
-0.6
-0.42
-0.6
-0.23
-0.15
Case 2
Long wall
0.06
-0.12
-0.2
-0.38
-0.3
-0.38
-0.2
-0.12
Case 2
Short wall
0.18
0.15
-0.3
-0.32
-0.2
-0.32
-0.3
0.15
Case 2
Long roof
0.06
-0.15
-0.23
-0.6
-0.42
-0.6
-0.23
-0.15
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction [°]
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Pressure coefficients
Long wall Case1
Long wall Case2
Figure 3.8. Differences in the pressure coeﬀicients between the cases 1 and 2 for sheltered
exposure class
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
27
3.2.3
Other relevant Inputs
Related to the wind profile and wind speed evaluation, the terrain type values, or wind
correction factors, are relevant to calculating the wind speed at the relative height
desired. These values significantly affect natural ventilation because they allow for
calculating the effective wind speed at the height where the building and relative
openings are. Table 3.4 presents the values used in the different programs, where α
is the exponent and K is the coeﬀicient of the wind factors:
Table 3.4. Different inputs for suburban/urban terrain type
Inputs
IDA ICE
IES-VE
VELUX EIC
Bsim
α
0.25
0.22
0.25
0.25
K
0.67
0.43
0.67
0.35
3.3
Cross-comparison between BES Software in
Simulating Natural Ventilation
This section aims to show the differences between the software in simulating natural
ventilation both from the user interface perspective and from a solver perspective. The
analysis will focus on the two contributions of infiltration, also called flow through
cracks, and simple natural ventilation or venting, flow through large openings or flow
through operable openings.
3.3.1
BSim
BSim (Danish Building Research Institute 2004) is one of Denmark’s most commonly
used tools in all consulting companies. Its easy interface and user interactivity are
points of strength [29]. The user can interact with the software by adjusting the
equation by changing relevant inputs such as coeﬀicients and exponents. The version
used is 7.16.8.11.
3.3.1.1
Infiltration
Regarding infiltration, in the figure below, the user interface for this system can be
seen, and it is based on four different inputs, see Figure 3.9. These four different
inputs allow multiple combinations of infiltration. These inputs are needed to calcu-
late the total infiltration (n) through the equation (3.1). This formula shows how the
infiltration is composed of three different parts, constant infiltration, temperature-
based, and wind-driven based. Explanations of each component of the equations and
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methodology
recommended values are taken from BSim’s user guide [35].
n = n0 + ct ∗(tin −tout)tp + cv ∗v
(3.1)
Where:
• no: it stands for Basic Air Change per hour, and it is the amount of air change
per hour (ACH) given by constant infiltration [h−1].
• ct or ”TmpFactor”: it stands for temperature factor and is a constant that
depends on the size and the location of the space and openings, usually 0.1 for
small buildings, while from 5 to 7 for tall and leaky buildings.
• tin: is the operative indoor temperature [◦C]
• tout: is the outdoor temperature [◦C]
• tp or ”TmpPower”: is the power of the temperature difference, normally 0.4 -
0.7
• cv: it stands for the wind factor and specifies the dependence of the air change
on the wind. For small, impervious buildings in a sheltered location (around
0.05 - 0.1), for large, exposed buildings, it can be up to 0.4.
• v: is the wind speed [m/s].
Figure 3.9. Infiltration BSim
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
29
The schedule is a fundamental input in every BES because it allows controlling every
system that has been added to the simulation, and how to implement it is shown in
Figure 3.10. The possibility to control the schedule via the user interface is with two
different tabs provided, the ”DayProfile” tab for the daily profile, which the user can
customize as the percentage and the hours of the day related, and the ”Time” tab,
where it can be selected when activating the daily profile throughout the year.
((a)) daily profile
((b)) Yearly profile BSim
Figure 3.10. BSim schedule inputs
3.3.1.2
Flow through large openings
To regulate and add airflow through large openings to the simulation, a different
system in the software should be used, called ”Venting”, with some additional inputs.
This system, as expected, is also dependent on the characteristics of the openings,
both windows and doors. The openings in this software are called ”windoors”. Each
windoor, to be related to venting, has to be connected to a system called ”Regulation”
that allows regulating the opening with a schedule.
First of all, a particular focus has to be on the windows settings, shown in Figure
3.11. The windows’ frame area can be inserted in the section ”Override” in Figure
3.11(a), which leads the software to calculate the other characteristics automatically.
In addition, here, we can add the system ”Regulation” for NV. In the second tab,
Figure 3.11(b), relevant inputs such as:
• Discharge coeﬀicients (Cd), determined by the geometry of the opening, typical
values between 0.62 to 0.7.
• (Cnt) is the geometrical centre of the opening; top hung windows have the centre
of the opening approximately at 20% distance of the height from the bottom of
the window.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methodology
• Afrac is the part of the actual opening that can be opened. If set to 0 is closed.
• Ka is the inlet air handling unit box constant used for calculating night cooling.
((a)) Property of windoors
((b)) Natural ventilation inputs
Figure 3.11. Windoor overview
From Figure 3.12, some changes have been implemented compared to the infiltration.
The interface to activate the opening seems the same, but it is substantially different
because the two components responsible for the control of NV are ”Max AirChange
[/h]” and ”Max Wind [m/s]”.
These two inputs are needed to set the maximum
air change per hour (ACH) allowed and the top wind speed condition in which can
open the doors or windows. The opening control is given by the tab ”VentingCtrl”,
which offers the setpoints for temperature and CO2 concentration measured in [ppm].
The priority of this control is the contaminant concentration. After the temperature,
according to the schedule, BSim opens the windows before trying to establish the
required indoor comfort and then the temperature setpoints.
Additionally relevant is the ”Natural Ventilation” of the Figure 3.12 here, BSim sug-
gests the different types of natural ventilation allowed based on the inputs provided in
the Afrac of each opening in the geometry. Afrac provides the percentage of opening
area, so it defines which window or door can be either opened or closed. The dif-
ferent options provided are single-sided, cross-sided, combined two levels, combined,
automatic, or disabled.
Given all the inputs, when only natural ventilation has been applied, the software will
distinguish between single-sided ventilation, cross-sided ventilation, buoyancy-driven
ventilation, and a combination of the two called combined. In the simulations, only
the air exchange to the ambient is considered, without mixing. The following equation
is used to calculate the flow, cv and ct are different inputs in the software depending
on the type of ventilation (single, cross or combined) [35]:
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
31
Figure 3.12. Venting BSim
qv =
±q2
w ± q2
V T
1/2 =

cv
|cv|(cv ∗v10)2 + ∆T
|∆T|(cT |∆T|1/2)2

1/2
(3.2)
Summing up, the main peculiarities that make a difference with the other software
are using pressure coeﬀicients only with cross-sided, buoyancy effect and combined
(not with infiltration and single-sided). There is only interaction between outside
and inside, no mixing mode included in the solver, and no difference between overall
inflow and outflow; the amount of air that comes in the zone is the same as that goes
out.
3.3.2
IDA ICE
IDA ICE version beta 5.0 has been used. IDA ICE is a software developed in Sweden
and used mainly in Scandinavian countries and worldwide, both from an educational
and an engineering consultant perspective. The mathematical model with all the equa-
tions is changeable in the schematic/code section, where all the solving equations are
available for the user. Changing/modifying the equation has not been considered
because changing the solving code needs a different level of expertise that not only
experienced users can do but developers. So, just what the user can change from the
layout in the basic model is considered. The built model has been used to analyze and
compare the equations used to simulate natural ventilation with advanced and code
equations. The most important benefits of using this software are the transparency
of the mathematical model, variables and parameters that want to be inspected, and
the realistic modelling capability of controls, macros and loops in the whole building
behaviour [29].
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Methodology
3.3.2.1
Infiltration
Figure 3.13 represents the user interface for setting infiltration, and there are two
different options, ”Wind driven flow” and ”Fixed infiltration”. The flow is based on
buildings’ leakages, wind pressure and buoyancy effects, and it is applied to only
vertical external walls. The first one is based on the pressure difference created by
wind effects, while the second one is constant infiltration.
Figure 3.13. Infiltration IDA ICE
The air-tightness of the buildings is determined at a pressure difference of 50 [Pa].
The flow in case of constant infiltration is calculated by dividing the air-tightness
value with an empirical coeﬀicient, representing the influence of exposure class and
seasonality. In the case of exposed buildings is 10, while for sheltered buildings is 30;
as a result, a value of 20 can be assumed as a good approximation for every kind of
building and simulation throughout the whole year. [34].
Although the method explained before is not accurate for the approximation in choos-
ing the coeﬀicient, a technique developed at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory [36]
analyzes and, in particular, considers the wind and pressure-driven effects on the air-
flow. The unit considered for leakage in this method is specified as Effective Leakage
Area (ELA), and it is calculated at a 4 [Pa] pressure difference. The equation that
links the ELA to the flow [34] is shown below, see equation 3.3.
ELA = Q

ρ
2∆P
 1
2
(3.3)
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
33
Where:
• Q is the volume flow rate [m3/s]
• ρ is the air density [kg/m3]
• ∆P is the pressure difference (4 Pa in this case) [Pa]
The equation responsible is the power-law equation, see equation 3.4, where the mass
flow through cracks is dependent on the power-law coeﬀicient c [kg/(s ∗Pan)], where
the software will choose using a boolean variable between cT or ELA (by default
cT =1 and ELA depending on the geometry of the building). In contrast, the pressure
difference (∆P) is calculated with equation 3.5:
˙m = c ∗∆P n
(3.4)
Where:
• c is the power-law coeﬀicient [kg/(s ∗Pan)]
• n is the power law exponent, by default 0.6
∆P = (Pin −ρin ∗g ∗zrin) −(Pout −ρin ∗g ∗zrout) −ρleak ∗g ∗dz
(3.5)
Where:
• Pin and Pout are floor and ground level pressures
• (ρ ∗g ∗z) takes care of the pressure change at the leak level
• (ρleak g dz) term takes care of the pressure change inside the leak
• zrin leak height from floor zone
• zrout leak height from ground level
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Methodology
3.3.2.2
Flow through large openings
The airflow profile through openings depends on the calculation of the neutral plan,
that is, the plan where the outside and inside pressures are equal. It is calculated by
setting the pressure difference to 0. The two equations responsible for calculating the
pressure differences are:
∆Pbot = (P1 −ρ1 ∗g ∗zb1) −(P2 −ρ2 ∗g ∗zb2)
(3.6)
∆Ptop = dPbot −ρ1 ∗g ∗zt + ρ2 ∗g ∗zt
(3.7)
Where:
• subscript 1, can be outdoor or zone 1 when there is an opening between two
zones
• subscript 2, can be inside or zone 2 when there is an opening between two zones
• zb1 and zb2 are the heights of the opening bottom above reference levels
To regulate airflow through large openings to the simulation, access to a single win-
dow or door is required. From Figure 3.14, the user interface layout for the window is
displayed. The most relevant inputs related to natural ventilation are the geometry
(where the window size can be filled) and the frame (Figure 3.14, fraction of the total
window area and U-value). Regarding the airflow, the related inputs are the opening
area defined in IDA ICE; the ”max relative width” and the ”height” are needed to set
the total percentage of opening, Cd is the discharge coeﬀicient, but to set the control
for the opening is displayed in Figure 3.15. For controlling the openings, there are
different options:
• Never open
• Always open
• Schedule: set a certain timing schedule for the opening
• PI temperature control: according to the cooling setpoint, the windows and
doors start to open proportionally
• Temperature control and schedule: possibility to set schedule together with PI
control
• New custom control allows to create the own control (Macro), a tool that allows
creating a customized control through the use of palettes.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
35
Figure 3.14. IDA User interface for Window accessories and pane on the left, while on the
right tool to set the max opening area and discharge coeﬀicient Cd
Figure 3.15. IDA user interface to set controls for the opening
3.3.3
VELUX EIC
As a software based on IDA ICE, the main equations and solving capabilities are
comparable and similar. The user interface layout is simplified in all the simulation
sections compared to the one offered by IDA ICE, with some limitations. Figure 3.16
allows adding the type of opening (door or window), the size, the exact location, the
openability and the possibility to add internal and external accessories.
After defining all the windows in the model, the control of natural ventilation is han-
dled in the tab called ”Ventilation”, presented in Figure 3.17. In this tab, different
controls can be used, such as setting setpoints, limits on the outdoor temperature to
stop/allow the windows to be opened and the schedule. An option for night cooling
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Methodology
Figure 3.16. Openings tab where all the windows can be defined
is possible to be added for the high possibility of energy-saving. Further options are
available for the type of controls, either CO2 control based or manual controls, in
addition to the construction of a hybrid system adding a mechanical ventilation sys-
tem.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
37
Figure 3.17. Definition of ventilation schedule and control
More in detail, the controls for ventilation are able to handle:
• Control of overheating: allows opening windows when the indoor temperature
is above the input value. It is a PI control, meaning that it starts to open
the window: 1-2 °C before the set point. It can be activated when people are
present, and the outdoor temperature is at least 2 °C less than the desired
indoor temperature.
• Night cooling: All openable roof windows open between 22:00 and 7:00 if the
indoor temperature at 22:00 is above the preferred maximum summer temper-
ature and the outdoor temperature is below the desired indoor temperature
(cooling setpoint).
• Controlled ventilation based on CO2: Ventilation system used to maintain the
required indoor comfort
• Manual control: opens windows when the Tout is above a certain input value.
If this occurs, when the schedule is active, the windows will open.
• Window ventilation flap for background ventilation when the temperature is
above a certain input value. Ventilation flaps are kept open all year whenever
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Methodology
the previous condition is fulfilled to provide indoor comfort even when the
outdoor condition is too cold and would not invite people open the windows.
• Mechanical ventilation, HVAC.
Overall, if the infiltration is treated as wind-driven (see IDA ICE), the airflow de-
pends on the openable area of the window, in particular, the width and the pressure
difference, the equation to calculate the airflow is:
qv = (3.70width −0.126) ∆P 0.53
(3.8)
Where:
• qv is the volume flow rate
• width is the opening width
3.3.4
IES-VE
IES-VE has an appealing user interface, and its complexity is simplified by the graph-
ical and interactive interface that guides the user through the different aspects of the
simulation. The differences in simulating natural ventilation in the software can be
grouped overall in two ways: an enhanced mode (with MacroFlo) and a not enhanced
mode (with Building Template Manager). MacroFlo simulates the different airflow
possibilities in a building. This solver considers the pressure differences in all the pre-
viously described software and the possible HVAC presence. MacroFlo handles the
opening types and quantifies crack characteristics to control the flow allowed through
infiltration, the degree of opening and the type. MacroFlo has, in addition, another
possibility to simulate natural ventilation, that is, with or without wind turbulence.
3.3.4.1
Infiltration
Regarding infiltration, the not enhanced mode presented in Figure 3.18 is a tab of the
building template manager, where also the loads and thermal textures can be added.
This mode does not consider pressure coeﬀicients, wind exposure, and wind strength
influences. It just calculates a steady constant infiltration through the whole year.
Setting the ACH amount calculates the amount of infiltration in [l/s].
Through MacroFlo, a more realistic representation of the airflow dependent on both
the buoyancy effect and wind pressure can be simulated.
The amount of airflow
through cracks is simulated through the following equation:
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
39
Figure 3.18. Definition of steady constant infiltration in building template manager
q = CL
ρref
ρ
0.5
∆p0.6
(3.9)
Where the inputs can be added in MacroFlo through this user interface shown in
Figure 3.19. Each component of the equation is described below:
• q is the air flow through cracks [l/s]
• C is the Crack Flow Coeﬀicient

l
s∗m∗P a0.6

• L is the length of the crack [m]; in MacroFlo, these inputs are included in the
tool as a percentage of the total perimeter (0-500%)
• ρ is the air density entering the crack
h
kg
m3
i
• ρref is the reference air density 1.21
h
kg
m3
i
• ∆p is the pressure difference across the crack of the opening
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Methodology
Figure 3.19. Definition of steady constant infiltration in building template manager
3.3.4.2
Flow through large openings
When openings such as doors and windows are added to the model, the airflow through
them is handled as well in Figure 3.19 and it can be calculated by the following
equation:
q = 0.62Aop
2
ρ
0.5
∆p0.5
(3.10)
Where:
• q is the airflow through the opening
h
m3
s
i
• 0.62 is the discharge coeﬀicient
• Aop is the openable area calculated as a function of ”Openable Area %”, ”Max
angle Open °”, and ”proportions” of the size of the window. It gives, as a result,
the ”equivalent orifice area” that is the effective openable area
• ρ is the reference air density 1.21
h
kg
m3
i
• ∆p is the pressure difference across the crack of the opening
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Cross-comparison between BES Software in Simulating Natural Ventilation
41
The openable area is controlled and calculated as below:
Aop = spfA
(3.11)
Where:
• f is the aerodynamic (or equivalent) area fraction (Openable area)
• p is the degree of opening, controlling schedule for setting timing schedule to
allow the window to be opened
• s is a control signal for the set point for openings, temperature threshold control
• A is the whole opening area m2
An additional peculiarity is added to MacroFlo, the ”Wind Turbulence”. It is used
to include effects of exposure type, stack pressure, cross ventilation, and ventilation
driven by mechanical ventilation and to cover flow through cracks and regulate the
flow through large external openings. Due to wind turbulence, the flow is calculated
with:
q = 0.05Aop ∗v
(3.12)
Where:
• q is the additional airflow due to wind turbulence
• Aop is effective opening area
• v is the wind speed
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Methodology
3.3.5
Comparison between the software for the inputs
Here the inputs of all the software related to the airflow calculation will be summarised
with all the calculations to make a fair comparison between the BES tools. This
section has been created to help the reader summarise all the inputs except the inputs
already explained before related to the geometry of the building and the openings’
geometry and other inputs already explained and differentiated previously. The table
presented in Figure 3.20 helps to describe and enlighten the differences between the
software.
Figure 3.20. Table representing the main inputs and description on how to simulate natural
ventilation in the different software
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This section will be divided into three main parts, one related to the ”Scientific ap-
proach” (qualitative analysis), one associated with the ”Consultant approach” (quanti-
tative analysis), and the last one related to the ”User interface” (qualitative analysis).
• Scientific approach focuses on the different types of natural ventilation to un-
derstand the differences in the solving methods between the software and the
effects of the different types of natural ventilation. The created weather file
isolates the unwanted inputs from interfering with the understanding of NV.
• Consultant approach: gives a more realistic overview of the possible outcomes
through indicators using the DRY climate file. The aim is to analyse what a
consultant must be aware of while simulating natural ventilation.
• User interface: evaluates the effectiveness and clarity of the BES tools.
The scientific approach will start systematically with infiltration, proceeding with
single-sided, cross-sided, stack and combined ventilation. Different numbers of win-
dows will open to recreate the different effects. The consultant approach will consider
from a different perspective the different outcomes that can be evaluated from such
analysis; here also, the multi-zone will be taken into consideration. The user interface
will give a qualitative evaluation of the software interfaces.
The plots and this section will use acronyms for simplicity of understanding based on
the different possibilities of the software to simulate natural ventilation:
• IDA ICE will be simulated in two different ways:
– With pressure coeﬀicients sheltered (IDA BETA)
– With pressure coeﬀicients set to 0 (IDA cp0)
• VELUX EIC will be sometimes associated to IDA BETA for problems of over-
lapping curves (will be explicitly said in the text)
• IES VE has been analysed in the way of simulating in four different ways:
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results
– Basic constant infiltration (Constant), grouped with BSim
– MacroFlo with turbulence (IES WT)
– MacroFlo without turbulence (IES NOWT)
– When the differences within MacroFlo modes cannot be evaluated (IES)
• BSim in constant infiltration will be grouped by (Constant); otherwise in all
the other scenarios: (BSim)
4.1
Scientific Approach
This section will explain all the outcomes thoroughly for each natural ventilation
effect for both single and multi-zone models.
4.1.1
Infiltration
The study of infiltration carried out is regarding the different ways of simulating it
in the different software. Regarding IDA ICE, the two ways of simulating: constant
and wind-driven infiltration. In IES VE, the options are a basic constant infiltration
(a not enhanced mode in ”Building Template Manager”) and MacroFlo (an enhanced
mode) with/without wind turbulence’s effect. VELUX EIC has only the option of
simulating wind-driven infiltration.
4.1.1.1
Constant Infiltration
When simulating constant infiltration, the first outcome expected is a steady infil-
tration throughout the whole year, although changes in outdoor weather conditions
may occur; different behaviours can be evaluated by analysing the inflow (Figure 4.1) .
In Figure 4.1, the label ”Constant” has been used to represent BSim and IES VE
(not enhanced mode). The steady constant infiltration has been reached by setting a
defined air change per hour (ACH) of 0.11 (corresponding to a value of 2.2 ACH at
50 Pa pressure difference [34]), leading to a constant infiltration of around 2.6 L/s
(9.36 m3/h) of airflow through the cracks throughout the whole year at any outdoor
condition.
IDA cp0 shows the influence of just the outdoor temperature but not the impact of
the wind showing a steady increase with the temperature, reaching the value of 2.6
L/s when no temperature difference between indoor and outdoor occurs while no fluc-
tuation appears in the plot because of the absence of the pressure coeﬀicients (set to
0). Instead, IDA ICE BETA 5 and IES VE MacroFlo show how variations in tempera-
ture and wind speed affect the infiltration. Overall, while high wind speed values lead
to the highest peaks for the airflow movements through cracks in both the software
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Scientific Approach
45
showing a significant contribution, the temperature has a minor contribution showing
a slight increase of the relative maximum airflow with the rise in outdoor temperature.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Inflow [L/s]
IES
IDA BETA
Constant
IDA cp0
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
0
25
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.1. Inflow rate for weather created
The detailed overview at 20°C shown in Figure 4.2 (”Constant” groups also IDA cp0)
underlines the primary outcomes of infiltration. Essentially, when a wind speed of
0 m/s and an outdoor temperature of 20 °C (zero pressure difference) occurs, IES
VE MacroFlo more accurately simulates the infiltration, giving a 0 L/s amount of
airflow. At the same condition, IDA ICE BETA 5 provides an airflow rate equal to
the steady infiltration (label ”Constant”). As expected, when the wind vanishes, IDA
ICE BETA 5 behaves like IDA cp0. A remarkable difference can be evaluated when
simulating constant infiltration between IES VE MacroFlo and the other tools when
a zero pressure difference occurs.
5100
5200
5300
5400
5500
5600
5700
Timestamp [hours]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Inflow [L/s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Velocity [m/s]
IES WT
IES NOWT
Constant
IDA Beta
Wind Speed
Figure 4.2. Constant infiltration at an outdoor temperature of 20°C, weather created
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results
The distributions of the infiltration rate throughout the whole year using the two dif-
ferent weather files are presented in Figure 4.3. Considering both the weather file and
assuming the steady constant infiltration as the expected output (label=”Constant”),
IDA ICE BETA 5 overestimates the infiltration rate, and IES VE is mainly under-
estimating it. The overestimation and underestimation of the tools are due to their
behaviour in the absence of pressure difference.
Comparing the box plots, the underestimation and overestimation can be better eval-
uated. IES VE has broader distributions of the airflow infiltration in Figure 4.3(a).
However, an underestimation can be appreciated in both the climate files. At the
same time, IDA ICE BETA 5 generally overestimates the constant infiltration be-
cause of how it is calculated, except for timestamps when zero pressure difference
occurs. Figure 4.3(b) shows that the underestimation of the infiltration in IES VE is
occurring almost all the time the airflow rate simulated in IDA ICE BETA 5 except
few outliers and a high probability of underestimating the ”Constant” infiltration as
well.
Constant
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
IES WT
IES NOWT
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inflow [L/s]
((a)) Weather created
Constant
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
IES WT
IES NOWT
0
1
2
3
4
Inflow [L/s]
((b)) Weather: DRY
Figure 4.3. Distribution of constant infiltration throughout the whole year
4.1.1.2
Wind-driven Infiltration
VELUX EIC and IDA ICE BETA 5 are presenting just minor irrelevant differences,
so they have been plotted just as a single line for the reason of using the equivalent
solver (minor variations are presented in appendix Figure A.7). Similarly, IES VE
MacroFlo based solver modes have been plotted as a single line. IDA cp0 has not
been included because of the 0 infiltration rate at any condition for the pressure coef-
ficients. While considering this case, there are different ways of considering it, driven
by wind pressure (IDA ICE and BSim) or wind and temperature-driven for IES VE
MacroFlo (IES).
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Scientific Approach
47
Figure 4.4 shows the relation between the infiltration and wind speed in the different
software at -15°C. BSim plot, when simulating the wind-driven infiltration, shows its
dependency on the wind speed through a step graph but not on the direction (at each
wind speed, the direction varies from 0° to 180°). It is because of the choice of the
software not to use pressure coeﬀicients concerning the infiltration. Overall, if the
wind is absent, there is a gap between the different software due to the temperature-
driven infiltration possible to simulate in IES VE, leading to underestimating the
other software. While with high wind speed, IES VE underestimates the airflow rate
through windows, although the rates are comparable.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Timestamp
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Inflow [L/s]
IES
IDA BETA
Bsim
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Velocity [m/s]
Wind speed
Figure 4.4. Wind-driven infiltration at -15°C
Considering the distribution plots, in the case of the created weather file (Figure
4.5(a)), an overall underestimation and more compactness of the distribution in IES
VE can also be confirmed while considering the DRY weather file (Figure 4.5(b)).
Regarding the DRY weather file, if the median infiltration rate value is comparable
in IES VE, VELUX EIC and IDA ICE BETA 5, the standard deviation is much higher
in the last two. On the other hand, BSim, with the choice of simulating infiltration,
based just on the wind-driven, shows a high overestimation of the infiltration rate
with a much broader distribution of the values, shown by the extended box and the
extension of the max whisker. A general presence of outliers representing maximum
infiltration rate is present in all the software due to extreme conditions.
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results
Bsim
VELUX EIC
IDA ICE
IES VE
0
2
4
6
8
Inflow [L/s]
((a)) Wind-driven distribution, weather created
Bsim
VELUX EIC IDA ICE Beta
IES-VE
0
2
4
6
Inflow [L/s]
((b)) Wind-driven distribution, weather DRY
Figure 4.5. Distribution of wind-driven infiltration throughout the whole year
4.1.2
Flow through Large Openings
The following figures represent the behaviour of the different software in simulating
the different types of natural ventilation effects (during the hours when the windows
should be opened). The created weather file has been used to make the comparison
and present the different outcomes. Opening the window on the south façade leads
to the single-sided ventilation (Figure 4.6). The cross-sided ventilation effect is gen-
erated when opening the two windows on the west and east façade (Figure 4.7). The
stack effect happens when two different windows with a height difference are opened.
In this case, the east-facing window and the roof window are operable (Figure 4.8).
Finally, the combination of cross-sided and stack effects has been accomplished by
opening east, and west-facing windows and the roof window (Figure 4.9).
Overall, it can be seen how the different opening modes affect the amount of airflow
through the openings providing other behaviours. At the same time, the single-sided
leads to the lowest amount of airflow entering the building, and the combined effect
composed of cross-sided and stack-effect leads to the most considerable amount of
airflow. In all the simulations, the rate of IDA cp0, as expected, is a flat step graph
because of the absence of pressure coeﬀicients with the steps representing the effect of
changes in outdoor temperature. All the figures show how the temperature influences
the airflow leading to the same initial values (when the wind is absent) for all the
software comparable with IDA cp0, except for BSim, which behaves differently in all
the cases except the stack effect.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Scientific Approach
49
0
50
100
150
200
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES WT
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
IDA BETA
0
150
300
450
600
750
900
1050
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
0
25
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.6. Single-sided
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
150
300
450
600
750
900
1050
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
0
25
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.7. Cross-sided
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
150
300
450
600
750
900
1050
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
0
25
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.8. Stack effect
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
150
300
450
600
750
900
1050
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
0
25
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.9. Combined
Two problems can be underlined in BSim behaviour while simulating the airflow and
opening windows. BSim is not opening the windows when the outdoor temperature
is higher than the indoor temperature in all the cases because there is no possibility
to set a manual control to open the windows. It is possible to evaluate just an airflow
rate due to infiltration at higher temperatures than the indoors. The calculation of
airflow entering or exiting the zones depends on the difference in pressure coeﬀicients,
zero when the active pressure coeﬀicients are equal or otherwise proportional to the
difference between them. For this reason, in Figure 4.7 at the timestamps correspond-
ing to 0° and 180° direction of the wind or the airflow is absent, the airflow calculated
is equal to the infiltration rate or zero. While in Figure 4.9 the zero airflow rates
correspond when the wind speed is equal to 0.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Results
4.1.2.1
Single-sided
Figure 4.10 shows how single-sided ventilation is simulated by the different software
and different modes at four different temperatures giving an overview that can help
to understand the differences.
Overall, from Figure 4.6 and 4.10, it comes naturally to evaluate the versatility of IES
VE for the possible choices of simulating natural ventilation through MacroFlo with
(WT) or without turbulence (NOWT). If from one side using turbulence, the rate
follows the trend of BSim at any outdoor temperature showing a significant contribu-
tion of the wind speed. On the other side, without turbulence, the software simulates
an airflow rate following the tendency of IDA ICE based tools simulations, showing
a dominant influence of the temperature in evaluating the amount of flow through
the window while almost no impact with the rise of wind speed. Although the wind
speed can reach 15 m/s, the airflow through the windows is not varying accordingly.
The problem expressed above regarding the issue of the opening control in BSim is
evident in Figure 4.10(d) where just the infiltration is contributing to the airflow rate.
An overall overestimation of the airflow is present when using IES VE with turbu-
lence and BSim compared to the other simulation tools (IDA ICE software-based)
and modes (IES VE NOWT).
Regarding the wind direction influence, a pattern that can be evaluated from the
Figures 4.10 is the absence or limited effect considering BSim and IES WT. BSim
presents just little impact at -15°C (Figure 4.10(a)) and almost no effects or negligible
effects at 15°C (Figures 4.10(b) and at 20°C 4.10(c)) on the directions of the wind
because the pressure coeﬀicients are not activated (only considered by the software
when two or more openings are active). IES VE MacroFlo with turbulence (IES VE
WT) presents just a minor effect leading to a similar steady step airflow as shown for
BSim. Meanwhile, the other tools offer an influence on the direction of the wind for
the pressure coeﬀicient, except, as mentioned earlier, IDA cp0 eliminates the fluctua-
tions because the pressure coeﬀicients are set to 0.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Scientific Approach
51
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES WT
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
16
15
14
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
((a)) -15 °C
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES WT
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
14
15
16
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
((b)) 15 °C
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES WT
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
19
20
21
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
((c)) 20 °C
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES WT
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
24
25
26
Temperature [°C]
Temperature [°C]
((d)) 25 °C
Figure 4.10. Single-sided overview, Weather created
A more detailed figure that shows how IES VE without turbulence (IES VE NOWT)
simulation mode and IDA ICE BETA 5 and VELUX EIC (IDA ICE BETA 5) have
the same pattern is shown in figure 4.11. The effect of pressure coeﬀicients can be
rated by the fluctuation of the amount of airflow calculated. Not the same pattern
can be evaluated when studying IDA cp0, where the absence of pressure coeﬀicients
limits the fluctuation. An underestimation of airflow through the window can be
estimated while comparing IES NOWT with the other IDA ICE based tools.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Results
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
Outflow [L/s]
IDA cp0
IES NOWT
VELUX
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
15
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
14.5
15.0
15.5
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.11. Single-sided airflow rate without BSim and IES VE WT at 15°C
4.1.2.2
Cross-sided Ventilation
Figure 4.12 represents the opening hours at the temperature of 15°C for the cross-
sided ventilation effect. Although the limitations previously explained related to IDA
ICE cp0 regarding the pressure coeﬀicients and BSim present problems in the calcu-
lation and open abilities of the openings under some conditions, when the openings
are active, all the software present almost the same rate.
Thanks to the created weather file, the wind direction varies from 0° to 180° at any
wind speed. The effect of pressure coeﬀicients on natural ventilation can be noticed,
essentially, at a wind speed of 0 m/s and at any other wind speed at wind directions
of 0° (blowing from the north) or 180° (blowing from the south) for BSim is 0 due
to the dependency of the airflow on the wind but also on the pressure coeﬀicients as
explained before. At the same condition, the airflow rate in all the other software
is around 100 L/s both for IDA ICE based software and IES VE MacroFlo without
turbulence. This is due to the fact that pressure coeﬀicients set to 0 or the absence of
wind provide the same result. At the same time, IES VE MacroFlo with turbulence
demonstrates its capability of being influenced by the wind speed showing higher
values of inflow rate at wind speed higher or equal than 6 m/s also for conditions
where the pressure coeﬀicients are not favourable. Overall, it can be evaluated that
BSim (when the windows are opened) is underestimating the airflow while IES VE is
overestimating compared to IDA BETA 5.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Scientific Approach
53
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IES-VE NOWT
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
14.5
15.0
15.5
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.12. Cross-sided natural ventilation at 15°C
4.1.2.3
Stack effect ventilation
When analysing the stack-effect in Figure 4.13 regarding the pressure coeﬀicients, if
in IDA cp0, the flat graph is still present for the pressure coeﬀicients set to 0. It can
be seen in the other tools how the pressure coeﬀicients highly influence the rate. This
effect is more significant than in cross-sided because of the locations of the windows.
Most airflow enters the building from the east-facing window and goes out from the
roof window facing south (buoyancy effect). A drop in the outflow can be evaluated
in the last step at each wind speed because, the wind direction (from the south). The
limited openable area of the roof window and the airflow dynamic explained above
limit the amount of air entering the building. Particular notice has to be put on the
particular trend in all the software; this is due to different wind correction factors
used by the different tools that lead to an offset. For this reason, a better quantitative
study should be evaluated considering the DRY weather file will be evaluated in the
consultant approach.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
14.5
15.0
15.5
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.13. Stack ventilation at 15°C
4.1.2.4
Combined ventilation
When all the natural ventilation effect occurs, a sum of the cross-sided and stack
effect leads to the highest airflow. Hence, as a combination of the two effects, the
airflow mainly enters from the facade windows and goes out from the roof window for
the buoyancy effect. Due to the three windows opening, some of the airflows come
out also for a cross-sided effect. Combining the two effects leads overall to a rate
comparable to the stack effect previously described. However, the higher flow rate
amplifies the effect, leading to more significant differences according to the different
wind directions. The difference between the software are amplified. Otherwise, at
wind speeds higher than 6 m/s, the rates in all the software are similar. BSim presents
a sensible underestimation at low wind speed, and IES VE slightly overestimates.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Consultant approach
55
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
14.5
15.0
15.5
Temperature [°C]
Figure 4.14. Combined ventilation at 15 °C
4.2
Consultant approach
This section will allow the cross-comparison between the BES software through more
useful indicators and statistical indexes on the results of the airflow simulation modes
already presented in the scientific approach. Regarding the air change per hour (ACH)
indicator, the timeframes considered, as explained in Section 3.2.1.3 are a single winter
and summer day. In contrast, the whole year will be considered for natural venti-
lation losses. The opening schedule hours throughout the year will be used for the
statistical indices like mean average error (MAE) and its normalized one (NMAE),
root mean square error (RMSE) and its normalized one (NRMSE). Furthermore, this
approach will be analyzed both for the single-zone and multi-zone.
The ACH indicator will be explained from a general overview considering the winter
and summer days for the effects possible to generate with operable windows. After
having given an overview, two different quantitative comparisons are possible, one is
within each BES tool, and one is between the BES tools:
• Within each BES tool: Considering the airflow in the combined effect as 100%
and looking within the software how much is the entity of the decrease in the
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Results
other natural ventilation effects, and evaluate if the tendency is the same be-
tween the different BES tools.
• Between the BES tools: Comparing each airflow at each ventilation type in the
different BES tools with the results provided by IDA BETA.
4.2.1
Single-zone
The first indicator used is the air change per hour (ACH), focusing on the winter
day (the 31st of January, Figure 4.15(a)) and summer day (the 15th of June, Fig-
ure 4.15(b)). Overall, comparing the Figures 4.15, it can be rated that, as expected,
within each software, from the least effective to the most effective from an airflow
perspective is going from single-sided, cross-sided, stack effect and combined as the
most effective. This rate is valid for each software for a typical winter day, Figure
4.15(a). The values of air change per hour vary according to the software. During
a summer day, Figure 4.15(b), the cross-sided effect is more effective than the stack
effect, but this is explained because the temperature difference between the air enter-
ing the zone and the indoor temperature is much less than in the winter periods. The
buoyancy-driven effect will be substantially reduced. Overall, a substantially lower
airflow can be appreciated comparing the summer with the winter day.
((a)) Winter day
((b)) Summer day
Figure 4.15. ACH calculated averaging the airflow rates during the 31st of January and
the 15th of June
Important to notice that IDA cp0 has to be treated as a mistake because not consider-
ing the pressure coeﬀicient leads to considerable divergences leading to many mistakes
in designing and sizing. As it can be noticed from Figure 4.15(b), the differences, com-
paring IDA cp0 with the other tools, are significant when analyzing cross-sided, stack
effect and combined. The differences are reduced when considering the winter day
(Figure 4.15(a)) because of the significant temperature differences between indoor
and outdoor.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Consultant approach
57
In all the other software, if the rate is homogeneous in all the software for the winter
day. Focusing on the summer day (Figure 4.15(b)), in BSim, the differences with
the other software stand on the not impressive difference between the different ven-
tilation effects (cross-sided, stack effect and combined) in comparison with the other
BES tools. This behaviour can be explained because of the strong influence of the
wind pressure in BSim more than the temperature. Instead, a remarkable difference
between the cross-sided and stack effect can be seen in the other tools. The differ-
ences will be quantified below.
Regarding the difference within the software, Table 4.1 shows that the software are
behaving analogously during a winter day with a decrease to around 80% from com-
bined to stack effect while around 60% when considering the cross sided and around
20% when single-sided. Although the consideration made before on IDA cp0, during
winter, it seems to follow the trend of the other software due to the strong influence of
the temperature difference between indoor and outdoor, during summer, the results
show the diﬀiculties in calculating the air flow rate when the pressure coeﬀicients are
not active. Regarding the summer evaluation, if BSim is decreasing much less the air-
flow compared to the other BES tools that are behaving similarly, basically, in BSim,
the decrease in airflow simulated is much less compared to the others in particular
concerning single-sided and stack effect, leading to a difference of around 20% for
single-sided and 30% for stack effect. Overall, the difference between the BES tools is
not significant, and they behave similarly except made for the previously stated cases.
Table 4.1. Differences within each software considering the different types of NV effects
Case
Decrease in %
BSim
IES WT
IES NOWT
VELUX
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
Winter
21%
18%
18%
23%
31%
23%
Single-sided
Summer
28%
13%
5%
5%
26%
7%
Winter
66%
55%
55%
59%
58%
61%
Cross-sided
Summer
94%
86%
87%
87%
51%
87%
Winter
84%
82%
82%
81%
79%
81%
Stack effect
Summer
70%
40%
39%
41%
76%
39%
Winter
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Combined
Summer
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
When comparing the software with IDA BETA, Table 4.2, some relevant differences
can be evaluated in particular with single-sided. As explained previously in the single-
sided scientific approach (Section 4.1.2.1), significant differences stand between IES
WT and BSim with the other tools. Here is confirmed by showing more than 100%
overestimation of the flow when considering the summer day. Otherwise, in winter,
because of the significant temperature differences and the not extreme wind condi-
tions, no significant difference stands between the software. The big difference stands
when simulating the summer day in BSim, showing an underestimation of around 30%
in simulating cross-sided and combined ventilation compared to IDA BETA. IDA cp0
here clearly shows the limitation and the importance the pressure coeﬀicients have in
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Results
simulating natural ventilation leading to severe problems of underestimation. Apart
from the cases analysed before, all the software considered behaving similarly without
showing significant differences above 20% difference.
Table 4.2. Differences between the software considering IDA BETA as the comparison to
compare to for the different types of natural ventilation effects
Case
Decrease in %
BSim
IES WT
IES NOWT
VELUX
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
Winter
-14%
-10%
-11%
0%
-1%
3.3
Single-sided
Summer
179%
129%
-16%
-14%
-9%
0.7
Winter
3%
1%
0%
-5%
-32%
8.7
Cross-sided
Summer
-29%
15%
15%
6%
-87%
9.0
Winter
0%
13%
13%
0%
-29%
11.6
Stack effect
Summer
17%
19%
16%
12%
-56%
4.0
Winter
-4%
12%
12%
-1%
-28%
14.3
Combined
Summer
-35%
15%
15%
6%
-77%
10.3
Figure 4.16 show a yearly indicator as the total natural ventilation and infiltration
losses can help to understand what can happen when avoiding the seasonality effect
can influence the results upon natural ventilation effects. Summing up the results
shown above, this leads to show a different ranking in ventilation losses throughout the
year. The results shown in the ventilation losses show how eliminating the seasonality
of the cross-sided ventilation seems more convenient than the stack ventilation effect.
Obviously, these results have to be allocated in the area of analysis and dimensions
of the window. In fact, a different analysis carried out using a different weather file
and a larger roof window would lead to different results. As expected from the results
shown before, it can be evaluated how IES MacroFlo software is overestimating the
airflow calculations and so leading to higher values of ventilation losses. Overall, it
can be seen how much is higher the factor influencing the combined ventilation losses
in IES VE compared to the others.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Consultant approach
59
Figure 4.16. Ventilation losses yearly
Now, the statistical indices will give a more scientific overview in comparing the soft-
ware when the windows are opened. Two indicators have been chosen. Normalized
mean biased error (NMBE) gives an indication of the overestimation or underesti-
mation, while the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) is a useful standard
indicator used for quantitative analysis, especially when making cross-comparisons
between software regarding the energy use. If usually, regarding the energy use for
hourly values, a good model is below 15% of (NRMSE), for simulating the airflow
rate, a broader limit would be accepted. From the bar plots 4.17(b) can be easily
rated that VELUX is obviously the closest because of the exact solver. Both IES
MacroFlo do not have significant variation except the single-sided in IES WT has
around 30% of yearly NRMSE overestimation. Instead, BSim shows that more than
30% of NRMSE can occur when using this software compared to IDA BETA.
Figure 4.17(a) is helpful in evaluating the underestimation and overestimation. It
can be seen that IES is overall underestimating the airflow except for the single-sided
when simulating without turbulence. Regarding VELUX, the underestimation is al-
most absent. BSim is showing a sensible overestimation in combined and cross-sided
ventilation, in the other cases is showing a general overestimation.
Regarding IDA cp0, the only case acceptable is single-sided. Overall, it can be seen
that apart BSim and IES WT for single-sided, all the software behave similarly with-
out committing large errors in calculating the airflow rates.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Results
((a)) NMBE weighted on the average of IDA
BETA
((b)) NRMSE weighted on the average of IDA
BETA
Figure 4.17. Normalized mean biased error and Normalized root mean square error for
opening hours
4.2.2
Multi-zone
The same approach used to analyse the single-zone has been used to analyse the multi-
zone with the difference that VELUX EIC has been taken out because of the missing
capabilities of simulating multi-zones. This approach will be treated differently for
the similarities of the results compared with the single-zone. The differences with the
single zone can give a more effective outcome. Another aspect is that simulating a
single zone as a more manageable model for the multi-zone can be an effective solu-
tion to reduce the simulation load. However, the risks and the differences between
these two ways should be considered.
The first indicator, ACH, on the winter and summer days will be used to analyse the
main differences in simplifying a multi-zone with a single zone and showing which er-
rors can be committed. The results for the single zone (Table 4.3) and the difference
in percentage (Table 4.4) are presented below:
Table 4.3. Air change per hours in single zone
Case
ACH
BSim
IES WT
IES NOWT
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
Winter
2.8
2.9
2.9
3.3
3.3
Single-sided
Summer
1.9
1.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
Winter
6.8
8.8
8.8
6.0
8.8
Cross-sided
Summer
4.7
10.3
10.3
1.2
9.0
Winter
11.8
13.0
13.0
8.7
12.0
Stack effect
Summer
3.6
4.8
4.7
1.8
4.0
Winter
12.2
15.9
15.9
10.9
14.8
Combined
Summer
5.9
11.9
11.9
2.3
10.3
Apart from the errors committed to not setting pressure coeﬀicients (IDA cp0), the
software behaves almost the same with a fair approximation apart BSim, which is be-
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Consultant approach
61
Table 4.4. Differences in percentages of ACH between single zone and multi-zone
Case
ACH
BSim
IES WT
IES NOWT
IDA cp0
IDA BETA
Winter
0.5%
0.0%
0.2%
0.5%
-0.2%
Single-sided
Summer
-0.2%
0.5%
0.2%
0.0%
-2.6%
Winter
-24.0%
0.6%
0.6%
0.9%
0.3%
Cross-sided
Summer
-26.3%
0.6%
0.6%
-0.3%
0.0%
Winter
2.1%
-0.3%
-0.3%
7.0%
4.1%
Stack effect
Summer
-23.6%
0.1%
0.0%
-1.2%
-0.7%
Winter
-10.4%
-0.1%
-0.1%
6.1%
3.4%
Combined
Summer
-11.7%
0.4%
0.4%
-0.3%
0.0%
having differently. While IES MacroFlo (WT and NOWT) are not presenting almost
any differences, what can be evaluated is that the differences in IDA BETA are not
sensible. They are below 4% in the conditions considered. BSim behaves differently
and leads to high differences in the airflow rate in the timeframes considered. A note
to be remarked is that the multi-zone mode is in beta version, and as said in the
user guide, some mistakes need to be taken into consideration. Overall, it may seem
that no differences can be really appreciated in simulating a single-zone instead of a
multi-zone.
Table 4.5 shows how the differences compared with IDA BETA when simulating multi-
zone. The only few differences that can be rated are enlarging the differences between
BSim and IDA BETA also during the winter day evaluation wherein single-zone the
results were closer.
Table 4.5. Differences between the software for multi-zone
Case
ACH
BSim
IES WT
IES NOWT
IDA cp0
IDA BETA [ACH]
Winter
-13%
-10%
-10%
0%
3.3
Single-sided
Summer
186%
136%
-13%
-7%
0.7
Winter
-22%
1%
1%
-31%
8.8
Cross-sided
Summer
-48%
15%
15%
-87%
9.0
Winter
-2%
8%
8%
-27%
12.0
Stack effect
Summer
-10%
20%
17%
-56%
4.0
Winter
-17%
8%
8%
-26%
14.8
Combined
Summer
-42%
16%
15%
-77%
10.3
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Results
4.3
User interface
This approach includes a qualitative opinion on the usability and user interface of the
software regarding how to simulate natural ventilation, particularly infiltration and
flow through large openings. The different BES tools will be evaluated for their user
interface when simulating the different types of natural ventilation.
Infiltration
• BSim gives the user the complete freedom to simulate various types of infiltra-
tion, either constant or temperature-driven or just wind-driven or a combination
of them. The tool provides the user with high freedom in choosing the infiltra-
tion behaviour. The equation to calculate the infiltration rate is strictly linked
to the inputs by the user, so the user precisely influences it.
• IES VE can simulate either steady constant infiltration or via MacroFlo, where
temperature and wind-driven infiltration occur together. In constant infiltra-
tion, the tool behaves the same as BSim. MacroFlo, instead, allows calculating
the infiltration depending on the length of the opening and the crack flow co-
eﬀicient [l/(s ∗Lperimeter ∗Pa0, 6)]. Different infiltration rates can be set to
different openings.
• IDA ICE offers the possibility of both constant and wind-driven. While con-
stant is influenced by temperature and wind, wind-driven shows no influence by
temperature. IDA ICE can set the infiltration in different system units, either
in L/s or m3/h referenced to the floor area, external surface area, or air change
per hour (ACH). By default, the wind-driven infiltration is the amount of ACH
at a pressure difference of 50 Pa (the user can change the pressure difference
value). The infiltration rate is calculated through the whole envelope of the
building and not based on each opening.
• VELUX EIC is based on the wind-driven one based on IDA ICE. VELUX
EIC has a database based on the classification of buildings for airtightness
and construction year directly linked to the value of ACH at 50 Pa pressure
difference.
Overall, if BSim has the most significant freedom in choosing the infiltration behaviour
by the user, IES VE allows calculating the infiltration based on the perimeter of the
openings that match the reality and allows the user to set different infiltration rate
for each opening. IDA ICE has the approximation of calculating airflow through any
vertical walls where no openings are present; this does not match the reality. The
infiltration rate is calculated on the whole envelope.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 User interface
63
Airflow through large openings
• BSim has no proper manual control that allows opening the windows or doors
under any outdoor conditions; besides, it will enable the operable windows
to activate when the temperature or CO2 set point occurs. There is also an
additional limit based on the maximum limit of ACH and wind speed. The
user can activate a detailed schedule also to diversify the different controls.
Limitations on openings when outdoor conditions are not suitable to improve
the indoor climate are applied, so the software is not allowing to open the
windows.
• IES VE has the advanced add-in MacroFlo, with manual or temperature thresh-
olds to open windows or doors. It can open manually according to a schedule
defined by the user in much detail or controlled by temperature when the set-
point occurs.
• IDA ICE gives the user the freedom to activate the operable windows with all
the controls, temperature, CO2 or manual. Likewise, in IES VE, the user can
set the schedule in detail. Macros specially used by the advanced user can allow
the user to activate the window/door opening according to a script editable
through the use of palettes.
• VELUX EIC has the same controls as IDA ICE with the limitation that people’s
schedules must be active while the opening can be activated. Easy interface to
control the openings schedule and control.
Considering this second case concerning the user interface, BSim has limited inter-
activity by the user not allowing to force the openings of the windows, that instead
happens in IDA ICE based software and IES VE. Although it can be helpful, the
manual control limitations in BSim are a feature that has been introduced to avoid
creating worse indoor environment conditions.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion of results
After the result session, which gives the reader the outcomes of this analysis, a more
detailed discussion of the results achieved in this thesis for each of the approaches,
applications, limitations, and further developments will be presented.
5.1
General Discussion
The scientific and consultant approaches show how and which different parameters
in BES tools affect the most natural ventilation. The primary influence on natural
ventilation is the pressure difference between indoors and outdoor, particularly tem-
perature and wind. For this reason, an overall analysis of the parameters and results
correlated will be presented.
First parameters that need a particular focus are the wind correction factors; these
parameters in the different BES tools have been chosen based on the topography and
roughness of the terrain (profile suburban). These factors change over the different
software, so they need to be considered in discussing the results because it changes
the wind speed at the height of the opening. The differences in the factors are mi-
nor concerning the exponent (α), while the constant (K) presents more significant
differences than the exponent. The choice of these values is based just on the default
inputs when choosing the profile in each software because the user, in general, would
not change those. A sensible result of these inputs that can be appreciated is related
to the offsets occurring while showing the resulting airflow through large openings
between the software.
Pressure coeﬀicients lead to significant differences; when not using the pressure coeﬀi-
cients (IDA cp0), this is a mistake and leads to significant differences with high levels
of underestimation. This explains the importance of this parameter. Another pa-
rameter that could have influenced the airflow calculation is the opening area, which
would enlarge or minimise the previously described results.
Regarding the infiltration, the wind has a more substantial influence than tempera-
ture generally in any software considered. The temperature in infiltration simulations
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Discussion of results
is a relevant factor that should provide the basal airflow, and the wind should increase
the rate. This behaviour is confirmed in IES VE MacroFlo, where both wind and
temperature influence, leading to the expected result of 0 infiltration rate when no
pressure difference occurs. IDA ICE, instead, shows no influence of temperature when
simulated in wind-driven mode, giving a zero infiltration rate when no wind occurs.
In constant infiltration, a slight influence of the temperature can be appreciated but
leads to a sensible overestimation when the wind is present. BSim has the most ex-
tensive freedom that allows simulating the airflow as wanted. Overall, all the BES
tools present no sensible differences when comparing the wind-driven mode in IDA
ICE, VELUX EIC and BSim, with the combined temperature and wind-driven mode
in IES VE MacroFlo.
While comparing the single side, BSim and IES VE simulated with turbulence show
a more significant influence by the wind speed leading to a sensible overestimation.
Instead, IDA ICE based tools are not showing a significant influence, which can be ac-
ceptable in conditions where the user will not allow to open the window when extreme
wind conditions happen. When the wind speed is below 5 m/s, the approximation and
the error between the different BES tools are minimised. According to the outdoor
temperature, the greater the difference, the higher the wind speed that IES VE and
BSim equalise the IDA ICE based software, meaning that these tools have the same
airflow rate at a certain wind speed (at -15 °C at 6 m/s, at 15°C around 3 m/s and
at 20 in the absence of wind). IES NOWT and IDA-based software present problems
in limiting too much airflow when a considerable wind speed occurs. If IDA ICE,
VELUX EIC and IES NOWT can be considered temperature-driven for single-sided,
BSim and IES WT should be considered both wind ad temperature-driven.
While considering cross-sided and stack-effect, apart from the relevant result of the
seasonality due to the temperature difference between indoor and outdoor leading to
a different hierarchy, the most significant difference lay down on BSim showing the
problems related to the openings and calculation of airflow. An underestimation of
30% is appreciated on cross-sided; instead, an overestimation of the same amount is
for the stack effect. The underestimation in BSim should be recalled to the problem
of diminishing the airflow when pressure coeﬀicients are close enough to lead to di-
minishing the inflow. Overall, IES MacroFlo has a tiny overestimation leading the
software to be a model that approximates the airflow like in IDA ICE Beta.
Considering combined ventilation, BSim presents less than 30% of underestimation.
Instead, IES VE MacroFlo reaches a value of approximately 10% of overestimation.
These considerations lead the software to have an overall acceptable level of approxi-
mation.
All the things considered, the different BES tools handle the natural ventilation apart
BSim and the single-sided cases presented above in a similar way. If from one side,
it can be evaluated that IES VE MacroFlo can be considered the best for analysing
==PAGE:79==
5.1 General Discussion
67
single-sided because the inflow is highly dependent on the wind speed. The error
committed to choosing either IDA ICE or IES VE is minor in the other conditions.
A more accurate study can be analysed from a different perspective leading to the
discussion of the limitations of this project.
For the multi-zone, the airflow values considering an opening like a hole (1m*2m)
between the ground floor and first floor have been considered. This resulted in no
significant differences between the single-zone and multi-zone, but this led to the lim-
itations of the project, where a more accurate analysis should have been carried out.
For example, CFD analysis and wind tunnels test could have given a fair comparison
to the reality.
From a user interface perspective, all the software will be discussed below.
VELUX EIC seems the more straightforward tool that any user can effortlessly use,
but it limits the user to its reduced interactivity (many inputs cannot be controlled).
So it can be considered a restraining tool to be used by consultants for its less trans-
parency and limited interactivity.
BSim, although the high allowed interactivity can be a beneficial point for the free-
dom offered to the user, but may also lead to not expected results because it can
activate some unwanted default values and effects. Although the not appealing and
not realistic layout is a limitation, the ample freedom allowed for interacting with the
software, especially for the infiltration study, is a plus for this software.
IDA ICE and IES VE’s transparency and interactivity are a strong plus. The res-
olution, different inputs and outputs provide the user with high completeness, but
a medium/high level of expertise is needed to utilise the tool thoroughly. Different
features are provided in both software to perform a detailed simulation.
Overall, IDA ICE and IES VE allow the user to create and personalise the simulation
as much as possible through Macros in IDA or the detail of the inputs in IES VE,
making these tools more complete. However, the extensive possibilities and strengths
can make these software less straightforward.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Discussion of results
5.2
Limitations of this study
This study has helped compare how the different BES tools simulate natural ven-
tilation, but some limitations have been faced during the project. Firstly, realistic
observed values could have helped compare the airflow behaviour with realistic values.
The statistical indices could have been compared to an observed model and not to
one of the software.
Secondly, CFD analysis could have been applied to the study, which could have sim-
ulated the different airflow movements approaching the opening and inside the zone
in a more accurate way. The use of a CFD analysis, particularly for the multi-zone,
would expect changes in the airflows that in the results have not been shown, so it
could have given a better understanding of the divergences of the different BES tools
with reality or CFD simulations.
5.3
Further research
According to the limitations and the results achieved in this master thesis project,
wind tunnel measurements and CFD analysis as a model to compare would create a
more realistic comparison. Different openings control will be interesting to take into
consideration. In particular, what can be relevant is to analyse how the different soft-
ware acts and solve a control set point for the openings, such as temperature or CO2
set points. More software can be analysed and make a scientific cross-comparison
not only on natural ventilation but also from the other perspective such as energy,
indoor comfort and lighting. In this way, an actual evaluation and quantification of
the potential of natural ventilation could have been the project’s outcome.
In comparison, within the different tools how the new simulation modes for thermal
stratification in IDA ICE beta and MicroFlo in IES VE can evaluate how these BES
tools solve CFD analysis.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This Master Thesis project has been a crucial and problematic study where different
assumptions have been taken. The aim was to determine how different BES tools
simulate natural ventilation and led to different research questions that have been
investigated throughout the five months of the project. The paragraphs below answer
the research questions of this project.
Which BES tools are worth the investigation and to who directs the analysis?
The first research question had the goal to find which software is used the most in
Denmark and worldwide for either scientific/teaching field but also from a consul-
tant’s perspective. All the three leading software (BSim, IDA ICE, and IES VE)
are used in Denmark, while IDA ICE and IES VE are also adopted worldwide from
consultant and teaching perspectives.
How can different BES simulate natural ventilation, and which outcomes and benefits
can they provide while fulfilling the building requirements?
The second research question is related to the benefits and potentials natural ventila-
tion can provide as a backup cooling system while saving energy. This question has
been partially answered by analysing the different effects of the inputs. However, the
results showed that the seasonality has to be considered, and natural ventilation has
all the potential to be evaluated as a valuable tool to help reach nearly zero energy
building.
Which different inputs regarding the parameters and the empirical model the different
software use lead to?
The main parameters are pressure coeﬀicients, wind factors and the pressure difference
that lead to divergences between and within each software, considering the different
natural ventilation effects. While pressure coeﬀicients adjust the outdoor wind pres-
sure according to the direction, the wind factors adjust the wind speed where it is
needed to calculate. Instead, the pressure difference is influenced by the differences
between outdoor (buoyancy and wind-driven pressure) and indoor (buoyancy).
==PAGE:82==
70
Conclusion
Can the software usability and interface be beneficial or controversial to its extensive
use from a designing perspective?
The user interface may lead to errors and choose different inputs that lead to different
outcomes. If BSim has considerable freedom in the user interface, it may also lead
to mistakes of over or underestimating. The different user interfaces may activate
the software different unwanted default inputs by the software that may lead to di-
vergences, so the more transparent a software is like IDA ICE and IES VE, the most
suitable it can be.
Which can be evaluated the best from a different perspective, such as usability, layout,
and user interface?
Overall, all the things considered, IES VE MacroFlo is the most accurate software in
completeness because it handles the pressure differences and calculates the airflows in
a more accurate way than also IDA ICE, which is limited by some solving capabilities.
How can we assess the reliability of different tools analysed in assessing natural ven-
tilation, based on the airflow models considered, and which simplification has been
applied in the simulation software programs?
The different tools’ reliability has been proven by simulating the created weather
file that led to understanding why the over and underestimation is. The simplifica-
tions applied are due to removing heat gains and people’s schedules, so the indoor
comfort evaluation has not been considered.
However, this study aimed to study
from a scientific perspective to help consultants study how to use and exploit natural
ventilation.
==PAGE:83==
Appendices
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Weather file DRY
Weather data file DRY is presented for their relevant data regarding natural venti-
lation just for few months representing the summer and winter months to show the
seasonality regarding outdoor temperature and wind speed.
05-01
20-01
04-02
19-02
06-03
21-03
05-04
Timestamp
15
10
5
0
5
10
Temperature [°C]
T outdoor
Wind speed
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Wind speed [m/s]
((a)) January to March
14-06
04-07
24-07
13-08
02-09
Timestamp
5
10
15
20
25
Temperature [°C]
T outdoor
Wind speed
0
2
4
6
8
10
Wind speed [m/s]
((b)) June to August
Figure A.1. Weather file DRY, outdoor temperature vs wind speed
A.2
Pressure coeﬀicients
Overview of the pressure coeﬀicient per exposure type. Case 1: default pressure coef-
ficients for IDA ICE BETA 5 and VELUX EIC; Case 2: default pressure coeﬀicients
for BSim and adapted for IES VE as well.
==PAGE:86==
74
Appendix A Appendix
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((a)) Case 1
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((b)) Case 2
Figure A.2. Pressure coeﬀicients, exposure class: sheltered
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((a)) Case 1
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((b)) Case 2
Figure A.3. Pressure coeﬀicients, exposure class: semi-exposed
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.5
0.0
0.5
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((a)) Case 1
0°
45°
90°
135° 180° 225° 270° 315°
Wind direction
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Pressure coefficients
Long wall
Short wall
Long Roof
((b)) Case 2
Figure A.4. Pressure coeﬀicients, exposure class: exposed
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A.3 Constant infiltration weather DRY
75
A.3
Constant infiltration weather DRY
Simulating the constant infiltration with the DRY climate file, it shows obviously the
main dependency on the wind pressure of all the software.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Inflow [L/s]
Constant
IES VE
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-01
11-01
17-01
23-01
29-01
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
T out
((a)) January
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Inflow [L/s]
Constant
IES VE
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-05
11-05
17-05
23-05
29-05
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
10
20
Temperature [°C]
T out
((b)) May
Figure A.5. Constant infiltration, weather DRY
==PAGE:88==
76
Appendix A Appendix
A.4
Wind driven infiltration weather DRY
Simulating the wind driven infiltration with the DRY climate file. The influence of
temperature can be seen only on IES VE while no influence on the airflow on the
other software, just limited.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inflow [L/s]
IES-VE
VELUX EIC
BSim
IDA Beta 5
05-01
11-01
17-01
23-01
29-01
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
T out
((a)) January
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inflow [L/s]
IES-VE
VELUX EIC
BSim
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-05
11-05
17-05
23-05
29-05
Timestamp [hours]
0
10
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
10
20
Temperature [°C]
T out
((b)) May
Figure A.6. Wind-driven infiltration, weather DRY
Differences between IDA ICE BETA 5 and VELUX EIC are almost not present so
they are irrelevant.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Date
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Outflow [L/s]
VELUX EIC
IDA ICE Beta
5
0
5
10
15
20
Velocity [m/s]
Wind speed
Figure A.7. Wind driven infiltration at -15 and -10 °C comparison between VELUX EIC
and IDA ICE Beta 5
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A.5 Flow through Large Openings weather DRY
77
A.5
Flow through Large Openings weather DRY
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-01
13-01
21-01
29-01
06-02
14-02
22-02
02-03
10-03
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
5
0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.8. Single-sided winter
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
04-06
19-06
04-07
19-07
03-08
18-08
02-09
17-09
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.9. Single-sided summer
0
200
400
600
800
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-01
13-01
21-01
29-01
06-02
14-02
22-02
02-03
10-03
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
5
0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.10. Cross-sided winter
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Inflow [L/s]
BSsim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
04-06
19-06
04-07
19-07
03-08
18-08
02-09
17-09
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.11. Cross-sided summer
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix A Appendix
0
100
200
300
400
Inflow [L/s]
BSsim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
04-06
19-06
04-07
19-07
03-08
18-08
02-09
17-09
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.12. Stack effect winter
0
100
200
300
400
Inflow [L/s]
BSsim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
04-06
19-06
04-07
19-07
03-08
18-08
02-09
17-09
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.13. Stack effect summer
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
05-01
13-01
21-01
29-01
06-02
14-02
22-02
02-03
10-03
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
5
0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.14. Combined winter
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Inflow [L/s]
BSsim
IES VE WT
VELUX
IDA ICE_cp0
IDA ICE BETA 5
04-06
19-06
04-07
19-07
03-08
18-08
02-09
17-09
Timestamp [hours]
0
5
10
Velocity [m/s]
Wind Speed
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Temperature [°C]
T out
Figure A.15. Combined summer
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R.
Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. May-
cock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield, “Ipcc, 2018: Global warming of 1.5°c.”
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/, 2019.
[2]
R.
Lindsey
and
L.
Dahlman,
“Climate
change:
Global
temperature.”
https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/
climate-change-global-temperature, 2021.
[3]
S. Matemilola, O. Fadeyi, and T. Sijuade, “Paris agreement.” https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-02006-4_516-1, 2020.
[4]
IETA.org,
“Cop26
summary
report.”
https://www.ieta.org/resources/
Resources/COP/COP26-Summary-Report.pdf, 11, 2021.
[5]
G. Köktürk, “Global warming.” https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.
cvt.dk/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-030-02006-4_931-1, Encyclo-
pedia of Sustainable Management, 2020.
[6]
M. Lauring and R. Marsh, “Architecture and energy: Strategies for a changing
climate,” pp. 186–188, 2009.
[7]
K. Roth, J. Dieckmann, and J. Brodrick, “Natural and hybrid ventilation,”
ASHRAE Journal, vol. 48, pp. H37–H39, 06 2006.
[8]
J. Cheng, D. Qi, A. Katal, L. L. Wang, and T. Stathopoulos, “Evaluating wind-
driven natural ventilation potential for early building design,” Journal of Wind
Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 182, pp. 160–169, 11 2018.
[9]
T. Yang and D. Clements-Croome, Natural Ventilation in Built Environment,
pp. 431–464. 01 2018.
[10] T. products, “https://www.tealproducts.com/natural-ventilation-control,” 2022.
==PAGE:92==
80
Bibliography
[11] M. Ohba and I. Lun, “Overview of natural crossventilation studies and the latest
simulation design tools used in building ventilation-related research,” Advances
in Building Energy Research, vol. 4, pp. 127–166, 2010.
[12] P.
Heiselberg,
“Natural
ventilation
design.”
https://doi.org/10.1080/
14733315.2004.11683674, International Journal of Ventilation, 2004.
[13] T. Steen, F. Rémi, A. Kirkegaard, T. S. Larsen, C. Plesner, V. erie Leprince, emi
Carrí, A. K. Bejder, V. Leprince, and F. R. Carrié, “Calculation methods for
single-sided natural ventilation.” https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.
06.047, Aalborg Universitet, 2018.
[14] VELUX, “Sustainability report 2021, starting a new decade of action.” https:
//velcdn.azureedge.net/-/media/com/what-we-do/sustainability/
sustainability-reporting/reports/velux-sustainability-report-2021.
pdf, 2022.
[15] “Positive energy:
Maison air et lumière,” https://www.velux.com/what-we-
do/healthy-buildings-focus/demonstration-buildings/maison-air-et-lumiere
2011.
[16] H. Visscher, F. Meijer, D. Majcen, and L. Itard, “Improved governance for energy
eﬀiciency in housing,” Building Research & Information, vol. 44, no. 5-6, pp. 552–
561, 2016.
[17] Y. Chen, Z. Tong, and A. Malkawi, “Investigating natural ventilation potentials
across the globe: Regional and climatic variations,” Building and Environment,
vol. 122, pp. 386–396, 2017.
[18] P. Heiselberg, “Design principles for hybrid ventilation,” Aalborg Universitet,
Dept. of Building Technology and Structural Engineering, Indoor Environmental
Engineering Vol. R0039 No. 49 2008.
[19] B. Center for the Built Environment (CBE) | University of California, “About
mixed-mode.” https://cbe.berkeley.edu/mixedmode/aboutmm.html, 2013.
[20] M. Krarti, “Integrated design and retrofit of buildings,” Optimal Design and
Retrofit of Energy Eﬀicient Buildings, Communities, and Urban Centers, pp. 313–
384, 2018.
[21] VELUX,
“Read
about
active
and
passive
ventilation
and
cooling
sys-
tems.”
https://www.velux.com/what-we-do/research-and-knowledge/
deic-basic-book/ventilation/ventilation-and-ventilation-systems.
[22] R. Stasi, F. Ruggiero, and U. Berardi, “The eﬀiciency of hybrid ventilation on
cooling energy savings in nzebs,” Journal of Building Engineering, p. 104401, 4
2022.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
81
[23] “Ashrae standard 55,” American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc, 2010.
[24] R. J. D. Dear and G. S. Brager, “Thermal comfort in naturally ventilated build-
ings: revisions to ashrae standard 55.”
[25] M. C. Peel, B. L. Finlayson, and T. A. McMahon, “Updated world map of
the köppen-geiger climate classification,” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences,
vol. 11, pp. 1633–1644, 2007.
[26] M. Orme, M. W. Liddament, and A. Wilson, “Numerical data for air infiltration
and natural ventilation calculations,” 1998.
[27] J. Pouriya and B. Umberto, “Building energy demand within a climate change
perspective: The need for future weather file,” vol. 609, Institute of Physics
Publishing, 10 2019.
[28] A. Chong, Y. Gu, and H. Jia, “Calibrating building energy simulation models:
A review of the basics to guide future work,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 253, 12
2021.
[29] D. B. Crawley, J. W. Hand, and B. T. Griﬀith, “Contrasting the capabilities of
building energy performance simulation programs a joint report by,” 2005.
[30] M. Magni, F. Ochs, S. de Vries, A. Maccarini, and F. Sigg, “Detailed cross
comparison of building energy simulation tools results using a reference oﬀice
building as a case study,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 250, 11 2021.
[31] T. G. Trucano, L. P. Swiler, T. Igusa, W. L. Oberkampf, and M. Pilch, “Calibra-
tion, validation, and sensitivity analysis: What’s what,” Reliability Engineering
and System Safety, vol. 91, pp. 1331–1357, 10 2006.
[32] “Velux energy and indoor climate visualizer 3.0 user guide.” http://eic.velux.
com, 2016.
[33] P. G. Wang, M. Scharling, K. B. Wittchen, and C. Kern-Hansen, “Dansk design
reference year supplerende datasaet-projektrapport til energistyrelsen: Data til
teknisk dimensionering for parametrene atmosfaeretryk, vindretning, skydaekke,
vandtemperatur og jordtemperatur samt data til byggesagsbehandling,” 2013-18.
[34] M. W. Liddament, A. Infiltration, and V. Centre., A guide to energy eﬀicient
ventilation. Air Infiltration and Ventilation Centre, 1996.
[35] K. Wittchen, K. Sørensen, K. Johnsen, and J. Rose, “Bsim: User’s guide,” 2011.
Publisher: Danish Building Research Institute.
[36] M. H. Sherman, “Air infiltration measurement techniques.” https://www.osti.
gov/biblio/5675177, 1989.
==PAGE:94==
