==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
EU Taxonomy’s vade mecum and
absolute environmental sustainability
assessment of its electricity generation
criteria
Author
Thomas Filhon - s202930
Supervisors
Michael Zwicky Hauschild
Alexis Laurent
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Quantitative Sustainability Assessment Section
June 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This Master Thesis have been written in the department of Environmental and Resource En-
gineering in the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It has been conducted in the Quan-
titative Sustainable Assessments division under the supervision of Michael Zwicky Hauschild
and with the cosupervision of Alexis Laurent. This study has been conducted independently
of any private or public authority.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Michael Zwicky Hauschild and my cosupervisor Alexis
Laurent providing valuable feedback on my work as well as motivating discussions through
the whole project.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Faced with the lack of sustainable investment to reach its Green Deal targets, the EU has
developed a plan for fostering sustainable finance whose the Taxonomy is the cornerstone.
The Taxonomy aims at i) providing clarity on what is a green activity, ii) reorienting capital
flows towards sustainable investments, iii) fostering transparency, and iv) avoiding informa-
tion asymmetries and greenwashing. This study proposes a dual approach, where firstly
the Taxonomy is summarized in a concise and comprehensive summary and secondly an
absolute environmental sustainability assessment is conducted on the Taxonomy technical
screening criteria for electricity generation. The absolute boundaries used in the study are
carbon budget emanating from the latest IPCC report for the Working Group III as well
as a specially-built carbon budget regarding the EU Green Deal targets. An egalitarian
allocation process is used for an even share of the safe operating space and grandfathering is
used to upscale the individual share of safe operating space to the EU electricity generation
sector. Finally, electricity generation scenarios from the EU and Bloomberg are used to
obtain a life-cycle emissions not to exceed to stay inside the safe operating space.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Taxonomy’s vade mecum
3
2.1
Genesis and further developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Expected goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Economic sector coverage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Users and reporting obligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned? . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Substantial contribution to the environmental objectives
. . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
The Do Not Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Social safeguard compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
The Technical Screening Criteria (TSC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.5
An example: Electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment of the electricity gen-
eration criteria
15
3.1
General AESA methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
AESA methodology applied to the case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Parameters definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
The allocation parameter (AP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
The safe operating space SOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.3
The EU electricity generation (GenerationEU,elec) . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.4
The upscalling method (UMEU,elec) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Conclusion and recommendations
23
References
Appendix A: Supplementary table about the electricity generation in the
Taxonomy
I
Appendix B: Assumptions and scenarios description
II
Appendix C: LCE calculation
XI
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
List of Figures
2.1
Timeline with the milestones enabling the establishment of the current Tax-
onomy as well as the further expected development for 2022
. . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Interactions between the Taxonomy, the NFRD/CFRD and the SFRD. In-
spired by [43] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Allocation of the global carbon budget to the EU electricity generation industry 16
3.2
Allocation of the global carbon budget to the EU electricity generation industry 19
3.3
Annual electricity generation per capita for three different scenarios (kWh/-
capita/year). The value per capita rather than for the whole EU are displayed
because ETS and NZS scenarios cover additionally the United Kingdom, Nor-
way and the Switzerland. For each year, the total electricity generation has
been divided by the correspondent population projections.
. . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
LCE limit per year to be compliant with C1 and C4 depending on the elec-
tricity generation scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the EU REF 2020 electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1
Projected median annual GHG emissions over the years across four of the
IPCC’s global emissions pathways using 4.3 [3].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
4.2
EU annual net GHG emissions using historical data reported by the EU under
the UNFCCC from 1990 to 2020 included, and the 2030 and 2050 Green Deal
targets after [40]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
4.3
Gross electricity generation by sources between 2005 and 2050 in the EU.
Under the EU REF 2020 scenario, the total electricity generation will increase
by 30% between 2020 and 2050 [57] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
4.4
Likewise the electricity and steam production carbon intensity is decreasing
over the period 2005-2050, the share of electricity-related CO2 emissions is
decreasing too but at a lower rate. Indeed the share of electricity among final
energy is increasing by 48% over the period 2020-2050 while the demand is
increasing by only 30% 4.3. It might be due to an increase in energy efficiency VII
4.5
European electricity generation by source following the ETS [56] . . . . . . .
IX
4.6
European electricity generation by source following the ETS using Table 4.9
data inferred from Figure 4.5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
4.7
European electricity generation by source following the NZS [56] . . . . . . .
X
4.8
European electricity generation by source following the NZS [56] . . . . . . .
XI
4.9
LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the ETS electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XIV
4.10 LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the NZS electricity generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XIV
4.11 Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets fol-
lowing EU REF 2020 electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh)
. . . . . . . .
XV
4.12 Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets fol-
lowing the ETS electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh)
. . . . . . . . . . .
XV
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
4.13 Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets fol-
lowing the NZS electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh) . . . . . . . . . . . .
XVI
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The cumulative scientific evidence is unequivocal: Climate change is a threat to human well-
being and planetary health.
Any further delay in concerted anticipatory global action on
adaptation and mitigation will miss a brief and rapidly closing window of opportunity to
secure a liveable and sustainable future for all [1].
This is the last sentence of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) "Climate
Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability" summary for policymakers, highlight-
ing the urgency of the situation. The human influence on global warming is now indisputable,
and has already caused an increase of the global surface temperature of 1.07°C between 1850
and 2019 [2]. It has also increased the frequency and intensity of extreme climate events
causing losses and damages to nature and people, like the reduction of food and water secu-
rity [1]. Worse, the policies implemented by all countries worldwide by the end of 2020 could
lead to a median global warming of 3.2°C by 2100 [3]. However, actions are still possible to
limit global warming to 1.5°C but they need to be taken in the next years to stop greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions’ increase after 2025 [3].
In 2015, 194 countries and the European Union (EU), representing 98% of the global emis-
sions, have committed to keep global warming well below 2°C above pre-industrial level, with
a target at 1.5°C, under the United Nations (UN) Paris Agreement [4]. To reach their target,
they acknowledge the need to drive financial flows towards low-emission and climate-resilient
investments. According to the UN, US$5-7 trillion of infrastructure investments are required
annually to meet the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030 [5].The transition is
vital but costly. In 2019, the EU committed under the Green Deal to reduce GHG emissions
by at least 55% by 2030 compared to 1990 levels and to become the first climate-neutral
continent by 2050 [6]. Following this commitment, the EU estimated that €350 billion and
€130 billion of additional annual investments would be needed to meet its 2030 target and
other environmental goals, respectively [7]. When compared to the EU total annual budget
(€170 billion in 2022), it is clear that the EU will need the participation of the private
financial sector to provide the capital required for the transition towards sustainability.
It is important to note that only little research was conducted on the integration of sus-
tainability in investment decision-making before 2018 [8]. It was at best considered as a
nice-to-have but not at all as a must-have as it should be nowadays. Climate change may
have negative impacts on economic growth and global banking system, increasing the fre-
quency of banking crisis [9]. For companies, it has been shown, that the access to bank
lending is negatively correlated with their exposure to climate risks [10]. Moreover, the in-
crease of companies’ GHG emissions might decrease their values on financial markets, and
only the ones implementing methodologies to assess and control climate-related risks may
ensure long-term corporate value [11][12]. Similarly, mandatory emissions disclosure for com-
panies may lead to a reduction in their GHG emissions without showing any detrimental
effect on their financial performances [13].
Page 1 of 23
==PAGE:8==
Despite the potential for financial opportunities, sustainable finance remains a niche sector,
unevenly distributed across regions and economic sectors [5]. Nonetheless, financial flows
towards climate mitigation and adaptation increased by up to 60% between 2013 and 2020
[3]. However, climate change mitigation attracted most of the investments and the overall
growth tended to slow down since 2018 [3]. Additionally, mitigation and adaptation invest-
ments remain well under public and private financial flows for fossil fuels [3]. In June 2021,
green funds were representing only 1.3% of European assets under management [14]. One of
the reasons for this slow adoption is the lack of consistent, robust and comparable standard
to assess how green is an asset [15]. The so-called green funds can use different Socially Re-
sponsible Investment (SRI) domestic labels, such as the Nordic Swan Ecolabel in the Nordic
countries and the ISR label or the Greenfin label in France, to certify their financial products.
Label assess assets based on Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) data, which can
be collected thanks to reporting initiatives, such as the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)
Standards or Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD). Nevertheless,
both are voluntary disclosure frameworks. The broad The diversity of green labels forces
investors to be able to assess the credibility and comparability of such labels. This, in turn,
leads to i) increased transactions costs, ii) lower financial returns and iii) reduced market
size for green financial products [16][17].
In 2018, the European Commission (EC) adopted a three-axis plan with the aim of ad-
dressing the challenges revolving around green finance. The plan relies on i) a classification
system for sustainability activities, ii) a disclosure framework for financial and non-financial
companies, and iii) standards and labels for green products. It unifies the information flows
from the companies activities to the final investor. The classification system is called the EU
Taxonomy, from the two Greek words "taxis" (arrangement) and "nomia" (method), and
will be the focus of the present thesis [18]. The EU Taxonomy provides companies, investors
and policymakers with a science-based method to assess how green is an economic activity.
The purpose of this study is to understand to what extent the Taxonomy can help the
EU to achieve climate neutrality by 2050. The first part of this thesis will summarize the
mechanics of the Taxonomy, from its genesis to its practical application through its scope.
Clearly understanding the Taxonomy is the first step to assess it. The second part, will
provide an absolute environmental sustainability assessment (AESA) of the Taxonomy’s
electricity generation technical screening criteria regarding the EU’s climate targets.
A
safe operating space (SOS) is allocated to the electricity generation economic activity over
the period 2020-2050 based on IPCC’s scenarios and the associated carbon budgets. The
electricity generation quantity and mix over this period of time are extracted from different
prospective energy system scenarios made by the EU and BloombergNEF. Finally, regarding
previous data, the thesis will provide recommendations to set a relevant criteria on electricity
generation that could allow to meet the electricity demand and to stay inside the boundaries
of the SOS.
Page 2 of 23
==PAGE:9==
2
Taxonomy’s vade mecum
The Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to
facilitate sustainable investment, or commonly called the Taxonomy, has been the result of
a long journey to foster sustainable finance in the EU [19]. Its Regulation and Technical
Annexes respectively published two years and one year ago, no comprehensive summary of
the actual Taxonomy and its 10 documents (for 955 pages) has been found in the literature
review. This chapter’s purpose is to fulfill the need of understanding the Taxonomy’s ins and
outs to further properly assess it. Thus we will firstly explore the Taxonomy’s genesis and
further expected developments (section 2.1), then its scope, encompassing its expected goal,
economic sector coverage and users (section 2.2), and finally how an economic activity can
be Taxonomy-aligned 2.3. In this section, the notion of green, environmentally sustainable
and Taxonomy-aligned will be considered equivalent.
2.1
Genesis and further developments
In 2016, the G20 under Chinese presidency established a Green Finance Study Group to as-
sess the challenges impending green financing scale-up [20]. Lack of clarity in green finance
and asymmetric information was two of them, and establishing clear definitions, taxonomies
and disclosure guidelines a way to tackle them.
By the end of 2016, the EC appointed
the High-Level Expert Group (HLEG) to recommend EU sustainable finance policies. The
HLEG delivered its final report in January 2018 and the first recommendation was to es-
tablish and maintain a common sustainability Taxonomy at the EU level by 2020 [21]. The
Taxonomy is initially defined as a technically robust classification system for economic ac-
tivities and establish market clarity on what is "sustainable" or "green", directly linked to
the Paris Agreement and the SDGs. Increasing the comparability of financial products will
allow financial actors to invest in sustainability with greater confidence and ease. Following
HLEG’s recommendations, the EC adopts the Action Plan in Financing Sustainable Growth
aiming to:
1. reorient capital flows towards sustainable investment in order to achieve sustainable
and inclusive growth;
2. manage financial risks stemming from climate change, resource depletion, environmen-
tal degradation and social issues; and
3. foster transparency and long-termism in financial and economic activity [22].
In 2018, the EC replaced the HLEG by the TEG to provide recommendations on how to
build the Taxonomy. TEG’s 35 members were mainly industry, academic and civil society
experts. To have a second viewpoint on the future regulation, the EC appointed a Member
State Expert Group (MSEG) composed with one to two experts per Member State. Meet-
ings between MSEG and TEG members was held every two to three months [12]. These
meeting purposes was: i) to update Member States on Taxonomy developments and ii) to
provide feedback loop from Member state to the TEG. In June 2019, the TEG published an
Page 3 of 23
==PAGE:10==
2.1
Genesis and further developments
intermediate report open to feedback from expert and future users and, in March 2020, its
final report including their ultimate recommendations. The final report was accompanied
by two exhaustive technical annex defining the technical screening criteria (TSC) to assess
under which conditions economic activities may contribute to climate change mitigation and
adaptation [23].
After EC and Member States consultations, the official Taxonomy Regulation was published
the 18 June 2020 in the Official Journal of the European Union. However, the Regulation
only provide the broad framework of the Taxonomy, and does not include any economic
activities specific TSC. Moreover, it replaces the TEG by the European Platform on Sus-
tainable Finance to advise the Commission for the development of the economic activities’
TSC and any further Taxonomy updates. The latest is composed of 80 experts from the
public and private, financial and non-financial sectors. The Platform used the TEG final re-
port as well as the comments on specific TSC coming from the public consultation to set the
technical criteria for both climate change mitigation and adaptation Taxonomy’s objectives
[12]. A total of 257 respondents provided their feedback on climate change mitigation as part
of the public consultation. Among them, 30% were industry associations, 21% businesses,
15% investors, 10% public authorities or international organisation, 8% non-governmental
organisations, 3% consultancies or law firms and 13% from other groups or unspecified [12].
Having industry insights about the criteria is important to know how stringent they might
be but it opens the door for lobbying too.
Eventually, the Taxonomy’s Climate Delegated Act and its two technical annexes was adopted
in June 2021 and established the economic activities and their related TSC to be categorised
as having a substantial contribution to climate change mitigation and/or adaptation. The
economic activities and their related TSC for the four remaining environmental objectives
are supposed to be published in 2022. The Climate Delegated Act was published with an
thorough impact assessment report to assess the approaches taken to set the TSC against
the requirements of the Taxonomy Regulation [12]. It was closely followed by the Taxonomy
Disclosure Delegated Act in July 2021, providing Taxonomy users (e.g. companies) with
clear reporting guidelines and templates [24].
It is worth mentioning the Nuclear and Gas Delegated Act, approved in principle by the
EC on 2 February 2022 but that received indicative vote against among the European Par-
liament’s environment and economy committees in June 2022 [25]. The Delegated Act will
be presented to the European Parliament for final adoption at the beginning of July [25].
The annexes of this Delegated Act set under which criteria nuclear and gas electricity or
heat production can be qualified as i) having a substantial contribution to climate change
mitigation and adaptation ii) do not significant harm the other objectives. Both economic
activities was previously declared as not Taxonomy-aligned in the TEG report and took out
of the official technical annexes for further development. Answering to the EC willingness
to include both activities in the Taxonomy, the Platform has raised concerned regarding
the seriousness and science-based approach of their inclusions [26]. Indeed, they struggled
to justify that gas can really participate to climate change mitigation and adaption with
Page 4 of 23
==PAGE:11==
2.1
Genesis and further developments
the increasingly development of renewable energy. For the nuclear electricity generation,
proving that it does not significant harm other environmental objectives was the issue. The
incorporation of these two activities in the Taxonomy is threatening its integrity and letting
the door open to more political incursions in "science-based" decisions.
The only economic activity that was removed from the TEG report in the Climate Delegated
Act was agriculture [27]. The new Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) adopted in December
2021, and with an implementation for January 2023, is already taking into account the EU
Green Deal targets and any other criteria than the CAP’s ones are required to define how
sustainable is an agricultural practice [28].
In July 2021, The Platform for Sustainable Finance released a recommendations report for
Taxonomy possible extensions including No Significant Impact (NSI) and Significant Harm
(SH) criteria, which laid the foundations for a "brown" Taxonomy [29]. Lately, in February
2022, the Platform released their final report about what could be a social Taxonomy to
complement the environmental one [30]. Taxonomy’s main events are shown on Figure 2.1.
Page 5 of 23
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Genesis and further developments
Figure 2.1: Timeline with the milestones enabling the establishment of the current Taxonomy as well as the further expected
development for 2022
Page 6 of 23
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Scope
2.2
Scope
2.2.1
Expected goal
The Taxonomy aims at i) providing clarity on what is a green activity, ii) reorienting capital
flows towards sustainable investments, iii) fostering transparency, and iv) avoiding informa-
tion asymmetries and greenwashing [12]. Currently, only 1.3% of the EU bond and equity
markets (corresponding to €290 billion) finances Taxonomy-aligned activities [31][32]. The
most attracting sectors for green investments are electricity production (with renewable
energy), construction, and water supply, sewerage and waste management [31]. The Eu-
ropean Central Bank assesses that green loans and bonds could grow to 10% of total debt
financing thanks to the enormous growth potential of the transport and building sectors [31].
However, around 15% of the market finances Taxonomy-eligible activities [31]. A Taxonomy-
eligible economic activity is part of the Taxonomy but needs to meet the required TSC to
be Taxonomy-aligned. Taxonomy-eligible activities are not green yet, but could be in the
future with adequate actions. The not-Taxonomy-eligible activities can be climate-harmful
activities (e.g. the oil industry) or activities not yet included in the Taxonomy (e.g. retail).
Institutional investors and public orders have an import role to enhance green investments.
Under its latest roadmap, the European Investment Bank (EIB) has pledged to have 50% of
its lendings Taxonomy-aligned by 2025, reaching 1 trillion euros over the next decade [33].
Furthermore, the EIB will use the Taxonomy’s Do Not Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria
to avoid having other investments harmful for the environment. Similarly, InvestEU, an EU
investment program supporting post-covid recovery, is targeting 30% of Taxonomy-aligned
investments [34].
The EU will adopt a Green Bond Standard (GBS) by 2023, to foster
transparency of green bonds regarding their Taxonomy-alignment [35]. By 2025, the GBS
should be mandatory for all bond marketed [35]. Additionally, the implementation of an EU
Ecolabel will be awarded to the most Taxonomy-aligned financial products, guiding investors
to them. In the latest 2021 EcoLabel draft proposal, to be stamped by the EcoLabel the
financial product required a share of Taxonomy-aligned underlying asset(s) of 50% [36]. It
might be worth mentioning that this share was 70% in the 2020 draft proposal [37].
Once the Taxonomy fully implemented, investment funds might have Taxonomy-related
targets of assets under management and it will be more difficult for non-aligned companies
to find funding. Moreover, just as the EU GBS and EcoLabel, more and more policies will
be implemented relying on the Taxonomy definition of a green activity. Finally, companies
could have a reputational damage if not compliant and could suffer of difficulties to attract
talents.
2.2.2
Economic sector coverage
To differentiate the economic activities, the Taxonomy is using the European economic ac-
tivities classification system called NACE, from the French "Nomenclature statistique des
Activités économiques dans la Communauté Européenne". The macro-sectors covered by
the Taxonomy for the climate change mitigation objective are forestry (agriculture is not in-
Page 7 of 23
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Scope
cluded), manufacturing, energy, water supply sewerage, waste management and remediation,
transport, construction and real estate activities, information and communication and close
to market research, development and innovation [38]. Nevertheless, there is not necessarily
a one-to-one matching between a NACE code and an economic activity as defined in the
Taxonomy. For example, the activity "manufacture of renewable energy technologies" can
be assigned to several NACE codes [38].
Regarding the climate change mitigation objective, the TEG final report was encapsulating
71 economic activities corresponding, to 80% of the EU emissions while the official regula-
tion is encapsulating 88 economic activities but with probably less emission coverage [39].
Indeed, the removal of the Agriculture sector (11,78% of 2020 EU GHG emissions) in the
final regulation, to let it fully driven by the CAP, is the main reason for the likely reduction
of covered emissions [40]. The 71 economic activities from the TEG report have a share
of only 20% of employment and 28% of gross added value, showing that activity’s emission
was the right metric to know which activity to include firstly in the Taxonomy [39]. In the
Climate Delegated Act, economic activities has been added mainly in the transport sector
with 7 new activities, e.g. "low carbon airport infrastructure", and in the manufacturing
sector with 8 new ones, e.g. "manufacture of batteries". Thus, the sectors covered by the
Taxonomy are the most carbon intensive ones and therefore the ones with the highest po-
tential of emissions reduction. Nevertheless, few carbon intensive economic activities should
be added in the future for a better emission coverage, e.g. air transport (3.8% of the EU
emissions in 2017), manufacture of coke and refined petroleum, wholesale and retail, and
mining and quarrying [41][39].
It is important to keep in mind that the Taxonomy is dynamic and that new economic
activities can be added or that current ones can be removed. Thus, the Taxonomy can
evolve with the technological and market developments [12]. Additionally, if an activity
is not included in the Taxonomy, it does not mean inevitably that it is an unsustainable
activity [12]. Such an activity could only marginally contribute to the objective or sim-
ply not being assessed yet. Therefore, while we know that a Taxonomy-aligned activity is
green, a not-Taxonomy-aligned activity is not necessarily detrimental for the environment.
Furthermore, the Taxonomy-alignment is binary for an economic activity but it is not the
case for companies which can have different activities. For example, an utility company may
have different power plants using different primary energy sources to produce the electricity,
some Taxonomy-aligned like wind and some not like coal. Companies should then aim at
increasing their Taxonomy-aligned share.
2.2.3
Users and reporting obligations
The Taxonomy has three groups of mandatory users:
1. The EU and its Member States need to use the Taxonomy criteria for every
policies regarding green bonds or sustainable financial products under the Article 4 of
the Regulation [19]. The Taxonomy should be the only "truth" about the definition of
Page 8 of 23
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Scope
environmentally sustainable. However, the obligation does not apply for market-based
labels and standards.
2. The financial market participants selling "green" financial products in the EU,
even if not EU-based, need to report on the Taxonomy-alignment share of their prod-
ucts, funds or portfolios under the Articles 5-7 of the Regulation and the Article 8 and
9 of the Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR) [42]. The SFDR, adopted
in November 2019, guides how financial market participants, including assets managers
and financial advisers, should disclose sustainability information for end-investors and
asset owners[12].
3. Large and/or listed companies based in the EU need to report the Taxonomy-
alignment share of financial key performance indicators (KPIs), as specified below,
for each of the economic activities or projects they are taking part in. Companies
are binded under the Article 8 of the Regulation and the Non Financial Reporting
Directive (NFRD), which will be amended in 2024 by the Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive (CSRD) [19].
Figure 2.2: Interactions between the Taxonomy, the NFRD/CFRD and the SFRD. Inspired
by [43]
While 11 700 large and/or listed companies was covered under the NFRD, the CSRD,
adopted by the Commission on 21 April 2021 raises this number to more than 49 000 [12].
I will cover 75% of the turnover of all limited liability companies in the EU [12].
The
NFRD was biding only listed companies on regulated markets and the ones with more than
500 employees. The CSRD goes further and puts the threshold to small and medium-sized
enterprises’ (SME) level (250 employees) and includes banks, insurers and investors [44].
Moreover, the CSRD requires the audit by a third party of the reported information which
Page 9 of 23
==PAGE:16==
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
was not the case before [44].
European companies need to report on all their economic
activities, even the ones outside of the EU borders. To ease the reporting process, the Dis-
closure Delegated Act provides companies with clear guidelines and templates to report their
Taxonomy-alignment [24].The interactions between the Taxonomy, the NFRD/CSRD and
the SFRD can be seen in Figure 2.2.
The first Taxonomy-related reporting is due in 2022 (regarding financial year 2021) for non-
financial companies [45]. For financial companies, it is due in 2023 (regarding financial year
2022) using 2022 non-financial companies reporting [45].
The non-financial companies have to report, for each KPI, the share related to Taxonomy-
aligned activities. The KPIs are:
• turnover, equivalent to the company total revenue;
• capital expenditure (CAPEX), defined as additions to tangible and intangible
assets during the financial year;
• operational expenditure (OPEX) defined as direct non-capitalised costs that are
accounted for research and development, building renovation measures, short-term
lease, maintenance and repair, and any other direct expenditure relating to the day-
to-day operations [45].
However, they do not have to disclose the exact assessment for their economic activities
failing to be Taxonomy-aligned, but may do so voluntarily to show to investors that they are
on the track to be aligned in the future [46]. Until CSRD implementation, the robustness of
the Taxonomy-alignment claims of companies does not have to be verified and no sanction
is explicitly set in the regulation for wrong claims.
More than just being used by mandatory users, the Taxonomy is expected to be used vol-
untarily by investors to reorient their investments towards Taxonomy-aligned activities and
projects. The SMEs, representing 99% of all businesses in Europe, are not subject to the
CSRD but could still report their Taxonomy-alignment to attract investments and to be
part of eco-labelled financial products [46][47]. According to a survey carried on by the EC,
approximately three fourths of the investors interrogated said they are likely or very likely to
use the EU Taxonomy in their investment decisions [12]. Finally, To allow a better compa-
rability and interoperability for non EU-based financial market participants and companies
with global operations, coordination has be undertaken with existing taxonomies other, for
instance the Chinese one [12].
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
As said previously, the Taxonomy-alignment is assessed for a company or a project at its eco-
nomic activity level. An activity is Taxonomy-aligned, green or environmentally sustainable
as defined in the Regulation, if it:
Page 10 of 23
==PAGE:17==
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
1. contributes substantially to one or more of the six environmental objectives;
2. does not significantly harm any of the environmental objectives;
3. is carried out in compliance with the minimum social safeguards;
4. complies with its specific TSC [19].
2.3.1
Substantial contribution to the environmental objectives
The six environmental objectives lying at the core of the Taxonomy are:
1. climate change mitigation;
2. climate change adaptation;
3. the sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources;
4. the transition to a circular economy;
5. pollution prevention and control;
6. the protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems [19].
For the climate change mitigation objective, the Taxonomy established that an economic
activity could contribute substantially by i) being by itself low-carbon, ii) by transitioning
towards a greener state or iii) by enabling other activities to contribute substantially. The
low-carbon or "green" economic activities are already considered as decarbonised and consis-
tent with the long-term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement [23]. It might be activities
reducing current GHG emissions, avoiding them or even removing the one already emit-
ted. Generally, this category of activity is Taxonomy-aligned by default through its nature
and does not need to meet any specific TSC. For instance, electricity generation using solar
photovoltaic technology or composting of bio-waste are green activities and do not need to
comply with any technical criteria [38].
The transitioning or "greening of" activities are carbon intensive activities but no tech-
nologically or economically feasible low-carbon alternative exist yet [23]. This category of
activities is encompassing the transport sector, a part of the electricity generation, and the
manufacturing industry.
Such activities are essential for our society and need enormous
investments to contribute to the transition for a net-zero emissions economy. Their TSC
are mainly specific emission thresholds and might correspond to the best-in class reachable
emissions by the sector. An example could be the specific TSC threshold for producing one
ton of grey cement clinker which is equal to 0,722tCO2eq [38]. It represents the average
value of the 10% most efficient installations in 2016 and 2017 captured by the European
Trading System (ETS) [38]. Indeed, for the economic activities covered by the ETS, the
thresholds are the same. Most generally, when an activity is already covered by another EU
regulations, the TSC is consistent with this latest. Therefore, while all the companies or
Page 11 of 23
==PAGE:18==
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
projects engaged in a transitioning economic activity are Taxonomy-eligible, most of them
are not Taxonomy-aligned. The main hazard emerging form the transitioning category is the
possible lock-in effect induced by the long lifetime of the asset. Indeed, a factory with a 40
years lifetime might be Taxonomy-aligned today but not compatible with a climate neutral
pathway to 2050.
The enabling or "greening by" economic activities are not green by themselves but support
other economic activities to be green or to transition. For example, the manufacturing of
renewable energy technologies is enabling the electricity generation sector to reduce their
emissions. Then it is Taxonomy-aligned by default, without any regards about what is ex-
actly produced or how it is produced [38]. Finally, just as for the green category, the enabling
activities usually qualify as Taxonomy-aligned just by their nature, without any specific TSC.
In partitioning the economic activities in these three different categories of substantial contri-
bution for the climate change mitigation objective, the Taxonomy allows economic activities
not green by themselves but necessary for the environmental transition to have access to
green funding.
2.3.2
The Do Not Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria
The DNSH criteria avoid the case where a Taxonomy-aligned activity is, in one hand con-
tributing substantially to one or several environmental objectives but, in the other hand,
harming one or several other objectives. These criteria are activity specific just as the TSC.
For instance, the DNSH criteria for electricity generation using solar photovoltaic technology
regarding the transition to a circular economy objective is to assess the availability of and,
where feasible, uses equipment and components of high durability and recyclability and that
are easy to dismantle and refurbish [38]. This example also shows that some criteria are
open to the users’ subjectivity.
2.3.3
Social safeguard compliance
Pending a possible DNSH criteria linked to a future social Taxonomy, the social safeguard
compliance requires the respect of the basic social right. The activity needs to be aligned
with the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the UN Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights, including the principles and rights set out in the eight fun-
damental conventions identified in the Declaration of the International Labour Organisation
on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and the International Bill of Human Rights
[19].
2.3.4
The Technical Screening Criteria (TSC)
As mentioned in section 2.3.1, different types of TSC exists depending on the activity. How-
ever, they should all have the same characteristics. All of them should be i environmentally
ambitious and science-based, ii) consistent with EU legislation (e.g. the ETS), iii) easy to
use and iv) should not lead to market distortion and inconstant incentives when used by
Page 12 of 23
==PAGE:19==
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
companies and investors [12]. The easy to use attribute fosters accounting methods and
metrics the companies are already familiar with to assess the possible alignment of the ac-
tivity. A too stringent criteria might be environmentally ambitious, but if it is out of the
sector’s reach, the companies might not even try to attain it and then not use it.
The use of life-cycle assessments (LCA) is advocated in the Taxonomy to cover all the scopes
of emissions generated by the activities but also to highlight possible impacts on the other
5 environmental objectives. Therefore, it is an important tool for the determination of the
TSC as well as for the DNSH criteria. Additionally, it gives to the criteria a science-based
approach and an environmental integrity. However, a full LCA approach is not always re-
quired to account for GHG emissions. For instance, the threshold regarding passenger cars
is only taking into account tailpipe emissions. A reason for not using LCA is the lack of
available and comparable data regarding the specific economic activity or the variability of
the study results [12].
Eventually, the TSC will be reviewed by the Platform for Sustainable Finance every 3 years
for the transitioning activities and every 5 years for the others activities [12]. The review
will ensure that technological improvements and new sector specific policies are taken into
account to set threshold’s levels. It will not occur on a shorter time period to avoid the costs
of updating infrastructures too often on companies’ side, and uncertainty on investors’ side.
Moreover, new economic activities could be added to the Taxonomy’s scope and current
green activities could be pushed in the transitioning category when not consistent anymore
with the a climate-neutral pathway.
2.3.5
An example: Electricity generation
Electricity generation is one of the most carbon intensive economic sector. In 2019, 29% of
EU GHG emissions was coming from electricity and heat generation [48]. The Taxonomy
includes eight electricity generation economic activities (as shown in Table 4.1 of Appendix
A) and all of them are related to renewable sources.
The Platform has chosen to use a performance-based TSC, and to have the same for elec-
tricity and heat generation. The TSC is a life-cycle GHG emissions (LCE) - we will consider
LCE being about GHG emissions in the rest of the thesis - threshold expressed in grams of
CO2 equivalent emitted per kWh of energy generated or gCO2eq/kWh. By using a life-cycle
consideration, the criteria is science-based, technology neutral and allows for a better stan-
dardization across calculation methods and comparability of results [12]. Moreover, LCE of
electricity and heat production has been assessed for many years and quantitative data are
available. Thus the criteria is a simple and easy to use threshold using a well-known metric
in the energy sector.
The threshold has been set to 100 gCO2eq/kWh by the Platform according to the TEG
recommendations. The Platform explains that this value has been set at it is high enough
to include all the renewable sources, and low enough to keep the fossil sources out [12][49].
Page 13 of 23
==PAGE:20==
2.3
How to qualify an economic activity as Taxonomy-aligned?
Four of the electricity generation economic activities, namely the wind energy, ocean energy
and the two solar technologies ones, does not even need to perform a LCA to show there
compliance to the criteria. Indeed, even in the worst case, their LCE will still be below the
threshold [49].
The TEG recommended the Taxonomy to integrate a declining threshold across electricity
and heat generation activities “in line with the trajectory to a net-zero economy” [12]. Nev-
ertheless, the Platform believes the criteria suitable to a climate-neutral pathway, and that
lowering the threshold in the future will not lead to significant results [12]. As a comparison,
2019 average carbon intensity of the EU was 275 gCO2eq/kWh and only accounting for the
production phase [50].
However, no calculation or science-based study has been conducted in the Climate Delegated
Act impact assessment to show if this threshold was compatible with a climate-neutral
pathway. It will be the topic of the next chapter.
Page 14 of 23
==PAGE:21==
3
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment of
the electricity generation criteria
An absolute environmental sustainability assessment (AESA) of Taxonomy’s 100 gCO2eq/kWh
threshold for electricity generation activities will be conducted in this chapter. The questions
we will try to answer are the following: Is this threshold already climate-neutral compliant?
If no, when should it be lowered to foster less carbon-intensive electricity sources?
3.1
General AESA methodology
An AESA is an environmental sustainability assessment of a company, a sector, a nation
or any other stakeholder against an absolute boundary [51]. Environmental sustainability
implies LCA and different categories of impact, however the thesis will focus on life-cycle
GHG emissions only. An absolute boundary is a planet budget that cannot be stretched
and usually associated to the planet boundaries for its wide impact coverage [52]. The space
inside the absolute boundary where, at a global scale, it is possible to act without harming
the environment is called the safe operating space (SOS). Afterwards, the SOS is downscaled
from a global level to the level of the individual, who has a decision-right on how to allocate
his share of the safe operating space (SoSOS). Different downscaling methods exist and will
be discussed later. The underlying concept behind downscaling is that only human beings
have the right over the planet budget, contrary to nations, companies or other stakeholders
[53]. The right for nature entities to own a SoSOS should be further studied, but will not
be included in this thesis. Stakeholders’ SoSOS is then the sum of what all individuals have
decided to allocate them. From a methodological point of view and as we can not know
everyone allocation decisions, an upscalling method is used to convert individual’s SoSOS
into a Stakeholder’s SoSOS. The SoSOS allocated to a given stakeholder is denoted SoSOSs
and is calculated according to Equation 3.1:
SoSOSs = SOS ∗AP ∗UM
(3.1)
where the global SOS is combined with a downscaling allocation parameter AP and an up-
scaling method UM [53]. Note that if the stakeholder is the individual, SoSOSs = SoSOSind
and UM = 1 [53].
Ultimately, the SoSOSs is compared with the stakeholder’s real impact to assess if he is
environmentally sustainable or unsustainable from an absolute perspective [54]. The absolute
sustainability ratio (ASR) represents this comparison and is calculated according to Equation
3.2
ASR = Impacts
SoSOSs
(3.2)
where Impacts is the impact of the stakeholder in question [53]. Finally, the stakeholder is
qualified as unsustainable from an absolute perspective if ASR > 1.
Page 15 of 23
==PAGE:22==
3.2
AESA methodology applied to the case study
3.2
AESA methodology applied to the case study
The purpose of this case study is to assess the Taxonomy’s electricity generation LCE thresh-
old regarding EU climate commitments, namely:
• reducing net GHG emissions by at least 55% by 2030 and 100% by 2050 compared to
1990 level [6]; and
• keeping global warming well below 2°C above pre-industrial level, with a target at
1.5°C [4].
These commitments will be considered as the absolute boundaries delimiting our SOS. Then,
the only impact assessed will be GHG emissions and the SOS will be a carbon emission
budget allowing to meet these targets. It is to be noted that under the Taxonomy the other
impacts are supposed to be assessed with the DNSH criteria (see 2.3.2). The global SOS will
be allocated to individuals, and the one living in the EU will allocate a part of their SoSOS
to electricity generation through their own consumption. Then, the SoSOS allocated to the
EU electricity generation economic activities is denoted SoSOSEU,elec and the related ASR
is calculated according to Equation 3.3:
ASR = ImpactEU,elec
SoSOSEU,elec
(3.3)
where ImpactEU,elec is the total LCE of all electricity generation in the EU. However, is the
ImpactEU,elec product of the quantity of electricity produced, denoted GenerationEU,elec (in
kWh), and the LCE emitted by the production of one unit of electricity, denoted LCEEU,elec
(in gCO2eq/kWh), as shown in Equation 3.4:
ASR = GenerationEU,elec ∗LCEEU,elec
SOS ∗AP ∗UMEU,elec
(3.4)
where UMEU,elec is the upscaling method to convert the global individuals’ SoSOS into
SoSOSEU,elec. The path between SOS and SoSOSEU,elec is disclose on Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.1: Allocation of the global carbon budget to the EU electricity generation industry
One method to conduct the assessment could be to set LCEEU,elec = 100 gCO2eq/kWh
and to assess the related ASR value against 1. While this method would only tell us if
Page 16 of 23
==PAGE:23==
3.3
Parameters definition
the threshold makes sens from an absolute sustainable perspective, taking ASR = 1 would
additionally provide us with the LCE limit for the EU electricity generation to be absolute
sustainable. The second method is the one chosen in this thesis. Equation 4.4 will be used
to calculate the highest LCE value usable as EU Taxonomy’s criteria to be compliant with
EU climate targets:
LCELimit
EU,elec = SOS ∗AP ∗UMEU,elec
GenerationEU,elec
(3.5)
3.3
Parameters definition
For the four parameters of Equation 4.4, namely AP, SOS, GenerationEU,elec and UMEU,elec,
the period 2020-2050 will be studied.
3.3.1
The allocation parameter (AP)
The allocation parameter AP scales the SOS from a global to an individual level. Different
allocation principles are possible depending on the indicator we want to use to share the
SOS. The equal per capita or egalitarian principle will be used for an equal distribution of
SoSOS among the world population [53][55]. Then AP can be wrote as follows:
AP =
1
Populationworld
(3.6)
where AP corresponds to the fraction of the world population Populationworld, which will
be the average population between 2020 and 2050.
This SOS distribution means that every inhabitant of the planet have the same right to emit
GHGs. It is just if no one as a vital need that would make him use a higher SoSOS than the
one allocated to everyone.
The use of other allocation principle are briefly discussed in Appendix C.1.1.
Main assumptions
• Utilization of the egalitarian allocation principle.
• Averaging the world population between 2020 and 2050.
3.3.2
The safe operating space SOS
As discussed in section 3.2, the safe operating space has to be a carbon budget respecting
EU climate commitments. In their latest report, IPCC’s working group III proposes more
than twelve global warming pathways, with the related cumulative CO2 emissions from 2020
to climate neutrality [3]. Thus, for the EU it will be the carbon budget between 2020 and
2050. The four IPCC’s carbon budgets are presented in detail in Appendix B.2.1.
Moreover, a EU-specific carbon budget has been built using the Green Deal’s 2030 and 2050
milestones. The scenario takes 2020 as starting point and assumes a constant decrease of
Page 17 of 23
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Parameters definition
approximately 3,4% of 2020 net value every year to reach net-zero in 2050. Its construction
is fully explained in Appendix B.2.2.
Table 3.1 summarized the carbon budgets used as SOS in the thesis.
Name
Source
Geographical scope
Description
C1
IPCC [3]
World
Limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited
overshoot with a likelihood >50%
C2
IPCC [3]
World
Return warming to 1.5°C after a high overshoot
with a likelihood >50%
C3
IPCC [3]
World
Limit warming to 2°C with a likelihood >67%
C4
IPCC [3]
World
Limit warming to 2°C with a likelihood>50%
Green Deal
Built by
the author
EU
Match 2030 and 2050 Green Deal’s target of
emissions reduction with a constant decrease
Table 3.1: Summary of the 5 carbon budgets used as SOS in the thesis
Then the question about how allocating this budget over the period 2020-2050 emerged.
However, as we know EU emissions in 2019, the value in 2050 (net-zero) and the sum over
the year (the carbon budget), we will distribute the carbon budget over the year using a
second order equation presented in the Appendix C.2. Finally, the carbon budget per person
in the EU over the period 2020-2050 is shown on figure. This carbon budget per person in
the individual SoSOS for an European. The second order modelling discloses its flaws on C1
carbon budget. A third order would have probably been required. Nevertheless, a negative
carbon budget net still have a scientific meaning. For C1, it is required to remove more
GHGs from the atmosphere than the one emitted after 2040.
Main assumptions
• IPCC’s carbon budgets: Climate neutrality is achieved in 2050.
• All carbon budgets used are accounting for net emissions which includes carbon cap-
tured by the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector and maybe
in the future from carbon removal technologies.
• Using a second order carbon budget distribution over the period 2020-2050
Page 18 of 23
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Parameters definition
Figure 3.2: Allocation of the global carbon budget to the EU electricity generation industry
3.3.3
The EU electricity generation (GenerationEU,elec)
More the EU produces electricity in a strictly defined SOS, less carbon intensive should be
the electricity generation sources. To have EU electricity generation values we will rely on 3
different scenarios presented in Appendix B.2 and summarized in Table 3.2. As we can see
on Figure 3.3, REF EU 2020 and ETS have a close generation profile while NZS generates
57% more electricity per person than REF EU 2020 in 2050.
Main assumptions
• The choice of the three scenarios.
• The addition of United Kingdom, Norway and Switzerland in the geographical scope
will not disrupt the results.
Page 19 of 23
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Parameters definition
Name
Source
Geographical
scope
Description
REF
EU 2020
European
Commission
EU
The EU Reference Scenario 2020 is a
projection of the effect of EU policies
implemented before 2020. It will
allow the EU to assess the
effect of every new policies.
ETS
BloombergNEF [56]
EU + UK
+ NO + CH
The Economic Transition Scenario
describes an economics-led pathway
to 2050 stripping away policy targets
and climate ambition
NZS
BloombergNEF [56]
EU + UK
+ NO + CH
The Net Zero Scenario (NZS) is
compatible with 2030 emission reduction
targets and with climate neutrality by 2050
Table 3.2: Summary of the 3 electricity generation scenarios used in the thesis. The two
scenarios from BloombergNEF have a geographical area covering Norway, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom additionaly than the EU
Figure 3.3: Annual electricity generation per capita for three different scenarios (kWh/capi-
ta/year). The value per capita rather than for the whole EU are displayed because ETS and
NZS scenarios cover additionally the United Kingdom, Norway and the Switzerland. For
each year, the total electricity generation has been divided by the correspondent population
projections.
Page 20 of 23
==PAGE:27==
3.4
Results
3.3.4
The upscalling method (UMEU,elec)
The upscalling method’s purpose is to scope the individual SoSOS, or in our case the individ-
ual carbon budget, to the European electricity generation sector. Just as for the allocation
principles, a broad range of upscalling methods can be used depending on our target. An
economical upscalling method usually used is the share of Final Consumption Expenditure
(FCE) a local person is willing to pay for [53]. However, in 2019 in the EU the electricity
share of FCE was 4,1% while it accounted for 29% of the EU GHG emissions [48]. Then
a grandfathering upscalling method (described in Appendix C.1) will be used to allocate
to the sector the share of its current impact. The value of 29% will be chosen and fixed
over the period 2020-2050. The European electricity generation sector will then have the
right to emit 29% of the EU’s SoSOS. Finally, the upscalling method for the EU electricity
generation in a particular year denoted UMEU,elec,year is shown in Equation 3.7:
UMEU,Elec = 0, 29 ∗PopulationEU
(3.7)
Main assumptions
• Choosing a fix upscalling method over the years.
• Setting the share of impact for the electricity generation sector to 29%
3.4
Results
Figure 3.4 highlights the little variability of the LCE limit regarding the electricity generation
scenario.
For C1, the prompt decrease in carbon budget hide the increase in electricity
production for each scenario, which is their only difference.
Figure 3.5 demonstrates that assessing if 100gCO2/kWh is environmentally sustainable from
an absolute perspective depends mainly on the carbon budget chosen. If the target is to
limit global warming to 1,5°C, corresponding to C1 and C2, then the Taxonomy’s criteria
should be decrease before 2030. However if the targets are the Green Deal or staying below
2°C, the criteria could stay the same until 2040.
The results for each carbon budgets and electricity generation scenarios are disclosed in
Appendix C.2.
Page 21 of 23
==PAGE:28==
3.4
Results
Figure 3.4: LCE limit per year to be compliant with C1 and C4 depending on the electricity
generation scenario
Figure 3.5: LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the EU REF 2020 electricity generation
Page 22 of 23
==PAGE:29==
4
Conclusion and recommendations
The purpose of this thesis was dual. Firstly, providing a concise and comprehensive Taxon-
omy’s vade mecum for both future users and researcher. Secondly, providing science-based
assessment of what should be the Taxonomy’s criteria for electricity generation.
The Taxonomy will be the European keystone to foster sustainable investments. It puts in
place a common definition of environmentally sustainable that will be beneficial for every-
one. The companies will know what to do to be sustainable and the investors will know
which companies are sustainable. Allied with the future CSRD, it will increase transparency
and blow away greenwashing. To do so, the Taxonomy needs science-based and stringent
technical screening criteria.
In addition to assessing climate change mitigation impacts,
the use of LCA standards for the set up of criteria will allow for a better consideration of
other environmental impacts. With the release of the technical annexes for the four other
environmental objectives expected in 2022, a single LCA may be sufficient to assess all of
them. A complete coverage of the environmental impacts may also avoid problem-shifting,
which is often lurking in the ecological transition. More than just the assessment method,
the Taxonomy’s criteria values are the main condition for helping the EU to meet its 2050
climate neutrality target.
The electricity generation technical criteria was not the result of a science-based analysis and
that is why this thesis has done one. The life-cycle emissions threshold of 100gCO2eq/kWh
is stringent compared to the current carbon intensity of the electricity. However, it is rec-
ommended to decrease before 2030 to follow a 1.5°C pathway. But what should be the next
one? It is complicated because almost only renewable sources have their average LCE below
100gCO2eq/kWh. It will mean for example fostering wind energy (around 12gCO2eq/kWh)
in comparison to solar energy (around 40gCO2eq/kWh). Maybe the solution will be then
to change the threshold’s metric to highlight the efficiency of the installation, such as the
number of year before producing the same amount of energy that it required to be produced.
A long-term vision is necessary for setting the criteria at the right value to avoid lock-in
effect. Factories and power plants have generally a lifetime of 30-40 years and fostering
investments in installations that helps to the transition today but not in a short future, such
as gas powerplant, should be avoided at all cost. In addition, the development of a "brown"
taxonomy could repel investors from environmental harmful investments. Then, the Tax-
onomy will not be only binary and the activities not significantly harming the environment
will not stand in the same category as the harmful ones anymore. Finally, the social side of
the sustainability is often forgotten and a social taxonomy could round off the sustainability
coverage of the EU Taxonomy.
Page 23 of 23
==PAGE:30==
References
[1]
Hans-O. Pörtner et al. [Summary for Policymakers] Climate Change 2022: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Working Group II Contribution to the Sixth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, 2022. url:
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_
SummaryForPolicymakers.pdf.
[2]
Valérie Masson-Delmotte et al. [Summary for Policymakers] Climate Change 2021:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, 2021. url: https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM_final.pdf.
[3]
Jim Skea et al. [Summary for Policymakers] Climate Change 2021: Mitigation of Cli-
mate change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, 2022. url: https://report.
ipcc.ch/ar6wg3/pdf/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_SummaryForPolicymakers.pdf.
[4]
UNFCCC. Paris Agreement. 2015. url: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/
files/english_paris_agreement.pdf.
[5]
UN Environment and G20 Sustainable Finance Study Group (SFSG). Sustainable Fi-
nance Progress Report. 2019. url: www.unepinquiry.org.
[6]
EU Commission. “Communication "The European Green Deal"”. In: (Dec. 2019). url:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:b828d165-1c22-11ea-
8c1f-01aa75ed71a1.0002.02/DOC_1&format=PDF.
[7]
EU Commission. Communication "Stepping up Europe’s 2030 climate ambition: In-
vesting in a climate-neutral future for the benefit of our people". Sept. 2020.
[8]
Elia Trippel. “How green is green enough? The changing landscape of financing a
sustainable European economy”. In: ERA Forum 21 (2020), pp. 155–170. doi: 10.
1007/s12027-020-00611-z. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12027-020-00611-
z.
[9]
Francesco Lamperti et al. “The public costs of climate-induced financial instability”.
In: Nature Climate Change 9 (Nov. 2019), pp. 829–833. doi: 10.1038/s41558-019-
0607-5. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0607-5.
[10]
Ivan Faiella and Filippo Natoli. “Natural catastrophes and bank lending: the case
of flood risk in Italy”. In: Bank of Italy Occasiona paper No.457 (July 2019). url:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3429210.
[11]
Ella Mae Matsumura, Rachna Prakash, and Sandra C. Vera-Muñoz. “Firm-value ef-
fects of carbon emissions and carbon disclosures”. In: Accounting Review 89 (2 2014),
pp. 695–724. issn: 00014826. doi: 10.2308/ACCR-50629.
[12]
EU Commission. IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT supplementing Regulation (EU)
2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council. EU Commission, June 2021.
url: https : / / eur - lex . europa . eu / legal - content / EL / TXT / ?uri = CELEX :
52021SC0152.
==PAGE:31==
[13]
Benedikt Downar Jürgen Ernstberger Stefan Reichelstein Sebastian Schwenen et al.
“The Impact of Carbon Disclosure Mandates on Emissions and Financial Operating
Performance *”. In: (2020).
[14]
Novethic and ADEME. “The limitations of green funds in Europe”. In: (2021).
[15]
Clarence Tolliver, Alexander Ryota Keeley, and Shunsuke Managi. “Green bonds for
the Paris agreement and sustainable development goals”. In: Environmental Research
Letters 14 (6 June 2019), p. 064009. issn: 1748-9326. doi: 10.1088/1748- 9326/
ab1118. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab1118.
[16]
Platform for Sustainable Finance. Draft Report by Subgroup 4: Social Taxonomy. 2021.
[17]
Kathrin Berensmann. “Upscaling green bond markets: the need for harmonised green
bond standards”. In: 2017.
[18]
taxonomy | Etymology, origin and meaning of taxonomy by etymonline. url: https:
//www.etymonline.com/word/taxonomy.
[19]
“REGULATION (EU) 2020/852 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate
sustainable investment, and amending Regulation”. In: Official Journal of the European
Union (June 2020).
[20]
G20 Green Finance Study Group. G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report. 2016. url:
http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2016/green-finance-synthesis.pdf.
[21]
High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable Finance. Final Report 2018 by the High-Level
Expert Group on Sustainable Finance. Jan. 2018.
[22]
EU Commission. Communication "Action Plan: Financing Sustainable Growth". EU
Commission, Mar. 2018. url: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
?qid=1483696687107&uri=CELEX:52016SC0405..
[23]
EU Technical Expert Group on sustainable finance (TEG). EU taxonomy technical
report. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_
economy_euro/banking_and_finance/documents/190618-sustainable-finance-
teg-report-taxonomy_en.pdf.
[24]
EU Commission. “"Disclosure Delegated Act": COMMISSION DELEGATED REGU-
LATION (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852”.
In: Official Journal of the European Union (July 2021). url: https://eur- lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32021R2178&from=EN.
[25]
MEPs on two committees vote against EU taxonomy delegated act : Nuclear Poli-
cies - World Nuclear News. June 2022. url: https://world-nuclear-news.org/
Articles/Committees-of-MEPs-vote-against-EU-taxonomy.
[26]
Platform on Sustainable Finance. EU Platform on Sustainable Finance response to
complementary Delegated Act. EU, Jan. 2022. url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/
sites/default/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/documents/
220121-sustainable-finance-platform-response-taxonomy-complementary-
delegated-act_en.pdf.
==PAGE:32==
[27]
EU Commission. Questions and answers: Taxonomy Climate Delegated Act and Amend-
ments to Delegated Acts on fiduciary duties, investment and insurance advice. Apr.
2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_
21_1805.
[28]
The common agricultural policy at a glance | European Commission. url: https:
/ / ec . europa . eu / info / food - farming - fisheries / key - policies / common -
agricultural-policy/cap-glance_en#thenewcap.
[29]
EU Platform on Sustainable Finance. Public Consultation Report on Taxonomy ex-
tension options linked to environmental objectives. July 2021. url: https : / / ec .
europa . eu / info / sites / default / files / business _ economy _ euro / banking _
and_finance/documents/sustainable- finance- platform- report- taxonomy-
extension-july2021_en.pdf.
[30]
EU Platform on Sustainable Finance. Final Report on Social Taxonomy. Feb. 2022.
url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_economy_
euro/banking_and_finance/documents/280222-sustainable-finance-platform-
finance-report-social-taxonomy.pdf.
[31]
Lucia Alessi, Stefano Battiston, and Ana Sofia Melo. Travelling down the green brick
road: a status quo assessment of the EU taxonomy. Jan. 2022. url: https://www.
ecb.europa.eu/pub/financial-stability/macroprudential-bulletin/html/
ecb.mpbu202110_2~ea64c9692d.en.html.
[32]
Malte Hessenius et al. Testing draft EU ecolabel criteria on UCITS equity funds. June
2020. doi: 10 . 2874 / 630919. url: https : / / op . europa . eu / en / publication -
detail/- /publication/c254aeb3- ba79- 11ea- 811c- 01aa75ed71a1/language-
en/format-PDF/source-search.
[33]
European Investment Bank. EIB Group Climate Bank Roadmap 2021-2025. Nov. 2020.
doi: 10.2867/503343. url: https://www.eib.org/attachments/thematic/eib_
group_climate_bank_roadmap_en.pdf.
[34]
Questions and answers: InvestEU Programme. url: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_1045.
[35]
Amy Geddes et al. THE EU GREEN BOND STANDARD: WILL COMPULSION
FRAGMENT THE MARKET? Feb. 2022. url: https://www.herbertsmithfreehills.
com/insight/the-eu-green-bond-standard-will-compulsion-fragment-the-
market.
[36]
Konstantas Antonios et al. “Development of EU Ecolabel Criteria for Retail Financial
Products Technical Report 4.0: Draft proposal for the product scope and criteria”. In:
JRC Technical Reports (2021). url: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc.
[37]
Dodd Nicholas et al. “Development of EU Ecolabel criteria for Retail Financial Prod-
ucts -Technical Report 3.0: Draft proposal for the product scope and criteria”. In: JRC
Technical Reports (2020). url: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc.
==PAGE:33==
[38]
European Commission. Annex 1 to the Commission Delegated Regulation supplement-
ing Regulation (EU) 2020/852. June 2021.
[39]
Franziska Schütze and Jan Stede. “The EU sustainable finance taxonomy and its con-
tribution to climate neutrality”. In: Journal of Sustainable Finance Investment (Dec.
2021), pp. 1–33. issn: 2043-0795. doi: 10 . 1080 / 20430795 . 2021 . 2006129. url:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/20430795.2021.2006129.
[40]
EEA greenhouse gases - data viewer — European Environment Agency. url: https:
//www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/data-viewers/greenhouse-gases-
viewer.
[41]
Reducing emissions from aviation. url: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/
transport-emissions/reducing-emissions-aviation_en.
[42]
EU Commission. "SFRD Regulation": REGULATION (EU) 2019/2088 OF THE EU-
ROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-
related disclosures in the financial services sector. Nov. 2019. url: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019R2088&from=EN.
[43]
EU Commission. Factsheet: How does the eu taxonomy fit within the sustainable fi-
nance framework? 2021. url: https : / / ec . europa . eu / info / sites / default /
files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/documents/sustainable-
finance-taxonomy-factsheet_en.pdf.
[44]
EU Commission. "CFRD proposal": Proposal for a DIRECTIVE OF THE EURO-
PEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL amending Directive 2013/34/EU,
Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Regulation (EU) No 537/2014, as
regards corporate sustainability reporting. Apr. 2021. url: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0189&from=EN.
[45]
EU Commission. "Annexes 1 to 5 of the Disclosure Delegated Act":ANNEXES to the
COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) .../... supplementing Regulation
(EU) 2020/852. July 2021. url: https://ec.europa.eu/finance/docs/level-2-
measures/taxonomy-regulation-delegated-act-2021-4987-annex-1-5_en.pdf.
[46]
EU Commission. Commission staff working document - Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation.
EU Commission, July 2021. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021SC0183.
[47]
SME definition. url: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/smes/sme-definition_en.
[48]
European Union (27) | Energy, Electricity/Heat | Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions
| Climate Watch. url: https://www.climatewatchdata.org/ghg- emissions?
breakBy=sector&end_year=2019&regions=EUU&sectors=energy%5C%2Celectricity-
heat&source=CAIT&start_year=1990.
[49]
Steffen Schlömer et al. Annex III: Technology-specific cost and performance parameters.
In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. IPCC, 2014.
==PAGE:34==
[50]
Greenhouse gas emission intensity of electricity generation in Europe — European
Environment Agency. url: https : / / www . eea . europa . eu / data - and - maps /
indicators/overview-of-the-electricity-production-3/assessment.
[51]
Morten Ryberg et al. “Absolute environmental sustainability assessment of a Danish
utility company relative to the Planetary Boundaries”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology
25 (3 2021), pp. 765–777. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13075. url: https://doi.org/10.
1111/jiec.13075.
[52]
Johan Rockström et al. “Planetary boundaries: exploring the safe operating space for
humanity”. In: Ecology and Society 14 (2 2009). url: http://www.ecologyandsociety.
org/vol14/iss2/art32/.
[53]
Anjila Wegge Hjalsted et al. “Sharing the safe operating space: Exploring ethical al-
location principles to operationalize the planetary boundaries and assess absolute sus-
tainability at individual and industrial sector levels”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecol-
ogy 25 (1 Feb. 2021), pp. 6–19. issn: 1088-1980. doi: 10.1111/JIEC.13050. url:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/sharing-the-safe-operating-space-
exploring-ethical-allocation-pri.
[54]
Company-level absolute environmental sustainability assessment - PRé. url: https://
pre-sustainability.com/articles/company-level-absolute-environmental-
sustainability-assessment/.
[55]
Mads Greaker et al. “A Kantian approach to a sustainable development indicator
for climate”. In: Ecological Economics 91 (July 2013), pp. 10–18. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2013.03.011.
[56]
Europe’s Path to Clean Energy: A $5.3 Trillion Investment Opportunity | BloombergNEF.
url: https://about.bnef.com/blog/europes-path-to-clean-energy-a-5-3-
trillion-investment-opportunity/.
[57]
European Commission et al. EU reference scenario 2020 : energy, transport and GHG
emissions : trends to 2050. Publications Office, 2021. doi: doi/10.2833/35750.
[58]
World Population Prospects - Population Division - United Nations. url: https://
population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/.
[59]
GDP (current US$) - European Union | Data. url: https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?contextual=region&end=2020&locations=EU&most_
recent_year_desc=false&start=1960&view=chart.
==PAGE:35==
Appendix A: Supplementary table about the electricity
generation in the Taxonomy
Table 4.1 displays all the electricity generation economic activities included in the Annex
1 of the Climate delegated Act. However, it do not display all the TSC of these activities
but only the emissions-related one. For hydropower, geothermal energy and renewable non-
fossil gaseous and liquid fuels electricity generation, the life-cycle GHG emissions need to be
calculated according to one of the following standards [38]:
• Recommendation 2013/179/EU.
• ISO 14067:2018.
• ISO 14064-1:2018.
Moreover, the final emission value needs to be verified by an independent third party [38].
Name of the activity
Emission-related TSC
Electricity generation using so-
lar photovoltaic technology
The activity generates electricity using solar PV tech-
nology.
Electricity generation using con-
centrated
solar
power
(CSP)
technology
The activity generates electricity using CSP technology.
Electricity generation from wind
power
The activity generates electricity from wind power.
Electricity
generation
from
ocean energy technologies
The activity generates electricity from ocean energy.
Electricity generation from hy-
dropower
The
life-cycle
GHG
emissions
from
the
genera-
tion of electricity from hydropower, are lower than
100gCO2eq/kWh.
Electricity
generation
from
geothermal energy
Life-cycle GHG emissions from the generation of
electricity from geothermal energy are lower than
100gCO2eq/kWh.
Electricity generation from re-
newable non-fossil gaseous and
liquid fuels
Life-cycle GHG emissions from the generation of elec-
tricity using renewable gaseous and liquid fuels are lower
than 100gCO2eq/kWh.
Electricity
generation
from
bioenergy
The greenhouse gas emission savings from the use of
biomass are at least 80 % in relation to the GHG sav-
ing methodology and the relative fossil fuel comparator
set out in Annex VI to Directive (EU) 2018/2001. It
also needs to comply with forestry and energy efficiency
directives.
Table 4.1: Excerpt of the Climate Delegated Act Annex 1 displaying all the electricity
generation economic activities and their emission-related TSC [38]
I
==PAGE:36==
Appendix B: Scenarios description
B.1 Carbon budget scenarios
B.1.1 IPCC’s global emissions pathways and their related carbon budgets - C1,
C2, C3 and C4
The four IPCC’s global emissions pathways presented in Table 4.2 are used to provide Paris
Agreement-compatible carbon budgets over the period 2020-2050.
Pathway Category
Pathway description
Likelihood
C1
Limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot
>50%
C2
Return warming to 1.5°C after a high overshoot
>50%
C3
Limit warming to 2°C
>67%
C4
Limit warming to 2°C
>50%
Table 4.2: Four of the twelve global emissions pathways described by the IPCC’s Working
Group III [3]. These four has been selected because they can meet Paris Agreement’s target
of limiting global warming to 2°C. An overshoot means that the temperature targeted is
exceeded at peak warming due to the inertia of the emissions but that it come back at the
targeted temperature afterwards. The likelihood is provided by the IPCC and reflects the
uncertainty of their models.
Table 4.3 provide the median annual GHG emissions for the four selected scenarios displayed
in Figure 4.1. On this Figure we can see that the main difference is made between 2020 and
2030. Indeed, 2030 emissions difference between C1 and C4 is equal to the difference between
the two same scenarios in 2050, with a value of 19 GtCO2eq.
Projected median annual GHG emissions (GtCO2eq/year)
Pathway category
2019
2030
2040
2050
C1
55
31
17
9
C2
55
42
25
14
C3
55
44
29
20
C4
55
50
38
28
Table 4.3: Projected median annual GHG emissions over the years across four of the IPCC’s
global emissions pathways [3]. It might be important to notice that none of them reach
net-zero in 2050.
II
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.1: Projected median annual GHG emissions over the years across four of the IPCC’s
global emissions pathways using 4.3 [3].
Table 4.4 provides the cumulative net CO2 emissions until reaching net-zero. As we can see
with the 5th and 95th percentile values, a high uncertainty lies in the median value. For
C1, the 5th and 95th percentile value are respectively 35% lower and 39% higher than the
median value. The median values are used to define different global SOS. Moreover, we will
assume that net-zero happens in 2050 in our modelling to make it compliant with the EU
Green Deal target, even if it is not the case for the IPCC’s pathways (see Figure 4.1). This
assumption should not impact our results as these carbon budgets are valid between 2020
and any net-zero years before 2100 [3].
Cumulative net CO2 emissions between 2020 and reaching net-zero (GtCO2)
Pathway category
Median value
5th percentile value
95th percentile value
C1
510
330
710
C2
720
530
930
C3
890
640
1160
C4
1210
970
1490
Table 4.4: Cumulative net CO2 emissions between 2020 and reaching net-zero before 2100
across four of the IPCC’s global emissions pathways [3]. The 5th and 95th percentile values
show the high variability of the median value. The median values is used to define different
global SOS.
III
==PAGE:38==
B.2.2 The Green Deal carbon budget
This section will explain how the Green Deal carbon budget has been built. This carbon
budget does not come from the EU but it is a construction made by the Author based on the
Green Deal targets. It allows to have a EU specific SOS for our modelling. As a reminder,
the Green Deal aims at reducing EU net GHG emissions by at least 55% by 2030 and
100% by 2050 compared to 1990 level [6]. Figure 4.2 shows the pathway following historical
EU annual net GHG emissions from 1990 to 2020 included, and meeting the Green Deal
targets with a constant decrease of emissions. Unlike IPCC’s budgets where the 2020 value
is modelled, Green Deal’s budget take a 2020 historical value. Net GHG emissions are total
GHG emissions minus the CO2 captured by the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry
(LULUCF) sector. This metric has been chosen because it is the one used by the Green
Deal to define its objectives. In 2019, total EU GHG emissions was 7% higher than the net
ones [40]. To be climate neutral in 2050, the emissions need to decrease by 3,4% of 2020 net
value every year between 2021 and 2050. Just as an example, the decrease between the 2019
and 2020 EU net GHG emissions, mainly due to the covid crisis, was 9% of the 2019 value.
Figure 4.2: EU annual net GHG emissions using historical data reported by the EU under
the UNFCCC from 1990 to 2020 included, and the 2030 and 2050 Green Deal targets after
[40]
Finally, we define as Green Deal carbon budget the sum of the annual net GHG emissions
emitted on the Figure 4.2 pathway between 2020 (included) and 2050. Its value is 48,15
GtCO2 for the EU over the period 2020-2050 both included, and the modelled annual net
GHG emissions can be found in Table 4.5.
IV
==PAGE:39==
Year
of
emission
EU annual
net
GHG
emissions
(GtCO2eq)
Year
of
emission
EU annual
net
GHG
emissions
(GtCO2eq)
Year
of
emission
EU annual
net
GHG
emissions
(GtCO2eq)
2020
3,06
2031
1,98
2042
0,83
2021
2,97
2032
1,87
2043
0,72
2022
2,87
2033
1,77
2044
0,62
2023
2,77
2034
1,66
2045
0,52
2024
2,67
2035
1,56
2046
0,41
2025
2,57
2036
1,45
2047
0,31
2026
2,47
2037
1,35
2048
0,2
2027
2,38
2038
1,25
2049
0,1
2028
2,28
2039
1,14
2050
0
2029
2,18
2040
1,04
2030
2,08
2041
0,93
Table 4.5: EU annual net GHG emissions for the pathway shown on Figure 4.2. They have
been calculated in taking a constant decrease between 2020 and 2030 values for 2021-2029
values, and between 2030 and 2050 values for the values in the period 2021-2049
B.2 European prospective energy scenarios
B.2.1 EU Reference Scenario 2020 - EU REF 2020
The EU Reference Scenario 2020 (EU REF 2020) is an informed, internally consistent, and
policy relevant projection on the future developments of the EU energy system, transport
system and greenhouse gas GHG emissions that acts as a benchmark for new policy initia-
tives. It reflects policies and market trends used by policymakers as baseline for the design
of policies that can bridge the gap between where EU energy and climate policy stands today
and where it aims to be in the medium- and long-term, notably in 2030 and 2050 [57].
The EU REF 2020 scenario has been mandated by the EC and takes into account all EU
regulation published before 2020, and so not the Taxonomy. Moreover, it assumes no addi-
tional measures between 2030 and 2050 which can explain the poor development of renewable
energy after 2040 as shown on Figure . The EU REF 2020 report comes with a MS Excel
file which is the data source of the Table 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 [57]. The Figures ?? and 4.4 are
displaying them. The data are given from 2005 to 2050 each 5 years. Interestingly enough,
with only a reduction of 43,8% by 2030 and 59,4% by 2050, the EU REF 2020 does not meet
the Green Deal targets[57]. This failure call for new regulations to be implemented, such as
the Taxonomy.
V
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Gross electricity generation by sources between 2005 and 2050 in the EU. Under
the EU REF 2020 scenario, the total electricity generation will increase by 30% between
2020 and 2050 [57]
Gross Electricity generation by source (TWh)
Year
Nuclear
energy
Biomass-
waste
(including
biogas and
waste gas)
Hydro
(pumping
excluded)
Wind onshore
Wind
off-
shore
Solar
2005
916
76
307
66
1
1
2010
854
132
372
133
5
23
2015
785
173
338
245
17
100
2020
675
176
336
341
47
141
2025
573
175
361
496
113
243
2030
518
172
361
673
202
349
2035
476
175
363
773
261
421
2040
455
192
364
839
306
498
2045
423
189
368
944
344
580
2050
403
207
368
990
359
599
Table 4.6: EU REF 2020 gross electricity generation by source (1) [57]
VI
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Likewise the electricity and steam production carbon intensity is decreasing over
the period 2005-2050, the share of electricity-related CO2 emissions is decreasing too but at
a lower rate. Indeed the share of electricity among final energy is increasing by 48% over
the period 2020-2050 while the demand is increasing by only 30% 4.3. It might be due to
an increase in energy efficiency
Gross Electricity generation by source (TWh)
Year
Geothermal
heat, other
renewables
(tidal etc.)
Solid fossil
fuels
Petroleum
products
Natural
and
man-
ufactured
gases
Total
2005
5
830
137
551
2894
2010
6
722
82
621
2954
2015
7
710
67
426
2873
2020
7
389
27
495
2638
2025
7
329
11
505
2818
2030
7
269
6
433
2995
2035
7
161
6
464
3112
2040
9
38
5
503
3212
2045
16
13
3
436
3320
2050
16
12
2
458
3420
Table 4.7: EU REF 2020 gross electricity generation by source (2) [57]
VII
==PAGE:42==
Year
Population
(in
mil-
lion)
Share
of
electricity
among
fi-
nal energy
consump-
tion (%)
Electricity
and Steam
production
carbon
intensity
(gCO2/kWh)
Total
GHG
emis-
sions, excl.
interna-
tional excl.
LULUCF
(MtCO2eq)
Electricity-
related
CO2
emissions
(MtCO2) -
Calculated
by
the
author
Share
of
electricity-
related
CO2 emis-
sions
among
total GHG
emissions
(%) - Cal-
culated by
the author
2005
434,4
21
448
4569,9
1296,7
28
2010
440,6
22
400
4209,3
1181,6
28
2015
443,6
23
368
3849,3
1057,3
27
2020
447,6
23
265
3216,2
699,1
21
2025
449,2
24
223
3099,2
628,4
20
2030
449,1
27
175
2725,3
524,2
19
2035
448,2
29
133
2391,1
413,9
17
2040
446,7
31
92
2115,1
295,5
13
2045
444,4
33
73
1957,9
242,3
12
2050
441,2
34
72
1895,2
246,2
12
Table 4.8: EU REF 2020 data collection for other parameters. The electricity and steam
production carbon intensity accounts only for CO2 and not all GHGs.
Additionally, it
includes only the production phase and do not apply life-cycle considerations. The electricity-
related CO2 emissions have been calculated as the product of the carbon intensity and the
total gross electricity generation. Thus it only include CO2 emissions for the production
phase. Finally the share of electricity-related CO2 emissions has been calculated by dividing
the electricity-related CO2 emissions previously calculated by the total GHG emissions. This
share is underestimated as the electricity-related emissions only account for CO2 emissions
B.2.2 BloombergNEF - Economic Transition and Net Zero scenarios
The two selected scenarios from BloombergNEF are:
• the Economic Transition Scenario (ETS) describes an economics-led pathway to 2050
stripping away policy targets and climate ambition; and
• the Net Zero Scenario (NZS) is compatible with 2030 emission reduction targets and
with climate neutrality by 2050 [56].
Both these scenarios geographical scope is not only the EU but it includes the United-
Kingdom, Norway and Switzerland too. Fore this scenarios, Europe will describe this aggre-
gation.
In contrary to the EU REF 2020, the raw data was not available. Therefore, the author
extrapolates the values in the Table 4.9 and Table 4.10 from the graphs available on their
VIII
==PAGE:43==
website, respectively shown in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.7. Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.8 are the
graphs done with the data, and are similar Bloomberg’s ones.
Figure 4.5: European electricity generation by source following the ETS [56]
Figure 4.6: European electricity generation by source following the ETS using Table 4.9 data
inferred from Figure 4.5
IX
==PAGE:44==
Annual electricity generation by source (TWh)
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Total
3442
3361
3481
3580
3623
3829
3953
4127
Flexible and batteries
65
66
86
123
154
164
173
243
Solar
104
165
267
382
490
617
743
887
Ofshore wind
38
92
185
381
389
393
395
434
Onshore wind
265
369
682
1055
1181
1372
1589
1612
Other
19
27
21
15
14
13
12
12
Biomass
177
235
215
85
33
31
29
27
Hydro
549
513
471
398
390
371
363
356
Nuclear
871
833
732
693
607
511
297
209
Oil
50
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
Gas
516
668
566
445
360
353
350
345
Coal
782
375
252
0
0
0
0
0
Table 4.9: Annual electricity generation by source for the ETS inferred from Figure 4.5
Figure 4.7: European electricity generation by source following the NZS [56]
X
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.8: European electricity generation by source following the NZS [56]
Annual electricity generation by source and by year (TWh)
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Total
3442
3361
3645
3948
4343
5026
5728
6258
Flexible and batteries
65
66
98
141
177
188
199
280
Solar
104
165
273
389
537
709
967
1191
Ofshore wind
38
92
289
552
575
673
716
758
Onshore wind
265
369
781
1161
1553
2057
2613
2823
Other
19
27
19
14
14
14
14
14
Biomass
177
235
86
34
33
31
27
26
Hydro
549
513
467
399
385
370
367
370
Nuclear
871
833
733
695
604
501
292
206
Oil
50
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
Hydrogen
0
0
0
35
68
234
374
465
Gas
516
668
690
480
356
245
156
121
Coal
782
375
202
42
35
0
0
0
Table 4.10: Annual electricity generation by source for the ETS inferred from Figure 4.7
Appendix C: LCE calculation
C.1 The allocation parameter (AP)
The egalitarian principle has been chosen to share evenly the SOS to the world population.
Two other allocation principles could have been used [53].
XI
==PAGE:46==
Year
Population projection (million)
2020
527
2025
528
2030
527
2035
526
2040
523
2045
519
2050
513
Table 4.11: Population projections in million between 2020 and 2050 for the area including
the EU, the UK, Norway and Switzerland [58]. These data will be used for scenarios ETS
and NZS as no data about their population forecast was found.
• The grandfathering principle means that the current share of emission of a stake-
holder stays the same in the future. In other words, the ones polluting today will have
the same right to pollute tomorrow. As we can see on Table 4.12, the EU would have
almost one percent more of SoSOS with this principle.
• The ability to pay principle means that the ones producing value have the right
to pollute. It is calculating in using the share of GDP produced by the stakeholder.
With almost 18% of the world GDP in 2019, the EU SoSOS using this principle will
be three times higher (see Table 4.12).
World
EU
Absolute value
Absolute value
Share of the
world
value
(%)
Population (million) 2020 [58]
7794
447
5,74
Population (million) 2050 [58]
9735
422
4,34
GDP (trillion $) 2019 [59]
87,56
15,68
17,91
GHG Emissions 2019 (GtCO2)
55
3,36
6,54
Table 4.12: The EU in the world. EU participation to the world GDP, GHG emissions and
population in 2020 and 2050
C.2 Budget carbon distribution over the period 2020-2050
Using a second order distribution, the carbon budget for year 2019+t denoted CB(2019+t)
can be written as follows:
CB(t + 2019) = a ∗t2 + b ∗t + c
(4.1)
where a, b and c are the parameters defined in the Table We can find these parameters by
using the three following limit conditions:
fort = 0, CB(2019) = c
(4.2)
XII
==PAGE:47==
fort = 31, CB(2050) = a ∗312 + b ∗31 + c = 0
(4.3)
31
X
t=1
a ∗t2 + b ∗t + c = SOS
(4.4)
However, the initial condition depends on the country the individual is living in. It is shown
in Table 4.13. The coefficient a and b are shown in Table 4.15 and 4.14, respectively.
Geographical area
Net GHG emissions per
capita in 2019 (tCO2eq/capita)
Population 2019 (million)
Net GHG emissions
2019 (GtCO2eq)
World
7,130385263
7713
55
EU 27
7,560613245
445
3,4
Table 4.13: The net GHG emissions per capita in 2019 are the coefficient c for different
place.
Carbon budget
EU 27
C1
-0,58903
C2
-0,43929
C3
-0,31807
C4
-0,08988
Green Deal
-0,12885
Table 4.14: Value of the coefficient b depending on the chosen carbon budget
Carbon budget
EU 27
C1
0,011134
C2
0,006303
C3
0,002393
C4
-0,00497
Green Deal
-0,00371
Table 4.15: Value of the coefficient a depending on the chosen carbon budget
XIII
==PAGE:48==
C.2 Results
Figure 4.9: LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the ETS electricity generation
Figure 4.10: LCE limit per year to be compliant with the different carbon budget following
the NZS electricity generation
XIV
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.11: Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets follow-
ing EU REF 2020 electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh)
Figure 4.12: Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets follow-
ing the ETS electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh)
XV
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.13: Average LCE over the period 2020-2050 for the different carbon budgets follow-
ing the NZS electricity generation (in gCO2eq/kWh)
XVI
