==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Structural optimisation of airborne wind 
energy systems with rotary transmission 
Jannis Wacker
DTU Wind Energy-M-0511
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0511 
June 2022
Project period: 
January - June 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Mac Gaunaa
Michael McWilliam
DTU Wind Energy
Michael Muskulus
NTNU Norway
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above 
education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Jannis Wacker
Title:
Structural optimisation of airborne wind 
energy systems with rotary transmission
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Rotary Airborne Wind Energy Systems (RAWES) are networks of tethered wings that form
flying wind turbines. The power extracted from the wind this way, can be transmitted to
ground-based generators through open tensegrity systems. In recent years, there have
been different approaches to such a Tensile Rotary Power Transmission (TRPT) and pro-
totype designs are often driven by try-and-error. In this thesis a steady-state model was
developed, to analyse and optimise the shape and size of RAWES with TRPT, with re-
spect to their power density. The model is based on the Daisy Kite design, but can also
be applied to other concepts.
This thesis investigates the structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with
rotary transmission. Therefore a steady-state model based on the Daisy Kite concept
was developed, to analyse the system performance. A parametric analysis was used
to evaluated the key design features of the Daisy Kite and compare it to other RAWES
concepts. The steady-state model was then passed to a solver, to optimise the shape
and size of RAWES with TRPT, with respect to their power density.
The results show that higher power densities were achieved mainly through scaling up the
rotor diameter and lengthening the TRPT. The resulting power densities, coefficients of
performance and power harvesting factors were then compared to conventional turbines.
In conclusion, RAWES with TRPT can designed strategically to maximise power density,
coefficients of performance or power harvesting factor and while they will not be able to
outperform conventional wind turbines, they have the potential to be more cost efficient
due to their reduced material requirements.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to AWE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Classification of AWES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Metrics for comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
RAWES Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Daisy Kite Design
11
3.1
Coordinate Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Steady State Model
15
4.1
Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Sub-model - Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
TRPT Aerodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Sub-model Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results
31
5.1
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Parameter Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Optimisation
37
6.1
Optimisation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Optimisation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Discussion
45
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Comparison to other Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
8
Conclusions
47
9
Further Work
48
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
51
iv
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1.1
Overview and Categorisation of pursued AWES concepts in 2019 [32] . . .
2
2.1
Sketch of ground station and rotor plane in Rotating Reel concept [5] . . . .
7
2.2
Bladetip Energy concept with tethered network [19] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The Pyramid concept [28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
someAWE Labs RAWES during operation [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Overview of Daisy Kite design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
Dimensions of Daisy Kite Design with TRPT version 4 [33] . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Sketch of TRPT deformation due to applied torque . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
TRPT deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Normalised Tether drag convergence plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Normalised frame drag convergence plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Deformation of tensegrity systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.7
Effect of Prandtl’s root and tip correction on BEM analysis . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.8
Effect of yaw and tilt corrections on open center rotor . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.9
Simplified TRPT segment with a hexagon frame (red) and 6 tethers (blue) . 27
4.10 Drag loss and material weight of a simplified TRPT systems with different
shapes, normalised to the Daisy Kite design with hexagons and 6 tethers . 28
4.11 Power loss and material weight of simplified TRPT system with different
deformation angles and constant segment length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.12 Block diagram of steady-state model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1
Steady state results for Daisy Kite with TRPT version 4 and 3 rigid rotors
. 31
5.2
Steady-state results for the MAR1 design under someAWE Labs’ test con-
ditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Power over elevation angle, normalised to the base case
. . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Efficiencies over tip speed ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.5
Normalised power output subject to the blade pitch angle and tip speed ratio 34
5.6
Power loss and power density for a Daisy design with varying numbers of
tethers and frame corners. The results are normalised to the base case
marked with an x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.7
Normalised power output subject to the number of rotors in the Daisy stack
35
5.8
Daisy stack with 3 rotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.1
Block diagram of optimisation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Optimisation result for the Daisy Kite base case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3
Optimised Daisy Stack with 3 rotors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.4
Optimised MAR1 with 13 segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.5
Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions 42
6.6
Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions 42
6.7
Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions 43
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
v
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
4.1
Design Variables for Daisy Kite Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Parameter Input for Daisy Kite
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.1
Summary of Optimisation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
vi
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to AWE
Wind power is considered a crucial part of the green energy transition needed to prevent
climate change. In 2021 wind energy covered 15 % of Europe’s electricity demand [11]
and the EU has ambitious plans to expand wind power generation by 30 GW each year,
to achieve 55% emission reduction by 2030 [11].
However with only 11 GW new capacity installed in 2021 within the EU-27, this expan-
sion faces significant challenges, including limited wind resources, public acceptance and
supply chain issues. In addition to that, volatile global prices for steel and other resources
pose a problem for conventional wind turbines.
Airborne Wind Energy Systems (AWES) may present a solution for these problems. Air-
borne wind energy is defined as ”the conversion of wind energy into electricity using teth-
ered flying devices” [32]. In general AWES consist of flying wings or blades that are teth-
ered to the ground, thus making towers of conventional wind turbines obsolete. Thereby
AWES would allow to reach higher altitudes with better wind resources, reduce material
usage and potentially decrease visual impact. Furthermore, AWES have the potential
to produce renewable energy at times and locations where conventional HAWTs are not
well suited. The developers of Kitepower for example made their AWES easy to transport
and set up [15]. It could therefore be applied as disaster relief in areas without reliable
electricity supply.
1.2
Classification of AWES
Since Loyd first showed the significant potential of AWES in 1980 [18], a multitude of dif-
ferent concepts have been proposed, which can be categorized in many ways [1][34][9].
Roland Schmehl for example categorized AWES concepts with electricity generation ac-
cording to three functional design features [32].
The first feature is the type of power generation and transfer. Electricity generation can
happen on-board the flying or floating device in which case the tether is transferring the
electrical power to the ground. Generally, AWES that utilise this concept can operate
at high efficiencies, but must lift the heavy generators and cables. The alternative is to
transfer the mechanical power to a fixed or moving ground station through an unwinding
tether, shaft, belt-drive or tensegrity system. This operation mode generally leads to more
robust light weight devices, but the transfer losses can be comparably high.
The second feature is the flight mode. Blades can be suspended by a lighter-than-air
structure like a balloon. Since these voluminous structures have high drag they are typ-
ically staying in the air stationary while they support a number of rotating blades. Lifter
kites also stay stationary in the wind but rely on their aerodynamic lift. Alternatively, de-
signs with cross-wind flying wings or blades are kept up due to the lift they experience.
Some AWES systems use the two of these effects in combination.
Lastly AWES can be categorised with respect to their take-off and landing procedures.
Blades and wings can be launched and landed like airplanes or slingshots using the gen-
erator as motor until operating conditions are reached. Alternatively, kites or balloons can
take off using their lift or buoyancy force without additional power.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Overview and Categorisation of pursued AWES concepts in 2019 [32]
The resulting overview can be seen in figure 1.1.
Following Schmehl’s categorization, this thesis will investigate the narrow field of fixed
ground station Rotary Airborne Wind Energy Systems (RAWES). More specifically, the
investigation will look at RAWES with Tensile Rotary Power Transmission (TRPT) where
the lift is provided by the rotors autogyro effect and optionally a lifter kite. The focus
will further be on steady-state operation, the lifter kite dynamics, as well as take-off and
landing strategies will therefore be of minor importance.
RAWES can be defined as a network of multiple wings or blades, often rotating around
a common axis. Wing networks have constrained flight paths, thus reducing the control
requirements compared to single wing crosswind flying AWES [33].
AWES can be compared based on their power harvesting factor ζ using the wing area, or
the power coefficient Cp using the rotor swept area as a reference [18][9]. In this thesis
Cp will be used as a metric, because comparisons to conventional wind power are easier.
For AWES to become competitive with conventional wind power, significant improvements
will have to be made in terms of power output, reliability and Levelized Cost of Energy
(LCOE). Since many cost aspects are still unknown for new AWES concepts, this thesis
will use Power density (Pd) as a simplified metric for LCOE.
1.3
Overview
In the following chapters, RAWES with TRPT will be explained and relevant literature for
its design and modeling will be presented. Next, a steady-state model will be presented
that, given a set of design parameters and external conditions, analyses the performance
of a RAWES. After verifying the model output with simplified analytical calculations, some
observations and conclusions can be made regarding the Daisy Kite design. The steady-
state model will then be expanded with an optimiser to generate new AWES design with
improved power density. This will be followed by a discussion about the results, before
identifying possible improvements and concluding the work.
2
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
The following section will discuss relevant literature on AWES designs and their underlying
aerodynamic principles and modeling strategies.
2.0.1
Potential Power of AWES
According to Loyd’s analysis, the potential power generation P of a crosswind flying teth-
ered wing depends largely on its lift-to-drag ratio CL
CD , which can also be called glide ratio
[18].
P = 2
27ρAwingv3
wCL
( CL
CD
)2
(2.1)
Where ρ is the air density, Awing is the wing area and vw is the wind speed.
A key difference to the actuator disk theory is, that Loyd neglects induced effects of the
kite slowing the wind and assumes the wing is always in a non-disturbed wind field. This
assumption might hold for single wings and open centre rotors, but is not necessarily valid
for turbines with higher rotor solidity.
Based on Loyd’s approximation, Diehl investigated the power limitations of AWES oper-
ating in drag-mode and came up with the theorem equation (2.2).
Pmax = 2
27ρAwingv3
w
(√
C2
L + (CD + CD, power)2
)3
C2
D
(2.2)
where CD is the total system drag coefficient from wings and tethers and CD, power is the
coefficient of extracted power. However, if the wing area is not perpendicular to the wind
direction, but tilted by an angle β, then cosine losses will apply.
According to Diel, Pmax can only be reached by AWES operating in drag-mode, when the
apparent wind velocity va of the wing is [9].
va =
2
√
C2
L + (CD + CD, power)2
3CD
vw
(2.3)
And the extracted power coefficient is
CD, power = 1
2CD
(2.4)
In other words, in drag-mode the power extraction should be half as big as the drag losses
and slow down the wing speed by one third compared to it’s cross-wind velocity without
power extraction [9]. This gives clear guidelines for the torque and speed control of an
RAWES generator.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
3
==PAGE:10==
2.0.2
Modeling Options of Airborne Rotors
The sport industry has made great contribution in optimising kite design for different appli-
cations and reduced material costs. Soft kites keep their shape due to aerodynamic load
distribution, are lightweight and able to survive crashes. Further, they fly at relatively low
speeds which make them safer and easier to operate than rigid wings. For these reasons,
soft kites are very useful for prototyping [9][30].
In wind sports, hybrid wings find increasing popularity. These utilise tube kites, com-
pressed air tubes and tension elements to increase the maximum wing loading and glide
ratio, while maintaining very low weight. These methods can also be used in AWES. Read
for example strengthened the soft kites used in early Daisy Kite designs with carbon fibre
tubes [33].
However, rigid wings have higher lift-to-drag ratios than soft kites which allow higher power
yield. The high risk of crash damage can be reduced through precise flight control. There-
fore, most RAWES use rigid wings or blades for their more advanced designs.
The modeling of RAWES can present several challenges. For example, dynamically mod-
elling soft kites with high accuracy is significantly more complex than modelling rigid wings.
This is especially the case at high altitudes where wind veer and turbulence are less re-
searched [2]. Further the shapes and operating conditions of RAWES are often more
complex when compared to HAWT.
The rotor plane of RAWES is usually orthogonal to the tether and therefore tilted down-
wards by the elevation angle β. This is because in most concepts, the rotor’s axis of
rotation is equal to the TRPT’s axis of rotation. Further, the rotors thrust might have to
contribute to the systems lift, which is not possible with a horizontal axis.
When modeling a tilted rotor using Blade Element Momentum Theory (BEMT), a yaw
correction has to be applied, which correct the normal and tangential force coefficients
depending on the rotors azimuth position and thereby account for the skewed inflow and
wake [29][22]. For this thesis, the model developed by Pitt and Peters [25] will be used.
Micallef and Sant give an overview of different yaw correction models and experimental
studies of yaw at HAWT [23]. The studies agree that Pitt and Peters model gives good
estimations, but the inaccuracies increase with yaw angles greater than 30°, as well as
strong wind speeds and high tip speed ratios [22]. Furthermore, most experimental cam-
paigns that investigated the effect of yaw and tilt only went to 30° or 45° [23][29][22]. It is
therefore unclear how high the inaccuracies get at angles greater than 45°.
Rahimi et.al. compared Pitt and Peters’ blade tip corrections to experimental results for
open centre rotors and found that the error is greater than models of closed center rotors
[29]. The modelling results would improved after adding a separate root loss correction
model, like the one developed by Prandtl [27].
2.0.3
Rotary Power Transmission
The mechanical power transmission of RAWES with ground generation can take on sev-
eral forms, but the lightweight requirements, operating height and other design consider-
ations pose several challenges. Solid shafts that can withstand the torsional forces are
generally too heavy or suffer from fatigue due to the high load cycles. Belt or rope drives
can transmit the power but require a gear system to translate the rotor’s axis of rotation to
the rotation axis of the pulleys. Further a force has to be applied counteracting the rotor’s
torque.
Tensile Rotary Power Transmission (TRPT) is term introduced by Oliver Tulloch to de-
4
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:11==
scribe tether networks, held apart by rigid components, that can transmit torque as long
as sufficient tension is applied [33]. This form of power transmission is also called ”Soft
Shaft” or ”Open Tensegrity Shaft”[24]. With little applied tension, the TRPT stiffness de-
creases leading to strong dynamic responses and increases difficulties in system control.
A TRPT system can succeed in transmitting rotating power over long distances with rel-
atively light weight. However, depending on the TRPT geometry and applied forces the
system deforms like a torsional spring and can fail by twisting up too much [33].
Tulloch derived analytical equations for TRPT deformation from the geometry system.
He used these derivations to developed three numerical models with increasing fidelity to
analyse the steady state and dynamic behaviour of a TRPT in a Daisy Kite. He compared
the simulated data with experimental measurements and was able to identify several dy-
namic patterns which could be used to improve the design [33].
2.0.4
Drag Losses
Since the lift to drag ratio is so crucial to AWES, tethers and other moving components
should not be neglected. Tests performed by Makani Power found that the Drag coefficient
rose from 0.03 to 0.07 after including the tether drag contributions [9].
The drag forces acting on tethers and other cylindrical components can be divided into
pressure drag force Fp from cross-flow over a cylinder and the viscous skin friction force
Fv, which according to Bootle [7] and Hoerner [12] can be evaluated as
Fp = 1
2ρ Cpd, t d l v2
a sin(α)2
(2.5)
Fv = 1
2ρ Cvd, t d π l v2
a cos(α)2
(2.6)
Where Cpd, t and Cvd, t are the drag coefficients, d and l are the cylinders diameter and
length respectively, while α is the angle of attack.
According to Dunker, the approximate range of aerodynamic pressure drag coefficients
for cylinders in the AWE applications is 0.98 < Cpd < 1.8. The viscous friction coefficient
values are much smaller, with Cvd < Cpd
10 [10].
Some proposals to reduce Cvd, t and Cpd, t have been made by Bevirt to use aerodynam-
ically shaped tethers or sheaths [6] and by Jung to apply latex coating to tethers [14]. As
these approaches seem promising, the effect of different drag coefficients will be analysed
in later chapters.
Dunker added that vortex-induced vibrations can be relevant for dynamic tether systems,
when the flow shedding frequency is in harmonic resonance with a natural frequency of
the tether [10]. Due to the modeling complexity, vibration induced drag effects are not
considered in this thesis.
Tulloch developed two working models for tether drag in the TRPT of Daisy Kites. The
first one considered only the pressure drag due to the tethers rotational speed, returning
the resulting torque loss. The second, improved model considered also the wind speed
influence on the angle of attack and returned the torque losses and induced axial tension
due to pressure and viscous drag [33].
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
5
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Metrics for comparison
AWES however have only become feasible due to recent advancements in control and
automation technology. The research community has not formed a consensus which of
the many design concepts is the most promising. One reason is that even within the field
of RAWES it is difficult to compare new concepts quantitatively, because field tests can
be unreliable and models are run with different operational conditions.
AWES are usually compared with respect to their Power Harvesting Factor ζ, which is
the useful power harvested by a wing divided by the power that flows through the wing’s
cross sectional area Awing [9].
ζ =
P
1
2ρAwingv3w
(2.7)
Modern wind turbines have a ζ factor of approximately 5.5. For AWES the theoretical
limit is around 30 with the highest value achieved by Makani, a cross-wind flying, tethered
plane in drag-mode [9].
Or alternatively, AWES can be compared with the coefficient of performance Cp which is
based on the wing’s swept area and more commonly used for conventional wind turbines.
For this thesis Cp is defined as the ratio of power extracted by the rotor over the potential
power of the wind passing through the projected swept area.
Cp =
Prot
1
2 ρ cos(β) π R2
rot v3w
(2.8)
Thereby Cp is separated from the cosine losses due to the elevation angle and gives a
better indication of the rotor performance given its tilted position.
Compared to other AWES, RAWES have fixed swept areas with rotor dynamics closer to
HAWT. Therefore Cp will be the preferred over ζ in this thesis.
2.2
RAWES Concepts
In this section, some of the leading RAWES concepts are presented to get a general
understanding of the pros and cons of certain design features.
2.2.1
Rotating Reel
The Rotary Reel concept developed by Benhaïem and Schmehl is made up of a single
TRPT segment with the special feature that the ground station and the rotor frame do not
need to be in the same plane due to cyclic reeling of the tethers at each rotor revolution
(see figure 2.1) [5]. A proof of concept prototype was successfully built and tested.
The concept has the potential to reduce the material requirements of the ground station
and can be expanded by superimposing multiple rotors. On bigger scales however, the
cyclic reeling system might be a weak point.
2.2.2
Bladetips Energy
The Bladetips Energy Concept is a RAWES in lift-mode, utilising a pumping cycle [19].
This means the rotor lift is used to unwind the ground tether and thus spin a generator.
Once the maximum height is reached, the rotor is brought into a position with less lift while
the ground tether is reeled in again. The cycle has a positive net, but discontinuous power
output. Since The rotor is connected to the ground station with a single line with little to
no cross-wind movement, the concept minimises the drag losses of single wing lift-mode
AWES. The Bladetips Energy uses vertical take-off and landing procedures, with the rotor
providing the lift itself.
6
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Sketch of ground station and rotor plane in Rotating Reel concept [5]
Figure 2.2: Bladetip Energy concept with tethered network [19]
One of Bladetips Energy’s design ideas seen in figure 2.2, include a rotor as a tethered net-
work of three wings, relies on the centrifugal forces which keep the tethers under tension.
The tether length can be changed mid-flight, to increase or decrease the rotor diameter.
2.2.3
The Pyramid
The idea of such a tethered network of wings is picked up by The Pyramid concept first
presented at the AWEC 2021 [28]. The Pyramid operates in drag-mode with the tethers
acting as a TRPT, relaying the rotational power from the rotor to the ground station.
The dynamic control of such a system is more complex compared to a rotor with a rigid
frame, but still easier when compared to single wing concepts because the three wings
constrain each other’s movements. As figure 2.3 shows, each wing is like a fully control-
lable plane.
The concept is in a very early stage without any experimental tests so far. However, the
steady-state potential of the Pyramid Design will be will be investigated in this thesis.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: The Pyramid concept [28]
2.2.4
SomeAWE Labs
SomeAWE Labs developed a RAWES with a lifter kite, a four-bladed rotor, a TRPT and a
fixed ground generation. The TRPT consists of dozens of rods forming the cross-beams
of a helix, where the ends of each rod are connected cross-wise to both ends of the next
rod by four tethers (see figure 2.4).
The benefit of such a TRPT architecture is that it deforms very little under rated conditions
because the deformation angle is preset to a minimum of δ = 90°. A disadvantage how-
ever is the the slack and extra drag from tethers with little tension. This slack can also be
seen in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: someAWE Labs RAWES during operation [4]
SomeAWE Labs performed many test runs with multiple design and control schemes. At
the AWEC 2021, Beaupoil and Unterweger presented a cyclic pitch control [28], which
has the potential to improve the rotors Cp.
8
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:15==
2.2.5
Daisy Kite
Developed by Roderick Read as part of Windswept and Interesting (W&I), the Daisy Kite
also uses a lifter kite, rigid blades, TRPT and fixed ground station [30]. The differences
to the someAWE Labs’ concept are in the TRPT and rotor architecture.
The Daisy Kite uses polygon frames and at least five tethers within the TRPT (see fig-
ure 3.1). Although this leads to higher drag losses, this approach avoids single point
failure.
W&I gathered experimental data with various test setups and used numerical models
to improve the designs step by step. For example the newer designs use pentagon or
hexagon frames instead of the rings from earlier designs due to improved structural per-
formance.
Tulloch combined BEM analysis with his TRPT and tether drag models to simulate Daisy
Kites in steady state and dynamically under turbulent wind field conditions.
Due to their rigorous test campaigns and modelling efforts, the Daisy Kite and someAWE
Labs’concepts can be considered well developed. However the developers still rely mainly
on experience values and gut feeling when making big and small design decisions [30][24].
Under these circumstances the development of a structural optimisation of the design
features seems justified. The optimisation proposed in this thesis will give design recom-
mendations to maximise power output and power density. Further, the Daisy Kite will be
compared to someAWE Labs’ MAR1 design and the Pyramid concept.
2.3
Objectives
The first goal of this thesis is to improve the understanding of tilted open centre rotors as
well as TRPT, in order to improve current RAWES designs and identify their limitations.
A second goal is, to propose specific RAWES designs with optimised power density, power
output over system mass, Pd = Pout/m and compare them to existing designs.
The last goal is, to use the developed steady-state models to compare different RAWES
and evaluate their design principles.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
9
==PAGE:16==
10
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:17==
3
Daisy Kite Design
The basis of this investigation is a RAWES called Daisy Kite, a type of flying wind turbine,
which was designed and tested by Windswept and Interesting (W&I) [30, 33]. The system
is made up of a lifter kite, a number of rotors, a Tensile Rotary Power Transmission (TRPT)
as well as a ground station. The components can be seen in figure 3.1 and are further
described in the following sections. The whole setup faces downwind and has a certain
elevation angle between the ground and the axis of rotation.
Figure 3.1: Overview of Daisy Kite design
3.0.1
Lifter
The lifter kite provides uplift to the system, thereby contributing to the elevation angle and
the axial tension in the TRPT. The lifter kite is tethered to the highest polygon and can be
secured by a second anchor to stabilise the elevation angle. Lifter kites can fly at higher
altitudes where wind speed tends to be stronger and more continues, they thereby serve
as a reliable and easy control, especially during take-off and landing strategies. During
take-off for example the lifter kite is launched first and used to pull up the TRPT and rotor.
Lifters are typically soft single skin kites, however the same function can also be fulfilled
by a rigid wing, balloon or even the autogyro effect of the rotor.
3.0.2
Rotor
The main function of the open centre rotor is to turn the kinetic energy from the wind
into rotational mechanical power. However, due to the tilt of the rotation axis the thrust
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
11
==PAGE:18==
acting on the rotor provides lift and tensions the tensegrity system. Depending on the
wind conditions and the design, this autogyro effect is sufficient to operate the RAWES
under steady-state conditions without the lifter kite providing additional lift or tension.
The power generation can be increased by attaching nr rotors to the highest TRPT poly-
gons. W&I calls such Daisy Kites ”Daisy Stacks” can be made. figure 3.1 for example
depicts a Daisy Stack with 2 rotors.
While early Daisy Kite prototypes used soft kites for the rotor wings, newer designs use
rigid blades instead. Although rigid blades are less robust, they can generate more power
due to their higher lift to drag ratio, also called glide number. This was shown experimen-
tally as well as theoretically by W&I and Tulloch respectively.
3.0.3
TRPT
The TRPT is a tensegrity system consisting of a number of tethers and frames. Frames
can take the form of rings, polygons or rods and the tethers are distributed equally with
a symmetry around their common axis of rotation. The tethers are always under tension,
so when a torque is applied to one of the frames, it causes the TRPT to twist up and pull
the following frame along. The amount of torque that can be transferred depends on the
tether attachment angle. Further, as the tensegrity network starts twisting, the distance
between two neighbouring frames becomes shorter.
Since the frames and tethers rotate in the wind, they experience resistance due to aero-
dynamic drag. This introduces additional tension into the system and causes losses in
the mechanical power.
3.0.4
Ground Station
The ground station is connecting the bottom most TRPT frame to a generator and an
anchor. The generator transforms the mechanical power into electrical power while the
anchor serves as foundation, resisting the axial tension of the TRPT. The setup is able to
rotate and pivot to allow adjustments in the elevation angle and changes in wind direction.
The ground station is also raised slightly above the ground, to ensure none of the frames
hit the ground.
Sometimes a second anchor is placed downwind with a tether to the anchor. This in-
creases the contractility of the system and prevents single point failures. However with
such a second anchor the system can not easily adapt to changes in the wind direction.
This sums up the concept of the Daisy Kite design.
3.1
Coordinate Systems
All points of the Daisy type RAWES can be described in three different coordinate systems.
Each having their origin at the centre of the ground station frame. Note that this origin is
not at ground level.
The global coordinate system describes the system in the wind reference framework.
• xw is parallel to the wind direction
• yw is orthogonal to the wind direction and parallel to the ground
• zw describes the vertical axis orthogonal to the ground
This system is used for example, whenever wind speed vector is involved.
The TRPT reference framework is a radial coordinate system where
12
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:19==
• xr is parallel to the axis of rotation
• yr is the azimuth position of the TRPT segments, also denoted θ, where the 0°
position is pointing downwards the shortest distance towards the ground
• zr describes the radial distance, orthogonal from the axis of rotation
The system is used for the TRPT shape calculations.
The TRPT reference framework can also be described as a Cartesian coordinate system
where
• xt is parallel to the axis of rotation
• yt is orthogonal to the axis of rotation and parallel to the ground
• zt is orthogonal to the previous two facing downwards
This system is used to obtain the radial and tangential components of a force vector.
The transformation matrices are used to transfer coordinates from one system to the other.
Other RAWES with TRPT might differ in details like the frame shape, tether configura-
tion, control strategies as well as take-off and landing procedures. However, many of
the underlying design principles and limitations remain the same. Therefore the models
developed in this thesis allow some observations and comparisons to be made between
the Daisy Kite, someAWE Labs’ MAR1 and The Pyramid.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
13
==PAGE:20==
14
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:21==
4
Steady State Model
4.1
Model Development
In order to describe the steady-state performance of a daisy type RAWES, a Matlab model
was developed. As can be seen in the block diagram figure 4.12, the model can be
divided into eight sub-models covering design variables, operating parameters, TRPT
shape, wind profile, rotor aerodynamics, structural analysis, TRPT aerodynamics and
ground station.
In this chapter, each sub-model will be explained and analysed individually.
4.1.1
Design Variables
First the design variables describing the system topology must be defined. The frame radii
and tether lengths in the TRPT are introduced as the vectors R and Lt respectively. The
blades with blade length lb and pitch angle α are attached at their centre to the uppermost
frame at radius Rrot. and the lowest frame with Rgen is attached to the generator.
Figure 4.1: Dimensions of Daisy Kite Design with TRPT version 4 [33]
The base case for the steady-state analysis is the Daisy Kite design with TRPT version
4 [33]. The relevant dimensions are given in figure 4.1. The design uses 13 hexagon
frames, 6 tethers, 3 blades and 100 N induced tension from the lifter kite. A full list of
Design variables for this base case can be found in table 4.1.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
15
==PAGE:22==
Table 4.1: Design Variables for Daisy Kite Optimisation
Design Variable
Symbol
Base Case
Frame radii
Rrot, R2, ..., Rgen
1.52, 0.82, 0.54, 0.32, 0.32, 0.32,
0.32, 0.32, 0.32, 0.32, 0.32, 0.32, 0.315
Tether lengths
Lt1, Lt2, ..., Lt12
3.667, 1.496, 0.686, 0.52, 0.52, 0.52,
0.52, 0.52, 0.52, 0.52, 0.52, 0.43
Elevation angle
β
25
Blade length
lb
1
Blade pitch
α
4.5
Tip speed ratio
λ
3
Further, the operational speed ω is defined here as well as the elevation angle β.
During experimental tests it was discovered that both ω and β are subject to dynamic
effects from wind speed fluctuations in the system. Even with constant wind, the rotation
speed is a fine balance set by the rotor torque, the TRPT stiffness and the generator
control. β depends on the equilibrium of lift and tension forces from rotor and lifter kite
with the gravitational force of all components. This model however investigates the steady
state, therefore ω and β are assumed to be constant and equal for all components in the
system. This also implies that the catenary shape of individual tethers is neglected.
4.2
Sub-model - Parameters
In this section the operating conditions are defined, like the air density ρ as well as the
parameters of the wind shear profile vref, href, ψ.
Other parameters set the general shape of the RAWES by giving the number of rotors,
frames and tethers.
The lifter kite is not modeled separately with its own aerodynamics like done in Tulloch’s
model [33]. Instead the lifter kite is reduced to the axial Tension T that it would introduce
to the TRPT. This is done because the lifter kite helps in reducing dynamics and vibration
in the system, but is not necessarily needed during steady-state operation. Further, lifter
kites can be easily controlled, so that lifter tension T can just be considered a constant
parameter. Any potential losses due to aerodynamic drag from the lifter kite’s connections
and bridle lines are neglected.
The parameters defining the Daisy Kite with TRPT version 4 are listed in table 4.2.
16
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:23==
Table 4.2: Parameter Input for Daisy Kite
Parameters
Symbol
Base Case
Wind speed parameters
vref, href, ψ
5.3, 5, 0.2
Number of rotors
nr
1
Number of tethers
nt
6
Number of frame corners
nf
6
Number of frames
nR
13
4.2.1
TRPT Shape Analysis
The TRPT consist of nR nf-sided polygons, which are connected by nt = nf tethers by
their corners and rotate around a common axis of rotation. The polygons and tethers
are assumed to be rigid with the tethers under constant tension, however the attachment
angle between them is not fixed.
When the TRPT experiences a change in the applied torque, it deforms depending on
its geometry and the applied forces. More specifically, the deformation angle δ changes,
which describes the difference in azimuth position of two neighbouring frames.
Figure 4.2: Sketch of TRPT deformation due to applied torque
figure 4.2 shows one TRPT segment without applied torque (left), where δ = 0 and one
segment with an applied torque where δ ̸= 0 (right). δ is subject to the tether length of
each segment, described by Lt, the frames radi R, as well as the axial tension T and the
applied torque Q. It should be noted, that along with δ, the distance between the frame
Ls also changes, as does the attachment angle γ between the frame’s tangential and the
tether. For better understanding, these parameters are marked in figure 4.12.
The deformation of a Daisy type TRPT was investigated experimentally by Felicity Levett
[16] and Oliver Tulloch derived the underlying equations equation (4.1), equation (4.2)
and equation (4.3) based on the system geometry in chapter 4 of his PhD thesis [33].
The derivations were verified and the key equations will be presented here without further
proof.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
17
==PAGE:24==
The transmitted torque Q of a TRPT section is
Q = R1R2T
sin δ
√
l2
t −R2
1 −R2
2 + 2R1R2 cos δ
(4.1)
The distance Ls between two frame sections can be calculated as
ls =
√
l2
t −R2
1 −R2
2 + 2R1R2 cos δ
(4.2)
Figure 4.3: TRPT deformation
TRPT sections with Lt > R1 + R2 fail when δ reaches 180° and the tethers cross the
axis of rotation. In this case the tethers start to twist up into a double helix and cannot
transfer any torque. However, as shown by Tulloch the critical deformation angle δc is
reached much earlier, at the point where the TRPT stiffness peaks, meaning, where the
TRPT can transfer the most torque for a given tension, see figure 4.3. To ensure a stable
operation the deformation should be kept below that critical deformation point which can
be calculated as
δc = cos−1
(
R2
1 + R2
2 −l2
t ±
√
l4
t + R4
1 + R4
2 −2R2
1l2
t −2R2
2l2
t −2R2
1R2
2
2R1R2
)
(4.3)
For TRPT sections where Lt ≤R1+R2, δc does not apply, because the geometry prevents
δ from exceeding a certain limit δlim which is below 180°, in which case the two frames
are in the same plane with Ls = 0. δlim can be derived from the the law of cosines.
δlim = cos−1
(R2
1 + R2
2 −l2
t
2R1R2
)
(4.4)
As indicated in figure 4.12, the TRPT shape sub-model is part of fixed point iteration.
This is because the TRPT shape depends on the applied forces, which are found in the
subsequent sub-models which are dependent on the outputs of the tether shape.
The torque Q transmitted through the TRPT system is the torque injected by the rotors
minus the torque losses occurring at each tether and frame segment. The same goes for
18
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:25==
the axial tension T which is the sum of the lifter kite, the rotor thrust and the drag forces
acting parallel to the axis of rotation.
T = Trot + Tf + Tt
(4.5)
Q = Qrot −Qloss, f −Qloss, t
(4.6)
The torque and tension thus found is fed back to the operational sub-model to ensure the
initial assumptions were correct. The four sub-models are run repeatedly until the error
between two subsequent iterations becomes sufficiently small.
4.2.2
Rotor Aerodynamics
In order to find the rotor torque and thrust, NREL’s standalone AeroDyn tool is used. This
allows for tried and tested Blade Element Momentum (BEM) calculations with a range
of rotor shapes and inbuilt modeling options [13]. The BEM algorithm is summarised by
Micallef and Sant [23]
The tool takes two input files to define the problem. Firstly, the primary AeroDyn input
file defines modeling options, environmental conditions, blade properties, and output file
specifications [13].
Most notably, the Blade Element Momentum Theory (BEMT) is set as induction model.
The skewed inflow caused by rotor tilt or yaw is corrected with the Pitt and Peters model
[25]. Blade tip losses and root losses of the open centre rotor are handled by the Prandtl
tip loss model [27]. Modeling options for tower interference or underwater turbines are
switched off.
The primary input file further imports the airfoil data with all relevant aerodynamic coeffi-
cients of the NREL’s S809 airfoil at different angles of attack as well as the blade’s shape
file, which is set depending on the blade length lb, aspect ratio lb
lc = 5 as well as pitch α.
Secondly, the driver input file defines the rotor shape and the operating conditions [13].
Theoretically Daisy Kites could have any number of blades, but AeroDyn is limited to a
maximum of three blades, which are set at hub radius Rhub = Rrot −lb. The rotors tilt
angle is set equal to the elevation angle β. The rotational speed ω, wind speed Vw and
shear exponent ψ, are passed on as well as the simulation time.
Several studies showed, that the thrust and power coefficients vary depending on the
azimuth position of the rotor [23, 8, 29]. To ensure numerical stability, the time steps are
to cover 200 azimuth positions per rotor revolution, which is NREL’s recommendation.
The mean of these time step results for power torque and thrust respectively are returned
to the steady state model.
Multiple rotors of a Daisy Stack can be modeled by calling the AeroDyn tool several times.
However, the wake effects caused be the up-wind rotors are not considered so that the
results are less reliable.
4.2.3
Wind Profile Analysis
The wind speed vw at elevation z is given by a shear profile following the power law, which
is described in many textbooks and papers, for example by Archer [2].
vw = vref( z
zref
)ψ
(4.7)
In the base case, the reference height, reference speed and wind shear exponent href, vref
and ψ are chosen to match the conditions of one of the Daisy Kite test conditions as
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
19
==PAGE:26==
recorded by Tulloch as zref = 5, vref = 5.3, ψ = 0.2 [33]. This profile is used for the
following aerodynamic analysis of the rotor and TRPT.
It is important to note, that this wind speed profile acts as the design wind speed. That
means, the rotor and TRPT size and shape will be optimised to the given wind speed.
4.2.4
Structural Analysis
The structural analysis of the TRPT serves two purposes. Firstly the tether and frame
tube diameters dt and df are found which are needed for precise drag calculations. And
secondly, the mass of the tethers and frames mt and mf are added to the lifter, blade and
the ground station mass to find the total system mass m. The forces are due to tension
and torque from rotor and lifter. Centrifugal forces will not be considered. Further, the
components are considered stiff and non flexible.
The material properties for the tethers and frames, which are made from high performance
polyethylene Dyneema and carbon fibre tubes respectively, are set in this sub-model.
Namely the tensile and compression strengths σtensf , σcompf , σtenst, σcompt as well as the
densities ρf and ρt.
The tensile force Ft acting on a tether depends on the TRPT shape and the applied axial
tension T.
Ft =
T
cos(κ) nt
(4.8)
Where κ is the angle between the tether orientation ˆet and the axis of rotation. ˆex, with
κ = ˆet · ˆex. Tulloch showed that cos(ϕ) is equal to the ratio of the frame distance to the
tether length Ls
Lt , such that.
Ft = T Lt
nt Ls
(4.9)
To get the tether’s cross-sectional area and diameter dt the force can be divided by the
tensile strength σtenst. A safety factor SF = 5 is applied, in order to account for fluctuations
and dynamics of the system.
dt = 2
√
T Lt SF
nt Ls σt π
(4.10)
Given the density of ρf = 557 kg/m3 for the tether material Dyneema [17], the mass of
the tethers can be found as
mt =
nL
∑
i=1
T L2
ti
Lsi σt
ρt
(4.11)
The forces acting in the frame tubes are caused by the in and outgoing tethers and can be
derived from the geometry. Only the radial component (with respect to the rotation plane)
of ∑Ft is acting on the frame tube as force Fft. When φ is the angle between two frame
sides φ = (2nf−4)π
2nf
and ϕ is the radial attachment angle ϕ = tan−1 (
cos(δ)R1−R2
Ls
)
, then
Fft =
out
∑
i=in
Ti
2 tan(ϕ) tan(φ
2 )
(4.12)
20
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:27==
Aft =
out
∑
i=in
Ti
σcomp, f
tan(ϕ) tan(φ
2 ) SF
(4.13)
All polygons and tethers are assumed to remain rigid, meaning neither the side lengths nor
the angles at each corner are changing. Strong centrifugal forces can cause significant
deformations at the rotor polygon. However, these can be reduced by choosing nf = nt
or increasing the structural strengths of the polygons.
To find the material mass the cross-sectional area must be multiplied by the frame tube
length lft = 2R sin
(
π
nf
)
, the number of frame sides nf and the density of carbon fibre,
estimated as ρf = 1600 kg/m3 [20].
mf =
nR
∑
i=1
nf Afti lfti ρf
(4.14)
The lift force of a kite can be expressed as
FL = 1
2 ρ Awing CL v2
a
(4.15)
where va is the apparent air velocity.
Since FL ∝Awing, the weight of the lifter kite can be approximated as function of the lifter
tension Tl. Where ρl = 10 kg/kN, ml can be found as
ml = ρl Tl
(4.16)
With lbh being the average blade thickness and density ρb = 100 kg/m3, the weight of the
rotor mr is approximated as
mr = nb lb lc lbh ρb
(4.17)
The weight of the ground station mg depends on its height. If for example the TRPT has
high radi, the ground station must elevate the first frame so that it does not touch the
ground. So ρg = 10 kg/m in mass per unit length is taken as simplification. It should be
noted that this mass grows linearly with scale.
mg = Rgen ρg
(4.18)
m = mf + mt + ml + mb + mg
(4.19)
The final mass of the system is the sum of all components. This value is used as a highly
simplified cost evaluation. Using the power density Pd = Pout
m
as a metric, designs of
different scale can be compared to each other.
4.3
TRPT Aerodynamics
The movement of the TRPT components relative to the wind causes a resistance to the
applied torque Q and introduces further tension T. The aerodynamic analysis is split into
a tether drag model and a frame drag model. It is assumed that tethers and frame tubes
are perfectly cylindrical and wake effects can be neglected.
The cross-flow and skin friction coefficients Cpd f=1.2, Cvd f=0.04, Cpd t=1.2, Cvd t=0.04 are
defined.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
21
==PAGE:28==
Tether Drag
The tethers are assumed to be non-flexible and under constant tension. Their shape is
cylindrical with the drag coefficient CD, t. The procedure to identify the drag forces acting
on the tethers is largely adopted from Tulloch’s ”Improved Tether Drag Model” [33].
First the diameter, position and orientation of the tethers is found from the TRPT geometry
and expressed as a vector. Next, the tethers of each TRPT section are partitioned into
ntp parts. Then the average apparent wind wind speed and angle of attack is found for
each part, allowing equation (2.5) and equation (2.6) to be applied.
The resultant force vectors must be transformed into force components tangential to the
rotational movement and parallel to the rotation axis, which are the torque loss Qt and
induced tension Tt respectively. Lastly Qloss and Tt of each tether part are allocated to
the nearest frame.
In summary the power loss for a tether part with the average rotation radius R and the
length ltp can be approximated as
Ploss,t = ωRtpρv2
wltpdtπntCpd, t
nt
∑
i=1
1
2π
∫2π
0
(ωRtp
vw
+ sin(θi)sin(β)
)2
dθi
(4.20)
For steady-state operation the drag looses are averaged over one rotation, hence the in-
tegration over the azimuth positions of the tether partition θ. Since vw is not constant at
different azimuth positions due to the shear profile, the integral is best evaluated numeri-
cally rather than analytically.
The next step is to integrate Ploss, t over the tether length. Numerically this is done by
summing up the power losses at each partition. And here the model of this thesis diverges
from Tulloch’s model, by increasing the number of tether partitions ntp from 2 to 20. Since
the rotation radius Rtp is non-linear along a tether section, an increased ntp improves the
accuracy of the numerical approximation for TRPT sections with a change in frame radius
or deformation δ ̸= 0.
An example can be seen in figure 4.4, where the accuracy of of the power loss calculation
can be improved by nearly 9% compared to the model used by Tulloch. ntheta that at
least 6 different azimuth positions should be tested to reduce the error of the numerical
evaluation of the second integral.
Frame Drag
The frame drag model was not investigated by Tulloch, but follows the same approach
used in the tether drag model.
The frame sides at azimuth position θ are described as vectors and partitioned into nfp
parts of length lfp, with the average rotation radius Rfp and the elevation zfp. The outer
diameter of the frame tubes is kept constant at df = 0.004m.
Then the magnitude and orientation of the apparent wind speed va is found at each part,
subject to the wind speed vw = vref( zfp
zref )ψ and the rotational speed vr = ωRfp. The dot
product of the unit vectors of the apparent wind speed ˆva and the frame part ˆffp returns
the angle of attack α.
With these parameters known, equations 2.5 and 2.6 can be applied to get the drag and
friction force magnitudes. The corresponding orientation can be obtained from ˆffp as they
act perpendicular and parallel to the tether. With respect to the rotation, the tangential and
22
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:29==
(a) Tether partitions
(b) Azimuth positions of tethers
Figure 4.4: Normalised Tether drag convergence plots
axial components of Td, fp and Ff, fp are identified leading to the induced tension Tf, fp
and torque loss Qloss, fp
Rfp
.
Lastly, the results must be integrated over the whole frame tube length with respect to lfp
and over one whole rotation with respect to θ.
equation (4.21) sums up this procedure, although it should be remembered, that Rfp and
vw are non-linear functions depending on the TRPT geometry and the shear profile.
Ploss, f = nf
1
2π
∫lf
0
∫2π
0
ωRfpρv2
wlfpdfπnfCpdf
(ωRfp
vw
+ sin(θi)cos(β)
)2
dfθidlfp
(4.21)
When solving the integrals numerically, the number of frame partitions nfp and azimuth
positions nθ is especially important for frames with a small number of frame sides nθ, like
the step-ladder design or triangular frames. With the convergence tests seen in figure 4.5,
the nfp is set to 20 and nθ is kept as 6.
4.3.1
Ground Station
In Daisy type RAWES the ground station serves several functions, like anchoring the
system and controlling the rotational speed by varying the torque in the generator. Some-
times the generator is even run as a motor to support take-off and landing procedures or
prevent overtwisting at the TRPT [19, 33, 28]. In this numerical model however, only its
most important function, electrical power generation is of importance.
It is assumed that the generator operates at the constant speed ω with a fixed generator
efficiency ηgen = 0.95. The final power output Pout is then
Pout = (Prot −Ploss, f −Ploss, t) ηgen
(4.22)
4.4
Sub-model Validation
4.4.1
TRPT shape
Figure 4.6a depicts the relation between the segment length ratios and the deformation
angle. It was already established, that operating points beyond the critical deformation
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
23
==PAGE:30==
(a) Frame partitions
(b) Azimuth positions of frame
Figure 4.5: Normalised frame drag convergence plots
are unstable due to the negative stiffness. Figure 4.6a shows additionally, that these high
angles would also shorten the TRPT segment and subsequently reduce the hub height.
(a) TRPT length over deformation
(b) Critical deformation of Tensile Rotary Power
Transmission
Figure 4.6: Deformation of tensegrity systems
Figure 4.6 is an important finding as it depicts the inherent limitation of any TRPT due
to its critical deformation. Systems that operate with force ratios above the line exceed
the critical deformation and are therefore unstable. These results match the findings by
Tulloch [33], who compared his analytical deformation results to experiments [33, 16] and
found them to be consistent.
4.4.2
Rotor Aerodynamics
The sub-model for rotor aerodynamics is based on the AeroDyn tool developed by NREL,
which is tested and reliable. However, two modelling options will be of extraordinary
importance for simulating flying turbines with the AeroDyn tool and should be looked at in
more detail.
The first option is the inclusion of root and tip losses in the BEM calculations. The pressure
24
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:31==
differences at the blade root and tip of an open centre rotor respectively cause wake in
form of helical vortices. These result in power losses, which are not considered by the
BEMT itself, but can be accounted for with the tip-loss model developed by Prandtl [27].
The standard daisy kite rotors tested by W&I have relatively short blade lengths compared
to their radii. Figure 4.7 shows that Cp decreases from 0.495 to 0.385 after including root
and tip correction. Since the outer parts of a blade generally produces more power, the
tip losses are naturally greater than the root losses.
Further, the figure shows how the optimal tip speed ratio λ is effected by the modelling
option. When including tip-losses only, the optimal speed increases and when including
root losses only it decreases compared to the BEM calculations without any correction.
Figure 4.7: Effect of Prandtl’s root and tip correction on BEM analysis
The other modelling option of interest is the effect of the rotor tilt. As previously discussed,
the yaw correction developed by Pitt and Peter has been reviewed by several studies
[23, 29, 8]. While mathematically both yaw and tilt work with an asymmetric flow field,
it should be noted that all these studies work with yawed HAWT, not tilted open center
rotors. figure 4.8 shows a comparison between the yaw and tilt corrections in AeroDyn
for a Daisy Kite rotor.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: Effect of yaw and tilt corrections on open center rotor
The analysis indicates that yaw and tilt corrections in AeroDyn are identical for small
and large angles. The small differences in Cp between 15° and 45° are expected, since
AeroDyn consideres the wind shear profile across the rotor. These results suggest that
the statements made by literature about the accuracy of the Pitt and Peter yaw correction
model can be transferred to tilt-correction. This means that tilt angles above 30° can
introduce inaccuracies, especially at high wind speeds and high tip speed ratios while tilt
correction below 30° can be considered accurate [22].
4.4.3
TRPT Aerodynamics
As mentioned in the literature review, there is no consensus on the number of tethers and
shape of the frame elements of TRPT’s. To minimise the stresses in the frame structure,
the number of tethers and polygon corners should be identical, however, as long as sym-
metry is maintained, they can deviate. Ultimately, the TRPT design must balance power
losses, material and manufacturing cost with more practical aspects like redundancy and
ease of handling.
For instance, frames with sharp corners might lead to tether entanglement (as reported by
someAWE Labs [24]), during take-off and landing procedures, while ring shaped frames
are prone to deformation and buckling [33]. Meanwhile TRPTs with more than four tethers
have redundancy that allows continued operation even after one tether failed.
In order to get a numerical evaluation of the power loss and weight implications, a single
TRPT section is modeled with different numbers of polygon corners and tethers. The
TRPT section, seen in figure 5.6, has a radius R = 0.5, tether length Lt = 1, deformation
angle δ = 0 and rotational speed ω =. The wind speed is kept to 0 such that the friction
losses are purely due to the TRPT’s rotation.
Under such conditions, the two extreme cases are the helix, where the frame is made
up of straight rods (2 polygon corners) perpendicular to the axis of rotation. This design
is for example used by someAWE Labs [24] and experiences only pressure drag. Using
Dunkers equations for cross-flow ??, the resultant power losses can be expressed as
Ploss, helix =
∫rout
0
1
2 ρ Cpd df r3 ω3 dr
(4.23)
26
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.9: Simplified TRPT segment with a hexagon frame (red) and 6 tethers (blue)
The other extreme would be ring shaped frame (∞polygon corners) which was used by
the first daisy prototypes [30]. When rotating, the frame only experiences viscous drag.
Under the given simplified conditions the drag forces can be calculated with equation 2.6
and resulting power loss can be expressed analytically as
Ploss, ring = 1
2 Cvd df π l r3 ω3
(4.24)
Although the skin friction drag coefficient for carbon fibre is significantly lower than the
cross flow drag coefficient, the ring shaped frame has more area exposed, and the forces
act at a greater radius. In figure 4.10a it can be seen that the numerically modeled Power
losses correspond to the analytical results for the step ladder and ring frames. In between
at the extreme cases, a combination of pressure drag and viscous drag lead to fluctuating
power losses. Most notably the jump from 2 to 3 corners is caused by the sudden in-
crease in material from a single rod to a 3-sided polygon. The model might include slight
inaccuracies due to the neglect of wake considerations in the model.
The power loss due to tether drag is plotted in figure 4.10b and shows that the numerical
model is accurately describing the theoretical tether drag calculated analytically with equa-
tions 4.23, 4.24. Since the cross-sectional area of all tethers combined is kept constant
to simulate same load conditions, the mass of the TRPT is not affected by the number
of tethers. The results show that aerodynamic drag losses can be reduced by choosing
fewer, thicker tethers instead of a greater number of relatively thin tethers. In this simple
system for example the daisy design with 6 tethers leads to 1.75 times the power loss for
a helix design.
The performance of the TRPT system can be expressed by the transmission efficiency
ηT RP T which is found as
ηT RP T = Prot −Ploss, f −Ploss, t
Prot
(4.25)
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Frame drag
(b) Tether drag
Figure 4.10: Drag loss and material weight of a simplified TRPT systems with different
shapes, normalised to the Daisy Kite design with hexagons and 6 tethers
Since the power loss in the TRPT network is proportional R3 and ω3, the efficiency is
reduced for higher frame radii and higher rotational speeds. Equations 2.5 and 2.6 showed
that the tether drag also depends on the angle of attack, which is affected by the azimuth
position of the tether, the tip speed ratio and the deformation angle δ of the TRPT. The
impact of δ on the power loss of the simplified system is plotted in figure 4.11. When
increasing the deformation angle, the tether must be longer to bridge the same distance
between frames, hence the fluctuation in material weight.
Figure 4.11: Power loss and material weight of simplified TRPT system with different
deformation angles and constant segment length
Some TRPT designs like someAWE Labs’ MAR1 helix use crosswise tethering, thereby
maintaining a relatively high, but constant deformation angle δ [24]. Compared to a helix
with only 2 tethers, a helix design with 4 tethers attached to rods with δ = 90° will have up
to 2.2 times more tether weight and up to 1.3 times higher power loss. This increase will
have to be weighted against the improved robustness and predictability of such a design.
28
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:35==
4.5
Summary
The block diagram, figure 4.12, shows the arrangement of the eight sub-models and the
information flow between them.
Figure 4.12: Block diagram of steady-state model
As indicated in figure 4.12, the steady-state model uses a fixed point iteration. This is
necessary, because the TRPT deformation, hub height, wind speed, tension and torque
form a circular dependency. The convergence loop ends, if the power output of two con-
secutive iterations have a reasonably small error.
As previously mentioned, the steady-state model is based on theoretical principles and
models developed by Tulloch as well as Read and Tveide [33][28].
To clarify the changes to Tulloch’s previous work, the newly implemented features are
listed below.
• The BEM analysis is now flexible and allows changes in the rotor diameter, blade
length, pitch and speed. However, due to the use of AeroDyn tool, some limits are
set, like the number of blades per rotor cannot exceed 3.
• The model allows designs with several rotors, forming a Daisy Stack. However, if
the tether length is not big enough Ls > 2Rtipsin(β), it can not be guarantied that the
down-wind rotors are shaded by the up-wind rotors. Theoretically the wake should
be skewed downwards, away from subsequent rotors, but without wake analysis no
numerical estimate can be made, increasing the uncertainty of Daisy Stack models.
• A structural analysis is included, to obtain the cross-sectional area and subsequent
mass of the tethers and frames. In addition to the approximate mass of the blades
and ground station, this gives the total mass of the system. The frame analysis is
limited to the material strength and does not consider buckling or bending effects.
However. the frame is made of tubes in order to increase the second moment of
area and reduce the risk of buckling. Further, the centrifugal forces are neglected,
which would act opposite to the compression forces. In comparison to other com-
ponents the weight contribution of the tethers and frames is minuscule, only making
up around 2% of the total mass.
• The numerical tether drag calculations are improved to be more accurate. This was
achieved by increasing the partitioning of of tethers and frames when solving the
integrals of the non-linear power losses. For strongly deformed TRPT segments,
the accuracy was shown to increase up to 6%.
• Frame drag calculations are now included into the TRPT aerodynamics. The power
losses due to frame drag are approximately half as big as the tether drag losses
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
29
==PAGE:36==
and should therefore not be neglected. The frame drag also contributes to the axial
tension within the TRPT. Further, the frame shape can be changed in the model, al-
lowing the analysis of various TRPT designs. Uncertainties might come from frames
with sharp angles, like a triangular frame, where one frame side might be shaded
by another, especially near the corners. To resolve this uncertainty a wake model
would need to be applied.
• The iterative approach is used to ensure that TRPT deformation and hub height are
correct.
• New is also, the use of power density as a metric to compare different RAWES
designs and concepts. Power density commonly has a problem with scaling as
the system mass increases with the scaling factor cubed m ∝k3, while Power
only increases with with the scaling factor squared Pout ∝k2. This will have to be
considered during optimisation and discussion of the results.
The Matlab code for the full steady-state model can be found in a github repository (see
Appendix A).
30
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:37==
5
Results
Having gained some understanding and confidence in the numerical models for TRPT
shape as well as rotor and TRPT aerodynamics, the investigation can now move to whole
systems. In this chapter the model will be validated and the used in a parameter study, to
analyse the impact of different designs.
5.1
Model Validation
The full steady-state model can be validated against experimental data from different
prototypes and against other models.
5.1.1
Daisy Kite
Figure 5.1 shows a sketch of the Daisy Kite base case in operation, alongside the con-
tribution of different components to the power and mass outputs. The power breakdown
indicates the losses and resulting power output as a percentile of the potential wind power
across the swept area. The mass breakdown shows the contribution of different compo-
nents to the total mass in percent.
Figure 5.1: Steady state results for Daisy Kite with TRPT version 4 and 3 rigid rotors
During field tests of the modelled Daisy Kite with TRPT version 4 and 3 rigid rotors at λ = 5,
the measured power output was around 150 W, with a large standard deviation around
70 [33, 31]. The corresponding wind speed was 5.3 m/s measured at 5 m height with
a standard deviation around 1.1. Unfortunately these conditions do not allow a precise
comparison. But the experimental results indicate that the model, with power output of
164 W and an estimated error of 9 %, is within the reasonable range.
The modelling results can also be compared to Tulloch’s simplified steady-state model.
A good metric for comparison is the power transmission efficiency which was reported by
Tulloch as ηTRPT = 88.6% and modeled as ηTRPT = 73.0%. This decrease in efficiency
is expected, as the tether drag accuracy was improved and the frame drag was newly
implemented. For this particular TRPT shape Ploss, f ≈Ploss, t
2
. Further, both models find
that λ = 5 used in the field test is above the optimum tip speed ratio.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
31
==PAGE:38==
5.1.2
MAR1
With small modifications, the steady state model can also be applied to other concepts.
SomeAWE Labs’ MAR1 design uses 0.5 m long rods as frames, crosswise connected by
0.5 m long tethers. With a total length of 80 TRPT segments, the system is longer than the
Daisy Kite prototypes. A test at 10 m/s wind speed with a tip speed ratio of 3.2 resulted in
a power output of 364 W or Cp,combines = 0.1 [3]. The lifter tension is assumed to Tl = 200N
When applying the MAR1 dimensions and operating conditions to the steady state sys-
tem, a power output of 337 W is obtained, suggesting p, combined = 0.10 and the error
compared to the measured data is 7.4 %. The resulting power and mass breakdown can
be seen in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Steady-state results for the MAR1 design under someAWE Labs’ test condi-
tions
However, the AeroDyn tool limits the the number of blades in the model to 3 blades per
rotor, while the MAR1 prototype uses 4. Rotors with more blades have a lower tip speed
ratios λ, so λ of the 3-bladed MAR1 model was optimised to 4.19, resulting in a power
output of 393 W, with p, combined = 0.12 and Pd = 45 W/kg.
The new error compared to the measured data is 7.97 %, which might be due to inaccurate
wind measurements, or simplifications made in the model. For example, the prototypes
frame joint shape and details of the rotor frame are neglected in the model.
5.2
Parameter Study
In order to show the system response to various design features, several parameter stud-
ies are performed. The goal is to develop general recommendations for improving the
Daisy Kite concept.
5.2.1
Operating conditions
To ensure the base case is operating at the optimal elevation angle β, tip speed ratio λ and
blade pitch α, several parametric analyses are performed. The optimal β is a compromise
between faster wind speeds at higher altitude and cosine losses. According to the analysis
plotted in figure 5.3, the power for the Daisy Kite peaks at β = 23° with a shear parameter
of ψ = 0.2.
32
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.3: Power over elevation angle, normalised to the base case
The combined coefficient of performance Cp, combined is the product of the rotor’s power
coefficient Cp, rot, the power transmission efficiency ηTRPT and the generator efficiency
ηgen, which are plotted in figure 5.4. The drag losses are proportional to ω3, therefore
ηTRPT decreases rapidly. Cp, rot however peaks around λ = 6, such that the resulting
Cp, combined peaks around 4.5.
Figure 5.4: Efficiencies over tip speed ratio
This observation matches with the results from figure 5.5, where the power output is plot-
ted with respect to λ and α. The best pitch angle is found as α = 4.5°. The figure confirms
that, faster spinning blades will generally have lower optimum pitch.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.5: Normalised power output subject to the blade pitch angle and tip speed ratio
5.2.2
TRPT shape
The normalised power output and power density for different shapes are plotted in fig-
ure 5.6. The modeling results show, that fewer tethers and frame corners make the TRPT
more efficient, with a helix design yielding around 8 % higher power and 10% greater
power density. Experiments showed however, that such systems operate rather unstable
and are at risk of single point failure. To prevent single point failure in the TRPT, the sys-
tem need at least 5 tethers, which were also shown to improve daisy kite’s power output
by 1.5%.
Figure 5.6: Power loss and power density for a Daisy design with varying numbers of
tethers and frame corners. The results are normalised to the base case marked with an x
The number of frame corners nf and the number of tethers nt are kept equal to avoid
asymmetries in the TRPT. The significant difference between the results for nt = nf = 2
and nt = nf = 3 is due to the helix design having only one straight carbon fibre tube,
while the polygon shaped frames have 3, 4, 5 etc. tubes.
5.2.3
Daisy Stack
The Daisy Kite design can be expanded by attaching nr additional TRPT segments with
blades. Figure 5.7 shows that with 5 rotors, power output can be improved by a factor
34
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:41==
of 3.3 when compared to the base case. Power density peaks earlier, at 4 rotors for 2.5
times the power density.
Figure 5.7: Normalised power output subject to the number of rotors in the Daisy stack
The reason for the decline are the decreasing Cp, rot and ηTRPT with each additional
section. In order for all rotors to operate at their optimum Cp, rot, their radii should in-
crease continuously such that they are running at the correct λ.
Figure 5.8: Daisy stack with 3 rotors
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
35
==PAGE:42==
36
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:43==
6
Optimisation
The steady-state model can be used to analyse and compare specific AWES designs.
The next step is to find the set of design variables with the highest power density, given a
set of external constrains.
6.1
Optimisation Model
Figure 6.1: Block diagram of optimisation model
To achieve that, an optimiser is set up, using the steady-state model as objective function
and power density as objective value. For further clarification, the corresponding block
diagram is plotted in figure 6.1.
6.1.1
Inputs
The optimiser gets two sets of inputs. First, the parameters are defined as global vari-
ables. They describe the external operating conditions like the wind profile and the applied
tether tension.
Also included are several shape parameters defining the number of rotors, tethers and
frames. Because they are integer values, including them into the optimisation with the
floating point design variables would increase the optimisation complexity significantly.
Therefore these shape parameters are also chosen as external conditions.
And second, the initial design variables are given as a vector DV 0. Each element of DV0
is subject to change under the optimisation, so the complexity rises exponentially with the
number of TRPT segments.
It could be argued that the rotor and TRPT should be optimised separately. The difficulty of
that approach is the influence they have on one another. If for example the rotor design is
kept constant and only the TRPT frame radii and tether lengths are optimised, the resulting
TRPT drag would affect the optimal tip speed ratio (as seen in figure 5.4). Figure 5.5
showed that the optimal blade pitch depends on the tip speed ratio and would therefore
also have to change. Due to this circular dependency, it was decided to optimise rotor
and TRPT design variables together at the cost of computation time.
In turn, the lifter tension was not included in the design variables but set as a parameter.
This was done, because the lifter kite is an important control tool to maintain the elevation
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
37
==PAGE:44==
angle, while providing lift is considered of secondary importance. In future works, this
approach might be changed and the lifter tension will be part of the design variables.
The parameters and design variables for the optimisation of the Daisy Kite base case, are
the same as the inputs for the steady-state base case given in table 4.1 and table 4.2.
The initial design variables will change for each optimisation to avoid local minima, but are
generally of less importance. The parameters however are critical for each optimisation,
so any changes from the base case will be clearly stated.
6.1.2
Constraints
The design variables are constraint with lower and upper boundaries to ensure they are
physically feasible.
A linear constraint prevents the inner radius of the open center rotor to be smaller than
zero.
Rrot ≥lb
2
(6.1)
Further, a number of non-linear constraints are defined to prevent invalid results and errors
in the objective function.
The deformation angle must be below the critical deformation angle δc or its physical limit
δlim to avoid over twisting. To compensate for small variations like turbulence, a certain
safety angle SA = π
10 is applied as well. This constraint is checked for all TRPT sections
separately.
δi < δc, i for Lt, i > R1, i + R2, i and ∀i ∈nL
(6.2)
δi < δlim, i for Lt, i ≤R1, i + R2, i and ∀i ∈nL
(6.3)
The rotor must fly high enough to not hit the ground. Therefore the tip radius must be
smaller than the hub height.
Rrot + lb <
∑
(Ls ) sin(β) + Rgen
(6.4)
38
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:45==
6.2
Solver
The full optimisation problem can be defined as
min
R,Lt,β,b,α,λ −Pout
m
s.t.
δi < δc, i
for Lt, i > R1, i + R2, i and ∀i ∈nL
δi < δlim, i
for Lt, i ≤R1, i + R2, i and ∀i ∈nL
Rrot + lb <
∑
(Ls ) sin(β) + Rgen
Rrot ≥lb
2
Rlb < R < Rub
Lt, lb < Lt < Lt, ub
βlb < β < βub
lb, lb < lb < lb, ub
αlb < α < αub
λlb < λ < λub
The optimisation solver is Matlab’s fmincon(), using the interior-point algorithm to min-
imise the negative of the power density Pd. Changing the objective value to the power out-
put Pout, the systems coefficient of performance Cp, combined or the power harvesting factor
ζ is also possible. The solver is gradient-based, which means it identifies the Hessian of
the Lagrangian of the objective function with respect to each design variable. Therefore,
the gradient of the objective function must be defined, so discontinuities in the sub-models
have to be avoided. The exact theory behind the interior-point algorithm can be looked
up in the Matlab documentation [21].
6.3
Optimisation Results
The parameters and constraints for the following results are as previously described in
table 4.1 and table 4.2. More information about the exact results for each optimisation
can be found in Appendix A.
6.3.1
Daisy kite variations
When running the optimisation of the Daisy kite base case, the solver encountered two
different problems. First, the objective value with respect to the 29 design variables form
several local minima. And second, the gradient function is not clearly defined for all vari-
ables. The problems could have been tackled with different optimisation algorithms or
normalised design variables. However there was a pattern found in several local minima,
which might hold some lessons about the limitation of this design.
Given the dimension of the Daisy Kite base case, figure 6.2 shows the optimisation result
after 27 iterations with 360 function calls with an optimality value of 7.3 · 10−10. Further
, the same result was obtained after a restart with new initial conditions. Besides these
statistics hinting towards a successful optimisation, the result is only a local minima.
It seems like the solver increases the frame radii to reach higher altitudes. However it is
unclear why the frame below the rotor is so slim. One theory is, that the weight contribution
of the rotor, lifter and ground station are so much large, that the additional frame mass
due to high forces is not very important.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
39
==PAGE:46==
Compared to the base case, the power density was more than tripled while the power
output was increased by a factor of 7.6. So the design was certainly improved although
not in an intuitive way.
Figure 6.2: Optimisation result for the Daisy Kite base case
By setting nr = 3, the base case Daisy Kite can be turned into a Daisy Stack with 3 rotors.
Although this solution is most likely also just a local minima, the resulting design, seen
in figure 6.3, has increasing rotor radii for the higher rotors so that they operate at their
optimum tip speed ratio.
Figure 6.3: Optimised Daisy Stack with 3 rotors
6.3.2
MAR1
The MAR1 prototype has 80 TRPT sections. In order to compare it better with the daisy
design the cross-tethered helix design was optimised with the fixed parameters nR =
13, nf = 2, nt = 4, lb = 1 as well as Tl = 200.
The optimisation result was rerun with first order optimality values in the range of 10−10,
40
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:47==
giving some confidence in the success of the optimisation. When repeating the optimi-
sations with different initial conditions, the same result was achieved, suggesting that the
solution is global minima. The frame radii of the result are very close to its lower bound
of 0.1 m, forming a long and slim TRPT. as seen in figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Optimised MAR1 with 13 segments
The result cannot be compared to the initial MAR1 design, since the wind parameters
were changed from the someAWE Labs field test to the Daisy Kite field test conditions.
6.3.3
Pyramid
The Pyramid concept developed by Read, Tveide and Tulloch uses only only one TRPT
segment with triangular frames. The concept is not tested yet, but the physical limitations
can be described by the limitations of force ratio and length to radius ratio of the TRPT,
which was plotted in figure 4.6.
The Pyramid has only one TRPT segment, three tethers and no lifter kite, so the parame-
ters are set to: nR = 2, nf = nt = 3, Tl = 0. With a size limitation of the blade length set
to lb, ub = 10 m, the Pyramid design is optimised with respect to power density Pd. The
solver goes through 28 iterations, with 360 function calls ending with an optimality value
of 0.0044. This and the following optimisations were restarted from at least two different
sets of initial conditions.
The optimised design, reaches 12.4 kW power output with 4.3 m long blades an average
rotor radius of 20 m, 45 m long tethers and a ground station that is at least 6 m high.
With λ = 4.88, the rotor’s speed is greater than the optimum efficiency of the daisy design,
because the drag contribution from the TRPT is smaller and because the tip radius is much
bigger. This trend can also be seen in conventional wind turbines.
As seen in figure 6.5, the mass of the system is dominated by the weight of the blades,
however the ground station also plays a significant role due to the need for a tower.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.5: Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions
6.3.4
Maximising Cp, combined
The objective value in the optimisation problem can be changed to the systems coefficient
of performance Cp, combined. The constraints and parameters are left the same as in the
previous optimisation.
Cp, combined =
Pout
1
2 ρ cos(β) π R2
rot v3w
(6.5)
The resulting design keeps similar tether length and frame radii as figure 6.5, but reaches
the upper blade length limit of 10 m and has a power output of 57.4 kW. The Cp, combined
increased combined coefficient of performance of 0.25, comes at the cost of a significantly
reduced power density and power harvesting factor.
Figure 6.6: Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions
Although this design also has a 10 m high tower as ground station, the systems mass is
42
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:49==
absolutely dominated by the blades (see figure 6.7). At this point it becomes obvious, that
the density of a small blade made out of lightweight foam should not necessarily compared
to big hollow wings that could be made from carbon fibre composites.
6.3.5
Maximising ζ
The last optimisation was made with the power harvesting factor ζ as objective value.
ζ =
Pout
1
2ρAwingv3w
(6.6)
Again, the problem definition is changed while keeping the constraints of the previous
optimisations. This time non of the constraint limits are reached. The resulting maximised
ζ is maximised to 5.4, producing 22.7 kW with blades of ??? m length. The power density
is fairly high at 35 W/kg. The coefficient of performance is 0.16.
Figure 6.7: Optimisation results for the Pyramid design under base case wind conditions
6.3.6
Summary
A summary of the Base Cases and the optimisation results is given in section 6.3.6. All
optimisations
Table 6.1: Summary of Optimisation Results
Concept
Objective Value
Pout
Pd
ζ
Cp,comb
Cp,rotor
ηT RP T
Daisy
steady-state
168
16.1
3.31
0.23
0.3
0.79
Daisy
Pd
1282
52
4.8
0.18
0.27
0.68
Daisy, nR = 5
Pd
798
37
1.79
0.15
0.27
0.6
MAR1, vref = 10
steady-state
393
45
3.0
0.12
0.24
0.53
MAR1
Pd
405
85
2.66
0.23
0.29
0.84
Pyramid
Pd
11993
40
5.3
0.12
0.19
0.65
Pyramid
Cp,comb
57443
18.62
4.2
0.25
0.31
0.84
Pyramid
ζ
22716
35
5.4
0.16
0.23
0.73
As comparison, the highest measured power harvesting factor was ζ = 8 [9] for the Makani
design, which used a large wing with onboard generation. Large conventional wind tur-
bines have reached Cp,combined = 0.52 and an approximate ζ = 5.5 [9]. Therefore the
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
43
==PAGE:50==
prototypes as well as the optimised design perform worse than Makani power or conven-
tional wind turbines.
44
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:51==
7
Discussion
7.1
Limitations
It was shown, that with little adjustments, the proposed model can be used to analyse,
optimise and compare different RAWES concepts and designs. This could be used to
improve existing prototypes, or analyse completely new concepts. However, several lim-
itations apply to the steady-state model and the optimisation.
Most importantly, the model application is limited to RAWES with a continuous, looped
flight path with 1 < nr < 3 rotors. The TRPT and rotor must have a continuous axis of
rotation.
It is not possible to determine the best RAWES design or concept, as this would depend
greatly on the specific set of operating conditions. However, the analytical expressions for
tether drag and structural analysis suggest four key design principles to maximise power
output while minimising weight.
• Increase the rotors swept area and thereby the harvested power. This is achieved
primarily by increasing the rotor radius, but also by increasing the blade length.
• Keep the frame radii small in order to reduce the TRPT drag and the size of the
ground station.
• Minimising the directional changes of tethers coming in and out of the frame nodes.
This reduces the forces in tethers and frames and subsequently their required weight.
It was therefore surprising to see the first optimisation find solutions that do not follow
these principles. The risk of finding local minima is a big weakness of the current model.
When scaled by a factor k, the power output of RAWES increases proportional to their
area, as well as the wind speed cubed, which increases with respect to the shear exponent
such that Pout ∝k2+0.2·3. Mass however increases proportional to the cube of the scaling
factor m ∝k3. It is therefore to be expected, that the optimisation with respect to the
power density Pd = Pout/m is biased towards smaller models.
The fact, that the dimensions of the optimisation results do not tend towards zero, is due
to two factors. First, the lifter weight and minimum mass of the components (minimum
due to the lower bounds of the design values) form a a minimum system mass, similar
to fixed costs. Secondly, the lifter and ground station masses are set to increase linearly
with the scale. As the optimisations indicate, the optimised designs increase their power
production through higher elevation and bigger rotor radii, before this growth is limited by
the rapidly increasing blade mass.
It can be argued that the system mass and in extension the power density are somewhat
arbitrary since they depend heavily on assumptions made about the ground station and
lifter, as well as the material properties of frames, tethers and blades. When using the
model for specific design optimisations, these assumptions should be reviewed and when
necessary adapted.
The optimisation of the RAWES structure is based on various assumptions and limitations.
The most important of which, is the assumption of steady state, with the TRPT and rotor
being in a static equilibrium. This assumption neglects dynamic effects like turbulent wind
and internal vibrations.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
45
==PAGE:52==
The increased stress due to such dynamic effects is compensated in the steady-state
model by applying a safety factor to the to the cross-sectional areas of tether and frame.
However, the steady state model cannot detect if a certain operating point cannot be main-
tained due to dynamic effects and assumes constant ω and beta throughout the system.
When modeling the TRPT as a multi spring disc model, Tulloch found that the internal vi-
brations are not insignificant. The TRPT stiffness for example causes a positive feedback
loop in response to fluctuations in the wind, potentially leading to resonance [33].
The TRPT frames are assumed to rotate in parallel planes with a common axis of rotation.
In practice, the weight of its components causes the TRPT network to form a catenary
shape. This can creates cyclic slack in the rotating tethers, increase fatigue and will effect
the final elevation angle of the rotor. The effect is stronger for long TRPT networks and
can be minimised through lightweight materials and high axial tension.
In the structural analysis of the tether and frame components, centrifugal forces not in-
cluded. Instead the focus is on preventing buckling of frames due to high deformations.
Further, the tether and frame mass had relatively little impact on the total system mass.
This means that in practice the designs might rather be based on available material sizes.
7.2
Comparison to other Concepts
It is common that prototypes are build at different scales and tested at different wind
conditions, so the power output alone is not a good comparison. Metrics for the efficiency
like the Power Harvesting Factor ζ or the coefficient of performance Cp, combined provide
useful information, can however not show at what cost this efficiency is achieved. For
that, the LCOE would be the best metric, but the necessary data is location dependant
and often not available during early development phases.
For a reasonable comparison, different concepts have to be optimised for the same set of
external conditions and evaluated based on their resulting power density. Section 6.3.6
shows a list of different optimisations and their results, given the same wind shear profile.
It is difficult to identify a clear correlations between the the metrics for power output, power
density, coefficient of performance and power harvesting factor.
In terms of power density and combined efficiency the optimised MAR1 design outper-
forms the other results, except the pyramid design that was specifically optimised with
respect to Cp,comb. The designs perform not as good as conventional turbines. However
looking at the power output and efficiencies might not always be a fair comparison. A
modern 2 MW turbine has blades that weight around 11.3 tons [26] resulting in a power
density of 60 W/kg, without even counting the nacelle, tower and foundations are all added
to that. It was shown in this thesis, that RAWES can perform in that range as well.
46
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusions
The power output of the steady-state models for the Daisy Kite and MAR1 were compared
to experimental data. The modeled results show an error margin bellow 10 % which is
acceptable under field test conditions. The mass calculations resulting and power density
could not be compared as not all necessary data is reported for the respective prototypes.
The parametric analysis investigated the impact of several parameters and design vari-
ables on the power performance with respect to the Daisy Kite base case. It was shown
that for the given wind shear profile and the Daisy Kite length an angle of 23° yields the
highest output, however, this might change depending on the system size and shear ex-
ponent. When compared to the same rotor without yaw, the cosine losses amount for 8%
of the potential energy in the wind. Further, a helix shaped TRPT would have the highest
power output and power density, but with consideration to a fail safe design a 5-sided
polygon frame could be the best option for the Daisy Kite design.
The parameter study for power coefficient Cp over tip speed ratio λ, showed that the Daisy
Kite performs best at λ = 4.5. Using his spring disc model, Tulloch found a peak slightly
lower, at λ = 4.2 which is reasonably close, considering that he used a different airfoil
and pitch angle. In comparison, modern HAWT typically have design tip speed ratios of
6 < λ < 8 [tsr_BAKIRCI].
In conclusion, the proposed steady-state model and optimisation can be a useful tool
to find the best structural design for different RAWES concepts at specific rated wind
conditions. Depending on the preference, the optimisation can be used to maximise the
systems power density, coefficient of performance, or power harvesting factor.
If the model is used this way, the presumed parameters, like wind profile and material
properties should be reviewed and adapted to the respective conditions. Further, the
inherent limitations of the model must be considered as well as the possibility of identifying
local minima.
Optimisations can be a very effective tool for identifying high performance design config-
urations for RAWES. The optimisation should however never be the only design criteria,
as the optimisation can have biases and limitations and dynamic behaviour and safety
considerations are not captured in the steady-state analysis.
The results further show that it is possible to compare different RAWES concepts with
respect to their power density. Although power density is biased towards smaller systems,
it provides information that cannot be shown through coefficients of performance and
power harvesting factors alone. In the best case scenario, all three metric could be used
to quickly evaluate new ideas, or to rate the potential of different concepts.
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
47
==PAGE:54==
9
Further Work
9.0.1
Improvements to the steady-state model
The blades are modeled with uniform thickness and have only one attachment point in
their centre. To make the blade shape more realistic in future versions, the blades thick-
ness should correspond to the stresses in the material, thick in the center and thinner
at the sides, like the wings of a plane. Another option is to add bridle lines to distribute
the loads across the blade, or change the attachment position of the blade to the frame.
For greater efficiency, the blade shape could be further improved by including different
degrees of twist along the blade and by including cyclic pitch as done by someAWE Labs
[28].
W&I’s current focus is in Daisy Stacks, Daisy Kites with multiple rotors. Although such
stacks can be analysed and even optimised with the proposed model, the results can be
inaccurate due to wake formation. Therefore, the model could be expanded to include
skewed wake profiles of each rotor in order to increase the accuracy for daisy stack anal-
ysis.
For open center rotors with relatively small wings compared to the tip radius the Prandtl
model does not perform very well [27]. New approaches, like Shen’s tip loss model have
a lot of potential and should be further validated in combination with yaw correction.
The mass of the required material was used as a way to estimate the system cost. More
work could be done to find the material and installation cost. Also, by decoupling the
design wind speed from the actual wind speed, a specific design could be analysed at
a range of wind speeds. Given a wind speed distribution, the estimated annual power
production can be found. Knowing the annual power production and cost would give a
better approximation of the LCOE.
9.0.2
Research potential in RAWES
Dunker reported that the tether vibrations can contribute to the drag losses [10]. The im-
pact of these vibration based losses on RAWES with TRPT could be further investigated.
In general, the dynamic analysis of AWES in turbulent flow poses a major gap in current
research. This includes both time marching results along with eigen frequency analysis to
assess stability. Partially this is due less data about the flow properties at higher altitudes
is available [2].
The development of better dynamic models will also be beneficial for the further improve-
ment of effective control algorithms. Better control would increase the performance while
decreasing the risk of failure of the AWES.
48
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Weber et. al. Airborne Wind Energy. 2019. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy21osti/79992.pdf..
[2]
Cristina L. Archer. “An introduction to meteorology for airborne wind energy”. In:
Green Energy and Technology (2013). ISSN: 18653537. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-
39965-7_5.
[3]
Christof Beaupoil. Practical experiences with a torsion based rigid blade Rotary
Airborne Wind Energy System with ground based power generation. 2019.
[4]
Christof Beaupoil. Video - Team Tüddelpower knots a lot for some Airborne Wind
Energy. URL: https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = R81q6I1bKLc. (accessed:
24.06.2022).
[5]
Pierre Benhaïem and Roland Schmehl. Airborne wind energy conversion using a
rotating reel system. 2018. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-1947-0_22.
[6]
J. Bevirt. “Tether Sheaths and Aerodynamic Tether Assemblies”. In: US Patent
0,266,395 (2011).
[7]
W. J. Bootle. “Forces on an inclined circular cylinder in supercritical flow”. In: AIAA
Journal 9.3 (1971), pp. 514–516. DOI: 10.2514/3.6213.
[8]
Francesco Castellani et al. “The yawing behavior of horizontal-axiswind turbines: A
numerical and experimental analysis”. In: Machines 7 (1 2019). ISSN: 20751702.
DOI: 10.3390/machines7010015.
[9]
Moritz Diehl. “Airborne wind energy: Basic concepts and physical foundations”. In:
Green Energy and Technology (2013). ISSN: 18653537. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-
39965-7_1.
[10]
Storm Dunker. Tether and bridle line drag in airborne wind energy applications.
2018. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-1947-0_2.
[11]
Wind Europe. Wind energy in Europe - Statistics 2021. 2022.
[12]
S. F. Hoerner. Fluid-Dynamic Drag: Practical Information on Aerodynamic Drag and
Hydrodynamic Resistance. Brick Town, NJ, USA, 1965.
[13]
B. J. Jonkman R. R. Damiani R. E. Murray J. M. Jonkman G. J. Hayman. AeroDyn
v15 User’s Guide and Theory Manual. URL: www.nrel.gov/publications..
[14]
T. P. Jung. “Wind Tunnel Study of Drag of Various Rope Designs”. In: Proceedings
of the 27th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, San Antonio, TX, USA (June
2009). DOI: 10.2514/6.2009-3608.
[15]
Kitepower. Kitepower Falcon. URL: https://thekitepower.com/product/. (accessed:
25.02.2019).
[16]
F. Levett. “Airborne Wind Energy Systems - Discovering the optimal length of tether
to torque ratio”. In: University of Strathclyde (August 2020).
[17]
Liros. Rope Catalogue 2022/2023. URL: https://www.liros.com/userdata/files/
LIROS_rope_catalogue_2022_2023_eng_210_x_297_mm_low_res.pdf. (accessed:
20.06.2022).
[18]
M. L. Loyd. “Crosswind Kite Power, journal =”. In: ().
[19]
R. Lozano. Bladetips Energy. URL: https : / / www . f6s . com / bladetipsenergy. (ac-
cessed: 25.02.2019).
[20]
Performance Composites .Ltd. Mechanical Properties of Carbon Fibre Composite
Materials. URL: http://www.performance-composites.com/carbonfibre/mechanicalproperties_
2.asp. (accessed: 20.06.2022).
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
49
==PAGE:56==
[21]
Matlab. fmincon Interior Point Algorithm. URL: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/
optim/ug/constrained-nonlinear-optimization-algorithms.html#brnpd5f. (accessed:
20.06.2022).
[22]
D. Micallef et al. “Comparison and Validation of BEM and Free Wake Unsteady
Panel Model with the MEXICO Rotor Experiment”. In: Euromech Colloquium 508,
Wind Turbine Wakes (2009).
[23]
Daniel Micallef and Tonio Sant. A Review of Wind Turbine Yaw Aerodynamics. 2016.
DOI: 10.5772/63445.
[24]
R. Schmehl O. Tulloch. “AWEC 2019 - Book of Abstracts”. In: (). DOI: 10.4233/uuid:
57fd203c-e069-11e9-9fcb-441ea15f7c9c. URL: https://bitbucket.org/rschmehl/awec_
latex_boa.
[25]
Dale Pitt and David Peters. “Theoretical prediction of dynamic-in ow derivatives”.
In: Vertica 5 (Jan. 1981).
[26]
LM Wind Power. Product - 2 MW. URL: https://www.lmwindpower.com/en/products/
blade-types/1mw-to-2mw. (accessed: 20.06.2022).
[27]
Betz Prandtl. “Vier Abhandlungen zur Hydrodynamik und Aerodynamik”. In: Göt-
tinger Nachr. (1927), pp. 88–92.
[28]
A. Groce S. Thoms R. Schmehl L. Fagiano. 9th international Airborne Wind Energy
Conference (AWEC 2021): Book of Abstracts. 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4233/
uuid:696eb599-ab9a-4593-aedc-738eb14a90b3.
[29]
H. Rahimi et al. “Investigation of the current yaw engineering models for simulation
of wind turbines in BEM and comparison with CFD and experiment”. In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 753 (2 2016). ISSN: 17426596. DOI: 10.1088/1742-
6596/753/2/022016.
[30]
R. Read. Kite Networks for HarvestingWind Energy. Green Energy and Technology,
2018, pp. 515–537. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-1947-0_21. URL: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-981-10-1947-0_21.
[31]
Roderick Read. Windswept and Interesting. URL: https://windswept-and-interesting.
co.uk/. (accessed: 24.06.2022).
[32]
R. Schmehl. Airborne Wind Energy An introduction to an emerging technology.
URL: http://www.awesco.eu/awe-explained/. (accessed: 20.06.2022).
[33]
O. Tulloch. Modelling and Analysis of Rotary Airborne Wind Energy Systems-a
Tensile Rotary Power Transmission Design. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/351443078.
[34]
Roland Schmehl Uwe Ahrens Moritz Diehl. Airborne Wind Energy. Green Energy
and Technology. Springer, 2013. ISBN: 978-3-642-39964-0.
50
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
Detailed data on the optimisations as well as the used code for the steady-state system
are provided in a github repository which can be found under:
https://github.com/MScWacker/MSc-Thesis-Appendix.git
Structural optimisation of airborne wind energy systems with rotary transmission
51
