==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Modelling of reactive power and voltage 
control of hybrid power plants
Luis Larrosa Lopez
DTU Wind and Energy Systems-M-0537
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems M-0537
July 2022
Project period: 
January - Juny 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Kaushik Das
Poul E. Sørensen
Fatemeh Shahnazian
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Luis Larrosa Lopez
Title:
Modelling of reactive power and voltage control of 
hybrid power plants
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and  
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Renewable-based Hybrid Power Plants (HPP) present several advantages in front of
stand-alone power plants, such as higher capacity factor, better use of the transmission
and/or distribution networks or enhancement of flexibility and controllability of the
assets. However, they also present challenges, such as financial or legal uncertainty and
technical complexity.
In the last years, researchers worldwide have addressed the technical complexity of mod-
elling and controlling renewable-based Hybrid Power Plants (HPP) by developing dy-
namic models to understand the interaction of different assets and how to produce ef-
fective control architectures, with diverse purposes. Extensive effort has been dedicated
to active power controllability and frequency regulation, but little research had focused
on voltage control and reactive power so far.
In this context, the project develops a novel control architecture to coordinate wind
turbines, solar PV inverters, electric batteries and a STATCOM to deliver a fast reactive
power response to amend voltage imbalances in the power grid. The location of the
STATCOM is carefully chosen to maximize the reactive power capability of the HPP.
An On-Load Tap Changer (OLTC) transformer is implemented to connect the HPP to
the export line.
Three scenarios are used to explore how different degrees of ownership of the grid (OLTC
transformer and export line) impact the reactive power capability and voltage control
controllability. The model is implemented in MATLAB/Simulink using the Simscape
Electrical environment. The results show that the OLTC is a fundamental tool to en-
hance the reactive power capability of the assets and that the technologies used are quite
flexible in terms of voltage control, but a STATCOM with a capacity of around 8-12
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This Thesis has been possible thanks to the guidance and support of professors Kaushik
Das, Poul Sørensen and Anca Daniela Hansen. They have guided me since the very
beginning of the project, where I barely knew the concept of Hybrid Power Plant and
all their inherent benefits and challenges.
We all worked together in defining the objective and scope of the study, which was
actually one of the most challenging issues of the project, since I had some ideas which
needed to be shaped into something practical, interesting and exciting. They all were
there to assist me with this and whenever I needed help at later stages of the work.
I would like to dedicate a special mention to Kaushik, who has been very close to me
and gave me a hand at any time needed. I felt his support and confidence during the
whole development of the Thesis, which kept me motivated to spend time and effort in
producing a solid work.
I also need to thank my very close friend Diego Domenech, who has been supporting
and checking on me from time to time even if he lives abroad. Our discussions about
both professional and academic matters have also boosted my motivation on the work.
Lastly, I want to thank all my friends in Denmark: Vicente, Elvira, Jorge, Olivia and
Constantine, who have watched my sweat and tears for these last months and have been
so kind to care about me.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and Scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Contribution of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Assumptions and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Literature Review
13
2.1
Q-V interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Why should voltage and reactive power be controlled? . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Reactive power capability of converter-based power plants . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Reactive power capability of STATCOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
Modelling and Control of Hybrid Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6
Grid Code Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Modelling and Control
41
3.1
General Description and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2
Control architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3
Plant and Asset models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Results and Discussion
59
4.1
Validation of the HPP to meet Q-related requirements in the Danish Grid
Codes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2
Voltage control function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusion and future works
67
Bibliography
71
Thesis title
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Acronyms
Acronym
Meaning
aFRR
Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve
CAPEX
Capital Expenditures
CSP
Concentrated Solar Power
DEVEX
Development Expenditures
DSO
Distribution System Operator
EMS
Energy Management System
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission System Operators
EPC
Engineering, Procurement and Construction
EU
European Union
f
Frequency
F
Farad (unit for capacitance in the International System of Units)
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve (Primary Frequency Reserve)
FFR
Fast Frequency Response
FRT
Fault Ride-Through
GHG
Green House Gas
GSC
Grid-Side Converter
H
Henry (unit for inductance in the International System of Units)
HPP
Hybrid Power Plants
MPPT
Maximum Power Point Tracking
MSC
Machine-Side Converter
NREL
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
OLTC
On-Load Tap Changer
OPEX
Operation Expenditures
P
Active Power
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PF
Power Factor
PI
Proportional Integral (controller)
PIB
Plant Interconnection Bus
PoC
Point of Connection
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronym
Meaning
PPM
Power Park Modules
PV
Photo-Voltaic
Q
Reactive Power
RoCoF
Rate of change of frequency
RES
Renewable Energy sources
RfG
Requirements for Generators
S
Apparent power
SIL
Surge Impedance Load
SPP
Solar Power Plants
STATCOM
Static Synchronous Compensator
TSO
Transmission System Operator
V
Voltage
Var
Volt-Ampere Reactive
VRP
Voltage Reference Point
VRT
Voltage Ride-Through
WPP
Wind Power Plants
Ω
Ohm (unit for resistance in the International System of Units)
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Power systems are experiencing a deep transformation worldwide. One of the main as-
pects of such transformation is the diversity of power plants. Traditionally, electricity
was provided by few, large conventional generators that made use of fossil fuels such
as coal, gas or oil. However, these conventional plants are being replaced by multiple
distributed, renewable-based generators. This transformation is motivated by environ-
mental concerns, such as reducing the Green House Gas (GHG) emissions associated to
the energy sector; and economic interests, such as improving energy independence and
cutting the costs of electricity generation.
To illustrate this transition, Figure 1.1 exhibits the global annual investments in the
renewable electricity sector, categorized by technology.
It shows that annual global
investments in renewable electricity stabilized around $300 billion between 2014-2019,
of which approximately 95% were dedicated to wind and solar power.
Figure 1.1: Global annual renewable energy investments by technology, 2005-2019 [1]
. Taken from .
Thesis title
1
==PAGE:10==
To complement this idea, Figure 1.2 displays the new installed renewable and non-
renewable capacity (left axis) and the share of renewable capacity (right axis) between
2001-2020. The blue line proves how the share of renewables has been on the raise since
the beginning of the century.
Figure 1.2: Global annual renewable energy investments by technology, 2005-2019 [1]
The energy transition is not over yet, and more and more countries are incorporating
the installation of large renewable capacity in their strategic plans on the energy sector.
This is the case of most National Energy and Climate Plans in Europe, such the Italian
[2], Spanish [3], French [4] or German [5] ones, which are aligned with the European
Commission directives [6].
Other examples of supporting policies for Renewable Energy Sources (RES) are the
Australian Renewable Energy Regulations 2001 [7] or the American Energy Policy Act
[8].
In few words, all these plans include policy incentives for the construction and
operation of renewable-based power plants, which will keep enhancing the investments
in RES in these countries.
It seems clear then that most of the new capacity to be installed in the upcoming
years will be renewable-based, such as Wind (WPP) and Solar Power Plants (SPP).
These technologies are leading the transition thanks to their technical maturity and low
costs. However, high penetration of RES in power systems comes with several challenges,
especially with regards to power quality, reliability and stability.
Some of the main challenges are:
2
==PAGE:11==
• Decrease in system’s inertia due to the use of power converters, which decouple
the generator’s frequency from the grid’s frequency [9].
• Variability and uncertainty associated to Variable Renewable Energies (VRE),
such as wind and solar, increase the need for balancing services [10], and threaten
system’s stability.
• The reliability of power systems with high renewable penetration can be compro-
mised, especially in isolated systems such as islands. This creates a greater need
for storage to provide a reliable service [10].
In this context, Hybrid Power Plants (HPP) can contribute to the integration of RES
while addressing all their inherent challenges. But before talking about the benefits of
HPP, the definition and scope must be introduced.
1.1.1
Definition of Hybrid Power Plant
Since it is a relatively new trend in the fast-growing energy field, the concept of Hybrid
Power Plant (HPP) still needs standardization. Researchers and organizations make use
of this term to refer to power plants with different topologies and technologies involved.
To illustrate this lack of concordance, the definitions of two very prestigious research
organizations are presented below:
• ”Power-generating facility that converts primary energy into electrical energy and
which consists of more than one power-generating modules connected to a network
at one connection point.”. This is Wind Europe’s interpretation of HPP, as per
[11].
• ”Power plants that contain two or more energy generation sources such as wind
turbines, Photo-Voltaic (PV) solar, Concentrated Solar Power (CSP), geothermal
power, hydropower, biomass or even natural gas, oil, coal or nuclear power.” This
is the meaning of HPP for the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
as per [12].
When comparing both explanations, it is remarkable how Wind Europe includes one
important requisite which is missing in NREL’s definition: the connection of all the
assets to a single Point of Connection (PoC) with the grid . While for Wind Europe an
HPP needs to have all the individual assets connected to the same PoC, NREL considers
the possibility of having a virtual connection, by means of telecommunication systems.
HPPs with the former topology are also referred to as ”Co-located HPP”. Figure 1.3
depicts both configurations for comparison. In the remain of this report, Wind Europe’s
definition will be adopted when mentioning HPP.
1.1.2
Benefits and Challenges of Hybrid Power Plants
Several researchers have studied the motivations and drawbacks of HPP, and they have
provided valuable arguments to contemplate whether combining technologies can be
useful for owners and grid operators, and under which circumstances.
At first, it is
essential to consider that most of the relevant benefits derive from the possibility to install
3
==PAGE:12==
more power than the export capacity authorized by the Transmission System Operator
(TSO). This may come with a high cost, since overplanting1 can potentially lead to
energy curtailment, which becomes greater with higher degrees of oversize. However,
energy curtailment can be partially or fully avoided by selecting a good site, where the
RES to be utilized are negatively correlated2, and by properly sizing the HPP, which
is done by means of a complex optimization process, as described in [14]-[15]. After
considering this, the main advantages of HPP are listed below, as described in [11],[16]:
• Optimization of the use of the grid. The grid can achieve a higher degree
of utilization if larger capacity than the stipulated in the connection agreements
is installed. This optimizes the use of the grid and defers further investments in
reinforcements.
• Increased capacity factor. When combining negatively correlated resources and
overplanting, the overall capacity factor of the HPP is higher if compared with the
same installed capacity split in individual power plants.
• Lower costs in the PoC. Having less authorized export capacity than installed
capacity reduces the total costs associated to export permissions and infrastruc-
ture.
• Better use of the land. For certain configurations, combining several technolo-
gies can bring a more eﬀicient use of the land. For instance, in WPP there needs to
be long distances between each turbine where PV panels, inverters and batteries
could be placed.
• Synergies. Developers can harvest synergies within different stages of the projects,
leading to a reduction of Development (DEVEX) Capital (CAPEX), and Operation
(OPEX) Expenditures.
• Higher controllability and reduction of forecast error. When incorporating
batteries, HPP using Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) can correct deviation
between actual and committed generation due to errors in forecasting, enhancing
greater controllability. This opens the door to expanding business possibilities,
such as the participation on ancillary services, which could increase the market
value of the plant.
• Prevention of energy curtailment. Overplanting can be done not only in HPP,
but also in stand-alone power plants. However, in the latter case energy curtailment
can reach unacceptable levels. When making use of negatively correlated resources
and properly sizing the HPP energy curtailment can be very limited. This can
1Overplanting means installing larger capacity than stipulated in the connection agreement with
TSOs [13].
2Negative correlation of energy sources means that at times when one of the resources has potential
to produce large amounts of energy, the other one has limited potential, and vice versa. For example,
a site where the wind tends to blow faster at night normally shows a negative correlation between wind
and solar resources.
4
==PAGE:13==
be further improved by incorporating batteries that capture energy which would
otherwise be wasted in times of high generation.
Figure 1.3: Co-located vs virtually connected HPP. Own preparation.
However, HPPs present not only benefits in front of stand-alone power plants, but also
disadvantages, of which the most important are listed below based on [11].
• Suboptimal siting. The best site to harvest one type of resource does not nec-
essarily match the best site to harvest another, so trying to find a place where
both resources are negatively correlated may lead to the selection of suboptimal
locations.
• Financial/legal uncertainty. Since most Grid Codes and relevant legislation
do not include special terms for HPPs yet, specific requirements and benefits to
HPPs can be more complex to achieve than those of individual technologies. In
many cases, the requirements to HPPs are the same that those applied to the
technologies combined [17].
• Reduced battery’s ability to provide maximum value. If placed together
with other assets, the HPP owners may want to restrict the usage of the batteries
to maximize their own benefits, which may not be aligned with the needs of the
power system. Therefore, there may be a suboptimal use of the batteries from the
5
==PAGE:14==
whole grid’s perspective3.
• Technical complexity. Combining different technologies increases the diﬀiculty
in optimizing the sizing and operation of HPPs. Particularly, the various control
systems of the plant become more complex and need a special attention. Herein
lies the main focus of this study (as justified below).
Contemplating all the considerations above, it seems reasonable that a greater demand
for HPPs appears, at least in regions with weaker grids. Some good examples of this
are India and Australia, where the Grid Codes have pretty demanding requirements
for power plants, thus enhancing the advantages of HPPs versus stand-alone technolo-
gies. Another critical advantage for weak power grids is the better utilization of the
grid infrastructure and the consequent deferral of investments in transmission and dis-
tribution systems. Perhaps this last reason motivated the publication of hybrid-specific
policy schemes in India [11]. On the other hand, regions with high differences in power
prices within the same day, such as California, are witnessing a large amount of hybrid
projects in development and construction phases [16]. This should in principle flatten
the so-called ”duck-curve”4, motivated by high renewable penetration in the state of
California.
Nevertheless, as explained above, there are still challenges to be faced by HPP developers
and owners. Particularly, in the field of modelling and control of the plant, there has
been extensive effort to develop advanced control systems for frequency support (these
will be referenced in the Literature Review), but little to none attention has been placed
in voltage and reactive power controllability. Thus, this study will humbly contribute to
lay the groundwork of coordinated voltage control of HPP.
1.1.3
Challenges in voltage control and reactive power management
Unlike in the case of frequency - active power control loop, the voltage - reactive power
control loop has a local character which is of great relevance. When there is an imbalance
in a power system’s frequency with respect to its nominal value, all generators within
the synchronous system can contribute to restore the frequency by adjusting their active
power generation accordingly. If the frequency is below its nominal value the generators
will increase active power output, and they would reduce it in the opposite case5.
However, this is not the case when there is a deviation of voltage with respect to its
nominal value, since only nearby generators and reactive power sources will respond to
3Although this risk could be mitigated if appropriate requirements and rules are specified in the
relevant Grid Codes.
4This refers to the residual load curve in regions with high renewable penetration (particularly solar
energy). When subtracting VRE generation from total demand along a day’s load curve, the resulting
curve has a ”duck shape”, given by high demand in the evening which contrasts with low/zero generation
from solar assets
5This is a simplification of how power flows and frequency control are managed in reality. In real life
operation, TSOs need to consider specific aspects of the grid topology and state, such as the loading of
transmission lines. Besides, delivering active power from long distances increases the power losses in the
grid.
6
==PAGE:15==
the imbalance. There are at least two fundamental reasons why voltage imbalances are
handled using local resources. First, when the loading of a transmission line increases,
its own reactive power consumption increases as well. So if reactive power is sent from
a remote power plant, an important part of it will be consumed by the lines connecting
the plant with the receiving bus. It is therefore preferable to have reactive power de-
vices (such as shunt capacitors or shunt reactors) distributed among the grid to manage
reactive power flows on a local basis.
Second, the interaction between reactive power flow and voltage in a bus imposes another
constraint to the delivery of reactive power from a remote power plant. When there is a
voltage drop in a particular bus, all nearby buses will experiment a certain voltage drop
too, until the reactive power generated on-site increases and brings all voltages back
to their nominal values. However, if trying to supply this missing reactive power from
a far bus, all the buses in between will experiment an increase in their voltage level.
This is generally not an issue if the voltages in the buses are below 1 pu but it can be
problematic for buses in the way which have normal voltage values.
This problem is exemplified in Figure 1.4, where bus L3 has a low voltage which needs
to be brought back to 1 pu by injecting reactive power.
The initial situation (left)
depicts voltage levels across the grid with no voltage control, the second image depicts an
hypothetical situation if the remote generator supplies a large amount of reactive power
to increase the voltage in bus L3, and the last image (right) shows another hypothetical
situation where the reactive power is supplied within the own bus L3. The voltage levels
profile in the third situation is ideal, while injecting reactive power from a long distance
generates over-voltages in some buses in the way.
Figure 1.4: Voltage profiles in a grid with reactive power supplied from remote generator
vs from on-site capacitor bank. Own preparation.
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.5: Single line diagram of Hornsea One Offshore WPP and export system.
Adapted from [18].
This problem is well-known, and many authors have published different methodologies
to address the issue by using an optimal reactive power dispatch algorithm, as explained
in [19, 20, 21]. These papers address the management of reactive power flows from a
transmission or distribution line operator view. On the other hand, extensive research
has been dedicated to find the optimal location for reactive power resources such as
Static Synchronous Compensators (STATCOMs) in the grid [22, 23].
However, the optimal location of reactive power sinks and sources is also of great rele-
vance to plant owners and operators. As depicted in [18], several reactors, STATCOMs
and other devices might need to be installed in the plant to enhance voltage stability
and reactive power capability. Figure 1.5 exemplifies this complexity. It represents the
electric diagram of Hornsea One offshore wind park, which is located off the Yorkshire
coast.
The optimal placement of support devices such as STATCOMs or shunt capacitors can
enhance the reactive power capability of a plant while minimizing the CAPEX. On the
other hand, power plants with upgraded reactive power capability may have a better
market value in front of other assets if new market products are designed for voltage
control services, as the UK’s TSO National Grid suggests in [24].
In this context, the optimal location of a STATCOM in the HPP will be also a matter
8
==PAGE:17==
of study in the project, as it is commented in Chapter 3.
The interaction of reactive power and voltage is addressed in Section 2.1 while the reasons
to control voltage and reactive power flows are explained in Section 2.2.
1.2
Objectives and Scope of the project
This work studies the interaction and coordination of the different assets in a co-located
HPP to produce a combined response against voltage deviations in the power system,
through the management of reactive power exchange with the grid. The competence of
the HPP in providing such service will be tested by comparison with the Danish Grid
codes, as described in [25].
To achieve such a coordinated response, a novel control architecture needs to be de-
veloped, to account for each plant’s reactive power capability and distribute power set-
points accordingly. Furthermore, the addition of ancillary devices to support voltage
control, such as STATCOM and transformers equipped with On-Load Tap Changers
(OLTC) will be analyzed and included in the control architecture. The sizing of the
STATCOM will be based on achieving enough reactive power capability to meet the
Danish Grid Codes.
Lastly, the impact of different degrees of ownership of the grid on the HPP’s reactive
power capability will be studied too. In principle, owning part of the export lines reduces
the capability of the plant, as more reactances and resistances are to be considered, but
this also opens the door to installing a STATCOM closer to the Point of Common
Coupling (PCC), which should enhance voltage controllability over such bus.
The objectives of the project can be summarized as follows:
• To develop a novel reactive power control architecture to produce a coordinated
response against voltage imbalances in the grid. The architecture should be suit-
able to work in two different control modes: Specific Reactive Power Control and
Voltage Control.
• To study the interaction of the different assets in the HPP, from the point of
view of voltage control and reactive power management.
The list of assets of
interest includes a) Wind Power Plant, b) Solar Power Plant, c) Battery Energy
Storage System, d) Static Synchronous Compensator and e) On-Load Tap Changer
Transformer.
• To assess the aptitude of the HPP as a voltage control service provider, using the
Danish Grid Codes as reference.
• To study how the addition of ancillary devices enhances reactive power and voltage
controllability in an HPP.
• To evaluate how much additional reactive power capacity is needed to meet the
Danish Grid Codes (if any).
9
==PAGE:18==
• To analyze the impact of the ownership of the line and the location of reactive
power sources on the plant’s capability.
1.3
Contribution of this study
The main contributions of this project are listed below:
• State of the Art of HPP. A brief summary of the concept, advantages and
challenges of HPP is provided already in this introduction, in Subsections 1.1.1
and 1.1.2.
• Background of Q-V Interaction. Section 2.1 provides a comprehensive the-
oretical background to understand the interaction between reactive power and
voltage, which is harder to understand than the interaction between active power
and frequency. The reasons for the need to control voltage and reactive power
flows are also provided in 2.2.
• Reactive Power Capability. Section 2.3 explains how to obtain the reactive
power capability curve of converter-based technologies, such as Type 4 Wind Tur-
bines or solar PV inverters.
• Modelling of HPP. Section 2.5 provides an overview of the State of the Art of
HPP modelling and control, with various references to other studies that focus on
this topic.
• Analysis of Grid Code Requirements. Section 2.6.3 interprets the specifica-
tions of the Danish Grid Codes regarding voltage control and reactive power for
power plants.
• Novel control architecture for V and Q control in HPPs. The core of this
project is the development and verification of a control system that makes use of
all the assets in an HPP to produce a coordinated response in front of voltage
imbalances in the grid. The model for the HPP and the control architecture is
developed in MATLAB/Simulink.
– The control architecture covers the Asset, Plant and HPP control levels.
– Two control functions are implemented: Specific Reactive Power control and
Voltage control.
– An external grid is modelled and integrated with the HPP model.
– Different degrees of ownership of the HPP transformer and export line are
studied by using 3 different scenarios.
– A simple methodology to size the capacity of a STATCOM is implemented by
comparison with the Danish Grid Codes. The methodology uses the dynamic
model developed.
10
==PAGE:19==
1.4
Assumptions and Limitations
The assumptions considered in the development of the study and their limitations are
presented as follows:
• The reactive power capability of wind turbines Type 4, solar PV inverters, electrical
batteries and STATCOMs can be obtained in a similar way, by using a voltage
limitation constraint and a current limitation constraint. This is because all these
technologies are based in power converters, whose capacity and limitations define
the reactive power capability of the specific device.
• For simplicity, all wind turbines are assumed to produce the same amount of active
and reactive power, and the same applies to all the solar PV panels. This neglects
the spatial variations of wind speed and solar irradiation, as well as other significant
differences (shadows, wake effect, etc.).
• The variability and uncertainty of wind speed and solar irradiance are neglected
in this study.
The simulations are conducted for short periods of time (up to
few seconds), so that wind speed and solar irradiance are considered constant. In
real operation, it is well known that oscillations in these natural resources can be
captured by the wind turbines and solar PV panels, disrupting the active power
generation and, therefore, the room for reactive power exchange with the grid (in
other words, the reactive power capability).
• In the absence of specific Technical Regulations with requirements for HPP within
the Grid Codes, the reactive power capability of the HPP is compared against the
Danish Technical Regulations for Power Park Modules (PPM). More specifically,
the Technical Regulation for Electrical Energy Storage Facilities, as specified in [26]
is used as reference. This is done because ”storage plants have the same functional
requirements as power park modules, so the requirements are principally the same
[for all the technologies involved in the plant]”6.
1.5
Thesis Structure
The remaining part of this report is organized as indicated below:
• Chapter 2 presents the literature review. It provides the necessary theoretical back-
ground to understand the interaction between reactive power and voltage control
and the need for controlling both. It also presents a methodology to calculate
reactive power capability of selected technologies and the State of the Art of HPP
modelling and control.
• Chapter 3 elaborates on the approach used for the modelling and control of the
HPP. All the asset and plant models are explained together with the control ar-
chitecture. The 3 scenarios used are also explained here highlighting the modelling
and control differences from one to another.
6M. Andersen (Energinet), personal communication (e-mail), June 20, 2022.
11
==PAGE:20==
• Chapter 4 presents all the results, sensitivity analysis and discussion
• Finally, Chapter 5 concludes and proposes ideas for future related works
12
==PAGE:21==
2
Literature Review
2.1
Q-V interaction
This section is entirely based on Chapters 3.2 and 3.3 of [27] and the Appendix of [28].
The aim is to explain in a brief, conceptual way the interaction between reactive power
and voltage, with a focus on inductors, capacitors and synchronous generators.
In Alternating Current (AC) systems, Reactive power (Q) is the component of complex
power that oscillates back and forth through the lines and is exchanged between electric
and magnetic fields, not getting dissipated. It is measured in Volt-Ampere Reactive
(VAr). The need for managing reactive power is explained in Section 2.2. Active power
(P) is the term used to refer to the ”useful” energy that a generator is producing, or a
load is consuming. It is the part of the total power that is effectively transformed into
another type of energy, such as calorific or mechanical energy. It is measured in Watts
(W). Finally, the vector summation of these two gives the apparent power (S), so the
module of S can be obtained as follows:
S =
p
P 2 + Q2
(2.1)
Power Factor (PF) is a measure of the amount of ”useful” energy that a generator is
delivering, or a load is consuming. It expresses how much active power is being produced
or consumed, as compared with total apparent power. It is linked to the phase difference
between current and voltage (ϕ). The large phase difference there is between voltage
and current, the more reactive power is being exchanged, and the less active power is
being transmitted with respect to apparent power:
PF = P
S = cos(ϕ)
(2.2)
2.1.1
Inductors and Capacitors
Inductors
The behavior of an inductor or solenoid is linked to the magnetic field induced by any
electric current flowing through it. When placed in an AC circuit, this magnetic field
varies with time in a similar way that the current flowing through the cable, i.e., sinu-
soidally. At the same time, this variable magnetic field induces a second current in the
inductor which opposes to the main current, and whose value depends on the rate of
change of the magnetic flux1. In other words, the inductor shows an inhibiting effect on
a change in the current flow which results in a delay or phase shift of the current with
1As per Faraday’s Law of Induction, mathematically expressed as: ϵ = −dθ/dt where ϵ is the electro-
motive force and θ is the magnetic flux
Thesis title
13
==PAGE:22==
respect to voltage. An ideal inductor produces a delay of the current with respect to
voltage of 90°. This is commonly referred as a lagging current. Lagging and leading cur-
rents are represented in Figure 2.1 together with voltage, in both temporal2 and phasor
representations.
Figure 2.1: Leading and Lagging current vs Voltage. Own elaboration.
Figure 2.2: Voltage, current, magnetic field and stored energy in an inductor. Adapted
from [28].
2Considering a frequency of 50 Hz
14
==PAGE:23==
Another way to look at this is by understanding that an inductor is actually storing and
releasing energy continuously on its magnetic field. Figure 2.2 illustrates this idea by
representing the voltage, current, magnetic field, power and energy stored in an ideal
inductor connected to a voltage source. When the voltage is at its maximum, current
starts to build in the inductor (point A) and stores energy in the magnetic field. When
voltage reverses (Point B), the current is still flowing to the inductor because of the
energy stored in the magnetic field, which is weakened as it releases it. Lastly, in Point
C, current, magnetic field and energy stored become zero, and the current and magnetic
field start building in the opposite direction driven by the negative voltage.
Capacitors
A capacitor consists of two conducting surfaces facing each other and separated by a
small gap. The plates can carry an electric charge, which generates an electric field in
the capacitor. A capacitor stores and releases energy by means of its electric field in
a similar way that inductors do in their magnetic field. It is commonly said that AC
”can get across the capacitor”. The impulses that electrons transmit to each other get
through the gap thanks to this electric field (provided the voltage keeps changing), so
current can flow through the gap in AC.
Figure 2.3: Voltage, current, electric field and stored energy in a capacitor. Own elabo-
ration based on [28]
The value of the current flow is proportional to the rate of change of the electric field
(and, therefore, to the rate of change of voltage). An ideal capacitor connected to a
voltage source makes the current lead voltage, and the energy is stored and released
just like in an inductor, but at opposite intervals. This can be observed by looking at
Figures 2.2 and 2.3. Both share the voltage source (red line), but the current, power,
electric/magnetic fields and stored energy are shifted. It is easy to appreciate that power
flows from the voltage source to the inductor in the interval A to B, and then gets back
to the voltage source from B to C. In the capacitor, power flows to the voltage source
15
==PAGE:24==
in the interval A to B, and gets back to the capacitor from B to C. This fashion repeats
for the rest of the cycle in both cases.
Voltage Drop
Overall, both elements have a very similar behavior in the presence of an AC voltage
source, but it is shifted in time. When one of them is storing energy, the other one is
releasing it. This is extremely useful, because it allows to use one of them to cancel
the other, as explained in Section 2.2. By convention, inductors are often referred to
as reactive power sinks and capacitors are referred to as reactive power sources (even if
there is no net ”consumption” or ”production” of reactive power).
Voltage drop results from the interaction of the current being transmitted through
impedances in the lines (resistances, inductances and capacitances).
It is expressed
by Equation 2.3, where:
• XL is the line’s inductive reactance
• XC is the line’s capacitive reactance
• R is the line’s resistance
• Vdrop is the voltage drop across the line
• I is the current flowing through the line, expressed in phasor quantity
Vdrop = I ∗(R + j(XL −XC))
(2.3)
To understand the impact of reactances and capacitors on voltage drop, Figure 2.4
illustrates the phasor diagrams of the voltage at the beginning (UA) and end of the line
(UB) together with current supplied to the load (Iload), and the voltage drops in a purely
inductive line (UL,line) and purely capacitive line (UC,line).
If taking UB as the reference voltage and placing a certain Iload, the voltage drop over
the line can be drawn as a phasor that is perpendicular to the current and begins at the
end of the phasor UB. Its module would depend on the line impedance and the current
value (as described in Equation 2.3). The figure shows how, for an inductive load, the
voltage drop is larger with an inductive line, while the capacitive line can even have a
negative voltage drop. This means that the voltage at the end of the is higher than at
the beginning, and is depicted on the right hand side of the figure.
Generally speaking, power systems have an inductive character since most of the devices
in the grid (generators, transformers, overhead lines, motors...) contain or behave as
inductors, so capacitor banks are often used to compensate this inductive behavior, bring
the PF closer to 1 and reduce voltage drop. With landed cables, though, a capacitive
effect is more common due to the proximity of cables and ground, so reactances may be
needed to avoid overvoltages.
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4: Voltage drop across an inductive (left) and capacitive (right) line, given an
inductive load. Own elaboration.
2.1.2
Synchronous Generators
This section is based on Chapter 4.3 of [27].
The relation between reactive power produced by generators and voltage is not as intu-
itive as the relation between active power and frequency. A first appreciation is that, by
increasing the Direct Current (DC) in the rotor (excitation current), there is an imme-
diate increase in the magnetic field in the rotor, and this in turn increases the voltage in
the stator. In other words, by modifying the excitation current in the rotor, the voltage
at the generator’s terminals is rapidly changed.
The voltage phasor in the stator is always lagging 90° with respect to the magnetic flux
phasor, while the position of the current phasor will depend on the nature of the load.
• If the current is in phase with the stator voltage, the load is resistive and the PF
is 1, so the generator does not supply or absorb reactive power.
• If the current is lagging the stator voltage, the load is inductive and the generator
needs to supply (act as a capacitor) reactive power. This is the common situation,
as loads tend to be inductive.
• If the current is leading the stator voltage, the load is capacitive and the generator
needs to absorb (act as a inductor) reactive power.
This situation can also be represented through the magnetic fields of rotor and stator.
Recall that a rotor in a synchronous machine is composed by a DC current that produces
a static magnetic field, which spins at the rotor speed. On the other hand, the three
phases in the stator generate a spinning magnetic field with a constant value, which
17
==PAGE:26==
spins at the grid’s frequency. In synchronism, both fields spin at the same time, but
they show a certain phase shift, which describes the behavior of the generator. The
”more perpendicular” these field are, the more torque is exchanged.
In the extreme
case, if these fields are parallel, there is no transmission of torque between rotor and
stator.
For analytic purposes, the stator field is sometimes represented as the sum of two separate
phenomena: one component is parallel to the rotor field and another is perpendicular.
The latter represents the transmission of torque between rotor and stator; the former
expresses and addition (leading power factor) or subtraction (lagging power factor) to
the stator field. This is represented in Figure 2.5.
When the power factor lags, the stator field weakens the rotor field and, therefore, the
voltage in the stator is reduced. This situation is considered a delivery of reactive power
from the generator. On the opposite case, when the power factor leads, the stator field
enhances the rotor field and, likewise, the voltage in the stator.
Figure 2.5: Magnetic field of rotor and stator in a synchronous generator supplying
power to an inductive load. Own elaboration based on [27].
2.2
Why should voltage and reactive power be controlled?
This section justifies the need for controlling voltage levels and reactive power flows
throughout the power grid. It is based on Chapter 1 of [28].
On AC power systems, voltage is mainly controlled through the management of reactive
power production and absorption. There are three main reasons why voltage and reactive
power need to be monitored and controlled:
1. Both consumers and generators are equipped with electrical and electronic devices
which are designed to work within certain voltage levels (typically with a margin of
±5% from the nominal value). If such devices work outside these limits, they may
18
==PAGE:27==
perform poorly. For instance, at low voltages bulbs provide less illumination and
electric motors demand higher current and can overheat and get damaged. With
too high voltages, the insulation of cables and other elements may be destroyed,
causing short circuits and potentially breaking the devices.
2. The presence of reactive power flowing through the grid is associated with ad-
ditional current, which incurs costs in the form of additional active power losses
due to Joule effect. Therefore, an optimal management of reactive power flow can
minimize these losses.
3. The fact that generators need to supply reactive power increases the capacity
requirements in both generators and lines3. An optimal strategy of reactive power
management can also prevent unnecessary investments in generator’s capacity.
Two additional considerations are worth mentioning here. First, the transmission and
distribution lines act themselves as reactive power sources or sinks, depending on the
load they are carrying. With very light loads (below the so-called Surge Impedance Load
[SIL]) the lines behave as a capacitor, thus delivering reactive power. On the other hand,
when carrying high loads (above SIL) the lines behave as an inductor, thus absorbing
reactive power.
Second, similarly to the frequency-active power loop (P/f) of a power system, where all
generators increase or decrease their active power generation after there is a frequency
event in the grid, in the voltage-reactive power loop (Q/V) all generators (and other
components) in a particular zone act to amend an imbalance of reactive power. This
prevents the voltage in some buses from collapsing when there has been an important
event (e.g., the loss of a large generator).
Nonetheless, P/f and Q/V loops also have dissimilarities which need to be considered.
Two critical differences to bare in mind are as follows:
• Frequency is a ”global” variable, meaning that following an event in any point
of the grid (for instance, a sudden load increase) frequency will change in all the
system, and the power loss shall be also compensated from any point of the grid.
However, voltage is a ”local” variable, meaning that when there is a voltage drop
in a particular bus of the system, only nearby generators can solve the problem by
injecting more reactive power.
• The generation of real power requires the conversion from other energy source,
which can be chemical, mechanical, calorific, etc. However, the absorption/gen-
eration of reactive power does not need for any kind of ”fuel” to be consumed.
As a matter of example, a PV inverter will only produce active power if the solar
modules attached are being hit by solar irradiation, but this is irrelevant for the
reactive power it consumes/delivers.
3As it is explained in Section 2.3, the delivery/absorption of reactive power by generators diminishes
the room for active power generation
19
==PAGE:28==
2.3
Reactive power capability of converter-based power
plants
Electrical machines have certain limitations with respect to the current and voltage
they can stand. This imposes constraints on the active and reactive power exchanged
between generator and grid to preserve its integrity under normal operating conditions.
If these constraints were not respected, the machine would be subjected to overloading
or overvoltage, which can destroy the insulating material on the generator and lead to
a short circuit [27].
The reactive power capability curve of a generator represents how much reactive power
it can exchange with the grid depending on the active power that it is producing. This
is commonly depicted as a closed area in a P-Q plot, where P is represented in the x-axis
and Q in the y-axis. This area is typically the result of the interaction of several curves,
each of which symbolizes a particular constraint of the machine.
Figure 2.6: Reactive power capability curve of a synchronous generator. Own prepara-
tion based on [29] and [30]
The constraints are technology-dependent, so a PV inverter and a synchronous generator
have different capability curves. As a matter of example, a traditional synchronous ma-
20
==PAGE:29==
chine4 has three main constraints: armature (stator) current limit, field (rotor) current
limit and end region limit. An example of capability curve for a synchronous machine
is depicted in Figure 2.6, [29] and [30].
Fortunately, the reactive power capability of converter-based technologies, such as wind
turbines, PV inverters and batteries is very similar, since the limitations come from the
maximum value of current and voltage that the power converters can stand before expe-
riencing overload/overvoltage. This idea is depicted in [31] in the form of reactive power
capability curves and it is supported by [32] and [33], which use a similar methodology
to characterize the reactive power capability of wind turbines Type 4 and PV inverters,
respectively. Therefore, this chapter will derive the reactive power capability of a wind
turbine and a complete WPP, to then generalize the process for the SPP and BESS.
2.3.1
Reactive power capability of wind turbine and WPP
This section is based on [32]. Figure 2.7 depicts a diagram of a wind turbine Type 4 and
its connection with the rest of the WPP through the collection system. According to [34],
wind turbines Type 4 include a pair of back-to-back converters that fully decouple the
generator from the grid’s frequency, allowing for variable rotational speed in the turbine,
while P and Q can be controlled separately.
Normally, the Machine-Side Converter
(MSC) controls P and the AC voltage at the generator terminals, while the Grid-Side
Converter (GSC) controls Q and the voltage at the DC link between both converters.
Figure 2.7: Diagram of a Wind Turbine Generator (WTG) connected to a WPP’s col-
lection system. Own preparation.
The GSC is connected to a transformer to raise the voltage level (typically from 690 V to
11/33 kV) through a short cable and a filter with certain impedances. The transformer
is then connected to the collection system of the WPP, where the power coming from
all the turbines is gathered and sent to the grid. In the figure, Zfilter represents the
impedances of the filter and Zcables the impedance of the cables connecting the GSC
with the transformer, whose impedance is Ztrafo. Lastly, Zcoll represents the impedance
of all the cables and/or lines that connect the turbine with the collection system of the
WPP.
Considering Figure 2.7, to assess the reactive power capability of a wind turbine at the
4Like the ones used in gas-fired or hydro power plants
21
==PAGE:30==
high-voltage side of the transformer (point Coll in the diagram), all the impedances
between the GSC (point C of ”Converter”, in the diagram) and the high-voltage side of
the transformer need to be considered. In all the equations below, ZWT represents the
sum of Zfilter, Zline and Ztrafo. There are two main limitations for the reactive power
capability of a wind turbine Type 4, as well as other generators that rely on power
converters. The equations describing both limitations are introduced below.
Voltage limitation
The active and reactive power flowing to the collection system (measured at the high-
voltage side of the transformer) can be expressed as follows (letters in bold indicate a
phasor quantity):
Pcoll + jQcoll = Vcoll ∗I∗
coll
(2.4)
The current flowing to the collection system is:
Icoll = Vcoll −VC
ZWT
(2.5)
Equation 2.6 is obtained by replacing Icoll in Equation 2.4 with the right-hand side of
Equation 2.5.
Pcoll + jQcoll = Vcoll
Vcoll −VC
ZWT
∗
(2.6)
After separating in real and imaginary parts and performing several mathematical ma-
nipulations and rearrangements (for full mathematical demonstration see [32]), the con-
straint for reactive power of a wind turbine based on converter voltage limitation is given
in Equation 2.7 below. Notice that after the mathematical rearrangements no phasors
are present in the equation anymore, but only scalar quantities which are typically ex-
pressed in pu:
QV =
v
u
u
u
t


VcollVC
q
R2
WT + X2
WT


2
−

P + V 2
collRWT
R2
WT X2
WT
2
−
V 2
collXWT
R2
WT + X2
WT
(2.7)
This Equation provides the voltage limitations for the injection (QV,inj) and absorption
(QV,abs) of reactive power when VC is replaced by the maximum (VC,max) and minimum
(VC,min) allowable converter voltages, respectively.
It must be noticed here that, for a certain VC,max, the maximum value of Q that can
be exported is limited by the value of Vcoll. This can be observed in Equation 2.7 since
V 2
coll is subtracting both from inside and outside of the square root. So, the larger Vcoll,
the less Q can be injected by the wind turbine.
22
==PAGE:31==
Equation 2.8 provides a better picture of this idea5. This equation calculates the amount
of reactive power exchanged between two buses separated by a purely inductive line,
where US is the voltage of the Sending bus and UR is the voltage of the Receiving bus.
Considering that cos(δ) ≤1, the flow of reactive power from bus S to bus R will happen
only if US is larger than UR. Following this reasoning, the Q absorption capability for a
given VC,min is also limited with low values of Vcoll.
QS→R = US ∗UR ∗cos(δ) −U2
R
Xline
(2.8)
Current limitation
The rated apparent power at the high-voltage side of the generator is given by 2.9, where
ICmax represents the maximum allowable current of the GSC.
P 2 + Q2 = S2 = (VcollICmax)2
(2.9)
This can be rearranged to obtain the current limitation for the injection and absorption
of Q:
QI = ±
p
(VcollICmax)2 −P 2
(2.10)
The positive root provides the current limitation for the injection of reactive power
(QI,inj) while the negative root provides the limitation for the absorption of reactive
power (QI,abs).
Reactive power capability of wind turbine Type 4
Finally, the capability of reactive power injection and absorption of a wind turbine Type
4 given a certain level of P is provided by the minimum and maximum values of the
correspondent voltage and current limitations (respectively), as expressed below:
Qinj,max,WT = min(QV,inj, QI,inj)
Qabs,max,WT = max(QV,abs, QI,abs)
It is important to note here that the reactive power capability could have been char-
acterized at any point of the diagram, by using the correspondent voltage and all the
impedances between the GSC and the point of choice.
Using data displayed in Table 2.1 in Equations 2.7 and 2.10, the reactive power capability
curve of a wind turbine Type 4 can be easily obtained, as depicted in Figure 2.8. As
indicated in the table, the curve corresponds to a voltage level in the collection system
(Vcoll) of 0.95pu. For higher voltages the curves are moved down, so the injection capacity
is reduced and the absorption capacity is increased.
5This Equation is not part of the Q capability of a wind turbine, but it can be applied to any two
buses separated by an inductive line. The equation is presented just for clarification purposes.
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 2.1: Parameters of the WT for Q capability calculation [32]
Parameter
Value (pu)
RWT
0.0084
XWT
0.135
VCmax
1.1
VCmin
0.8
Vcoll
0.95
ICmax
1.25
Figure 2.8: Reactive power capability of a WT Type 4. Own preparation based on [32]
Reactive power capability of WPP
Recall Figure 2.7. To calculate the reactive power capability of a wind turbine in the
point Coll all the impedances between the GSC and that point had been considered.
Now, to calculate the capability of a whole WPP, Equations 2.7 and 2.10 can be applied
again, but using the new impedance ZWPP which includes the resistance and reactance
of the collection system.
ZWPP is the equivalent impedance of the whole collection
system, and it can be calculated for every particular topology using the methodology
proposed in [35].
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.9: Generic diagram of a WPP connected to the main HPP transformer. Own
preparation.
Table 2.2: Parameters of the WPP for Q capability calculation [32]
Parameter
Value (pu)
RWPP
0.02
XWPP
0.136
VCmax
1.1
VCmin
0.8
VHPP
0.9
BWPP
0.021
ICmax
1.25
Same as before, the capability of reactive power injection and absorption of the WPP is
given by the minimum and maximum values of the correspondent voltage and current
limitation (Equations 2.11 and 2.12 respectively), plus an additional term that accounts
for the reactive power injection of the capacitive cables in the collection system:
QV,WPP =
v
u
u
u
t


VHPP VC
q
R2
WPP + X2
WPP


2
−

P + V 2
HPP RWPP
R2
WPP X2
WPP
2
−
V 2
HPP XWPP
R2
WPP + X2
WPP
(2.11)
QI,WPP = ±
p
(VHPP ICmax)2 −P 2
(2.12)
25
==PAGE:34==
Qinj,max,WPP = min(QV,WPP,inj, QI,WPP,inj) + BWPP VHPP
Qabs,max,WPP = max(QV,WPP,abs, QI,WPP,abs) + BWPP VHPP
Using Equations 2.11 and 2.12 and data provided in Table 2.2 (taken from [32]), the
reactive power capability of a WPP can be obtained, as depicted in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Reactive power capability of a WPP. Own preparation based on [32]
As it is depicted in [31], and aligned with [33] and [26], the reactive power capability of
a PV inverter and a battery are obtained in a very similar way to that of a wind turbine
Type 4, and the same applies to a whole SPP and BESS if compared with a WPP.
2.4
Reactive power capability of STATCOM
A Static Synchronous Compensator (STATCOM) is a reactive power support device typ-
ically used in power plants to enhance the Q capability of the plant, or in selected buses
of a distribution or transmission system, to enable voltage controllability along the grid.
It consists of a Voltage Source Converter (VSC) with a DC-link, a coupling reactance
and a coupling transformer. Generally, there are two controllers in a STATCOM: one to
control the reactive power exchange with the grid, and another to control the DC-link
voltage [36]. Figure 2.11 illustrates the main components of a STATCOM.
26
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.11: Overview of STATCOM’s main components. [36]
The Q capability of the STATCOM is obtained in a similar way as in the WPP, SPP and
BESS cases (since the STATCOM is also limited by its converter capabilities), however
the STATCOM does not produce any P, so Equations 2.12 and 2.11 are simplified as
follows:
QV,STAT = (VC −VHV,STAT ) ∗VHV,STAT
XSTAT
(2.13)
QI,STAT = ±IC,max ∗VHV,STAT
(2.14)
These equations represent the voltage and current constraints given by the STATCOM’s
converter limits. The limits to the injection capability are obtained by replacing VC with
VC,max in Equation 2.13 and taking the positive value in Equation 2.14. The limits to
the absorption capability are obtained by replacing VC with VC,min in Equation 2.13 and
taking the negative value in Equation 2.14.
So, the injection and absorption capability are expressed as follows:
Qinj,max,STAT = min(QV,inj, QI,inj)
Qabs,max,STAT = max(QV,abs, QI,abs)
27
==PAGE:36==
2.5
Modelling and Control of Hybrid Power Plant
Following the development of the first HPPs, various researchers worldwide have pro-
duced dynamic models and control architectures to study the behavior of HPP and find
out what the best strategies are to monitor and control them. Extensive effort has been
dedicated to understand the roles of the diverse control levels involved in an HPP, and
how they should interact with each other.
Once this overall control architecture was clear, significant studies have revolved around
active power and frequency control.
A hot topic within this area is to address the
vulnerability of systems with low inertia caused by high renewable penetration using
HPP with special control functions. Various studies have proposed different strategies
to deliver Fast Frequency Response (FFR), an ancillary service specifically designed to
compensate for low inertia6 [37]. MATLAB/Simulink and DigSilent PowerFactory are
the preferred simulation tools to validate the models, as referenced below.
Authors in [38] lay the foundations of HPP control by designing and implementing an
HPP controller which distributes the external commands for curtailments to the different
components of the plant through a dispatch function. This was firstly implemented in
MATLAB/Simulink and deployed later in an existing power plant.
In [39] a hierarchical control strategy is implemented to regulate the overall active power
injected into the grid. The study focus on the HPP controller, which receives reference
signals from the Energy Management System (EMS) and dispatches active power set-
points among the diverse power plants. Two control modes are implemented: Maximum
Power Point Tracking (MPPT) and power reference following. To validate the proposed
strategies, a model is implemented in MATLAB/Simulink.
In [40] a control architecture is developed to coordinate the assets in a renewable-based
HPP to provide frequency support services to the grid. In particular, the study focuses on
FFR and Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR, also called Primary Frequency Reserve)
and considers the latest regulations and recommendations by ENTSO-E7. The model is
developed in MATLAB/Simulink and it is tested in a system with reduced inertia.
In the same line, authros in [41] and [42] present a dynamic model in DigSilent PowerFac-
tory to enhance active power controllability in front of constant and turbulent weather
conditions. The model is firstly validated under normal operation, and then its ability
to provide ancillary services is assessed as well. Particularly, Frequency Regulation and
Low-Voltage Ride Through are implemented.
[43] studies the performance of a Supercapacitor in a HPP to provide FFR. The results
show that the Supercapacitor effectively reduces the Rate of Change of Frequency (Ro-
6Power systems with high renewable, converter-based penetration (such us wind turbines Type 3 and
4 or PV facilities) tend to have reduced inertia because the converters decouple the generator from the
grid. Therefore, these systems are more sensible in front of frequency events like the sudden trip of a
large generator.
7ENTSO-E stands for European Network of Transmission System Operators.
28
==PAGE:37==
CoF) and increases the frequency nadir. Various locations of the Supercapacitor are
tried to compare is performance under different conditions. The model is implemented
in DigSilent PowerFactory.
Authors of [44] explore the interface between the EMS and HPP controller of the plant,
defining the roles of each party and the variables exchanged between both. The aim
is to better understand the impact of market-related functions on real time operation,
as well as addressing how to keep the EMS updated for better optimization. This is
crucial in renewable-based HPP, because weather forecasts become much more accurate
as delivery time gets closer, so having the latest information available reduces forecast
errors. Time coordination and robustness over communication failure are also explored
and discussed in the paper.
The EMS is in charge of maximizing the revenue of the power plant through optimal
market bidding and dispatch.
On the other hand, the HPP controller executes the
dispatch plans by distributing set-points among the portfolio.
[45] is a PhD project with several contributions to this research topic, among which the
most relevant in this field are a) a procedure to develop plant models suitable for control
design, tuning and verification; b) an energy management system designed to handle
power variability and uncertainty; and c) a new methodology for designing and tuning
the power management system.
Authors in [46] develop a novel control architecture with four control levels: asset control
level, plant control level, HPP control level and HPP EMS level. This methodology has
been a great source of inspiration for the reactive power control architecture developed
in this project, so it is further summarized below.
2.5.1
Hierarchical Control Architecture of Hybrid Power Plants
This section is based on [46]. Hierarchical control architecture has been adopted in many
stand-alone renewable power plants, with two control levels. Particularly, a plant control
level watches power flows at the PoC and dispatches control commands to individual
assets.
On the other hand, asset control level makes sure that these commands are
followed by each asset, which can be a single wind turbine or a group of solar PV panels
connected to an inverter, for instance. In few words, overall active and reactive power
references for the power plant are allocated to each individual asset based on its available
power, and the asset controller tracks its own references. However, some specific features
of the plant can be implemented at the asset level only. For example, FFR is normally
implemented at the asset level because it requires very fast response, a requirement that
may not be fulfilled if communication delays between asset and plant controller arise.
For HPP, the architecture is more complex because there are several power plants that
must be coordinated towards the same targets. Up to 4 different control levels are defined
in the hierarchical control architecture of an HPP.
• HPP EMS. The objective of the HPP EMS is to maximize the revenue of the
power plant, while respecting utility regulations and the physical limits of the
29
==PAGE:38==
assets. To do so, the EMS optimizes the energy bids in the market considering the
plant’s availability and the latest forecast on energy generation. This is an iterative
process where the bids are constantly updated in the diverse energy markets (Day-
Ahead, Intraday and Balancing Markets) as the newest forecast is received by the
EMS before the delivery time arrives.
• HPP Controller. The HPP Controller makes sure that the market commitments
carried out by the HPP EMS are complied at all time. In other words, it watches
that the energy delivered to the grid is the same (or as close as possible) as the en-
ergy sold in the market. Other functions of the HPP Controller include respecting
the power limitations imposed by the network and ensuring that reactive power
flow and voltage at the PoC follow the set-points given by the TSO.
Figure 2.12: Diagram of a hierarchical control architecture in an HPP. Own preparation
based on [46].
• Plant Controller. The Plant Controllers ensure that the power delivered by each
individual plant follows the set-points provided by the HPP Controller. To do so,
it distributes active and reactive power references for each asset based on the HPP
Controller commands using a dispatch block. There are a number of approaches
for the dispatch strategy, such as dispatching according to availability or based
on an optimization algorithm. Additional control loops can be added to enable
30
==PAGE:39==
advanced control applications, such as frequency control, voltage control or Fault
Ride-Through (FRT) coordination.
• Asset Controller. Asset Controllers guarantee that output voltage and current at
the asset terminals follow the control commands received from the Plant Controller.
As depicted in Figure 2.12, overall control signals and set-points flow from top to bottom
in the hierarchical control structure, while data signals flow from bottom to top, so that
each controller has the necessary information to send appropriate control signals. The
main data that needs to be delivered from bottom to top includes active and reactive
power availability and energy stored in the battery, among other ancillary information.
A detailed explanation of the control levels used in this study, together with the variables
exchanged between each, will be provided in Chapter 3.
2.6
Grid Code Requirements
Grid Codes are technical specifications that define all the requisites that a certain facility
needs to meet in order to be connected to the grid. They address topics such as a plant’s
tolerance over frequency and voltage deviations, power quality, control and regulation,
protection, and data communication [25]. These requisites are typically technology and
size-dependent, and they are the result of a trade-off between the interests of power plant
developers and system operators.
Ideally, TSOs would be delighted to have full flexibility from generators available, so
the grid is as robust as possible against imbalances, faults, or any other potential issue
that may arise.
On the other hand, strengthening the power plants against adverse
conditions normally increases the CAPEX and OPEX of the plant, which is exactly
what developers would avoid if possible. In front of this situation, Grid Codes stipulate
reasonable specifications to reinforce the power system against imbalances and faults
while considering technology- and size-dependent technical features of power plants.
Every State has its own Grid Code with certain particularities in terms of definitions
and technical requirements. Power plant developers need to consider the Grid Code that
applies in the region where they want to build and operate an asset, and they are respon-
sible of ensuring that the plant will comply with all the specifications indicated. Failing
to meet these requirements implies that the TSO will refuse to allow the connection of
the plant to the public grid. Therefore, an important part of the Engineering, Procure-
ment and Construction (EPC) management of a project is to purchase and install all the
necessary equipment in such a way that the plant becomes robust against compliance
issues.
So, dealing with distinct technical requirements in each country can be a costly and te-
dious task for manufacturers and project developers. Fortunately for the EU countries,
the European Commission requested ENTSO-E to prepare a uniform Grid Code frame-
work for Europe. The outcome of this was the European Network Code Requirements
for Generators (RfG), which was published on April 2016. This document ”...helps to
ensure fair conditions of competition in the internal electricity market, to ensure system
31
==PAGE:40==
security and the integration of renewable electricity sources, and to facilitate Union-wide
trade in electricity.” [47].
This Code harmonizes definitions and rules for grid connection of generators across the
EU, but TSOs are responsible of implementing the specific parameters of the require-
ments in the national Grid Codes, always within the ranges indicated in the RfG. In
other words, the RfG provides standard rules and definitions, as well as open specifica-
tion ranges, which TSOs used later as a reference to update their Grid Codes with the
nomenclature proposed and defining specific requirements within the given ranges.
Two important definitions provided in the RfG are:
• Power Park Module (PPM): A PPM is a ”unit or ensemble of units generating
electricity, which is either non-synchronously connected to the network or connected
through power electronics”. Therefore, this concept applies to WPP (with wind
turbines of Type 3 and 4), SPP and BESS.
• Synchronous Power-generating Module: This is ”an indivisible set of installations
which can generate electrical energy such that the frequency of the generated voltage,
the generator speed and the frequency of network voltage are in a constant ratio
and thus in synchronism.”. This concept applies to thermal power plants with
synchronous generators, for example.
The technical requirements for the generators depend on whether the unit falls under
the category of PPM, Synchronous Power-generating Module, or offshore PPM.
TSOs from the EU countries have taken these guidelines and adapted their Grid Codes
accordingly. As a matter of example, the Danish Grid Codes used to include separate
technical regulations for solar [48] and wind [49] facilities, with particular specifications
applied to each type of power plant. However, this distinction does not exist anymore,
since wind, solar and electrical storage assets fall now under the category of PPM, and
therefore they share the requirements.
Source [25] has been analyzed to study the technical specifications with regards to re-
active power and voltage control that apply to PPM in Denmark. In the absence of
specific requirements for HPP, [25] is taken as a reference, assuming that, using only
technologies that would be classified as PPM, the whole HPP would also fall into this
category.
Danish Grid Codes differentiate between four main categories with respect to the plant’s
capacity and nominal voltage at the PoC, as per Table 2.3. Normally, more demanding
requirements apply to larger plants.
According to this table and having a nominal
capacity of 170 MW, the HPP of this project would fall into Category D.
32
==PAGE:41==
Table 2.3: Categories of Power Plant Modules according to Danish Grid Codes [25]
.
Category
Capacity
A
0.8kW < P ≤125kW
B
125kW < P ≤3MW
C
3MW < P ≤25MW
D
P > 25MW or VPoC > 110kV
2.6.1
Frequency and Voltage Operation Ranges
Grid Codes indicate the ranges of frequency and voltage within which power plants must
remain connected to the grid, either in normal or abnormal operation. For abnormal
operation, indications denote the minimum time period they must stay online. Beyond
this, if the fault has not been cleared and the values of frequency or voltage are still
anomalous, disconnection from the grid is allowed to prevent problems in the power
plant and potential damages to equipment.
The tolerance ranges specified in [25] distinguish between plants connected to the trans-
mission grid and distribution grid, as well as assets located in DK1 and DK28. The
HPP modelled here is supposed to be connected to the TSO, with a nominal voltage at
the PoC of 132 kV. So, Figures 2.13 and 2.14 depict the tolerance ranges for a facility
connected to the transmission system with a nominal voltage between 100-300 kV in
DK1 and DK2, respectively.
Figure 2.13: Frequency and voltage tolerance applied to PPM connected to the trans-
mission grid in DK1. 100-300 kV. Taken from [25].
8Denmark’s power grid is divided in two zones, namely DK1 (West) and DK2 (East). DK1 is part of
the Continental Europe Synchronous Area, while DK2 is part of the Nordic Synchronous Area.
33
==PAGE:42==
Starting for the DK1 case, a plant must remain connected continuously as long as the
frequency is within 49.00 and 51.00 Hz and the voltage at the PoC is within 0.9 and
1.118 pu. Within this frequency range, the plant must remain connected for one hour if
the voltage is between 1.118 - 1.15 pu, or 0.85 - 0.9 pu. When there is an overfrequency
between 51.00 and 51.5 Hz the plant must remain connected for at least 30 minutes. The
same applies if the frequency falls between 48.00 - 49.00 Hz, or between 47.50 - 48.00
Hz. However, in no case the plant must remain connected for more than 60 minutes if
the frequency is below 49.00 Hz.
Figure 2.14: Frequency and voltage tolerance applied to PPM connected to the trans-
mission grid in DK2. 100-300 kV. Taken from [25].
Regarding the DK2 case, a plant must stay online provided the frequency is between
49.00 and 51.00 Hz and the voltage is within 0.9 and 1.05 pu. For this frequency range,
it must stay connected for at least 60 minutes if the voltage is between 1.05 and 1.10 pu.
For overfrequencies and underfrequencies, the same requirements as for the DK1 case
apply.
2.6.2
Active power control requirements
Since the project studies reactive power and voltage control, active power requirements
will be briefly mentioned in this section while Subsection 2.6.3 will address reactive
power control requisites in greater depth.
Further information on active power and
other aspects of the Danish Grid code with respect to PPM can be consulted in [25].
WPPs and SPPs of categories A2, B, C and D must all provide downwards Frequency
Response. This is an automatic downward regulation service to stabilize frequency when
it is above the nominal value of 50.00 Hz. It corresponds to FFR in ENTSO-E’s standard
nomenclature9. Moreover, all SPPs of type C and D, and all WPPs of type D must be
9Both are comparable due to timing requisites, but FFR can be upwards too.
34
==PAGE:43==
able to provide Frequency Control10, which is a droop-based control strategy to adjust
active power generation according the frequency value on an automatic, continuous basis.
This service is equivalent to FCR, as per ENTSO-E’s nomenclature.
PPM of category D must provide Frequency Response This is an automatic regulation
service to stabilize frequency when its value deviates from 50.00 Hz through a very fast
response. It corresponds to FFR in ENTSO-E’s standard nomenclature. Likewise, they
must also be able to provide Frequency Control, although the service cannot be activated
unless prior agreement with the TSO has been made. This service is comparable with
FCR as per ENTSO-E’s standard nomenclature.
All the specific parameters detailing how Frequency Response and Frequency Control
must be executed (timing, droop values, trigger values, etc.) are depicted in the Technical
Regulation, as cited above.
In addition to this PPM within any category are required to include an absolute power
limiter function, which is used to receive and implement active power limitations sent
by the TSO in real time to manage critical situations of overloading in the public grid.
More advanced active power constraints are required for large power plants, as indicated
in the correspondent Technical Regulations.
2.6.3
Reactive power control requirements
This section will address the requisites on reactive power and voltage control applied to
wind, solar and storage assets within a relevant Category for the project.
PPM must be equipped with reactive power and voltage control functions which control
the reactive power supplied by the facility to the public grid via activation orders to
control the voltage in the Voltage Reference Point (VRP). This can be the PoC, the
PCC or any point in between, and its location is chosen by the relevant Distribution
System Operator (DSO).
There are three main control functions within this topic: a) Specific Reactive Power, b)
Power Factor and c) Voltage Control. The functions are mutually exclusive, meaning
that only one of them can be activated at a time. The parameter settings for reactive
power and voltage control functions will be determined by the DSO in collaboration with
the TSO.
Reactive Power Control
This function controls the reactive power generated or absorbed by the power plant
independently of active power in the PoC. The response to a specific reactive power set-
point must start within 2 seconds since the reference is received, and it must be achieved
no later than 10 seconds after. This can be represented as an horizontal line in a P-Q
chart, as depicted in Figure 2.15, so that the reactive power output from the plant is
the same regardless of the active power generation.
10It must be noticed, though, that a plant must not perform Frequency Control without prior specific
agreement with the TSO
35
==PAGE:44==
Power Factor
This function controls reactive power proportionally to the active power measured at
the PoC. The response must start within 2 seconds since the reference arrives, while it
must be effectively achieved no later than 10 seconds after. This is represented as a line
with a certain slope in a P-Q chart (Figure 2.16). The slope of the line equals tan(ϕ),
where cos(ϕ) = PF.
Voltage Control
This function controls the voltage in the VRP by adjusting the exchange of reactive
power between plant and public grid. The plant receives a set-point for the voltage in
the VRP and must start and finish the response no later than 2 and 10 seconds since
then, respectively. The plant must be capable of performing the control with the droop
value configured, as depicted in Figure 2.17
Figure 2.15: Representation of the Specific Reactive Power control function. Taken from
[25].
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 2.16: Representation of the Power Factor control function. Taken from [25].
Figure 2.17: Representation of the Voltage control function. Taken from [25].
PPM within Category D must be able to provide Reactive Power Control, Power Factor
37
==PAGE:46==
Control and Voltage Control. However, by default, the plant must be configured with
Reactive Power Control with a value of 0 VAr. A PPM must not carry out voltage
control unless an agreement with the DSO has been placed.
The design of the plant must be performed in such a way that the plant can work at any
point in the given area presented in Figure 2.18, which is a P-Q chart. So, for specific
values of active power, the reactive power that the plant must be able to produce is
capped by a maximum and a minimum value.
Likewise, Figure 2.19 represents the
limitations of the set-point given different values of the voltage at the PoC when the
plant is producing maximum power (rated capacity or 1 pu).
So, according to both figures, a PPM must be able to inject or absorb up to 0.329 pu of
reactive power, measured at its PoC, under different circumstances. If looking at Figure
2.19, it can be seen how this is actually a particular case of Figure 2.18, where the
plant is producing its rated capacity (upper boundary of Figure 2.18. Since the voltage
level at the PoC can impact the reactive power capability of the plant (particularly, the
converter voltage constraint) this figure will be used to assess whether the HPP modelled
in this project meets the Grid Code requirements or not.
Figure 2.18: Requirements for the delivery of reactive power as function of active power
for Category D PPM. Taken from [25]
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.19: Requirements for the delivery of reactive power as function of the voltage
in the PoC for Category D PPM. Taken from [25].
39
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
3
Modelling and Control
3.1
General Description and Approach
To develop and validate the control architecture, a model in MATLAB/Simulink has
been used. The starting point was to take an existing model of an HPP, mainly developed
by Qian Long. This model was used for the study [44], which focuses on active power
management based on the results of auctions in various electricity markets (i.e., Day-
Ahead, Hour-Ahead and Balancing Markets). It was developed following a hierarchical
control structure, similar to the proposal from [46]. However, the Q-V control loop was
missing, so the HPP was not ready to receive, process and distribute a certain reactive
power set-point among the assets.
The starting version included all the models for the wind turbines, solar PV panels,
inverters and batteries, as well as the interactions between the different control levels
and an advanced active power control architecture to provide frequency regulation. Par-
ticularly, the model was prepared to simulate the provision of FFR, FCR and automatic
Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR, or Secondary Reserve).
However, the model lacked an internal and external grid to study the interaction between
HPP and the power system it is connected to. The reason is that [44] focuses on the
internal control architecture and the interaction between the various control levels. This
project, on the contrary, aims at evaluating the impact of the HPP over the grid voltages
and power flows, so modelling the internal and external lines and transformers is of
imperative relevance.
So, to transform this starting version into something suitable for the purpose of the
study, all the changes performed were divided in two main blocks:
• Adding the Q-V control loop. This included the addition of a hierarchical con-
trol architecture which receives a certain set-point and distributes reactive power
references among the assets in parallel to the existing active power control loop.
The novel control architecture includes three control levels and two control func-
tions.
• Adding internal and external grids. Using the libraries and blocks provided in
the Simulink’s extension Simscape Electrical (formerly known as SimPowerSystems
and SimElectronics), the main electrical components within and outside the plant
were added.
The starting HPP model with the newly implemented features was connected to the
grid model by using Simulink’s built-in Dynamic Loads. One block is used to represent
each power module (WPP, SPP and BESS). The Dynamic Load block takes as input the
set-points for P and Q and consumes (or generates) power accordingly. So, the signals
Thesis title
41
==PAGE:50==
containing the P and Q outputs of each power plant in the HPP model were the inputs
to the corresponding Dynamic Load block. This way, the dynamic behavior of the plant
and the control system is linked to the grid, so that any change in the power output of
the plant is passed through the external grid. Moreover, the measurements of voltages
and reactive power in selected buses of the grid are sent to the HPP model for control
purposes. This is depicted in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Overall schematic representation of the dynamic model. Own elaboration.
Three scenarios are implemented to assess the reactive power capability of the plant
with different set-ups, where each scenario represents a particular degree of ownership
of the grid. According to the Danish Grid Codes, the PoC is the reference bus for Q
measurements, so by selecting a different location for the PoC on each scenario different
degrees of ownership are represented, and Q capability under each ownership scenario
can be assessed. The point PIB stands for Plant Interconnection Bus, and represents the
point where all the collections systems from the three power plants are linked together.
This point happens to meet at the PoC for Scenario 1.
42
==PAGE:51==
In principle, owning the highly inductive overhead lines and transformers should nega-
tively impact the reactive power injection capability (as the plant itself would be very
inductive). However, this also allows to place support devices such as STATCOMs closer
to the PCC, and this in return should enhance voltage control over such bus. More de-
tails about the set-up of the scenarios and the location of the STATCOM can be found
in Section 3.4.
The data used for the lines was taken from [50] and [30], and it is showed in Table
3.1. Table 3.2 shows the main characteristics of the transformers used in the model.
The numbers are taken from the default parameters of a three-phase transformer block
in Simulink due to diﬀiculties in getting more accurate, suitable data for the specific
transformers used in the model. Lastly, Table 3.3 shows the nominal capacity of each
plant and the parameters used to calculate the reactive power capability of the plant. The
data is taken from [32] and due to diﬀiculties in getting specific equivalent impedances
for the SPP and BESS, the same numbers were taken for all the plants.
Table 3.1: Line parameters used in the model.
Name
VNom(kV)
R (Ohm/km)
L (H/km)
C (nF/km)
l (km)
WPP line
33
0.069
0.00132
8.8
2
SPP line
33
0.069
0.00132
8.8
2
BESS line
33
0.069
0.00132
8.8
2
Export line
132
0.063
0.00267
22.48
20
Table 3.2: Transformer parameters.
Name
VLV,Nom(kV)
VHV,Nom(kV)
Xcc(pu)
SN(MVA)
WPP trafo
0.69
33
0.08
150
SPP trafo
0.69
33
0.08
50
BESS trafo
0.69
33
0.08
11
STAT trafo
0.69
33 or 132
0.08
Variable
OLTC Trafo
33
132
0.08
200
Table 3.3: Power plant capacity and parameters for Q capability calculation.
Name
PNom
(MW)
VC,MAX
(pu)
VC,min
(pu)
IC,MAX
(pu)
Req
(pu)
Xeq
(pu)
Beq
(pu)
WPP
120
1.1
0.8
1.1
0.0196
0.14
0.021
SPP
40
1.1
0.8
1.1
0.0196
0.14
0.021
BESS
10
1.1
0.8
1.1
0.0196
0.14
0.021
STAT
Variable
1.1
0.8
1.1
0
0.07
N/A
43
==PAGE:52==
3.2
Control architecture
The control architecture developed for this model is inspired by the hierarchical control
architecture proposed in [46]. In this section, the Q-V control loop architecture is ex-
plained in detail. However, the P-f control loop had been implemented beforehand, and
it is out of the scope of this project. Therefore, the details behind the P-f control loop
are omitted1.
Three control levels are defined: 1) HPP Controller, 2) Plant Controller, and 3) Asset
Controller. The roles, functions, most relevant blocks and main variables within each
controller are described in the following subsections.
No EMS Controller is included since the main function of this system is to optimize bid
submissions to energy markets to maximize the plant’s revenue from power sales. This
has limited impact in reactive power and voltage control, which are ancillary services
that the plant performs following TSO’s or DSO’s indications. On the other hand, one
could argue that the active power generated limits how much room for reactive power
there is, so EMS optimizing strategy does have a relevant impact on reactive power
management. However, in this project active power is taken as a given condition rather
than a variable, so that Q capability is tested with different levels of P. Therefore, it
would not make sense to spend efforts in modelling the EMS Controller for the purpose
of this study.
Two control functions are implemented: Q control and V control. The HPP Controller is
the only system that changes according to the control function selected. A Proportional-
Integral (PI) Controller is used for the Q control function, while a droop-based controller
is used for the V control function.
3.2.1
HPP Controller
The HPP Controller receives external orders from the relevant TSO or DSO. In this
case, the orders can be either a specific Q set-point or a reference value to control the
voltage at the VRP, depending on the control function triggered. Then, making use of
a reactive power dispatch algorithm, the controller distributes specific reactive power
set-points to each of the power plants.
As depicted in Figure 3.2, the HPP Controller receives the reference and the Q capa-
bilities of each plant (injection and absorption) in real-time.
All these variables are
the inputs to the dispatch algorithm. It must be noted, though, that the values of Q
availability of each power plant come expressed in pu, in each plant’s power base. So,
the first thing that needs to be done is to change to pu in the HPP power base. This is
simply a matter of multiplying each signal by its correspondent plant’s power base and
dividing by the HPP power base (170 MVA).
After this, the signals are sent to the dispatch algorithm, modelled with a MATLAB
function block. The set-up of this algorithm is rather simple, as it dispatches in pro-
portion to each plant’s Q capability. First, it calculates total HPP capability at the
1Also, for the sake of briefness.
44
==PAGE:53==
Poc:
QCAP,inj,HPP = QCAP,inj,WPP + QCAP,inj,SPP + QCAP,inj,BESS + QCAP,inj,STAT (3.1)
QCAP,abs,HPP = QCAP,abs,WPP + QCAP,abs,SPP + QCAP,abs,BESS + QCAP,abs,STAT (3.2)
Figure 3.2: HPP Controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
Second, it generates the reference for each power plant based on the overall Q reference
received and their capabilities:
If Qref,HPP > 0 =⇒Qref,i = Qref,HPP ∗
QCAP,inj,i
QCAP,inj,HPP
(3.3)
If Qref,HPP ≤0 =⇒Qref,i = Qref,HPP ∗
QCAP,abs,i
QCAP,abs,HPP
(3.4)
The output references are not capped, so the reference for a plant could be greater than
its capability. However, downstream controllers make sure that the limitations of each
asset are respected.
Regarding active power control, all the existing controllers have been removed for sim-
plicity, and to reduce the compilation and simulation times. The references displayed
in Figure 3.2 (top-right corner) correspond to each of the nominal active power of each
plant, in pu using the HPP power base. These values are used for the comparison of the
Q capability of the HPP against the Danish Grid Codes, as explained in Section 3.4:
• For the WPP: 0.706 ∗170 ≈120MW
• For the SPP: 0.235 ∗170 ≈40MW
45
==PAGE:54==
• For the BESS: 0.059 ∗170 ≈10MW
These references are sent to the respective plant controllers.
Figure 3.3: PI and droop-based controllers. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
The Q reference entering the dispatch algorithm is the output from a specific controller
depending on the control function triggered. For Specific Q set-points, a Proportional-
Integral (PI) controller as the one depicted in Figure 3.3 (top diagram) is used. This
controller receives the Q set-point and the actual Q flow at the PoC, computes the error
as the difference between both, and delivers a reference value for the overall Q to be
produced by the HPP.
This controller is needed to ensure that the Q flow at the PoC follows the given reference.
Otherwise, the reference would be followed at the PIB instead (let as call this point Power
Interconnection Bus - PIB). However, for Scenario 1 this controller is not needed, as the
plants are connected exactly at the PoC.
On the other hand, when working in V-control mode, the controller used is droop-based,
as depicted in Figure 3.3 (bottom diagram). In this case, the controller receives the
voltage in the VRP, sends it to a Lookup table, which contains all the corresponding
set-points for each voltage level. The values on the Lookup Table depend on the droop
value selected. For all the simulations the standard droop value of 4% (as indicated
in [25]) has been taken. This means that the plant will inject the maximum amount of
reactive power when voltage falls below 0.96 pu, and it will absorb the maximum amount
of reactive power when voltage raises over 1.04 pu.
The output of this block is the Q reference which is sent to the dispatch algorithm. So,
regardless of whether the HPP is working in Q-control or V-control mode, the references
46
==PAGE:55==
exiting the HPP controller are always Q set-points, and the Plant and Asset control
levels work in the same way.
3.3
Plant and Asset models
3.3.1
Plant controllers
The plant controllers receive the active and reactive power references, as well as the
voltage level at the PIB. The structure of the plant controllers is the same in all scenarios
and in all power plants (WPP, SPP and BESS). Figure 3.4 depicts the Q control loop at
the plant control level of the WPP. The P control loop is not showed because the focus
here is on Q and voltage, but the control architecture is very similar to the Q control
loop.
Figure 3.4: Q Plant controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
First, the Q reference arriving from the HPP controller passes through a Dynamic Sat-
uration block, which ensures that the reference does not exceed the Q capability limits
of the plant in real-time. This saturation block had been placed at first in the output of
the PI controller, but this was found to be a mistake. The problem with this is that the
Q set-point sent to the turbine is capped considering the whole WPP limitations, so this
approach underestimates the Q capability of the wind turbines, and therefore underuses
them.
To better understand this, it is helpful to use an example. Let us say that the Q injection
capability of the WPP is 0.3 pu for a given set of conditions (measured at the PIB).
If placing the saturation block at the end of the model shown in Figure 3.4, the wind
turbine receives the set-point of 0.3 pu, but the measurement of Q at the PIB (after
passing through all the cables and transformers) would be somewhere around 0.25 pu.
This approach is counting twice the impedances between the wind turbine terminals and
47
==PAGE:56==
the PIB, and therefore placing the saturation block before the PI will make a better use
of the resources available.
The Q capability is calculated with a MATLAB function. This function receives the P
generated by the WPP and the voltage level at the PIB. It also contains all the relevant
parameters to calculate the Q capability, following the procedure explained in Section
2.3 (XWPP , RWPP , BWPP , VC,max, VC,min and IC,max). The outputs of this function are
the injection and absorption capability of the plant (QCAP,inj,WPP and QCAP,abs,WPP ),
which are both sent to the Dynamic Saturation block mentioned above, and to the HPP
Q Dispatch algorithm.
Second, the filtered Q reference is compared against the Q flow measured at the PIB, and
the resulting error enters a PI controller, which sends the output to the wind turbine
controller.
This Q set-point is sent together with the P set-point, generated in the
parallel P control loop. For simplicity, all the variables and parameters in this block are
expressed in pu values, using the WPP nominal capacity as power base.
For the sake of briefness and as this configuration is repeated for the SPP and BESS
models, it will not be explained again. The only difference are the values of the param-
eters of each power plant.
3.3.2
Asset controller: Wind Turbine
Figure 3.5 shows the wind turbine controller. The starting version of this model con-
tained all the particular dynamics of a wind turbine, such as a pitch controller, an
aerodynamic model and a mechanical model. All these blocks are very useful to study
the dynamic behavior of the turbine in front of different wind speed levels. For instance,
a block would compare the P reference from the Plant Controller with the P available
based on the given wind speed and pitch angle of the blades, compute the minimum and
send it to the MSC Controller. However, all these blocks have been commented out2 to
simplify the model and accelerate the computation time (since P control is out of the
scope of this project).
Therefore, the active power reference coming from the Plant Controller enters the MSC
Controller directly, assuming that there is enough kinetic power available in the wind
to follow the reference provided by the plant controller. The MSC Controller is a PI
Controller which compares actual P vs P set-point, computes the error and sends a P
reference accordingly to the GSC Controller.
2Which is equivalent to ”removed”.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.5: Wind Turbine controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
More precisely, this signal is the reference for the direct current id,ref in the GSC con-
troller, while the input for the quadrature current iq,ref is the Q set-point coming from
the WPP controller, divided by the voltage at the wind turbine terminals. Another
block addresses FRT, which is an advanced control function to support the power grid
during the occurrence of a fault causing abnormally low or high voltages. As this study
focuses on static simulations, the analysis of transients like faults is outside the scope of
this project, and therefore the FRT blocks will remain inactive3.
In this configuration, the GSC Controller watches the voltage in the DC link of the back-
to-back converters of the WTG, and it also controls the reactive power exchange with
the grid. It receives id,ref, iq,ref, the voltage level at the turbine’s terminals, iqV RT,ref
and an FRT signal. These two last signals remain inactive, as the FRT function is not
explored here.
The output values of P and Q are the set-points to the Dynamic Load block that is used
to connect the WPP model with the grid model. This block will be further explained in
Subsection 3.3.7
3.3.3
Asset Controller: PV inverter
Recall that the SPP Controller is modelled in the same way as the WPP Controller,
which is explained in Subsection 3.3.1.
The simplified model for the PV asset controller is depicted in Figure 3.6. Similarly to
the wind turbine model case, the PV Asset Control level included a model for the PV
module which accounted for the available active power that could be produced based on
the solar irradiation and temperature values. Then, another block would compare this
available power with the P set-point from the SPP Controller. However, and following
the idea mentioned before, these blocks have been commented out.
3The inactivity of these blocks is achieved by using a null deviation of voltage with respect to nominal
value. Notice that voltages in this project will not deviate from 0.9-1.1 pu, while FRT is thought for
voltage levels below 0.5 pu or above 1.2 pu, which are maintained during typically 1-2 seconds max.
49
==PAGE:58==
So, the active power reference sent from the SPP controller enters the Grid Converter
block, which essentially accounts for the eﬀiciency of the asset.
No FRT block was
included in this model, so the control architecture is much simpler than in the wind
turbine case. Both the output of the grid converter and the Q set-point provided by the
SPP Controller are passed through a transfer function which introduces a slight delay
to represent the time taken in the diverse controllers in between. These signals are then
sent to the Dynamic Load block which represents the SPP in the grid model.
Figure 3.6: PV Asset controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
3.3.4
Asset Controller: Battery
Recall that the BESS Controller is modelled in the same way as the WPP Controller,
which is explained in Subsection 3.3.1.
Figure 3.7 shows the Energy Storage system. In this model, the voltage at the battery’s
terminals is read and multiplied by the id,out signal to compute the P generated (or
consumed) by the storage system.The value of P is sent to the Dynamic Load representing
the BESS in the power grid model. The id,out signal comes from the charge control block.
On the other hand, the P control block takes the voltage at the battery’s terminals, the
P set-point from the BESS controller, and the State of Charge (SOC) of the battery.
The output of this block is id,ref, which enters the Charge Control block together with
iq,ref. The latter comes from the division between the Q reference and the voltage at
the battery’s terminals.
The Charge Control block models the dynamics behind the charge and discharge of the
battery, and it was included in the starting version of the model. The two outputs of this
model are id,out (as previously mentioned) and iq,out, which is multiplied by the voltage
at the battery’s terminals again so that Q generated by the storage system is obtained.
This signal is sent as a set-point to the Dynamic Load block representing the BESS in
the power grid model, together with the P set-point as mentioned above.
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.7: Energy Storage Asset controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
3.3.5
STATCOM model
The STATCOM modelling was done with a similar approach as in the power plants’
models.
Although there is a built-in STATCOM block in Simulink, using it in the
grid model was discarded due to technical diﬀiculties. The main problem was too long
computation times when trying to run the simulation using this block4.
The STATCOM is implemented in the power grid by using a transformer and a Dynamic
Load whose set-points are driven externally by the STATCOM controller, as explained
below.
Figure 3.8 shows the control model for the STATCOM, which is similar to the Plant
controllers previously mentioned. The Q reference coming from the HPP Controller is
capped with the Q capability of the STATCOM and compared with the Q measurement
at the high-voltage side of the STATCOM’s transformer. The resulting output error is
sent to a PI controller.
4The STATCOM block was tested in a simple model with a line, a voltage source, a load and two
transformers. All the blocks in this simple model were the same as the ones used in the Simulink’s example
model provided to test the STATCOM built-in block. However, the problem of too long simulation time
could not be solved.
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.8: STATCOM controller. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
3.3.6
OLTC transformer model
As in the case of the STATCOM modelling, the built-in OLTC transformer model in
Simulink was causing several problems that led to the decision of not using this block in
the model. The block was tried first in a very simple model with a voltage source, one
simple transformer, a line, the OLTC transformer and a load. Several issues arose, with
the most important being an unexpected impact of the tap changes in the voltage levels
at both sides of the transformer. The trigger of the tap changer would increase/decrease
voltages simultaneously at both sides and would not control the voltage level to the
target value.
Having these persistent issues and considering that the focus of this project is on static
simulations, it was decided to set the ”tap position” manually. So the needed transfor-
mation ratio was set before running the simulation, by editing the nominal voltages of
the transformer. In particular, the nominal voltage at the low-voltage side (the HPP
side) was changed in a range between ±15%. So, having a nominal voltage on the HPP
side of 33 kV, the minimum transformation ratio during the simulations is 28/132 kV (or
0.212), while the maximum transformation ratio is 38/132 kV (or 0.288). The nominal
transformation ratio is 33/132 kV (or 0.25).
Even though this approach could be not the most elegant, it has proven to be as effective
as simple, as the model runs very fast (approximately 1 second per simulation) and it
is trivial to iterate until the desired voltage level is achieved (always respecting the
maximum and minimum transformation ratios).
3.3.7
Grid model
As explained in the previous subsections, the models of each power plant containing
the Plant Controllers and Asset Controllers are connected to the grid by means of Dy-
52
==PAGE:61==
namic Load blocks (one per plant). This block consumes the set-points of P and Q
given as inputs. So by sending the resulting P and Q of each power plant model to its
corresponding Dynamic Load block, the plant model is integrated with the grid model.
It must be noted, though, that the sign criterion is different for loads and generators.
For a load, positive signs are associated with a consumption of P and an inductor-like
behavior (absorption of Q), so there needs to be a change of sign between the output
signals coming from the plant models and the Dynamic Load blocks. This is exemplified
in Figure 3.9, where a Gain block with the value -1 reverts the sign of the set-points
entering the Dynamic Load block. This figure depicts the electric model of the WPP,
and the exactly same structure has been used for the SPP and BESS models.
Figure 3.9: WPP electric model. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
The Dynamic Load is representing all the wind turbines within the WPP. The P and Q
set-points are sent from the WPP model in pu, so a gain block is used to change to W
and VAr, respectively.
Each of the turbines includes a step-up transformer, which increases the voltage from 690
V to 33 kV. All these transformers are represented by the single 0.69/33 kV transformer
depicted in Figure 3.9. A Three-Phase RLC parallel branch is added between the Dy-
namic Load and the transformer. This is a parallel branch with a very high resistance
(1 MΩ) and inductance (1 MH) that needs to be added in order to prevent an error
in Simulink. The error message says that the Dynamic Load is modelled as a current
source, and therefore it cannot be connected in series with the inductive element, in this
case, the transformer. Adding this very high impedance in parallel solves the issue.
A Three-phase Pi section line of 2 km represents the collection system carrying the
current from the turbines’ terminals to the PIB. The thin block colored in brown at
the end of the diagram is a negligible line of only 1 meter, whose only function is to
differentiate between the end of the WPP collection system and the PIB. This is needed
to measure the power flows at the end of the WPP collection system, since in the absence
of this short line, this point would be exactly the same as the PIB, and therefore the
power flow measured would be not only coming form the WPP, but also from the SPP
53
==PAGE:62==
and BESS.
Another relevant consideration here is that the voltage values at the wind turbine ter-
minals and at the HV side of the transformer should not be taken as indicative of what
they would look like in real life. In the model, the single transformer represents all the
wind turbine transformers, and therefore a huge flow of reactive power goes through it.
In reality, the reactive power flowing through each transformer would be much smaller
(since it would be produced by one single WTG). Therefore, the impact on the voltage
levels at both sides of the transformer would be much weaker. In other words, if when
injecting a large amount of reactive power the voltage in the LV side of the transformer is
somewhere around 1.2 pu, this does not mean that there is an error or that the solution
is unfeasible, but it is a consequence of how the WPP is modelled.
On the other hand, Figure 3.10 depicts how the STATCOM is connected to the grid.
This is done following the same approach as with the power plants. There are only
two differences between the electric model of power plants and STATCOM. The first
difference is that there is no line in the STATCOM model, as it is assumed that the
STATCOM would be connected directly to the line, with no impedances in between.
The second difference has to do with active power: as there should be no P generated
by the STATCOM, a constant of value 0 is sent as P reference to the Dynamic Load.
Figure 3.10: STATCOM electric model. Screenshot from the model in Simulink.
This whole model is placed in different locations across the grid, depending on the
Scenario. The only change to be performed is to adapt the nominal voltage at the HV
side of the transformer according to the Scenario. For Scenario 1, the STATCOM is
54
==PAGE:63==
connected to a 33 kV bus, and therefore this is the nominal voltage that applies to the
HV side of the transformer. For Scenarios 2 and 3 the STATCOM is connected to a 220
kV bus, so this needs to be nominal voltage of the HV side of the transformer.
Figure 3.11 shows the PIB, where all the power plants and (in this case) the STATCOM
are connected; the OLTC Transformer; the Export Line; the PCC and the connection
with the rest of the grid. The set-up shown in this picture corresponds to Scenario 1.
Slight adjustments are performed for the other two scenarios, as explained in Section
3.4. The PIB and PoC happen to meet at the same point for this scenario.
Figure 3.11: Export line, OLTC Transformer, PCC and external grid. Screenshot from
the model in Simulink.
The PIB is connected to the OLTC Transformer (recall that this is modelled as a normal
transformer whose transformation ratio is changed manually for each simulation). The
OLTC Transformer is then connected to the 50 km Export Line, which leads into the
PCC. To simulate the external grid, a Voltage Source with another line has been used.
The Voltage Source acts as slack bus and controls the voltage on the point B-Grid to 1 pu.
The additional line separating this point from the PCC is used to enable controllability
over the voltage at PCC. In the absence of this line, the Voltage Source influence over
the PCC would be too large, and the voltage would be always 1 pu, regardless of what
happened in the rest of the model.
3.4
Scenarios
This section will present a full description of the Scenarios used in this project, high-
lighting the differences between each. Figure 3.12 provides an overview of the Scenarios
and the relevant changes from one to another.
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 3.12: Overview of the 3 different Scenarios studied in this project. Own prepa-
ration.
The main aspect of the approach that changes among the diverse scenarios is the owner-
ship of the assets in the grid and the location of the STATCOM. Recall that in Section
1.2 one of the objectives mentioned was ”To analyze the impact of the ownership of the
line and the location of reactive power sources on the plant’s capability”. In principle,
owning more transformers and lines increases the ”inductor-like” character of the plant,
which reduces the injection capability since these assets act as Q sinks in normal oper-
ating conditions. On the other hand, the boundaries of the HPP are expanded when
the line is property of the plant owners. This opens the door to install ancillary devices
such as STATCOMs closer to the PCC, thus enhancing voltage control over this point.
So, to represent different degrees of ownership in the grid, the PoC is placed on different
locations. This has an impact on the controllability of the OLTC transformer, and also
on the potential locations for the STATCOM. For simplicity, the STATCOM has been
placed in all Scenarios at the PoC. This makes sense from a technical point of view,
since the less lines there are between the STATCOM and the PoC, the less Q would be
consumed by such lines, and therefore the more Q is effectively delivered at the PoC5.
For each scenario, the Q capability of the HPP will be compared with the Danish Techni-
cal Regulation specs without considering the addition of the STATCOM. In cases where
5Which is the point where Q is measured for compliance concerns.
56
==PAGE:65==
the HPP has not enough capability, the capacity of the STATCOM will be increased
until the Danish specs are met for the most demanding conditions.
Starting from Scenario 1, as mentioned above the PoC happens to meet at the PIB. This
means that the OLTC transformer belongs to the relevant TSO/DSO, who will control
it in real-time. The Q capability of the HPP is then characterized at the LV side of
the OLTC transformer, and this is also the chosen location for the STATCOM. Recall
from Subsection 3.2.1 that this scenario is the only one which does not need for a PI
controller at the HPP control level. This is because the PIB and the PoC are the same,
so the plant controllers make sure that the overall Q delivered at the PoC follow the Q
set-point provided. The other two Scenarios require an additional PI controller at the
HPP control level due to having different locations for PIB and PoC.
In principle, this scenario should be the less favorable in regards of both Q capability,
as the lack of control over the OLTC transformer can lead to internal voltage levels at
the plan which limit the Q capability of the plants (this affects the voltage limitations
as developed in Section 2.3).
In Scenario 2, the OLTC transformer belongs to the HPP owners, and therefore it is
controllable by the HPP operators. This should enhance the Q capability of the plant,
although having the export line in between the PoC and the PCC may limit the voltage
controllability at the PCC, since the STATCOM would be installed at the HV side of
the OLTC transformer.
Lastly, in Scenario 3 both the OLTC transformer and the export line belong to the
HPP owners, allowing for controllability on the OLTC transformer and enabling the
installation of the STATCOM at the end of the line. The Q capability is expected to
be limited as compared with Scenario 2 because of the inductor character of the export
line. However, voltage control over the PCC may be better since the STATCOM is much
closer to the delivery point in this case.
The specific features of each scenario are summarized in Table 3.4:
Table 3.4: Specific features by Scenario.
Scenario
1
2
3
PoC
Same point as PIB
HV side of OLTC.
(Beginning of Line)
PCC.
(End of Line)
OLTC
Owned and
controlled by
TSO/DSO.
Owned and
controlled by the
HPP operators.
Owned and
controlled by the
HPP operators.
Export
line
Owned by the
TSO/DSO
Owned by the
TSO/DSO
Owned by the HPP
operators
STATCOM
Located at PoC
(PIB)
Located at PoC
(BoL)
Located at PoC
(PCC)
57
==PAGE:66==
58
==PAGE:67==
4
Results and Discussion
This Chapter presents the results of the various simulations carried out with the model
using the three scenarios previously presented. The first section addresses the validity
of the HPP and the control mode used to meet the Danish Grid Code requirements
regarding reactive power capability of the HPP.
The second section focuses on the voltage control function. The ability of the HPP to
control voltage at the PCC is analyzed for the three scenarios.
4.1
Validation of the HPP to meet Q-related
requirements in the Danish Grid Codes
As explained in Section 2.6.3, in order to be eligible for the connection with the public
grid, the HPP needs to be able to exchange a certain amount of reactive power with
the grid, under particular conditions. The frequency and voltage tolerances of the plant
will not be studied here, as that is related with the protections and size of the diverse
devices in the plant. Therefore, this section will address the Q capability of the plant,
as compared with the requirements for the delivery of reactive power. The reference for
this comparison is the curve representing the Q requirements as function of the voltage
in the PoC, when the power plant is working at rated capacity (in this case, the plant
is delivering 170 MW). Figure 4.1 represents this curve (which was already presented
in Section 2.6.3) with the four most demanding points for the plant. The points are
described as follows:
• Point A. The plant must be able to ”import” or ”absorb” up to 0.329 pu of
reactive power, when the voltage at the PoC is 1.05 pu.
• Point B. The plant must be able to ”export” or ”inject” up to 0.329 pu of reactive
power, when the voltage at the PoC is 1.04 pu.
• Point C. The plant must be able to ”export” or ”inject” up to 0.329 pu of reactive
power, when the voltage at the PoC is 0.9 pu.
• Point D. the plant must be able to ”import” or ”absorb” up to 0.329 pu of reactive
power, when the voltage at the PoC is 0.96 pu.
Points B and D are the most restrictive for the voltage constraint of the power convert-
ers of the grid. Recall from 2.3 that the converters are limited by the maximum and
minimum voltage they can be exposed to without experiencing problems. Voltages over
1 pu limit the injection of reactive power, while voltages below 1 pu limit the absorption
of reactive power. In normal operation, this is not an issue, since normally when there
is an overvoltage in a bus, nearby generators need to absorb reactive power to bring the
voltage back to 1 pu. Likewise, when the voltage in a bus is too low, nearby generators
Thesis title
59
==PAGE:68==
will inject reactive power to increase the voltage value back to 1 pu.
However, this
unfavorable situation is considered in the Technical Regulations, and therefore the plant
needs to have the capability to act according to these requirements.
Figure 4.1: Requirements for the delivery of reactive power at PNom with 4 selected
points. Adapted from [25].
The 3 Scenarios have been tested against these four set-points. To assess how much
additional reactive power capacity is needed to meet such requirements, the plant is
tested in each scenario first with zero capacity in the STATCOM. Then, in cases where
the set-point is not achieved, the STATCOM capacity is increased in intervals of 5 MVAr,
until the HPP Q capability is enough to meet the requirement.
In the following subsections, two tables present the most important parameters and
resulting values of each simulation together with the appropriate discussion. The first
table shows the balance of reactive power in the most relevant buses of the grid, as well
as the reactive power consumed by the OLTC transformer and the export line. The
60
==PAGE:69==
second table presents the voltages in all the buses in the grid.
As the topology of the grid changes depending on the scenario, the nomenclature in each
table is different. Nevertheless, a diagram illustrating each scenario has been attached
to ease the understanding of the results.
All the values in the tables show the results without adding the STATCOM. The indi-
cated STATCOM capacity on each scenario and point is such that the corresponding
set-point is successfully achieved such capacity.
4.1.1
Scenario 1
Figure 4.2 presents the diagram of Scenario 1 to facilitate the interpretation of the results.
Tables 4.1 and 4.2 show the Q balances and Voltage levels along the grid, respectively.
Figure 4.2: Diagram of Scenario 1. Own preparation.
In Scenario 1 the PoC is at the LV side of the OLTC transformer, so this is operated by
the relevant TSO, and therefore it cannot be used to enhance reactive power capability
by setting a favorable voltage level at the PIB. The results show that this configuration
has problems to meet the Q requirements in Points B and D. This reveals that the
voltage constraint of the converters is the main aspect limiting the plant’s Q capability.
For Point B, the voltage level at the PoC is 1.04 pu, which drastically limits the injection
capability of the plant. The result shows that a STATCOM of at least 15 MVAr needs
to be installed to meet the grid code requirements at this point.
For Point D, something similar happens. The voltage level at the PoC is 0.96 pu, which
restricts the absorption capability of the power plant. In this case the STATCOM needed
is only 5 MVAr. The reason may be the fact that the minimum admissible voltage in
the converters is 0.8 pu, so there is still an acceptable margin to consume Q. On the
contrary, in point A since the maximum admissible voltage in the converters is 1.1 pu,
the margin is smaller, and therefore the STATCOM capacity needed is larger.
61
==PAGE:70==
Table 4.1: Scenario 1: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Balance of Q.
Point
A
B
C
D
QPoC (MVAr)
-56.10
47.38
56.10
-54.84
QPoC (pu)
-0.33
0.28
0.33
-0.32
∆Qtrafo (MVAr)
25.44
19.42
19.90
31.16
∆Qline (MVAr)
27.30
20.24
20.83
34.64
STATCOM (MVAr)
0.00
15.00
0.00
5.00
Table 4.2: Scenario 1: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Voltage levels.
Point
A
B
C
D
VPoC (pu)
1.05
1.039
0.936
0.954
VBoL (pu)
1.001
1.040
1.027
0.902
VPCC (pu)
1.078
1.012
0.991
0.997
Trafo ratio
36.5/132
32/132
29/132
37.5/132
4.1.2
Scenario 2
Figure 4.3 presents the diagram of Scenario 2 to facilitate the interpretation of the results.
Tables 4.3 and 4.4 show the Q balances and Voltage levels along the grid, respectively.
Figure 4.3: Diagram of Scenario 2. Own preparation.
In this Scenario the PoC is at the HV side of the OLTC transformer, meaning that the
plant operators can use it to set a favorable voltage level at the PIB to enhance reactive
power capability. Besides, as the highly reactive export line is behind the PoC, it is not
detrimental for the achievement of the set-points.
The results show that in this configuration the reactive power capability of the individual
62
==PAGE:71==
power plants, optimized with the OLTC transformer, do not need additional reactive
power sources to meet the grid code requirements in the most demanding cases.
Table 4.3: Scenario 2: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Balance of Q.
Point
A
B
C
D
QPIB (MVAr)
-35.35
76.10
83.94
-31.34
∆Qtrafo (MVAr)
20.75
20.00
26.12
24.76
QPoC (MVAr)
-56.10
56.10
57.80
-56.10
QPoC (pu)
-0.33
0.33
0.34
-0.33
∆Qline (MVAr)
21.52
20.97
29.10
26.90
STATCOM (MVAr)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table 4.4: Scenario 2: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Voltage levels.
Point
A
B
C
D
VPIB (pu)
1.001
0.993
1.008
0.992
VPoC (pu)
1.050
1.059
0.924
0.956
VPCC (pu)
1.098
1.006
0.865
1.013
Trafo ratio
32.5/132
29.5/132
33.7/132
35.5/132
4.1.3
Scenario 3
Figure 4.4 presents the diagram of Scenario 3 to facilitate the interpretation of the results.
Tables 4.5 and 4.6 show the Q balances and Voltage levels along the grid, respectively.
Figure 4.4: Diagram of Scenario 3. Own preparation.
In this scenario, the PoC happens to meet at the PCC, so it is at the end of the export
line. This means that the plant operators have controllability over the OLTC trans-
63
==PAGE:72==
former, but on the other hand the highly inductive export line will impact the injection
capability of the HPP.
The results show that this configuration has issues when meeting the set-points given in
points B and C. In this case, the voltage limitations are not a problem, since by making
use of the OLTC transformer the voltage levels at the PIB are always close to 1 pu.
This suggests that the current constraint of the converters is the main aspect limiting
the plant’s Q capability. The plant is working at rated capacity, meaning that there is
already limited room for reactive power exchange with the grid. On top of this, both
the line and the transformer are consuming between 20 and 25 MVArs each. The HPP
needs to provide enough reactive power to compensate for this and still deliver the 0.329
pu at the PCC, but its current limitations prevent the injection of such amount of Q to
the grid, so a STATCOM is needed. A STATCOM with a capacity of at least 25 MVArs
is needed to meet the grid codes under this configuration.
For points A and D, where the set-point is an import of Q, the transformer and line
actually enhance the absorption capability of the plant, so the specified references are
achieved with no major diﬀiculties.
Table 4.5: Scenario 3: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Balance of Q.
Point
A
B
C
D
QPIB (MVAr)
-14.14
81.14
82.26
-5.64
∆Qtrafo (MVAr)
20.48
19.21
24.12
23.78
∆Qline (MVAr)
21.48
19.88
26.48
26.68
QPoC (MVAr)
-56.10
41.99
31.99
-56.10
QPoC (pu)
-0.33
0.25
0.19
-0.33
STATCOM (MVAr)
0.00
20.00
25.00
0.00
Table 4.6: Scenario 3: Results of Reactive power Requirement test. Voltage levels.
Point
A
B
C
D
VPIB (pu)
1.005
1.01
1.009
1.014
VBoL (pu)
1.021
1.096
0.965
0.928
VPCC (pu)
1.052
1.04
0.906
0.96
Trafo ratio
33/132
29/132
32.5/132
36.5/132
4.2
Voltage control function
This section presents the results when using the voltage control function to control
the voltage at the PCC in the 3 different scenarios. For these results, the STATCOM
capacity needed in each scenario (as per the results of Section 4.1) is included in the
plant1. Two cases are studied in each Scenario. In Case 1, the starting voltage at the
1This is done by assuming that the previous section was a sizing optimization problem, where the
smallest possible STATCOM was purchased to meet the grid code requirements. This section, on the
64
==PAGE:73==
PCC is 1.1 pu, and Case 2 it is 0.9 pu. The idea is to test how closer the voltage at the
PCC gets to 1 pu under each scenario to assess the performance on voltage control. In
all cases the HPP is producing 0.7 pu of P (119 MW) and a droop of 4% has been used.
Having a droop value of 4% means that whenever the voltage level at PCC is above 1.04
pu or below 0.96 pu, the plant is absorbing or injecting the maximum value of reactive
power allowed by its capability curve.
Starting from Case 1, all the Scenarios are within the voltage control ranges, since the
voltage at the PCC is only ∼2.5% over the nominal value. For this voltage value the
droop-controller sets a total absorption of 106.25 MVAr to be distributed among the
assets. For Scenarios 1 and 2 this is the total reactive power flow measured at the PIB.
The only difference is how the overall reactive power set-point is distributed among the
assets, since Scenario 2 does not have any STATCOM and therefore all the plants will
have to absorb more Q as compared with Scenario 1.
For Scenario 3, this is the sum of the total reactive power flow measured at the PIB
plus the reactive power consumed by the STATCOM, which is connected at the PCC.
In this case, the export line and transformer contribute to decrease the voltage level at
PCC back to its nominal value. Therefore, having the STATCOM at the beginning of
the line (Scenarios 1 and 2) is preferable, since the current flowing through the cable
is larger, and so are the reactive power consumed by the transformer and line. This
explains why the voltage level achieved at Scenarios 1 and 2 is slightly better (0.001
pu) than in Scenario 3. Generally speaking, the Q absorption capability of the plant,
together with the inductive character of the line and transformer, produce an effective
response against overvoltages in all scenarios.
Regarding Case 2, Scenarios 1 and 2 are working outside their voltage ranges, as the
voltage is beyond 0.96 pu.
This means that the HPP is injecting as much Q as it
can for this situation, as the assets are limited by the current constraints. Having the
STATCOM, Scenario 1 is injecting more reactive power than Scenario 2, since its Q
capability is enhanced. Therefore, a slightly higher voltage is achieved.
For Scenario 3, this case demonstrates the benefits of placing the STATCOM at the end
of the line. As the plant needs to inject a vast amount of reactive power to the PCC, the
transformer and export line weaken the HPP response by consuming an important part
of this reactive power flow. Therefore, having the STATCOM at the end of the line, the
total current flowing through the line and transformer is lower, and so are the Q values
consumed by both. This leads to a voltage level of 0.965 pu at the PCC in Scenario 3,
which is the only one working within its voltage ranges for this case.
contrary, represents a situation during the operation of the plant, so the necessary equipment to meet
the grid codes is considered to have been acquired previously.
65
==PAGE:74==
Table 4.7: Case 1. Overvoltage in PCC. Results of all scenarios.
Scen1
Scen2
Scen3
VPCC (pu)
1.025
1.025
1.026
VPIB (pu)
0.88
0.88
0.926
∆Qtrafo (MVAr)
31.00
30.7
25.8
∆Qline (MVAr)
34.50
34.30
28.05
QPIB (MVAr)
-104.3
-104.6.0
-93.5
Table 4.8: Case 2. Undervoltage in PCC. Results of all scenarios.
Scen1
Scen2
Scen3
VPCC (pu)
0.952
0.950
0.965
VPIB (pu)
1.000
0.99
0.978
∆Qtrafo (MVAr)
16.7
16.09
16.6
∆Qline (MVAr)
17.19
16.6
16.96
QPIB (MVAr)
121.12
115.6
124.6
66
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusion and future works
This project has developed a novel control architecture to control the reactive power
exchanged between an HPP and the power grid based on external set-points provided
by the relevant TSO or DSO. The control system is based on a hierarchical architecture,
as found in the literature, and it includes two control functions: reactive power control
and voltage control. These are two of the three different control functions indicated by
the Danish Technical Regulations applied to PPM and, therefore, to an HPP combining
wind, solar and storage assets1.
The reactive power control function has been used to assess whether the HPP meets
the requirements for reactive power capability indicated in the Grid Codes, while the
voltage control function has been tested in two cases: with voltage levels 10% above and
below nominal values.
Another objectives of the project was to explore different configurations of the ownership
of the line and the to find the optimal placement and size of reactive power support
devices such as a STATCOM. This objective has been achieved by using 3 different
scenarios, each of which represents a different degree of ownership of the export line
and transformer. The transformer connecting the HPP with the export line is an OLTC
transformer, and its impact in enhancing the reactive power capability of the plant has
also been analyzed.
The results show that being able to control the OLTC transformer increases the reactive
power capability of the power plant, as this device can help to maintain internal voltage
levels in the HPP close to 1 pu, thus reducing the influence of converter voltage limita-
tions on the capability of the plant. It must be noted, though, that generally speaking,
if the owner of the transformer is the TSO or DSO, they would normally control the
voltage at the PoC and fix it to 1 pu.
So, in normal conditions, there may be not
much added value in owning the OLTC transformer. However, to meet the grid code
requirements, controlling the OLTC can be very beneficial: the results show that with no
ownership of the OLTC, a STATCOM of 15 MVAr (this is 8.8% of the nominal capacity
of the HPP) needs to be added in order to comply with the most demanding set-points.
Having controllability on the OLTC, however, no additional STATCOM is needed.
When owning the export line, the injection capability of the HPP is limited, because
HV overhead lines are very inductive, and therefore they tend to absorb large amounts
of reactive power in normal operating conditions. So, the plant needs to supply all the
reactive power that the lines and the OLTC transformer absorb. The results are aligned
with this idea, since the resulting capacity to be added in this scenario has a similar
value than what the line absorbs (around 25 MVAr). On the other hand, the absorption
capability is enhanced, so no added capacity is needed to meet the ”import” set-points.
1This is an assumption made in the project.
Thesis title
67
==PAGE:76==
In general, for the scenario where the OLTC is owned by a third party, converter voltage
limitations are more restrictive; while for the scenario where the export line is part of
the HPP, converter current limitations are more restrictive instead.
Regarding voltage control, the ownership of the OLTC seems to not play a decisive role2,
since the performance of both scenarios 1 and 2 is very similar. However, if the export
line is owned and, therefore, the STATCOM can be placed at the end of the line, the
injection capability is enhanced, and therefore the voltage controllability at the PCC in
front of undervoltages is improved. This is what the results show, as when owning the
line the voltage level achieved at the PCC is closer to 1 than in the other two scenarios.
Nevertheless, for the case of overvoltage all the scenarios behave in a similar way.
As very little studies dedicated to voltage control in HPPs have been found in the
literature, this project humbly helps to establish the bases of coordinated reactive power
and voltage control architecture in HPPs. Therefore, there are still many aspects of this
topic that need further attention, opening the door to future works. Some of them are
listed below:
• Improving the accuracy of the data. As the main objective of this project
was to develop a novel control architecture, not too much resources have been
used to obtain very accurate data for the power plants. The numbers for a WPP
were taken and generalized for the other plants (using all values in pu). Therefore,
there may be value in replicating this study but taking a particular topology of
the power plants involved and calculating the equivalent impedances that impact
the reactive power capability of the HPP.
• Improving the dispatch algorithm. The dispatch algorithm here implemented
distributes reactive power references according to the availability of each asset.
This is straightforward to implement and works properly, but another dispatch
strategy could probably make a better use of the assets. Maybe a novel dispatch
algorithm for reactive power in HPPs could be developed which is inspired in
the dispatch algorithms used to optimize power flows along the transmission and
distribution systems.
• Including the OLTC in the control system. Due to technical diﬀiculties and
having other priorities, the control of the OLTC transformer has been excluded
from the voltage control loop. Including it and automating the tap-changer can
also add value to the model and reveal interesting conclusions in the future.
• Enable Fault Ride Through. FRT has been also excluded from the control
systems here developed because this project focused on static simulations, so faults
and imbalances were out of the scope of the study. Therefore, integrating a FRT
function together with the existing control architecture can provide interesting
insights to the dynamic behavior of an HPP. In general, exploring the dynamic
2As long as a third-party owner makes sure that the voltage at PoC is always close to 1 pu.
68
==PAGE:77==
performance of this control architecture is left to do and opens several research
opportunities.
• Running simulations with low active power generation. In situations where
the export line is loaded below its Surge Impedance Loading value, it behaves
as a capacitor rather than as an inductor (which is the common case). All the
simulations carried out here assume a generation of active power of either 1 pu or
0.7 pu, so this situation has not been studied3. Therefore, performing simulations
under these conditions to analyze the behavior of the plant with very light loading
of the line can provide a broader picture of the performance of the HPP.
3due to timing issues.
69
==PAGE:78==
70
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
International Renewable Energy Agency. World Energy Transitions Outlook: 1.5°C
Pathway. 2021. isbn: 9789292603342. url: www.irena.org.
[2]
Ministerio dell’Ambiente e della Tutela del Territorio e del Mare. PIANO NAZIONALE
INTEGRATO PER L’ENERGIA E IL CLIMA. 2019.
[3]
Ministerio para la Transición Ecológica y el reto Demográfico. PLAN NACIONAL
INTEGRADO DE ENERGÍA Y CLIMA. 2021.
[4]
Ministére de la Transition Écologique. PLAN NATIONAL INTEGRE ENERGIE-
CLIMAT de la FRANCE. 2019.
[5]
Bundesministerium fûr Wirtschaft und Energie. Integrierter Nationaler Energie-
und Klimaplan. June 2020.
[6]
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. Directive (EU)
2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018
on the promotion of the use of energy from renewables. 2018.
[7]
Oﬀice of Parliamentary Counsel. Australian Renewable Energy (Electricity) Regu-
lations 2001. Feb. 2022.
[8]
Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America. “Energy
Policy Act of 2005”. 2005.
[9]
Kamala Sarojini Ratnam, K. Palanisamy, and Guangya Yang. Future low-inertia
power systems: Requirements, issues, and solutions - A review. May 2020. doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2020.109773.
[10]
Falko Ueckerdt, Robert Brecha, and Gunnar Luderer. “Analyzing major challenges
of wind and solar variability in power systems”. In: Renewable Energy 81 (Sept.
2015), pp. 1–10. issn: 18790682. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2015.03.002.
[11]
Wind Europe. Renewable Hybrid Power Plants - Exploring the benefits and market
opportunities. July 2019.
[12]
Katherine Dykes et al. Opportunities for Research and Development of Hybrid
Power Plants (NREL). Sept. 2019.
[13]
Klinge Jacobsen et al. Overplanting in offshore wind power plants in different reg-
ulatory regimes Overplanting in offshore wind power plants in different regulatory
regimes. 2022.
[14]
Alessandra Cossu. “Optimal sizing of hybrid power plant”. Danish Technical Uni-
versity, July 2020. url: www.vindenergi.dtu.dk.
[15]
Mathias Kirk Jensen. “Sensitivity analysis for optimal sizing of wind-solar-battery
based hybrid power plant”. Danish Technical University, Mar. 2021. url: www.
vindenergi.dtu.dk.
[16]
Will Gorman et al. “Motivations and options for deploying hybrid generator-plus-
battery projects within the bulk power system”. In: Electricity Journal 33 (5 June
2020). issn: 10406190. doi: 10.1016/j.tej.2020.106739.
Thesis title
71
==PAGE:80==
[17]
Anca D Hansen et al. “European and Indian Grid Codes for Utility Scale Hybrid
Power Plants”. In: (2021). doi: 10.3390/en10100. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
en10100.
[18]
Markus Lehmann et al. Active Filtering in a Large-Scale STATCOM for the Inte-
gration of Offshore Wind Power.
[19]
Abhishek Rajan and T. Malakar. “Optimal reactive power dispatch using hy-
brid Nelder-Mead simplex based firefly algorithm”. In: International Journal of
Electrical Power and Energy Systems 66 (2015), pp. 9–24. issn: 01420615. doi:
10.1016/j.ijepes.2014.10.041.
[20]
D Thukaram and K Parthasarathy. Optimal reactive power dispatch algorithm for
voltage stability improvement. 1996, pp. 461–468.
[21]
Binod Shaw, V. Mukherjee, and S. P. Ghoshal. “Solution of reactive power dis-
patch of power systems by an opposition-based gravitational search algorithm”. In:
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 55 (2014), pp. 29–
40. issn: 01420615. doi: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2013.08.010.
[22]
K. Karthikeyan and P.K. Dhal. “Optimal Location of STATCOM based Dynamic
Stability Analysis tuning of PSS using Particle Swarm Optimization”. In: Materials
Today: Proceedings 5.1, Part 1 (2018). International Conference on Processing of
Materials, Minerals and Energy (July 29th – 30th) 2016, Ongole, Andhra Pradesh,
India, pp. 588–595. issn: 2214-7853. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2017.11.
122. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214785317323684.
[23]
Susanta Dutta, Provas Kumar Roy, and Debashis Nandi. “Optimal location of
STATCOM using chemical reaction optimization for reactive power dispatch prob-
lem”. In: Ain Shams Engineering Journal 7.1 (2016), pp. 233–247. issn: 2090-4479.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2015.04.013. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2090447915000696.
[24]
National Grid and AFRY. Future of Reactive Power Project Market Design-Project
Conclusions. Apr. 2022. url: https://www.nationalgrideso.com/document/249851/
download.
[25]
Energinet. Technical regulation 3.3.1 for electrical energy storage facilities. 2019.
url: https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/8FA21800D2234CFEABF5456DBE923836.
PDF?la=en&hash=B1EBC74294913D1B5B3B92B5DF8DE874D2993953.
[26]
Gabriel Haines. Power Factor Control with a Battery Energy Storage System
(BESS). 2018.
[27]
Alexandra Von Meier. ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS - A CONCEPTUAL IN-
TRODUCTION. John Wiley and Sons, 2006. isbn: 978-0-471-17859-0.
[28]
B. Kirby and E. Hirst. Ancillary service details: Voltage control. Oak Ridge Na-
tional Laboratory (ORNL), Dec. 1997. doi: 10.2172/607488. url: http://www.
osti.gov/servlets/purl/607488-O5YTjg/webviewable/.
[29]
Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability And Control by Prabha Kundur. Ed. by
Neal J. Balu and Mark G. Lauby. McGraw-Hill, 1993, pp. 99–194. isbn: 0-07-
035958-X.
72
==PAGE:81==
[30]
P M Anderson, San Diego, and California A A Fouad. Power System Control and
Stability Second Edition. Second. John Wiley & Sons, 2003. isbn: 0-471-23862-7.
[31]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. NREL Controllable Grid Interface (CGI):
Overview of Progress and Projects. NREL, 2018, p. 20.
[32]
Moumita Sarkar et al. “Reactive Power Capability Model of Wind Power Plant
Using Aggregated Wind Power Collection System”. In: Energies 12.9 (2019). issn:
1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en12091607. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/12/
9/1607.
[33]
R. Albarracin and M. Alonso. “Photovoltaic reactive power limits”. In: 2013,
pp. 13–18. isbn: 9781467330589. doi: 10.1109/EEEIC.2013.6549630.
[34]
International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61400-27-1:2020 Wind Energy
Generation Systems - Part 27-1: electrical simulation models - Generic models.
July 2020.
[35]
E Muljadi et al. Equivalencing the Collector System of a Large Wind Power Plant.
2006. url: http://www.osti.gov/bridgeonlineordering:http://www.ntis.gov/ordering.
htm.
[36]
Hamed Atyia Soodi and Ahmet Mete Vural. “Controller parameter optimization
for a 13-level cascaded H-bridge medium voltage static synchronous compensator”.
In: International Transactions on Electrical Energy Systems 29 (4 Apr. 2019). issn:
20507038. doi: 10.1002/etep.2805.
[37]
European Network of Transmission System Operators. Industrial Demand Re-
sponse for Frequency Balancing and Voltage Control. url: https://www.entsoe.eu/
Technopedia/techsheets/industrial-demand-response-for-frequency-balancing-and-
voltage-control.
[38]
Alin George Raducu et al. Design and Implementation of a Hybrid Power Plant
Controller.
[39]
Shree Om Bade. Control strategies of hybrid power plants. 2021. url: www .
vindenergi.dtu.dk.
[40]
Daniel Vázquez Pombo, Florin Iov, and Daniel Ioan Stroe. “A novel control ar-
chitecture for hybrid power plants to provide coordinated frequency reserves”. In:
Energies 12 (5 2019). issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en12050919.
[41]
Panagiota Adamou. Dynamic Hybrid Park Simulation for Co-located HPP for
Frequency Ancillary Services. 2019. url: www.vindenergi.dtu.dk.
[42]
Kaushik Das, Müfit Altin, and Edgar Nuño Martinez. “Dynamic Modelling of
Wind-Solar-Storage Based Hybrid Power Plant”. English. In: Proceedings of the
18th WInd Integration Workshop 2019. 18th Wind Integration Workshop : Interna-
tional workshop on large-scale integration of wind power into power systems as well
as on transmission networks for offshore wind power plants, WIW 2019 ; Confer-
ence date: 16-10-2019 Through 18-10-2019. 2019. url: http://windintegrationworkshop.
org/.
[43]
Aivaras Celna. Controller Interaction of Wind Hybrid Power Plants for providing
Ancillary Services. 2020. url: www.vindenergi.dtu.dk.
73
==PAGE:82==
[44]
Qian Long et al. Interfacing Energy Management with Supervisory Control for
Hybrid Power Plants.
[45]
Petersen. “Proof-of-Concept on Next Generation Hybrid Power Plant Control”.
Department of Energy Technology, 2020. isbn: 978-87-7210-658-8.
[46]
Qian Long, Kaushik Das, and Poul Sørensen. “Hierarchical Control Architecture
of Co-located Hybrid Power Plants”. In: TechRxiv (2022). doi: https://dx.doi.org/
10.36227/techrxiv.16571094.v2.
[47]
Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/631 of 14 April 2016 establishing a network
code on requirements for grid connection of generators (Text with EEA relevance).
Apr. 2016. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:
32016R0631.
[48]
Energinet. Technical regulation 3.2.2 for PV power plants above 11 kW. 2016. url:
https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/C4ED8450A81243EE83ED795040D5DADD.PDF?
la=en&hash=56CE2D05FBB235E28A01D454022FE26744C074EF.
[49]
Energinet. Technical regulation 3.2.5 for wind power plants above 11 kW. 2016.
url: https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/BD322E7805694462AB125E5B5D0D79BC.
PDF?la=en&hash=DB619E3EAD98AD2F2691CEA0B68BE8B438F4B3FD.
[50]
Energinet. Transmission System Data. 2020. url: https://en.energinet.dk/-/media/
76C3D434A7E2499F94E7DB66D3A2DE21.xlsx?la=en&hash=5FDA9131049632B5EB0BB0ABC870D
74
==PAGE:83==
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
