==PAGE:1==
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS en-
semble product as hydrological model forcing
Master Thesis
Magnus Hald
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
03 June, 2022
By
Magnus Hald
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Ål Nik, 2018
Published by:
DTU Sustain, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Environmental En-
gineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis was carried out in under guidance
of my two supervisors:
Jonas Wied Pedersen PhD, Postdoc, DTU Environment & DMI
Peter Bauer-Gottwein PhD, Professor in Hydrology and Water Resources Management,
DTU Environment
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, hydrology
and data analysis.
Magnus Hald - s164297
Signature
Date
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
ii
03-06-2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Many factions within the Danish authorities have recently started to prioritize the test-
ing and implementation of a regional flood forecasting system for Denmark. The Danish
Meteorological Institute (DMI) seeks to investigate the quality of their COMEPS NWP pre-
cipitation forecasts as forcing to a flood forecasting system.
The HYPE model, a hydrologic model developed by the Swedish Meteorologic and Hy-
drologic Institute (SMHI), was chosen for hydrologic transformation of the precipitation
forecasts into streamflow forecasts.
The COMEPS ensemble product was used to reforecast streamflow in the catchment of
Ryå in the months of February and March 2020. Flooding is known to have occurred in
the area in these months, with long periods of synoptic frontal systems passing over the
area. Various statistical tools were used to evaluate the performance of the COMEPS
ensemble product in a flood forecasting framework with HYPE as the hydrologic model.
The hydrologic model was found to be negatively biased in peak streamflow events with
the current level of calibration. The COMEPS ensemble product was found to have good
potential in forecasting peak streamflow from large winter frontal systems in a small-
medium sized Danish catchment as Ryå. Albeit the ensemble product displayed increas-
ing positive bias over increasing lead time, this did not result in a significant amount of
false alarms. A low number of false alarms may increase user confidence in a flood warn-
ing system.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude towards my supervisor, Peter Bauer-Gottwein, Profes-
sor in the Department of Environmental Engineering, for guidance, advice and technical
assistance on hydrological modelling throughout the preparation of this thesis. I would
also like to thank my supervisor Industrial Postdoc Jonas Wied Pedersen for expert guid-
ance in the areas of meteorological data, weather models, hydrologic modelling & data
modelling.
Additionally a profound thanks to Michael Brian Butts PhD, Senior Researcher at Depart-
ment of Flooding and Hydrology at DMI for expert knowledge on hydrologic concepts and
hydrologic models.
Lastly a big thanks to my girlfriend Thais Jiménez for proof-reading, both constructive and
aggravating feedback on figure design and eternal patience.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Flood forecasting using NWP products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Data
6
3
Methods
11
3.1
Hydrologic modelling and calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Data extraction and simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Results & Discussion
29
4.1
Hydrologic modelling and calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Reforecasting streamflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Conclusion
52
6
Further investigations
54
Bibliography
56
A Workflow
60
B COMEPS Perturbations
62
C Parameter runoff response
63
D Water storage & transfer in HYPE
64
E
Auto-calibration/Manual calibration
65
F
Evapotranspiration over soil depth
66
G MST observed streamflow data flaws
67
H 18 member ensemble forecast with peak attenuation
68
I
COMEPS and ClimateGridDK precipitation February & March 2020
69
J
Parameter scaling issues
70
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
HYPE
HYdrological Predictions for the Environment
NWP
Numerical Weather Prediction
PET
Potential Evapotranspiration
TIGGE
THOR-PEX Interactive Grand Global Ensemble
GEUS
National Geological Research for Denmark and Greenland
CAMELS
Catchment Attributes and MEteorology for Large-sample Studies
ECMWF
European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts
DMI
Danish Meteorological Institute
SMHI
Swedish Metrological and Hydrological Institute
HARMONIE
HIRLAM–ALADIN Research on Mesoscale Operational NWP in
Euromed(Mesoscale convection-permitting NWP model)
HarmonEPS Ensemble Prediction System based on the HARMONIE NWP model
COMEPS
Continuous Mesoscale Ensemble Prediction System, (DMI’s NWP
Ensemble product)
GRIB-file
GRidded Binary file
3D-Var
Three-dimensional Variational Data Assimilation
CSS
Composite Scaled Sensitivity
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
KGE
Kling-Gupta Efficiency
NSE
Nash-Sutcliffe Efficiency
MRE
Mean Relative Error
ROC
Receiving Operator Characteristic
CRPS
Continuous Ranked Probability Score
HRU
Hydrological Response Unit
SLC
Soil Land-use Class
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The risks of flooding are increasing with growing urbanization and changes in climate and
extreme weather (Seneviratne et al. 2012). The 2019 Global Commission for Adaptation
report (GCA 2019) urges action to innovate and advance climate adaptation solutions to
adapt to the inevitability of rising seas, fiercer storms, and more unpredictable rainfall.
Without adaptation, changing climate and weather patterns may reduce growth in global
agriculture yields up to 30 percent by 2050 (GCA 2019). The report highlights early and
reliable flood warning systems as an area where an increased investment would result in
substantial benefits.
Denmark is vulnerable to flooding caused by frequent and widespread storm surges,
cloudbursts and long periods with high intensity rain. Current warning systems in Den-
mark include a cloudburst warning system that produces a warning when a cloudburst
index reaches a certain threshold, as well as a coastal warning system that predicts peak
sea-water level. There is currently no warning system regarding peak flow in rivers and
water level in lakes. In the Danish Finance Reform of 2022 a partnership lead by DMI
was appointed as the authority to lead the creation of a flood warning system framework,
and it is therefore of great interest to conduct preliminary research and model testing with
DMI’s NWP COMEPS ensemble product as input to a hydrologic model.
1.1
Flood forecasting using NWP products
Since the early 1900’s weather forecasting has sought to represent the atmospheric condi-
tions and dynamic processes with physical equations, wherein future weather projections
is driven by integrating the partial differential equations that represent the dynamics of the
atmosphere. Figure 1.1 shows the evolution of forecasting skill over the last decades.
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the increasing forecast skill for different forecast horizons of the northern
hemisphere (NH) and the southern hemisphere (SH) from (Bauer et al. 2015).
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
1
==PAGE:9==
Forecasting skill of NWP (Numerical Weather Prediction) models is the correlation be-
tween the forecasted values and the observed values (Bauer et al. 2015). Figure 1.1
clearly displays that the predictive power of forecasts greater for shorter forecast hori-
zons than longer forecast horizons. Forecast horizon or lead time is the extent of time
into the future that a forecast is valid for (Cuo et al. 2011). The two terms, lead time and
forecast horizon, will be used interchangeably throughout this project. The World Meteo-
rological Organization (WMO) defines forecasts with different forecast horizons as (Cuo
et al. 2011):
• Nowcast: 0-2 hours
• Very short-range forecast: 0-12 hours
• Short-range forecast: 12-72 hours
• Medium-range forecast: 72 - 420 hours
Figure 1.1 also shows that historically, the forecasting skill has been considerably better
in the northern hemisphere than the southern hemisphere due to a broader and more
detailed level of in-situ observational data that gives a better initialization and parameter-
ization of the physical processes in NWP models. The confluence with the forecasting
skill of the southern hemisphere is induced by the breakthrough of satellite data utilization
in NWP models. Microwave and infrared sounders, measuring atmospheric temperature
and water vapour as a function of altitude, are particularly effective in reducing forecasting
uncertainty, accounting for approximately a 45% reduction of forecasting error (English
et al. 2013).
The uncertainty of a NWP weather forecast is obtained by taking into account an ensem-
ble of predictions. The individual members of the ensemble are generated from various
perturbations of the initial conditions or parameterizations of the physical processes in the
same model, or input of individual predictions for different numerical weather models over
the same forecast horizon.
Ensemble products from NWP forecasts have been generated since the 1990’s, with Eu-
ropean ECMWF ensemble forecasts starting in 1993. Ensemble prediction systems (EPS)
demonstrate a greater ability to forecast with increased accuracy over longer lead-times
when compared to deterministic NWP models (Lewis 2005), because of the erroneous na-
ture of the initial conditions and the parameterization of model physics (Lewis 2005). An
ensemble forecast system can be constructed by many different setups. Some ensembles
combine deterministic forecasts from multiple models, other ensembles originate from a
single model with a range of initial conditions, boundary conditions, or parameters.
1.1.1
Previous research
Resolution of rainfall cells in NWP predictions is a very important factor for the accuracy
of the forecast. Simply due to the cost of running an NWP model multiple times, an EPS is
normally run at around half the horizontal resolution of the equivalent purely deterministic
NWP model (WMO 2012). The improvement of the resolution for ensemble predictions
demands huge computational power, and together with storage, these remain limiting
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
2
==PAGE:10==
factors of improving cell resolution of these forecasts (Cloke and Pappenberger 2009).
The key component of a regular ensemble forecast is that the model is run many times
from very slightly different initial conditions, or perturbations on the parameterizations of
the physical processes. Some ensembles use more than one model within the ensemble
system, a multi-model EPS, and other ensembles use the same model but with different
combinations of physical parameterization schemes, known as multi-physics EPS (WMO
2012). A regular NWP ensemble product is usually produced from a single weather pre-
diction center.
Previous studies such as Jasper et al. 2002 & Davolio et al. 2008, have combined de-
terministic forecasts from different forecast centres into an ensemble known as the ’poor
man’s ensemble’. While this acknowledges the uncertainty in using a purely deterministic
forecast, the models used in a poor man’s ensemble have different sets of errors and
bias and are thus hard to aggregate. Another technique is to use time-lagged ensem-
bles, where forecasts with different lead times for the same prediction time are combined
(Cloke and Pappenberger 2009).
A ’grand-ensemble’ is the aggregation of several ensemble prediction systems captures
the uncertainties associated with the initial conditions and parameterisations of the indi-
vidual ensembles. The differences between the above-mentioned types of ensembles
are illustrated in figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Illustration of the different types of ensemble prediction systems. Left: NWP ensem-
ble product from one weather prediction center. Center: Poor man’s ensemble. Right: Grand-
ensemble.
There is great potential in the use of ensemble NWP products in hydrological models for
operational peak flow forecasting systems, and ever more institutions and agencies are
moving towards the adoption of ensemble products to drive their predictions (Cloke and
Pappenberger 2009). The bias of NWP precipitation forecasts has improved over the re-
cent years with the forecasts now producing more realistic concentrated sharp peaks of
precipitation, instead of smoothed-out and less intense precipitation that older forecasts
tended to produce (Göber et al. 2004). Another driver behind using ensemble forecasts
in flood forecasting systems is the ready availability of these data, given that many coun-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
3
==PAGE:11==
tries produce these forecasts multiple times per day (Cloke and Pappenberger 2009). An
advantage of using ensemble products as opposed to high-resolution deterministic fore-
casts is that the ensemble forecasts produce multiple scenarios, and hence also provide
an idea about uncertainty in the forecasts.
Flood forecasting is in its main essence, the process of modelling and predicting an accu-
rate hydrologic response from a watershed, by the application of a hydrologic model with
weather predictions as forcing input. The main purpose of a flood forecasting system is to
warn relevant authorities, and thereby reduce the economic, cultural and human losses.
Important factors in flood forecasts include reliability and forecast horizon of the forecasts.
Flood forecasts typically produce an output of waterway elevations, streamflow, extent of
inundation areas or data on the temporal extent of peak discharge (Jain et al. 2018).
With the appointment of DMI as the Danish flood-forecasting Authority in 2022, Denmark
enters the European Flood Awareness partnership (EFAS) who produce flood warnings
for member countries. However, the flood forecasts prepared by EFAS use coarse 18x18
km ECMWF medium-range forecasts and a spatially coarse distributed hydrologic model,
and is therefore intended only for catchments with areas ≥2000 km2 (P. Smith et al. 2016).
This appeals to the construction of a local flood forecasting framework in Denmark that is
able to predict peak streamflow in much smaller catchments.
1.2
Project outline
This project will focus on predicting streamflow in the Danish stream Ryå in Northern
Jutland. This will be done using the operational ensemble COMEPS NWP data from the
Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) as forcing input to the hydrologic model HYPE. The
HYPE model is a hydrological model for small-scale and large-scale assessments of water
resources and water quality. It was initially developed at the Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute (SMHI) during the period of 2005–2007, though the model code and
process representation is being modified and improved continuously, and new versions
with additional modules are still, to this date, being released. The set-up of the HYPE
model will be calibrated against in-situ observations of streamflow. The HYPE modelling
framework is an interesting candidate as a hydrological model for a warning system in
Denmark as it is already in use for that very purpose in Sweden and Ireland. Both Sweden
and Ireland use the same European HARMONIE-AROME NWP framework to produce
NWP ensemble products as DMI does to produce their COMEPS NWP data.
1.2.1
Learning Objectives
The main aim of this thesis is to investigate how well peak flows in the catchment of Ryå
can be predicted with DMI’s operational ensemble NWP product (COMEPS) as forcing
data input to a HYPE modelling framework that is calibrated on DMI’s ‘ClimateGridDK’
observational product. The following research questions will be investigated in the project:
• Which level of detail, in terms of hydrologic response units, parameters, and level of
calibration, are appropriate for peak flow modelling and forecasting within the HYPE
modelling framework?
• How does an hourly HYPE model-setup and calibration with fine resolution 1x1km
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
4
==PAGE:12==
ClimatreGridDK precipitation compare with a daily model setup with 10x10km pre-
cipitation as reference?
• How well does a warning system based on ensemble NWP data and the HYPE
modelling framework perform for recent flooding events of February and March 2020
in the Ryå catchment?
• How does the predictive skill of the HYPE model with DMI’s COMEPS NWP data
as input evolve over a range of forecasting horizons compared to benchmarking
techniques such as climatology and persistence?
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
5
==PAGE:13==
2
Data
This chapter will introduce data types and source used in this project. The data include
both those used for the calibration, and those used for the streamflow forecasting frame-
work.
Figure 2.1: Timeline of the periods that each of the different data source used in the project spans
over.
Figure 2.1 shows the respective time-period coverage that each data source has. There
is a large overlapping period where most data is available from 2011 to 2019. The most
important forcing data to keep constant over both the calibration and validation periods
is the precipitation, as perturbations in this data source, will in all likelihood result in a
considerable change in the streamflow output of the hydrologic model. The precipitation
is also the most difficult of the forcing inputs to forecast, and has the most uncertainty
related to it.
COMEPS NWP forecasting data
In order for a hydrologic model as HYPE to predict streamflow, forecasted precipitation
data is needed. Potential evapotranspiration is assumed to have minimal interannual
variability, and temperature is only used in the snow-melt module of HYPE when ob-
served PET is supplied. On this basis, forecasted values of these two climate variables
are not considered in this project. COMEPS (Continous Mesoscale Prediction System)
NWP ensemble forecast data from DMI is used as forecasted precipitation. This data
represents the domain used by DMI in the HarmonEPS, which is an ensemble prediction
system that originates from the HARMONIE NWP model framework. The HARMONIE
framework is used by 10 Northern-European countries, which means that the ensemble
products produced by the meteorological institutes in those countries are based on the
same parameterizations of the physical processes occurring in the atmosphere and same
perturbations of initial conditions. This makes comparison and/or exchange of knowledge
between different forecasting research more feasible.
The COMEPS ensemble product generates a 2.5km horizontal grid resolution, with hourly
updates using time-lagged three-dimensional variance analysis. The COMEPS product
generates a 18-member EPS probabilistic forecast, with a lead time of up to 56 hours,
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
6
==PAGE:14==
while the deterministic NWP forecast has a forecast horizon of 60 hours. A main differ-
ence to previous operational EPS is that other traditional ensemble prediction systems
runs alternating cycles between generation of forecasts and data assimilation. COMEPS,
on the contrary, incorporates data assimilation parallel to the forecast generation and en-
semble member generation. The time-lagged generation means that the ensemble mem-
bers are generated from the last 6 hours. For instance, at the time 08 UTC, the ensemble
is made up of perturbed members each hour over the last 6 hours (03, 04, 05, 06, 07,
08 UTC). With three ensemble simulations run at an hourly time-step that means that the
EPS contains 18 members at all times, apart from a warm-up period, as illustrated below
on figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the COMEPS computation scheme and the timelagging of ensembles
in order to optimize computation effort and number of ensemble members.
The dashed part of the lines in Figure 2.2 shows the time it takes for the HPC device to
produce the forecast of the three ensemble members for each time step, while the rest of
the lines represent the active part of the forecast. The dark blue line resembles the pertur-
bation with changed model physics, the grey line resembles the simulation with changed
initial conditions, and the light blue line resembles the standard model simulation. The
cycling of perturbations in the COMEPS framework can be seen in figure B.1 in appendix
B. The perturbations in model physics are changes to how turbulence and shallow con-
vection is represented in the model. The model changes in convection are aiming towards
getting a higher hit rate in precipitation events with convective rainfall. The perturbations
in initial conditions are either randomly selected within a predefined range or chosen with
an emphasis on which weather type is prevalent in observations.
The COMEPS ensemble data comes as GRIB-files. GRIB files are binary files containing
output information from numerical weather models in a raw and compressed format. Each
GRIB-file contains n number of messages, where the number of messages is restricted
only by physical memory, typically 2GB to 4GB, hence working with a large number of
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
7
==PAGE:15==
GRIB-files can require a sizeable amount computational effort. The GRIB-files used in this
thesis contains information on the unit of measurement, height of measurement, forecast
horizon, and a time-stamp indicating from which point in time the forecast was made.
Each GRIB-file from DMI represents a matrix with a precipitation and temperature value
for each grid cell in the area of investigation given by longitude and latitude integers. The
unit of precipitation in the data is given as kg · m−2. The forecast time is an accumulation
of precipitation 0-5 hours from the offset time. The offset time stamp is also encoded in
the GRIB-file.
2.0.1
ClimateGridDK Observed precipitation
Hourly values of observed precipitation, temperature and potentia evapotranspiration in
a 1x1 km spatial resolution is provided by DMI. The observed precipitation grid covers
the whole area of Denmark, and contains almost 50,000 grid cells. The data is obtained
through interpolation between the institutes network of in-situ gauges. The interpolation is
a weighting of each stations in the surrounding area, and has a distinct focus on reducing
the effect of coastal observations on inland areas. The observed PET is calculated with the
Makkink equation, which estimates PET from incoming solar radiation and the relationship
between water vapour and temperature (Jacobs and De Bruin 1998).
Table 2.1: The structure of the .txt-file with the latitude and longitude coordinates in m from the
centre of the grid cell, and precipitation values in mm
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Column 4
Grid ID
E coordinate
N coordinate
Precipitation value
Table 2.1 shows the file structure of the observed product. Grid cells are numbered start-
ing with lowest numbers in the Southwest corner of the grid. Numbers increase going
North, and once at top in a column, it continues in the Southern most point in the next
column to the east.
2.0.2
CAMELS-DK catchment data
Catchment Attributes and MEteorology for Large-sample Studies (CAMELS) is a collec-
tion of catchments by attributes such as catchment climate, hydrology, land cover, soil,
geology, topography, and river network.
The CAMELS-DK dataset is composed of both static and dynamic attributes, with static
attributes being catchment averages such as mean precipitation, mean air temperature
and mean slope, and dynamic variables being a time-series of daily climate forcing data for
the catchments in a period of 21 years (1990 - 2011) (Koch and Schneider 2022). These
daily forcing data are based on coarser spatial resolution DMI observational products such
as 10x10 km for precipitation, 20x20 km for temperature and 40x40 km for PET with the
PET here also being calculated by the Makkink equation.
The catchment chosen for investigation is the catchment around Ryå in Northern Jutland.
The catchment was chosen due to its relatively natural state compared to Danish stan-
dards. This means the river morphology remains largely natural and minimal retaining
of water is occurring along the length of the stream. The Ryå catchment shape from
the CAMELS-DK dataset is the upstream area surrounding Ryå. The catchment outlet is
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
8
==PAGE:16==
located near a small town called Manna, where Miljøstyrelsen also has a water level mea-
suring station, that is used to compute the observed discharge of the catchment through
varying seasonal rating curves.
Figure 2.3: The location of the Ryå CAMELS catchment in Northern Jutland, shown on the re-
gional danish DEM, Danmarks Højdemodel.
Figure 2.3 shows that the area in the downstream part of the catchment is very low lying,
with elevations below 10 MAMSL. The area is widely used for agriculture, and a lot of
low-lying fields, in danger of flooding under high streamflow, lie just beside the stream
itself, as is shown on figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: An aerial photo of the flooding of Ryå in early March 2020.
Photo: Danmarks
Naturfredningsforening Jammerbugt.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
9
==PAGE:17==
In the short time-span where data from operational COMEPS NWP forecasts are available
(see figure 2.1), the most interesting period of time is the months of February and March
2020, as displayed on figure 2.5. Both the forecasting quality of the streamflow peaks
themselves, the rising and receding limb of the hydrograph, as well as the high baseflow
is of interest. This will evaluate the capabilities of the HYPE model and the COMEPS
NWP forcing in terms of predicting periods of high streamflow.
Figure 2.5: Observed streamflow from station 60001, near the town of Manna. Period overlapping
with COMEPS operationability.
Observed streamflow data
Streamflow observations is provided as a time-series by Miljøstyrelsen (MST). The time-
series is encoded as a .txt-file with data points for flow measurements every 15th minute,
as seen in table 2.2. MST produces the streamflow measurements by establishing a rela-
tionship between stream depth and streamflow. The streamflow measurements are then
derived from a continuous reading of stream depth. The relationship between stream
depth and streamflow is dynamic over time and space, and can vary due to erosion, sedi-
mentation or growth of plants in the streambed. The amount of plants in the streambed is
season-dependant and therefore alternating relationships between streamflow and water
depth is used over a year. Different methods of interpolation are used in different streams
and varies over the season.
Table 2.2: The structure of the .txt-file with the date given in the format of DD-MM-YYYY, and the
time given in HH:MM. The unit of the flow measurement is L/s.
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Date
Time
Flow-value
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
10
==PAGE:18==
3
Methods
3.1
Hydrologic modelling and calibration
Set-up of HYPE model
The HYPE model can be applied to varying set-ups, from large lumped catchments around
a large regional river, to high resolution sub-catchments accounting for small tributaries.
For instance the swedish model set-up S-HYPE is used to calculate water discharge for
the entirety of Sweden with 37,786 catchments, with an average area of approximately
12 km2 (Bergstrand et al. 2014). On the other hand the world-wide set-up of the HYPE
model, WW-HYPE, was divided into 131,283 catchments with an average size of over
1,000 km2 (Arheimer et al. 2020).
In HYPE, the model parameters can either be general for the whole model or linked to
soil type or land-use class effectively making the parameters semi-distributed. The HYPE
framework also allows user defined grouping of subcatchments into larger parameter re-
gions (parreg). This regionalization of parameters applies mainly to correction parame-
ters, that can be used to regionally correct both forcing input such as precipitation, but to
a larger extent also internal water transfers in the model, with corrections of snow-melt,
recession, evapotranspiration and aquifer return flow. All this boils down to effectively
giving the user the option to scale the detail of the model on a scale from very simple,
lumped and conceptual, to a semi-distributed model with high resolution sub-catchments
and regional parameters.
The HYPE model is run through an executable file that takes several tab-separated .txt-
files as input. The model requires as a minimum 4 set-up files and 2 forcing data files. An
elaborate description of these files as well as a few other key components is described in
Table 3.1.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1.1
Code structure
Table 3.1: The structure of the .txt-files with the date given in the format of DD-MM-YYYY, and
the time given in HH:MM.
Files
Description of function and components
info.txt
This file contains model options and simulation settings, and governs
the simulation. It works as the user interface for a HYPE model run,
and herein the modeller can specify the simulation period, model time-
step and toggle on optional modules and outputs
GeoClass.txt
This file contains information on the soil types and land uses of the dif-
ferent sub-catchments. Herein the modeller gives a number of SLC’s
(Soil type - Land use Combinations) regarding soil type, land use, tile-
depth, drain-depth, depth of each of the three soil layers.
GeoData.txt
This file contains the ID of the sub-basins, area of each sub-basin,
downstream sub-basin, fraction of the hydrological response units cre-
ated in the GeoClass.txt file for each sub-basin, length of main river
within the sub-basin, and other optionals for each sub-basin.
par.txt
This file contains the model parameters that determine the function of
the model. Each model parameter has a dependency that determines
the model domain in which the parameter is active. The most important
model parameter dependencies are soil type, land use type, spatial di-
vision by dependency on a sub-catchment ID and temporal restrictions
i.e. parameters active only for certain months.
Pobs.txt
This file contains the precipitation forcing data. The unit is mm/time-
step, the time-step of the model is specified in the info.txt-file. The file is
a matrix with one precipitation value per sub-catchment per time-step.
Tobs.txt
This file contains the temperature forcing data. The unit is C/time-step.
The file is a matrix with one temperature value per sub-catchment per
time-step.
Qobs.txt
The Qobs.txt file holds observations of discharge for selected points
in the model domain. The discharge is assumed to correspond to the
outflow from a subbasin. The unit of discharge is m3/s. This time-
series needs to be continuous but doesn’t need to cover the whole
simulation period. This file is used as input in the automatic calibration
of parameters.
Xobs.txt
The Xobs.txt file holds observations of different variables for selected
points in the model domain. Some of the variables can be used as
forcing data in the model, for instance observed PET or observed con-
centrations of a substance. This time-series needs to be continuous
but doesn’t need to cover the whole simulation period.
3.1.2
Set-up and sensitivity of model parameters
The HYPE model contains over 150 parameters, and parameters are continuously being
developed to fit the different uses of the HYPE model. A large number of parameters are
developed for understanding the transport of nutrients within a hydrological model, and
some parameters are only used for specific climates or regions, such as glacier-related
parameters, elevation-correcting parameters. This effectively brings the parameters af-
fecting runoff generation in a relatively natural catchment without major influence from
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
12
==PAGE:20==
lakes or regulation of waterways down to ≈35.
In this project the generation of runoff is the process of interest in the HYPE model. The
runoff generation from soil is represented by various parameters that describes the lateral
and vertical transport of water in between the soil layers and between the soil layers and
the waterway. The HYPE model can incorporate from 1 to 3 layers of soil layers for each
Hydrological Response Unit (HRU). The SLC’s provided in the GeoClass model-setup file
act as HRU’s in HYPE. The soil-type/land-use combinations defined in the GeoClass-file
are then taken as input fractions for each sub-basin included in the HYPE simulation. This
governs the hydrological properties of each sub-basin.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the parameters governing the processes happening in the model.
The HYPE model is composed of a rainfall-runoff model for each HRU, with soil layers
representing buckets, as in a simplified description of the major processes occurring in the
hydrologic cycle. Figure 3.1 also present the most fundamental state variables describing
the state of a storage over time or throughout a spatial extent and flow variables, the
outflows from a water storage. State variables are marked in green font, flow variables
are marked in blue font, while model parameters are marked in red font.
In the soil component of the rainfall-runoff model, the fraction of precipitation that infiltrates
into the first soil layer is determined by the sum of precipitation and snow melt minus
the fraction of precipitation that infiltrates as macropore flow or reaches the stream as
surface runoff. The rate of melting snow is determined by a snow melt parameter, cmlt,
and a threshold temperature for snowmelt to occur, ttmp. The parameter, mactrinf, is a
threshold for infiltration set in the unit of mm ts−1.
Each soil layer is divided in the fractions wcep, wcfc, wcwp and non-penetrable soil (frac-
tion of solid soil particles). These parameters describe water retention in the soil and can
be specified for each soil layer, or assumed to be the same throughout the soil layers
depending on level of detail in the model. wcep is effective porosity of the soil, i.e. the
fraction of void space in the soil. wcfc is the fraction of soil available for evapotranspira-
tion but not for runoff in the root zone. The root zone is in the HYPE modelling framework
defined as the two uppermost layers. wcwp is the wilting point as a fraction of soil depth.
Upwelling from a lower soil layer to a higher soil layer can happen if all void space of a
lower layer is filled with water.
Surface runoff is in the HYPE framework split up into two components. The surface runoff
that is generated from the intensity of precipitation being greater than infiltration rate is
determined by the fraction srrate which is a dimensionless parameter between 0 and 1,
where 1 will mean no infiltration and all precipitation as surface runoff, this runoff com-
ponent can be tracked in time and space with the flow variable ros2. Surface runoff can
also be generated by an upwelling of water from the soil due to layer 1 being fully satu-
rated. This is governed by the parameter srrcs which is given in days−1. Surface runoff
generated by a high groundwater table can be tracked by the flow variable ros1.
Runoff is also generated by each of the soil layers. The subsurface transport of water from
the soils to the river is governed by the recession flow parameters rrcs1 and rrcs2 given in
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
13
==PAGE:21==
days−1. The recession flows are dimensionless coefficients determining the fractions of
water leaving the soil layers each time-step. rrcs1 governs the recession in the uppermost
layer, while rrcs2 governs the recession in the bottom layer. The recession is assumed to
diminish with depth and the recession in the middle layer is determined by a exponential
decay function of rrcs1. Recession from soil layers to the waterway can only happen if
the bottom bathymetry of the waterway is deeper than the saturated part of the soil layer,
i.e. if all layers are saturated, recession will occur from all layers, and if only a fraction of
the bottom layer is saturated, only this fraction will contribute to runoff by recession, given
that this saturated fraction is not deeper than the streambed.
The evapotranspiration module is composed of evapotranspiration of plants from the wa-
ter available in the root zone, which in the HYPE framework is defined as the two up-
permost layers, and open water evaporation from lakes and waterways (see figure 3.1).
The evapotranspiration in the model is by default governed by simple temperature-based
equation, where evapotranspiration occurs at a rate, cevp, that increases with increas-
ing temperature over a certain temperature threshold for evapotranspiration ttmp. The
evapotranspiration can be adjusted by a seasonal sinusoidal factor, cseason, that can be
used to dampen or increase the ET in specific periods of the year. cseason is dependant
on the two parameters cevpam and cevpph that describe the amplitude and phase of the
oscillation, respectively.
The HYPE model can also take PET as input into the model through an external .txt-file.
This simplifies the model, and reduces uncertainty related to the calculation of PET, but it
also makes the model less flexible for use in locations where historic records of calculated
PET are absent. Calculated PET is available from DMI, and is used in this project, as it
is likely to increase model accuracy in Denmark.
As illustrated in figure 3.1 the macropore flow goes directly from the surface to layer 3,
and is regulated by the parameter macrate which is the fraction of precipitation infiltrating
through macropores. Given that this process transports water to layer 3 and hereby ef-
fectively skipping the evapotranspiration in the root zone (layers 1+2), this parameter can
be used to regulate storage of water in the model. The maximum amount of water that
can infiltrate by macropore flow is determined by a threshold mactrsm set as a fraction of
wcwp + wcfc.
Water present in the porous soil space of layers 1-3 can also be transported vertically
across soil layers. Water can percolate to the layer below if its pores are not entirely satu-
rated. This process is controlled by the parameters mperc1 and mperc2 which represent
the maximum percolation capacity to layers 2 and 3, respectively. Percolation only occurs
if the field capacity is exceeded in the soil layer above.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
14
==PAGE:22==
Root zone
wcep3
wcfc3
wcwp3
Non-
penetrable 
soil fraction
rrcs1
cro1
cro2
rrcs2
cro3
Infiltration
(infilt)
infil
Macropore flow
(macrate, mactrinf, 
mactrsm)
Evapotranspiration 
from soil layers 1 + 2
(cevp, cevpph, cevpam, 
lp)
evap
Precipitation
Surface runoff
srrcs
ros1
mperc1
mperc2
Open water evaporation
(cevp, cevpph, cevpam, lp)
evap
Snow melt (cmlt)
srrate
ros2
Stream depth
Groundwater 
depth (gwat)
sml2
sml1
sml3
rcgrw
aqin
retrate
aqut
Aquifer Inflow and 
return flow 
interactions with 
other subbasins
Figure 3.1: A conceptualization of the HYPE framework, the parameters (in red) used in
the model set-up in this project, the state variables (in green) and the flow variables (in
blue) used to track the movement and storage of water in the model.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
15
==PAGE:23==
The influx of groundwater into waterways by surface-groundwater interaction is a vital part
of the flow in Danish streams. Results from Sechu et al. 2022 has revealed that about 85%
of Denmark’s streams are connected to groundwater with approximately equal portions
in sandy and clayey subsoil areas. It is therefore important to identify streams that have
a high degree of surface-groundwater interaction, as well as streams with a low degree
of surface-groundwater interaction.
Although a low recession coefficient in layer 3 can soften the peaks in discharge in the
hydrograph, an aquifer is needed to provide base flow throughout periods of little or no
precipitation. For the case of Denmark, the influx of groundwater into streams is also of
considerable significance for the total discharge (Sechu et al. 2022).
In the HYPE modelling framework, regional aquifers are linear reservoirs which can be
connected to multiple sub-basins. Water influx into the aquifer happens by percolation of
water from the deepest soil layer. The aquifer is represented through a user-defined total
volume and initial volume. The processes governing the recharge of the aquifer is the
dimensionless coefficient parameter rcgrw and the recession of the water into the stream
is determined by the parameter retrate, which is simply a fraction of the water volume
retained in the aquifer as outflow per time-step.
The parameters and which runoff-generating process they are linked to can be seen in
table 3.2 below.
Table 3.2: Parameters linked to the three runoff-generating processes used in this setup.
Run-off generating
process
Linked parameters
Soil storage capacity
wcfc & wcep
Soil Saturation runoff
rrcs1, rrcs2, srrcs, mperc1 & mperc2
Infiltration runoff
mactrinf, macrate, srrate & mactrsm
Snow-governing processes are known to be responsible for great variability in runoff gen-
eration for some regions (Kuraś et al. 2008). However, Denmark has previously been es-
tablished as part of a region where these processes have little effect on runoff generation
as less than 10% of precipitation occurs when the temperature is below 0 degrees Celsius
(Santos et al. 2022). The sensitivity of snow parameters have been tested by manual cal-
ibration of the snow melt parameter, cmlt throughout years, and was also found to have
insignificant effect on runoff generation throughout the study area. Hence it was excluded
in the calibration process.
The sensitivity of the soil parameters presented in table 3.2 within their range and across
catchment characteristics have been tested with a global HYPE set-up of 187 catchments
by Santos et al. 2022. The ranges in which parameters were found to be sensitive to
changes are presented in table 3.3.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
16
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.3: The parameter ranges of sensitive parameters for runoff-generating soil parameters
in a daily time-step HYPE set-up by Santos et al. 2022.
Soil parameter
Range
rrcs1
0.001 to 0.2
rrcs2
0.001 to 0.2
mperc1
1 to 25
mactinf
1 to 50
macrate
0.01 to 1
srrate
0.01 to 1
wcfc
0.01 to 0.8
The sum of the parameters governing soil moisture wcep, wcfc & wcwp for each layer
represents the total void space of the layer. Based on this and the fact that the total
porosity should not exceed ≈45% for sandy soils (W. Smith et al. 1929) and ≈60% for
clayey soils (Carman 1939), the calibration range of the parameters wcep, wcfc & wcwp,
is restricted to be between 0 and 60% of the total depth of each soil layer.
Pechlivanidis and Arheimer 2015 used a Monte Carlo uniform random draw to explore
the cevp parameter space over a constant range (0.15 ; 0.30) for each land-use type in
a HYPE setup for India, and found a pattern in the range of parameter values across
different land-use types through two different objective functions, as seen in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Parameter range of cevp throughout the different land-uses from Pechlivanidis and
Arheimer 2015, with the blue lines indicating results from the RMSE objective function and the red
lines the Bias objective function.
Based on these findings and the agricultural fraction and urban fraction given in the
CAMELS-DK dataset, the cevp parameter was set to 0.25 for the daily time-step setup.
Calibration of parameters in HYPE is specified by defining a lower and upper boundary
for every parameter over their dependencies (i.e general, soil-type, land-use) as well as a
specified minimum step width for parameter change. The ranges in table 3.3 can therefore
be valuable to limit computational effort used on auto-calibration on very large parameter
ranges of runoff-generating soil parameters.
The testing of sensitivity of parameters throughout time and parameter space is important
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
17
==PAGE:25==
in order to determine the importance of a parameter in the particular use of the model. Ini-
tially all the parameters were adjusted one at a time with multiple points in the parameter
space and the runoff response to the change in parameters was monitored. Most param-
eters were found to be more sensitive at times of high discharge and high variability in
discharge.
Figure 3.3: Example of the runoff response to the increasing and decreasing of the soil storage
parameters in the three-layered daily time-step HYPE set-up with 1x1 km ClimateGridDK as pre-
cipitation.
Figure 3.3 illustrates changes to major streamflow peaks, minor streamflow peaks, as
well as baseflow over the 9-month period displayed. Figure 3.3 shows that changing the
fraction of effective porosity in soil layer 3, wcep3 results in considerably more variability in
runoff generation during peak flow, than the corresponding parameters for layer 1 and 2.
This indicates that this could be a highly sensitive parameter. Changing the field capacity,
i.e. the fraction of runoff available for evapotranspiration, but not for runoff, appears to
be most sensitive in the middle layer. The sensitivity of this parameter is linked to the
parameter epotdist, that controls the exponential decay of evapotranspiration with depth.
The actual evapotranspiration from the bottom-most layer is so small, that perturbations
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
18
==PAGE:26==
in the parameter wcfc do not affect the runoff response, as illustrated in figure F.1 in the
illustration of the relationship between evapotranspiration and depth in Appendix F.
To quantify the sensitivity of the parameters that were found to be most sensitive during
the initial investigation of runoff response to altering the model parameters, the compos-
ite scaled sensitivity (CSS) is computed for each of the runoff-generating parameters,
based on a One-at-a-time (OAT) approach, where the sensitivity of one parameter is in-
vestigated, disregarding the effect of other parameters and variables on the parameter in
question (Morris 1991).
Given that a broad sampling over time and parameter space is tedious and time-consuming,
the dimensionless scaled sensitivity is computed for each of the parameters for 2 points
in the parameter space over 5 peak flow points spread out over a one year time period.
The use of a dimensionless sensitivity comparison method is of particular interest in a
rainfall/runoff model like the HYPE model, as it allows the quantification and comparison
of the sensitivity of parameters and their influence on simulation results. Equation 3.1
shows the dimensionless scaled sensitivity DSSij, for the i-th observation and the j-th
parameter as described in (Hill 2000).
DSSij = ∆yi
∆bj
· bj · ω1/2
i
(3.1)
where ∆yi is the difference in the simulated value at the i-th data point, bj is the vector
containing the parameter values and ∆bj is the difference in the j-th parameter. ωi is
the weight of the i-th data point (Hill 2000). All data points are weighted equally in this
computation of the DSS as no knowledge on the distinction of the high flow events is
known.
The sum of sensitivities in all data points for the j-th parameter, are summarized in the
CSSj equation (Hill 2000) seen in 3.2.
CSSj =
[∑n
i=1(DSSij)2
n
]1/2
(3.2)
where n is number of data points where the dimensionless scaled sensitivity was cal-
culated. The HYPE modelling framework contains parameters covering many different
physical processes and those parameters are therefore also expressed in different units.
The composite scaled sensitivity for a select number of parameters is illustrated in figure
3.4, and it can be seen that all the linked parameters in general are sensitive, but for
comparison the most sensitive parameters are the effective porosity for the third layer,
wcep3, the maximum percolation rate from soil layer 2 to soil layer 3, mperc2, and the
recession coefficient determining deep percolation flow from soil layer 3 to the deep-lying
groundwater aquifer, rcgrwst. Most of the parameters showing high sensitivity are linked
either directly or indirectly to the generation of runoff from the bottom layer, indicating that
this layer has the largest influence of the soil layers, on the generation of runoff.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
19
==PAGE:27==
The wilting point for the three layers wcepn is not linked to the generation of runoff in any
of the governing equations in HYPE, which explains the lack of sensitivity.
Figure 3.4: The composite scaled sensitivity for parameters linked to soil storage, soil saturation
runoff and infiltration runoff.
This local sensitivity analysis is, however, both restricted in exploring the sensitivity over
the entire parameter space and over all entire simulation period. To fully investigate the
parameter sensitivity in this HYPE set-up a global sensitivity analysis ought to be used.
3.1.3
Calibration
The objective of the calibration is to derive a reliable model that adequately represents
the temporal dynamics of flow (high flows, timing, variability, and volume) across the Ryå
catchment. In the calibration the simulated discharge at the basin outlet is calibrated to fit
the observed discharge at the gauge near Manna from Miljøstyrelsens (MST) network of
gauges. The HYPE modelling framework allows for the optimization of several measures
of uncertainty, incorporated with different weights (Lindström et al. 2010), but modelling
experiences have shown that single-objective calibrations show efficiency for highlighting
a certain property of a system, i.e highlighting runoff generation in a hydrologic model
(Mostafaie et al. 2018). With that in mind, the KGE is used as the sole element in the
objective function, with equal weighting of the components of the KGE.
Calibrating the model against the observed runoff does not necessarily result in an ad-
equate representation of all runoff-generating processes. In a rainfall-runoff modelling
framework, performing calibration using only runoff observations only adjusts future model
simulations towards a better runoff output. Thus, this does not guarantee a better simu-
lation of other water flows and storages in the model such as groundwater-surface water
interaction or soil moisture storage (Mostafaie et al. 2018). HYPE allows for real-time
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
20
==PAGE:28==
monitoring of the calibration through a log-file that is continously updated throughout cali-
bration. The log-file contains information on total simulations completed, average iteration
time on each simulation and an estimated remaining calibration time. The final calibration
(2011 - 2019) period was chosen in accordance with the automatization of rain gauges in
2011, and the introduction of the ClimateGridDK 1x1km Observational product.
KGE is a key performance indicator (KPI) that consists of Pearson’s correlation, r, the ratio
of standard deviations, alpha, and the ratio of arithmetic means, Beta. Given that KGE is a
KPI that consists of different uncertainty measures, KGE is a more useful tool than NSE for
comparing performance across seasons and catchments of varying size, and hydrologic
characteristics. Analysing the components of KGE, correlation (r), variability ratio (α) and
mean ratio (β) can reveal that the model has different strengths and weaknesses. For
instance, if KGE is low primarily due to a high α-value, while β and r are reasonable, it
means that the model overestimates the magnitude of the variability, while it is satisfactory
in simulating the average flow and the relative magnitude on different days.
Figure 3.5: An illustration of the relationship of NSE and KGE through hydrographs as presented
by Knoben et al. 2019.
KGE differs from NSE in the evaluation of performance by the two indicators. NSE evalu-
ates the performance of a model with the mean of the observation time series (NSE=0) as
an indicator of performance, and model improvements are typically defined as NSE > 0
(Knoben et al. 2019). The performance of the mean of observations can be exaggerated
in terms of model predictability and using the NSE as an indicator of model performance
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
21
==PAGE:29==
can have the pitfall of overestimating the significance of baseflow (Knoben et al. 2019).
Models that are able to accurately predict the temporal variability but produces model out-
put with a continuous constant over- or underestimation typically perform poorly with NSE
as the sole performance indicator, as seen on the upper hydrograph in figure 3.5, even
though the explanatory power of the model far surpasses that of the mean. Inherently,
the KGE measure also weights the performance of the model in times of peak flow higher
than in times of baseflow through the magnitude of variability component, hereby making
it a better fit for indicating performance for models intended to perform well in periods with
high flow. As the lower hydrograph in figure 3.5 shows; the model with a good explanatory
power in terms of predicting baseflow attains an over-all very high NSE, whereas the KGE
is relatively low, because of poor explanatory power in the periods with peak flow.
KGE will, together with NSE, also be used as a key performance indicator of streamflow
simulation, and will be used to interpret model performance, after initial visual inspection
of the hydrograph.
3.2
Performance evaluation
3.2.1
Benchmarking
Benchmarking is the comparison in performance of the modelled forecast against a ref-
erence benchmark forecast and a perfect forecast benchmark, which is the maximum
performance the modelled forecast could reach. The performance is evaluated over a
performance statistic of choice. A generic expression for a benchmarking skill, SSf, score
can be expressed as:
SSf = ϵf −ϵr
ϵp −ϵr
(3.3)
where ϵf, ϵr and ϵp is the error term or performance statistic for the modelled forecast, the
reference forecast and the perfect forecast, respectively.
Perfect forecast
The first benchmark that the ability of the COMEPS ensemble NWP to predict streamflow
will be compared to, is the one of perfect forecast. The perfect forecast benchmark is a
simulation of the HYPE model with the observed precipitation. This is considered as the
upper limit for how good the model can get. The initial state of the HYPE model will be
computed from the perfect forecasted streamflow, and will be used as a starting point for
the simulation of COMEPS forecasted streamflow.
Persistence
The persistence forecast, uses the value of observed discharge at the previous time step
to predict the expected discharge outcome at the next time step. The performance of a
model compared to the persistence can be illustrated through comparison of the CRPS
of the ensemble forecast and the MAE of the persistence at each forecast horizon. The
persistence is calculated for each forecast horizon, with using the value that was observed
an hour ago as having a lead time of 1 hour, and using the value that was observed 50
hours ago having a lead time of 50 hours.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
22
==PAGE:30==
More quantitatively, a persistence index can also be constructed. The persistence index
is similar to the NSE in its structure, the only difference being that it compares the sum
of squared error to the error that would occur if the value was forecast as the previous
observed discharge value, instead of the sum of the mean error (N. D. Bennett et al.
2013). Elaborated, the persistence index indicates how good the model is compared to
the observation from the time-step before. The persistence index, PI, is described in 3.4,
where n is number of observations, yi is the forecast, ˆyi is the observations (or perfect
forecast) and yi−1 is the persistence forecast.
PI = 1 −
1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
1
n
∑n
i=1(yi −yi−1)2
(3.4)
Climatology
There is no clear definition of how to use a climatological mean in streamflow forecasting,
though there is a general agreement that the climatological mean is a long term mean
used as a forecast. The climatological forecast is simply a sum of all the observed data
points up until each forecast horizon divided by the sum of time-steps as described in
equation 3.5 (Hamill and Juras 2006).
fc(t) = 1
n
n
∑
t=1
Qobs(t)
(3.5)
Where fc is the forecasted climatology at a certain timestep t. Qobs is the observed val-
ues from previous years at the same point in time, t, and n is the number of years, i.e.
the climatological mean in this project will be a mean of the values with the exact same
timestamp from previous years.
3.2.2
Performance evaluation
Performance evaluation of streamflow forecasts is an integral part of the forecasting pro-
cess. Evaluation of forecasts essentially monitor their accuracy, seek to understand the
prediction errors, and underline the potential for improvement of the forecasting frame-
work.
Statistical evaluation of uncertainty, error and bias is also a tool that helps in quantifying
the performance of the probabilistic model, where simple subjective verification is diffi-
cult. Certain attributes are of interest in the assessment of forecast skill in an ensemble
forecasting system - is the ensemble system sharply defined i.e., whether the ensem-
ble members show a low spread, or whether they display a low level of agreement. In
addition to spread, the accuracy of the mean or median ensemble member is also of in-
terest. A major component of the evaluation of ensemble performance is the assessment
of forecast skill over increasing forecast horizon.
Well-known conventional diagnostics for model evaluation such as the root mean square
error (RMSE) are not useful for probabilistic forecast, as it doesn’t provide measure of the
uncertainty in the ensemble (Hamill 2001). A measure that can provide insight into the
reliability of an ensemble forecast is the rank histogram. The term ensemble reliability
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
23
==PAGE:31==
refers to the consistency of the ensemble forecasts, and whether the forecasted probabil-
ities match the observed frequencies, i.e if over a longer period the events assigned with
a 20% probability actually occur 20% of the time (Johnson and Bowler 2009).
The rank histogram contains information on negative and positive bias as well as lack
or excess of variability can be interpreted from the slope of the ranks in the histogram
throughout the ranks. A high error in the mean, µ, will result in a skewedness of the
rank histogram, while high and low standard deviation σ results in a concave and convex
shape, respectively.
For a more complete image of the quality an ensemble forecast, the rank histogram ought
to be used in conjunction with other verification tools. One of those tools is the Continuous
Ranked Probability Score (CRPS). The CRPS is a measure of performance for compari-
son against other probabilistic forecasts or deterministic benchmarks (Hersbach 2000).
The CRPS of single ensemble member is defined as the integral of the squared distance
between the predicted density function and the density function of the perfect forecast.
The CRPS for a single ensemble member is formulated in equation 3.6.
CRPS(P, x) =
∫
[P(x) −Pobs(x)]2dx
(3.6)
where x is the variable of interest, for instance stream discharge. P(x) is the cumulative
distribution function of the single ensemble member, whereas Pobs(x) is the cumulative
observation function of the perfect forecast or the observed stream discharge.
A key component of the CRPS in model evaluation and verification is that for a determinis-
tic forecast the CRPS is reduced to the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), which means that the
error in a probabilistic forecast can be directly compared with the error in a deterministic
forecast or deterministic benchmarks such as persistence and the climatological mean
(Hersbach 2000).
Figure 3.6 illustrates a case, where an observed stream discharge at a given lead time has
the value x≈10.25, so the CDF shows 100% probability on the given value. The turquoise
line indicates a better performing forecast with a higher probability that the value is around
the observed x≈10.25, given the sharp increase in probability around the observed value.
The red line indicates the CDF of a worse performing forecast with probability being evenly
spread out over the spectrum of stream discharge values given a more linear slope in the
CDF.
The CRPS is used in this project to investigate predictive skill of ensemble flood fore-
casting for Ryå, with the NWP COMEPS ensemble precipitation data as input data. The
predictive power of the set-up is tested throughout different lead times, spanning from the
start of the forecast, with hourly forecast points from 0 to 50 hours into the future. As in
the operational use of the COMEPS forecast at DMI, where the 6 newest forecasts are
used in the weather forecasts, the forecasts of the 6 newest members (18 forecasts) will
be used for computation of the CRPS at a lead time of 1, and the 6 oldest members will be
used for computation of the CRPS at a lead time of 50. The last 6 hours of the forecasts
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
24
==PAGE:32==
are discarded as they will not have the same amount of forecasts available. Due to the
fact that the computation of the CRPS is affected by the number of forecasts included,
these last 6 hours were discarded to make for a fair comparison of the performance over
different lead times.
Figure 3.6: Cumulative distribution functions of an observed value and two forecasted values at
a given lead time.
The average CRPS over all lead times, k, can be calculated by the sum of all CRPS values
as seen in equation 3.7.
CRPS(k) = 1
k
k
∑
t=1
CRPSP,x
(3.7)
The weighted empirical distribution of the ensemble is derived at each timestep for each
lead time. The naive forecasting approach is taken, and all forecasts in the ensemble are
weighted equally at each forecast horizon. Climatological weighting has previously been
applied, where previous distributions and observed values are taken into account in the
weighting of ensemble members at the next timestep (Najafi et al. 2012).
Another tool for evaluating performance of a forecast is the Receiver operating character-
istic-curve (ROC-curve). The ROC curve is formed by plotting the true positive rate (TPR)
against the false positive rate (FPR), thus visualizing the rate of when a model predicts
values over a given threshold when the real values are over the threshold, and falsely pre-
dicts them over the threshold, when they are in fact below (Haghizadeh et al. 2017). The
TPR and FPR stems from the binary confusion matrix which contains information on the
distribution of cases where the predicted and the actual values align over the threshold
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
25
==PAGE:33==
and below the threshold (Haghizadeh et al. 2017). An illustration of the confusion matrix
is presented in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Illustration of the confusion matrix or contingency table, with TP: true positive = sim-
ulation positive in observed positive cases, FP: false positive = simulation positive in observed
negative cases, FN: false negative = simulation negative in observed positive cases, TN: true
negative = simulation negative in observed negative cases.
Observed value
Simulated
value
Positive
Negative
Total
Positive
TP
FP
Tsim
Negative
FN
TN
Fsim
Total
Tobs
Fobs
An average of the binary choice from the confusion matrices over the given period of time
is then computed giving a point on the ROC-curve (Park et al. 2004). The ROC-curves
presented in this project has 18 points, with each point representing an ensemble member.
Each of the points contain data on the mean TPR and FPR in the confusion matrix over
the evaluated period.
3.3
Data extraction and simulation
3.3.1
COMEPS data
DMI uses a custom coordinate reference system (CRS) for their COMEPS data. This
CRS is a rotated form of the The World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84).
Each COMEPS-file contains a matrix of precipitation as well as matrices of corresponding
longitude and latitude coordinates. To avoid increasing spatial uncertainty associated by
reprojecting the raster from an unspecified custom projection, a shapefile of precipitation
points was created from a set of longitude latitude coordinates for each point. Thiessen
polygons were then created around each point, consisting of all the area of the plane
closer to that point than to any other points. This is done in order to account for the uneven
spacing between the points as a product of the rotated angular custom projection.
The Thiessen polygons allows for the calculation of weighted mean precipitation, where
the areal fraction of each Thiessen polygon inside the catchment area is taken into ac-
count when calculating the mean precipitation inside the catchment for the given ensemble
member. The indices of the longitude and latitude coordinates of the Thiessen polygons
inside the catchment shape that matches the precipitation matrix is used to compute the
weighted mean precipitation for the catchment.
This results in the mean accumulated precipitation, for the given forecast horizon, which
is a range between 1 to 56 hours. To get the precipitation intensity for each forecast
horizon, the difference between the accumulated precipitation at current timestep, t and
the accumulated precipitation at the previous timestep t-1 is computed as seen in equation
3.8, where I is precipitation.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
26
==PAGE:34==
It =
T
∑
t=1
It −
T−1
∑
t=1
It−1
(3.8)
These mean values for precipitation at each hour in the forecast horizon are then exported
as a .txt-file with the hardcoded name ’Pobs.txt’ that HYPE expects as precipitation input.
The files are saved in folders matching the ensemble member that they are a product of
as well as the offset time where the forecast was produced. Small negative precipitation
numbers, due to numerical errors, these are assigned a value of zero, as they are the
result of data compression from the NWP model into the GRIB-files, and the HYPE model
expects only numbers I≥0 in the precipitation input file.
3.3.2
ClimateGridDK observed data
The grid network of hourly observed values of temperature and precipitation from DMI’s
1x1 km horizontal resolution ClimateGridDK comes as space-separated .txt-files, with one
file per hour and each file containing a grid cell ID, a set of longitude latitude coordinates,
and a precipitation value. The grid cells were intersected with the Ryå catchment polygon
from the CAMELS-DK dataset, and as a result, values from 340 grid cells were used.
Not all these grid cells were entirely based inside the catchment shape so Thiessen poly-
gons were also used to calculate a weighted average of the hourly precipitation from the
ClimateGridDK.
Table 3.5: A synoptic view of the of hours with rain in the Ryå catchment during the 9 year calibra-
tion period and the simulation year 2020. Classification as according to American Meteorological
Society.
Year
Light
Moderate
Heavy
2011
1698
49
5
2012
1947
26
2
2013
1474
31
0
2014
1930
47
2
2015
1720
53
0
2016
1604
38
0
2017
1889
56
3
2018
1324
24
2
2019
1944
35
0
2020
1635
35
0
Heavy rain events are classified as events with ≥7.6 mm/hr, moderate rain events are
classified as events with an intensity between 2.5 and 7.6 mm/hr and light rain events
between 0 and 2.5 mm/hr. A value of 0.1 mm/hr is set for rain event threshold as the
spatial interpolation in the 1x1km ClimateGridDK, as well as the weighted averaging on
the catchment, adds numerical uncertainty to the precipitation values. An areal reduction
factor (ARF) should ideally be used on the thresholds given that the thresholds are rain
intensity at gauge scale, and the values are weighted catchment averages. However,
establishing an ARF requires knowledge on the duration of each event, and no statistics
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
27
==PAGE:35==
on this matter are available to the knowledge of the author. Table 3.5 displays that both
wet years (like 2017) and dry years (like 2018) are present in the calibration period.
3.3.3
Batch simulation set-up
Model states are extracted from the model for every hour in the two month period of
February and March 2020. These model states are used as initial conditions for each
re-forecast. The model state files contain information on date and time in the filename
and the simulation start time is extracted from here. The end point of each simulation
is extracted from a fixed date and time 56 hours from the simulation start time, given
that all the ensemble members have identical forecast horizons. For each timestep these
simulation end and start points are written into the Info.txt-file.
The COMEPS precipitation timeseries with corresponding date and time to the initial
model state file is then copied into the file directory where it replaces the previous rainfall
forcing file. The HYPE simulation is then initiated. The simulation is only successful if the
start and end point in the Info.txt-file matches that of the precipitation file. Each HYPE
simulation has a runtime of 7-8 seconds, but since the HYPE program has to be forcefully
closed, a conservative pause of 12 seconds is used to add delay in the execution of the
framework. This ensures that each simulation is successfully conducted, and not force-
fully stopped before end of simulation. A total of 4,773 precipitation forecasts were issued
by COMEPS in the 2-month period. For hourly re-forecasts with HYPE during this period,
this results in an approximate total runtime of ≈17 hours. Figure 3.7 conceptualizes the
framework behind the batch simulations.
Figure 3.7: A conceptualization of the batch simulation framework, with the dotted line symboliz-
ing a single iteration, i.e. the issuing of a single streamflow forecast.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
28
==PAGE:36==
4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Hydrologic modelling and calibration
The HYPE model set-up was initially tested and calibrated with uniform soil storage pa-
rameter values, wcep, wcfc, wcwp, throughout the 3 soil layers. The calibration was also
initiated without an external aquifer, but instead targeting a slow recession of water from
layer 3 to the waterway, in the attempt of flattening out the initial peak flow overestimates
of the HYPE model and produce the baseflow that was initially lacking in the model. How-
ever this lead to an overall surplus of water in the model, where the HYPE model had
approximately 32% more water throughout the simulated period than the observed daily
discharge values from CAMELS-DK contained in the same period. However, after the ad-
dition of an aquifer, the HYPE model had 21% less water than the CAMELS-DK dataset,
and even though the predictive skill was increased with higher KGE and NSE, there was
still an underlying inflexibility of the model in the receding limb of the hydrograph. This is
illustrated in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The observed runoff from the CAMELS-DK dataset and the simulation with calibrated
uniform soil storage parameter values for a two-year period in a 10-year calibration period from
2006 to 2016, with a two year warm-up period from 2004 to 2006.
Figure 4.1 shows that in the time following a period with intense precipitation the model
only has the ability to delay the decline in runoff generation, and sufficient representation
of the baseflow is still absent. Therefore, the parameter controlling the return flow from
the aquifer to the bottom layer as well as the time constant delaying the return flow are
calibrated in an effort to reduce the steepness of the receding limb runoff after intense
precipitation.
The above-mentioned model-setup also only contains one soil class and one land use
type, i.e. the catchment that is calibrated upon has a uniform spatial 2D distribution of
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
29
==PAGE:37==
soil type and land cover. For the coupling of a deep aquifer to the catchment, the re-
turn flow from the aquifer to the catchment, retrate, was calibrated manually to represent
the baseflow of the CAMELS-DK observed data in longer dry periods without major pre-
cipitation. The adjustment was also done to align the simulated water balance, with the
water balance in the observed data. The return flow adjustment parameter, aqretcor, was
calibrated along the other parameters in the automatic calibration.
For the calibration of a catchment containing a single hydrological response unit, the best
fitting hydrograph obtained is shown in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The observed runoff from the CAMELS-DK dataset and the simulation with calibrated
layer-specific soil storage parameter values for a two-year period in a 10-year calibration period,
with a two year warm-up period.
The hydrologic simulation is now able to predict the baseflow to a more satisfactory de-
gree, and the individual precipitation events are also more explicitly expressed in the sim-
ulation. The NSE and KGE of the model have also improved considerably coming in at
0.80 and 0.88, respectively. The model displays strong explanatory power in all compo-
nents of KGE, both in terms of correlation, variability and bias. The correlation equalling
0.91 means that the simulation on average slightly underestimates the amount of dis-
charge at the catchment outlet compared to the observed discharge. A variability term of
1.05 means that the simulation slightly overestimates the variability in discharge, i.e the
peaks and lows of the hydrograph are a bit too distinguished. The bias term equalling
0.96 means that overall simulation has a slight tendency to underestimate discharge over
time.
The accuracy of the receding limb after a peak discharge is improved after dividing the
soil depth into three layers with distinctive soil storage and recession parameters. This
allows the model to better predict long time scale changes in streamflow. The fraction of
urban HRU is set equal to the fraction of paved area for each catchment as defined in the
CAMELS-DK dataset. The urban HRU is designed in HYPE as a very thin layer, where the
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
30
==PAGE:38==
surface runoff is generated by the groundwater table being located at the surface of the
layer and the recession coefficient for surface runoff, srrcs, decides the fraction of water
leaving as surface runoff. With the inclusion of the urban HRU, the deep-lying aquifer
and the addition of three soil layers the model also improved significantly in terms of
performance indicators. For the same calibration period and warm-up period, the NSE and
KGE improved to 0.88 and 0.93, respectively. Auto-calibration of the same parameters
for the CAMELS-DK catchments of Vejle Å and Ribe Å showed similar predictive skill in
evaluation of the hydrograph and similar model performance in terms of KGE and NSE.
The change over time of precipitation, infiltration, groundwater inflow and outflow, soil
groundwater level, soil moisture and runoff generation from the three soil layers for a
daily timestep calibration with 2 HRU’s for the catchment of Vejle Å can be seen in figure
D.1 in Appendix D.
Another key component of the calibration is to ensure that there are no long-term trends
affecting the water balance of the model, i.e. there should not be a considerable net-loss
or accumulation of water in the model. To reassure that the water balance in the model is
stable, the depth of the external aquifer is displayed in figure 4.3 below.
Figure 4.3: The water level in the external aquifer over a 10-yr calibration expressed in meters
below surface.
Figure 4.3 shows that the aquifer experiences seasonal variations, and that water level in
the aquifer is lower in the late summer months, this could mean that groundwater influx
to the stream is higher in summer, which is very commonly observed in Danish streams
(Pedersen and Sand-Jensen 2007). However, the figure also shows that there are no
major inter-annual changes of the water level in the aquifer. This is also confirmed by
looking at the total inflow to the aquifer and outflow from the aquifer to the stream, where
the total inflow over the 10-yr calibration period is only 4% larger than the outflow.
Table E.1 in Appendix E shows which parameters were manually calibrated, and which
parameters were auto-calibrated. 14 parameters were auto-calibrated, while 11 param-
eters were assigned a fixed value.
The number of parameters that were included in
the auto-calibration scheme were limited to the ones found to be most sensitive in the
scaled sensitivity analysis, in order to allow faster convergence of parameters towards
optimum. Generally speaking, most parameters concerning recession and percolation of
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
31
==PAGE:39==
water were auto-calibrated, the most important parameters governing water storage were
auto-calibrated, and most infiltration and delay and attenuation parameters were manually
calibrated.
Figure 4.4: The mean KGE and NSE from two 10-year daily timestep calibrations at a set of
DEMC generations as well as the average run time in minutes of the calibrations for the catchment
of Ryå. Number of populations (28) are fixed at 2x the number of calibrated parameters.
Figure 4.4 shows a considerable increase in both KGE and NSE values up to 1000 gen-
erations of parameter sets. After this the increase of KGE and NSE stagnates while the
run time of the calibration increases with an exponential trend.
The question on whether to accept a model with a slightly less predictive skill for a less
time-consuming calibration run time, is dependent on factors such as if the model requires
continuous re-calibration, how large the sample of areas needing calibration is and how
accurate the model predictions need to be in order to satisfy the project aims.
Another way to check parameter convergence towards optimum in DEMC auto-calibration,
is by use of the Gelman-Rubin convergence diagnostic. The Gelman-Rubin diagnostic
evaluates the difference between the within-chain variance and the between-chain vari-
ance for each parameter. A large difference indicates nonconvergence of the parame-
ters, while a low difference indicates convergence towards optimum. This approach is
advantageous because it allows for a quantitative evaluation of the convergence of each
parameter (Gelman and Rubin 1992).
The PSRF (Potential Scale Reduction Factor) indicates the difference between the two
variances throughout the chain. A PSRF-value of 1 indicates no difference in variance,
while values below 1.1 generally indicates convergence towards parameter optimum. Pa-
rameters with PSRF-values above 1.1 are typically indicating non-convergence. How-
ever, this is a user-defined criteria depending on the stringency sought by the user (Brooks
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
32
==PAGE:40==
and Gelman 1998). Accepting too high PSRF-values may result in the acceptance of a
parameter that has not reached the optimized value, but merely reached a local optimum
where the difference between within-chain variance and between-chain variance is small
(Brooks and Gelman 1998). To reduce the likelihood of local optima, the PSRF-threshold
is set to 1.05 in this study.
HYPE writes statistics and information on the chain and population number for all simula-
tions in an automatic MC calibration into the file Allsim.txt. The within and between-chain
variance is extracted from here and the Gelman-Rubin convergence of all parameters
is computed. The convergence of the 14 parameters that are calibrated through auto-
calibration is checked and summarized in Figure 4.5. Figure 4.5 illustrates the number of
parameters that obtained a PSRF of ≤1.05, with each box illustrating an auto-calibration
under a certain population size and chain length. A general rule of thumb is to use param-
eter population sizes of 2 to 3 times the number of parameters (Ter Braak 2006). Each of
the calibrations were iterated twice.
Figure 4.5: The number of parameters (0-14) with a PSRF ≤1.05, for each auto-calibration with
differing population and generation size. Green colors and red colors indicate a high and low
number of converged parameters, respectively.
Figure 4.5 predominantly shows that the fraction of converged parameters increases with
increasing chain length for all population sizes. The computation of the Gelman-Rubin
diagnostic also indicated that, though doubling the population doubles the number of sim-
ulations in the calibration, a higher number of parameters were not found converging
towards their optimum. This is in accordance with expectations, as larger populations
also require longer chains than small populations in order to converge (Ter Braak 2006).
Though larger populations and longer chains may reduce the chance to reach a local opti-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
33
==PAGE:41==
mum (Brooks and Gelman 1998), the additional run-time associated with running a larger
population size was deemed significant for future calibration of multiple catchments.
Each parameter in each population starts at a random value inside the parameter range
chosen for calibration. Even though a burn-in period is included in the computation, the
effect of the initial values on the convergence of the parameters is still considerable, and
thus a greater number of iterations should be carried out in order to establish confidence
in the parameter convergence.
Based on the KPI-value over DEMC generations shown in figure 4.4, and the parameter
convergence illustrated in 4.5, a DEMC generation size of 2,000 and a population size
of 28 (2 times the number of parameters), was chosen as the default DEMC calibration
routine for the parameter calibration in the Ryå catchment.
4.1.1
From daily to hourly timestep
The observed ClimateGridDK 1x1 km precipitation is the only forcing data with actual
hourly values. Potential evapotranspiration is disaggregated from daily to hourly timestep
by assuming a uniform hourly distribution of the evapotranspiration. A sinoid function
oscillating around the daily average could be implemented to give the hourly PET data
the naturally occurring difference between daytime and nighttime evapotranspiration, but
a more elaborate representation of PET was assessed to have little effect on the run-off
generation. The temperature is also disaggregated from daily timesteps, with the average
daily temperature assumed as the temperature at each hour of the day. When observed
PET is used, the only temperature dependant process is the snow melt, which as pre-
viously mentioned is not considered to have a substantial effect on runoff-generation in
Danish catchments (Santos et al. 2022).
The model parameters were not re-calibrated but the time-dependent parameters were
scaled to hourly values. Scaling of parameters has been investigated in previous studies
such as J. C. Bennett et al. 2016 and Olsson et al. 2017, with the latter scaling parameters
from daily to hourly timestep in a HYPE flood forecasting framework. The parameters that
are time-dependent are the recession coefficients between the three layers, the recession
coefficients in and out of the aquifer, the maximum percolation thresholds, as well as
snowmelt parameters and evapotranspiration correction parameters.
The time-dependent parameters are scaled as described in equation 4.1 (Nalbantis 1995):
p2 = p1 · ∆t2
∆t1
(4.1)
where p1 is the old parameter value, p2 is the new parameter value, ∆t1 is the old timestep
and ∆t2 is the new timestep (Nalbantis 1995).
While parameter scaling is an easy tool to convert model time-step without having to re-
calibrate, it is however not a panacea and J. C. Bennett et al. 2016 contemplates that
parameter scaling may not work well for flashy catchments, i.e. catchments with a high
degree of urbanized areas, or very small catchments with a quick runoff response. Kavet-
ski et al. 2011 emphasizes that parameter scaling should be used with caution, and that
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
34
==PAGE:42==
generally a large degree of knowledge on the governing equations should be acquired in
order to confidently apply parameter scaling.
Table 4.1: The KPI’s of a daily time-step simulated with parameters calibrated over a 9 year
period, as well as the KPI’s after the scaling of time-dependent parameters, and re-simulation of
the corresponding period with forcing data on an hourly timestep.
KGE
NSE
HYPE daily ts simulation
(w. calibration)
0.91
0.83
HYPE hourly ts simulation
(w. scaling)
0.88
0.79
Figure 4.6: Hydrograph with the daily and hourly simulations plotted against the MST observed
discharge aggregated on a daily level.
Figure 4.6 shows the hydrograph with a daily timestep simulation with calibrated param-
eters and an hourly simulation with scaled parameters from a two-year period within the
calibration period. The hydrograph shows similar predictive skill in the daily timestep
simulation and the hourly simulation with scaled parameters, with the hourly timestep
simulation showing a slightly better baseflow, while having a tendency to overestimate
quick–response runoff from short rain bursts.
4.1.2
Validation
The validation period is in this project restricted by the amount of data available. The
HYPE model is calibrated on the 1x1 km ClimateGridDK temperature and precipitation
data from DMI, which only dates back to 2011. The model calibration (2011 - 2019) was
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
35
==PAGE:43==
chosen to be validated on the years of 2020 and 2021. The purpose of the validation is
two-fold. The first aspect being to validate the auto-calibration of the model parameters,
and the second aspect serving as the upper boundary of performance for streamflow
prediction compared to the streamflow prediction with the input of the COMEPS ensemble
precipitation.
Figure 4.7: The hydrograph of the HYPE hourly timestep simulation on the validation period, as
well as the observed flow from Miljøstyrelsens gauge station at Manna.
Table 4.2: The KPI’s of the hourly simulated model with scaled parameters over the calibration
period and validation period.
KGE
NSE
Calibration period
0.88
0.79
Validation period
0.91
0.82
Table 4.2 shows that both KGE and NSE actually increases slightly in the validation pe-
riod. This indicates that the parameters are well calibrated to the hydrologic conditions
in the catchment, and that the parameters are not over-fitted on the calibration period.
The increase in KPI’s can be attributed to the fact that the model is very well calibrated
to handle peaks in streamflow, as can be seen on figure 4.7. The year of 2020 was a
wet year, with intense fronts passing Jutland in the winter and early spring months, this
contributes to the notion that the KPI’s are high because the years of the validation period
received higher than average annual precipitation.
At the final stages of the project it was discovered that the simple scaling used as shown
in 4.1, is a wrong representation of the scaling of time-constants governing output from
the linear reservoirs of the model. The rescaling of these parameters should, according
to Nalbantis 1995, be done as described in equation 4.2.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
36
==PAGE:44==
p2 = 1 −(1 −p2)
∆t2
∆t1
(4.2)
This was checked over a conceptual linear reservoir of 5,000 m3, with a daily recession
from the reservoir of 0.1 m3· day−1. When rescaling the rate by simple division, the reser-
voir volume was 12.2 m3 after 60 days (1,440 hours), but by rescaling as formulated in
equation 4.2 the reservoir volume was found to be 8.98 m3 - as was the output after 60
days with the recession rate of 0.1 m3· day−1. This conceptual linear reservoir is illus-
trated in figure J.1 in Appendix J. The maximum difference in the two flows was found to
be ≈4.5%, which is a considerable amount of error added to the model, and the maximum
error would be even higher with a higher recession.
Nonetheless, the effect on a outflow from a single linear reservoir might not correspond to
the changes in runoff generation from a rainfall-runoff model with multiple linear reservoirs
and outflows like HYPE. This was checked in order to account for errors made using the
linear scaling approach. The results were reassuring, and showed that the maximum error
in the validation period in a given timestep was 1.3% of predicted streamflow, and was
less than 0.5% in periods of peak streamflow. The hydrographs produced by a simple
division by 24 and the correctly scaling of outflow parameters can be seen in figure J.2
in Appendix J and shows that this is not a major contributor to error in the forecasted
streamflow.
The built-in auto-calibration in HYPE was also investigated on an hourly timestep, how-
ever the calibration routine was prone to crashing when a set of tested parameters re-
sulted in volumetric errors in the water balance. HYPE user guidelines suggest that when
encountering a water balance error, one should limit the parameter range more exces-
sively (Pers 2017). This indicates that re-calibration for an hourly time-step would require
extensive knowledge on the governing equations and physics representation on a fine
temporal scale.
This study has relied on studies on parameter sensitivity for a first guess on parameter
ranges for calibration. Santos et al. 2022 checked the sensitivity of selected parameters
throughout multiple catchments in the World-wide HYPE model on a daily timestep set-
up. Similar studies on an hourly timestep would benefit the parameter knowledge on an
hourly timestep. Process modifications in HYPE that improves fast-flow representation
would also facilitate easier calibration on a sub-daily temporal resolution (Olsson et al.
2017).
External hourly calibration could also be suggested as a method of bypassing the volu-
metric errors, by simply discarding the set of parameters resulting in the error, or assigning
them a very low objective function value. This would also result in increased control of
the calibration process.
4.2
Reforecasting streamflow
The hydrograph of the hourly simulations looks desirable in a daily aggregated time-series,
or in longer hourly time-series, but when zooming in for a more detailed view on the inter-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
37
==PAGE:45==
timestep variability, one notices sharp oscillations from timestep to timestep, and the hy-
drograph doesn’t represent realistic hourly fluctuations of a largely natural catchment as
the Ryå-catchment. These fluctuations are displayed in figure 4.8a, and stem from the
surface runoff generated by soil saturation in the thin-layered urban HRU. This problem
could be addressed by removing the urban HRU, but this resulted in a systematical un-
derestimation of streamflow peaks as the model lacks quick response to intense runoff.
Instead, a linear reservoir, in form of an attenuation box was added, delaying the runoff
and smoothing out the hydrograph, as seen in figure 4.8b.
(a) Streamflow peak without attenuation box.
(b) Streamflow peak with attenuation box.
Figure 4.8: Streamflow peak from hourly simulations, with and without damping to through the
addition of a delaying linear reservoir.
The ensemble NWP forecasts already contain a considerable amount of uncertainty, and
it is therefore of utmost importance to build a model that is robust and not over-responsive
to small amounts of rainfall. Figure 4.10 illustrates that the responsiveness shown in the
hydrograph with the observed ClimateGrid-product, shown on figure 4.8a, propagated to
of each of the ensemble members.
(a) Streamflow from mean and median COMEPS
precipitation without attenuation box.
(b) Streamflow from mean and median COMEPS
precipitation with attenuation box.
Figure 4.9: Predicted streamflow peak from mean and median hourly simulations with COMEPS
precipitation input.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.9 shows that the trend of two ensemble simulations is similar, both figure 4.9a
and 4.9b show that the COMEPS precipitation input results in the hydrograph not be-
ing able to capture the receding limb of the hydrograph after the first peak. Figure 4.9a
depicts that the streamflow forecasted with COMEPS in the model without any peak at-
tenuation follows the same pattern of over-responsiveness to small amounts of rainfall
as the streamflow forecasted with the observed precipitation. Figure 4.9b shows that the
COMEPS forecasted streamflow also becomes more smooth as the streamflow fed with
observed rainfall.
Figure 4.10: Ensemble of forecasts issued 56-53, 44-41, 32-29 and 20-17 hours before the
streamflow peak shown in the MST observed data.
Especially the small peak shown by some of the ensemble members on the forecasts
issued 44-41 hours before the observed peak event is of concern. The increase that the
forecasts issued 32-29 hours before the observed peak shows in the last hours of the
forecast also illustrates the sensitivity of this model setup.
When using a hydrologic model for flood forecasting, it is of importance that the user has
a model that isn’t oversensitive and biased on producing false positives, i.e. predicting
streamflow peaks, when no streamflow peaks are observed. A ’spaghetti’-plot with all
ensemble forecasts for the same period with damping applied can be seen in figure H.1
and in Appendix H, and depicts the same degree of smoothing as illustrated in figure 4.9b.
While the damping does not seem to affect the spread of the ensemble, it seems to reduce
accuracy.
Ensemble NWP rainfall forecasts have in the past been known to overestimate the tempo-
ral distribution of precipitation events (Göber et al. 2004), and the hydrograph produced by
the median and mean streamflow ensemble therefore requires inspection over the entire
period with COMEPS forecasts.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.11: Observed streamflow from the station near Manna as well as simulated streamflow
with observed precipitation, and mean and median streamflow from simulations with COMEPS
ensemble input.
First and foremost figure 4.11 shows that the COMEPS precipitation ensemble product
is reasonably good at predicting precipitation in the periods with stable winter weather
fronts, as the predicted streamflow from using the mean or median COMEPS forecast is
comparable to the observation-driven simulated streamflow.
This indicates that to enhance the forecast skill in the prediction of streamflow in large
winter frontal systems in Denmark, the calibration framework seems to be the area with
more room for improvement - rather than focusing on pre-processing and bias correction
of the COMEPS ensemble product.
4.2.1
Bias investigation
As hydrologic models are sensitive to the forcing inputs, and meteorological forecasts of-
ten contain significant biases and uncertainties, the forcing data is typically an important
source of bias and uncertainty in streamflow forecasting. These biases are manifest at
temporal and spatial scales that are relevant to hydrologic prediction. Biases in stream-
flow forecasts are often removed through statistical post-processing where, based on the
historical performance of the forecasting system, operational streamflow forecasts are
corrected in real-time (Verkade et al. 2013).
The forecasted precipitation from COMEPS used in this project is raw data, i.e. no post-
processing correction has been applied to the data. Numerous studies document the
tendency of the ensemble mean to systematically overestimate precipitation (Cuo et al.
2011).
To check whether the mean of the precipitation forecasts from COMEPS is systematically
biased in the validation period, double mass plots of the COMEPS NWP forecasts against
the observed precipitation are presented to investigate the bias of the NWP forecasts on
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
40
==PAGE:48==
particular streamflow events, and throughout forecast horizon.
Figure 4.12: Left: The cumulative sum of the mean ensemble forecasted precipitation plotted
against the cumulative sum of the observed 1x1 km precipitation. Right: The cumulative sum of
the median ensemble forecasted precipitation plotted against the cumulative sum of the observed
1x1 km precipitation.
Figure 4.12 shows the accumulated mean and median forecasted precipitation plotted
against the accumulated observed precipitation for the 2-month period with the first fore-
cast starting on 2020-02-01, and the last forecast starting on 2020-03-31. Figure 4.12
illustrates that by the taking the mean forecasted precipitation value for time-step, one
overestimates the total amount of precipitation considerably for the period of February
- March 2020. The figure also shows that by taking the median ensemble member the
systematic bias becomes less prevailing, and the slope lies closer to the ’perfect forecast’
1:1 line.
The period used for evaluation of streamflow forecasting is however not long enough
to conclude anything about a systematic bias of COMEPS. A period multiple years of
forecasting data would be needed to evaluate both potential seasonal and inter-annual
biases. The mean COMEPS precipitation also shows temporal dispersion as shown in
the summed daily precipitation in Appendix I, whereas the median COMEPS precipitation
shows a dispersion more similar to the observed one. Nonetheless, both median and
mean precipitation is overestimated at higher lead times over the entire period as indicated
by figure I.2 in Appendix I.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.13: The mean and median forecasts with different forecast horizons plotted against
streamflow forecasted with 1x1km ClimateGridDK precipitation and MST observed streamflow.
Each point in the forecasted streamflows in figure 4.13 shows the median or mean value
forecasted by forecasts issued within a 14 hour range, with forecast horizons of 1-14,
15-28, 29-42 or 43-56 hours.
Figure 4.13a shows that both the mean and median streamflow forecasts are almost iden-
tical to the streamflow simulated with observed precipitation for the first 1 - 14 hours of
lead time. This is in all likelihood a product of the proximity to the starting state of the
forecasted streamflow. The forecasts start at lead time 0 hours with streamflow from the
simulation with observed precipitation. For larger lead times the model generally overes-
timates the streamflow peaks when compared to the streamflow simulation with perfect
forecasted rainfall, but because the model calibration used in this study systematically un-
derestimates the high streamflow peaks, the forecast horizons that overestimates rainfall
appear to have a better fitting hydrograph to the actual observed values.
By visual inspection of the hydrographs on figure 4.13, it is also evident that the pre-
dictive power of the streamflow forecasts doesn’t degrade increasingly over larger lead
times. Previous studies have presented results where NWP ensemble-fed streamflow
simulations were highly erroneous at peak flow events, with errors of up to 100% (Cuo
et al. 2011). This indicates that the COMEPS ensemble product is most likely suitable for
predicting streamflow in periods with large frontal systems through a HYPE model set-up.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
42
==PAGE:50==
(a) Average variance over all forecast horizons.
(b) Mean Bias Error over all forecast horizons.
Figure 4.14: Average variance between all streamflow forecasts with same forecast horizon,
and Mean Bias Error (MBE) for the median and mean forecasted streamflow against streamflow
simulated with 1x1km ClimateGridDK precipitation.
Ensemble variance and other measures that explain the ensemble spread have previously
been categorized as proficient indicators of the accuracy of the ensemble mean forecast,
i.e. the higher the variance between the ensemble members, the more uncertainty is
associated with the mean ensemble prediction (Scherrer et al. 2004).
Figure 4.14 shows the statistical measures of variance and bias over different forecast
horizons for the months of February and March 2020. Figure 4.14a shows that the vari-
ance between ensemble members is exponentially increasing from forecast horizons 1 to
≈10 hours before the increase in variance stagnates and assumes a vaguely increasing
trend. Figure 4.14b shows that the bias increases linearly with increasing forecast horizon
for both the median and mean forecast. This means that for higher forecast horizons, the
model systematically overestimates to a larger degree than at lower lead times. Figure
4.14b also shows that using the mean ensemble member as opposed to the median en-
semble member will result in slightly more bias in the streamflow simulation. However
the increase over lead time is minor, as the maximum bias error seen in 4.14b is approx-
imately 5% of the average flow in the months of February and March 2020. This further-
more indicates that the streamflow predictions through HYPE simulations with COMEPS
ensemble NWP as input, could provide useful information over 2 days before a winter
peak flow event.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
43
==PAGE:51==
4.3
Performance evaluation
Figure 4.13 shows that the HYPE simulation with observed precipitation consistently ex-
hibits a negative bias in periods of peak streamflow in the period used for the reforecast. It
is desired to separate the uncertainty added by the calibration from the uncertainty of the
COMEPS forecast, and as a consequence the performance of the model will be evaluated
on the basis of two different scenarios:
1. A performance evaluation of the model when compared to real observed values from
Miljøstyrelsens gauge at Manna. This will be referred to as real observations.
2. A performance evaluation of the model when compared to simulated streamflow with
observed precipitation as input. This will be referred to as synthetic observations.
These segregated evaluations are presented both for the CRPS-diagram, the rank his-
togram and the ROC-curve.
Figure 4.15: CRPS for the ensemble streamflow forecast, and MAE for the deterministic bench-
mark forecasts of climatology, persistence and perfect forecast over the period of February and
March 2020 against real observations.
Figure 4.15 shows that the best forecasting tool for lead times ≤10 hours, is the per-
sistence index. This means that for forecasting streamfow in Ryå up to 10 hours into
the future, the estimate of the present value is still better than the one predicted by the
COMEPS-fed HYPE simulation.
Overall, figure 4.15 shows relatively good performance against the persistence index
and is way lower than the climatological mean. Benchmarking against the climatological
mean becomes more interesting at medium-long range forecast horizons, where predic-
tive power of the flood forecasting model and persistence is expected to have declined
considerably, and may be less valuable than a long-term average of the given period of
time.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
44
==PAGE:52==
The lack of performance degradation over lead time in figure 4.15, is anticipated because
of the general underestimation of streamflow peaks in the HYPE simulation of the valida-
tion period combined with the general overestimation of rainfall by the COMEPS ensemble
over higher lead times. This results in the ensemble-fed simulations appearing to have a
larger predictive power than the simulation with the observed precipitation as input (per-
fect forecast). This is of course misleading, and is the result of a negative bias in peak
flows and a positive bias in precipitation forecasting at higher lead times.
Table 4.3: Persistence index computed for the mean forecast with the given forecast
horizon, against the persistence with the same forecast horizon
Persistence index
Lead time
5
20
35
50
-1.70
0.69
0.78
0.64
Table 4.3 shows the persistence index for the mean forecast at lead times 5, 20, 35 and 50
against forecasts from persistence with the same lead times against the real observations.
The persistence index goes from −∞to 1, with 1 being the perfect model, negative num-
bers indicating worse performance than the persistence, and 0 being as good as using
the persistence forecast with the given lead time. From table 4.3, the same conclusions
can be drawn as from figure 4.15, namely that the persistence performs better than the
ensemble-fed streamflow forecasts at lower forecast horizons, while the ensemble-fed
streamflow performs better than persistence at higher forecast horizons.
Figure 4.16: CRPS for the ensemble streamflow forecast, and MAE for the deterministic bench-
marks of climatology and persistence against the synthetic observations.
Figure 4.16 depicts how a perfectly calibrated model would perform against persistence
and climatology. Most notably, it illustrates a higher slope of the CRPS for the ensemble
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
45
==PAGE:53==
forecast, i.e. a larger performance degradation over increasing lead time, which is a
result of the overestimation of rainfall by COMEPS on higher lead times. The MAE for
persistence and CRPS for the ensemble forecast are naturally alike in the low lead times
of this comparison due to the fact that the ensemble forecast gets the state of the water
storages and flows from the synthetic observations as the starting point of the forecast.
Both figures 4.15 and 4.16 show limited loss of predictive power of lead time. It is expected
that for spatially coarser medium-range forecasts with longer forecast horizons, the model
error would increase more with increasing lead time (Gouweleeuw et al. 2005).
(a) Lead time = 5
(b) Lead time = 20
(c) Lead time = 35
(d) Lead time = 50
Figure 4.17: Rank histograms for four selected lead times against the distribution of the real
observations.
Consistent biases in the distribution of the ensemble forecast can by use of the rank his-
togram be identified by the slope rank histogram (Hamill 2001). The skewedness towards
higher ranks in figures 4.18a & 4.18b indicate a strong bias negative bias at lead times
less than 20 hours. Figures 4.18c and 4.18d indicate that the simulation becomes less
negatively biased at higher lead times. This decrease in bias is likely due to the continuous
underestimation of streamflow with observed precipitation as input, and the fact that the
COMEPS ensemble product has a tendency to overestimate precipitation at higher lead
times as seen when comparing the observed ClimateGridDK precipitation to the precipi-
tation forecasted by the mean or median ensemble member over a corresponding period
as shown in Figures I.1 & I.2 in appendix I.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
46
==PAGE:54==
At higher lead times the rank histogram approaches a convex shape. As described earlier,
this usually refers to a lack of variability in the ensemble forecast. However this is highly
unlikely as the variance in between the ensemble members increase over time as shown
earlier in Figure 4.14a. This convex shape in the rank histogram can however also stem
from sampling half of the period from an ensemble with a negative bias and the other half
of the time from an ensemble with a positive bias. This convex shape is indistinguishable
from one created as a result of lack of variability (Hamill 2001). The rank histogram in
question would then simply indicate a measure of variability, and not a lack of variability,
shining light on one of the common interpretation pitfalls of the rank histogram.
(a) Lead time = 5
(b) Lead time = 20
(c) Lead time = 35
(d) Lead time = 50
Figure 4.18: Rank histograms for four selected lead times against the distribution of the synthetic
observations.
When comparing the predictive power of COMEPS as hydrological model forcing against
the simulation with ’perfect forecasted’ precipitation, figure 4.18a indicates that at lower
lead times the ensemble contains high variability, as an excess of variability in the ensem-
ble produces a concave shape and shows higher frequency in the middle ranks (Hamill
2001). Over increasing lead time the high variability of the ensemble shifts into a positive
bias illustrated by the strong skewedness to the left in figure 4.18d.
The scenario presented in figure 4.18 and 4.16 where the simulated streamflow with the
observed precipitation is used as a proxy for observed streamflow values is incorporated
to give an insight in the performance of the COMEPS product in a better model calibra-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
47
==PAGE:55==
tion that is not heavily negative biased. The variability depicted in the rank histograms in
figure 4.18 should be interpreted as how the variability and bias in the COMEPS ensem-
ble product would appear in a perfect calibration. From this perspective, the use of the
COMEPS precipitation as forcing input to HYPE in a streamflow forecasting framework,
would result in a positive bias that becomes more significant with increasing lead times.
For evaluation of model performance over certain thresholds vaious ROC-curves are pre-
sented. GEUS investigated the streamflow simulated by their hydrologic model, the DK-
model, at times of extreme rain with return periods of 5 - 1000 years (Henriksen et al.
2013). A rain event with a return period of 5 years was found to produce a peak stream-
flow value of 12.8 m3/s, and this is used as the initial threshold in the ROC-analysis.
(a) Synthetic observations.
(b) Real observations.
Figure 4.19: The ROC-curve for all values above the return period T=5 threshold of 12.8 m3/s.
Figure 4.19a shows that ensemble forecast performs slightly worse than the average
guess over a threshold of 12.8 m3/s, because the synthetic observations simply do not
have any timesteps where streamflow exceeds the thresholds. While the confusion ma-
trices of most ensembles members lie in the point (0,0) and indicate no true nor false
positives, there are a few ensemble members with a lead time of 50 predicting stream-
flow over the threshold, thereby resulting in a few false positives. Given the bias of the
precipitation forecasts on higher lead times, efforts should not be directed towards the
true positive rate at lead times of 35 and 50 depicted in figure 4.19b. The ROC-curve
also shows very few to no false positives, and this is a positive takeaway with regards
to forecast potential, as few false alarms issued by a flood warning system may increase
user confidence in the issued warnings.
Even though Ryå experienced widespread flooding of adjacent agricultural land, the peak
flow only exceeded the threshold of 12.8 m3/s in a total of 31 hours distributed on 2 stream-
flow peaks. Therefore, in order to better be able to investigate the performance of the
model, peak flow events with lower return periods are considered. These thresholds are
decided on the basis of the 5% and 1% upper quantile of the hourly observed streamflow
from MST in the total period where these data are available (2007 to 2021).
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
48
==PAGE:56==
(a) Synthetic observations.
(b) Real observations.
Figure 4.20: The ROC-curve for all values above the 5% upper quantile threshold of 7.8 m3/s.
Analyzing the ROC-curve can give the forecaster an insight into tendencies in the model
set-up to hit or miss events over or under a certain threshold set by the forecaster. Figures
4.20a and 4.20b illustrate that at streamflow values over 7.8 m3/s, the model performs
quite well, with a high true positive rate over 0.6 for all ensemble members, and in all
ensemble members the true positive rate by far exceeds the false positive rate. Figure
4.20 also highlights the high agreement between ensemble members, in terms of the true
positive:false positive ratio. This indicates that there is no single ensemble member that
continuously predict flow peaks that the other members missed, or vice versa. The area
under the ROC-curve, AUC, for flow events in the upper 5% quantile is shown in table 4.4.
For reference, 1 is the perfect scenario with all events forecasted and no false alarms, and
0.5 is a random sample of the binaries with equal rates of true and false positives.
Table 4.4: AUC value for the upper 5% quantile of streamflow against the synthetic observed flow
and the real observed flow at Manna.
Lead times
Synthetic
observations
Real
observations
5
0.99
0.96
20
0.98
0.97
35
0.97
0.97
50
0.9
0.91
Table 4.4, shows that the model has a better AUC at smaller lead times, but at the same
time that the loss of predictive power is minor, indicating that the model still has a high
ratio of hits per false alarm for higher lead times.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
49
==PAGE:57==
(a) Synthetic observations.
(b) Real observations.
Figure 4.21: The ROC-curve for all values above the 1% upper quantile threshold of 10.8 m3/s.
Looking at the ROC-curve for the 1% upper quantile of streamflow with ensemble fore-
casts plotted against the synthetic observations in 4.21a, one can observe that all the
points are below the dotted line, meaning that the model consistently performs worse that
the average guess. However, this ROC-curve is not so relevant because the simulated
flow with observed precipitation doesn’t forecast any values above the 10.8 m3/s thresh-
old, therefore only allowing for the occurrence of false positives.
Figure 4.21b depicts that albeit most confusion matrices show a low true positive rate,
there are only minor false positive rates between 0 and 20%. This can, as mentioned pre-
viously, indicate that the model does not have a tendency to overestimate peak stream-
flows when compared to observed flow, and is important knowledge in assessing the
performance of the forecasting framework, as this would result in less false alarm warn-
ings.
4.3.1
Reflection on results
Overall the model shows satisfactory performance in comparison to the persistence and
climatology benchmarks, with figure 4.15 indicating that the ensemble forecast attains
greater forecasting skill than persistence at lead times greater than 10 hours. The en-
semble streamflow forecasting model also shows a high true positive rate over different
thresholds as shown in figures 4.21b and 4.20b, and high AUC for even high lead times.
Albeit this indicates a justification of the usage of COMEPS ensemble precipitation in a
HYPE model for streamflow forecasting purposes, these results only reflect the perfor-
mance over a very limited time period in a single catchment. The negative bias observed
in peak streamflow for the calibrated HYPE set-up in the months of February and March
2020 is presumably not translatable to a certain type of catchments, periods or types of
precipitation, and no trends in bias should be assumed on basis of this study. While this
study offers a proposal for a streamflow forecasting framework, emphasis must be put
on the need for additional testing of the framework on multiple catchments and longer
periods. Model performance under varying conditions such as catchment size and pre-
cipitation type need to be accounted for in further studies on the matter.
The reforecasted streamflow in this study is from two winter months in 2022, and precip-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
50
==PAGE:58==
itation in the winter months in Denmark is typically dominated by synoptic-scale frontal
systems, and large frontal systems tend to be better represented by NWP forecasts than
smaller and more localized convective precipitation (Simonin et al. 2017). Consequently,
more research would be needed to evaluate performance of the quality of streamflow
forecasts for convective precipitation.
Previous case studies of operational flood foreasting in Austria and Germany have shown
that both the error from the hydrological simulation and the error from an ensemble NWP
forecast decreases with increasing catchment size (Nester et al. 2012). Streamflow fore-
casts in larger Danish catchments therefore might be expected to be similar or better in
performance than the relative small catchment of the Ryå.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
51
==PAGE:59==
5
Conclusion
In the set-up of the HYPE model for the catchment of Ryå, the effect of combining and
alternating different sets of parameters on runoff generation, was investigated through
both manual and automatic calibration. The automatic calibration of 14 parameters, and
a fixed manually calibrated value for 11 additional parameters was found to appropriately
reproduce a realistic hydrograph on a daily time-step. In terms of HRU’s, a large area of
vegetated surface, with a small urban HRU, corresponding to the paved area in the catch-
ment, was found to be adequate in representing the slow-response peaks in streamflow,
as well as the quick responding peaks. The coupling of an external aquifer to the catch-
ment, and the calibration of the parameters governing the flow to and from the aquifer was
found to provide a satisfactory inter-annual depiction of the water balance of the deep-
lying aquifer. This daily set-up was also found to have obtained satisfactory values of
NSE and KGE, with the calibration period displaying values of 0.88 and 0.93, respec-
tively. Through Gelman-Rubin diagnostics the highest level of parameter convergence
in the DEMC auto-calibration was found for a population size of two times the number of
parameters (28), and a chain length of 2,000.
In the conversion of the model from a daily time-step model to an hourly time-step model
with finer spatial resolution precipitation forcing and scaling of the parameters, the NSE
and KGE did not decrease considerably, but inspection of the hydrograph made it evident
that the model was too sensitive on a finer temporal resolution. Damping of the stream-
flow, through a flow attenuation box was applied after the conversion to hourly-timestep
to increase reliability and confidence in the results. This resulted in more realistic stream-
flow peaks, but compromised the sharpness and magnitude of the peaks. Ideally, the
cause of the increased sensitivity should be identified, which would also increase model
understanding and knowledge on process and parameter interdependence.
In the validation period, the calibrated hourly time-step HYPE model consistently under-
estimates the peak streamflow observed in the months of February and March 2020. In
spite of this, the performance of the model was deemed satisfactory in terms of CRPS
when compared to climatology and persistence benchmarks, both when isolating the un-
certainty of the COMEPS forcing by using simulated streamflow with observed precipita-
tion as observed streamflow, and by using actual observed streamflow as the true val-
ues. When using gauged streamflow values from Manna as true values, the persistence
forecast showed higher mean absolute error than the ensemble forecasting framework
after approximately 10 hours, demonstrating the potential of an ensemble-fed hydrologic
model in a forecasting framework. The evolution of uncertainty and bias of the COMEPS
ensemble product in a streamflow forecasting framework was illustrated with various sta-
tistical measures, such as the MBE and measure of variance over the forecast horizon,
as well as the evaluation of consistent biases in the ensemble distribution by the rank
histogram. The ROC curves established model performance and reliability over a set of
thresholds, with the forecasting framework showing substantial forecasting skill against
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
52
==PAGE:60==
observed streamflow for peak flow events above the 5% upper quantile of flow in the pe-
riod of 2007-2021, with the predictive power at the illustrated lead times 5, 20, 35 and
50 hours, far surpassing that of the mean. The AUC demonstrated that the rate of true
positives against false positives for the 5% upper quantile, though decreasing by ≈10%
from a lead time of 5 hours to a lead time of 50 hours, was still substantially higher than
that of a random guess.
The expected degradation of performance over increasing lead time was not found to be
evident, when using the observed values as the true values, as a negative bias in the
simulation of the validation period, and a positive bias of forecasted precipitation by the
COMEPS at higher lead times, were seen to equalize one another and dampen the loss
of forecast skill of time. To amplify the loss of performance over lead time, investigations
with the simulated streamflow fed with observed precipitation as the true observed value
was initiated. Here, the CRPS showed increasing error over increasing lead time, and the
rank histogram displayed an increasing positive bias over increasing forecast horizons.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
53
==PAGE:61==
6
Further investigations
In the aspect of model set-up, different set-ups of HYPE should be tested. A change in
the model set-up could be to introduce separate soil-classes for the vegetated surface
and the paved surface. As recession coefficients are dependencies on the soil type, this
would allow for the calibration of separate recession coefficients for the two hydrological
response units. Furthermore, a more spatially refined model should be set-up, with di-
vision of the catchment into smaller linked sub-catchments. This finer spatial resolution
would also provide a more localized insight in the forecasting of peak streamflow, poten-
tially being able to predict streamflow over certain thresholds for multiple places within a
catchment. This division of the catchment into sub-catchments could also be approached
from different angles. One angle could be to identify certain points of interest that are
especially vulnerable to flooding or have a high economic value, and delineate the catch-
ments upstream of this point, in order to obtain a greater potential of forecasting peak
streamflow at these points of interest.
A Global sensitivity analysis such as FAST (Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test) that sam-
ples parameter values in the entire parameter space and throughout the entire time series,
could be implemented to establish greater reliability in the sensitivity of HYPE parameters.
Subsequently, as previously discussed in section 4.1.2 the calibration could be carried out
externally, and thereby attaining greater control on the calibration process. The calibration
should also be carried out on an hourly time-step with the objective function being eval-
uated on that time-step, obtaining parameters that are actually calibrated to represent
processes on the hourly timescale.
For further assessment of the forecasting potential of the framework, a larger sample size
should be considered. This includes evaluating performance on more catchments, of
different sizes, and with different hydrologic characteristics. Additionally the streamflow
forecasting potential of COMEPS in a HYPE set-up should be tested on more events over
different seasons, as the predictive skill might very well vary from synoptic frontal systems
in winter to local convective summer precipitation.
A combination of different hydrologic models could also be employed in order to reduce
the potential bias induced by using a single hydrologic model. The potential of the incorpo-
ration of a neural network model that learns from the patterns of the bias of the hydrologic
model could also be investigated in order to reduce bias.
As the persistence forecast displayed less error than the ensemble forecast for lead times
less than 10 hours, it could also be recommended to use the persistence forecast for low
lead times, or if that data is potentially hard to obtain, extrapolated precipitation from the
radar could be used for the first few hours of the forecast horizon.
It is also likely that flood forecasting authorities would like a longer forecast horizon than
the 56 hours of COMEPS. A forecasting setup combining COMEPS short-range forecast-
ing with for instance 18x18km medium-long range forecasts from ECMWF. Longer fore-
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
54
==PAGE:62==
cast horizons would provide the relevant authorities with more time to adapt to a potential
peak streamflow scenario, but the increased forecast horizon combined with coarser spa-
tial resolution would result in increased uncertainty related to the forecasts, and thresholds
for flood warning would probably have to be dynamic over increasing forecast horizons.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
55
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Arheimer, Berit, Rafael Pimentel, Kristina Isberg, Louise Crochemore, Jafet Andersson,
Abdulghani Hasan, and Luis Pineda (2020). “Global catchment modelling using World-
Wide HYPE (WWH), open data, and stepwise parameter estimation”. In: Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences 24.2, pp. 535–559.
Bauer, Peter, Alan Thorpe, and Gilbert Brunet (2015). “The quiet revolution of numerical
weather prediction”. In: Nature 525.7567, pp. 47–55.
Bennett, James C, David E Robertson, Phillip GD Ward, HA Prasantha Hapuarachchi,
and Quan J Wang (2016). “Calibrating hourly rainfall-runoff models with daily forcings
for streamflow forecasting applications in meso-scale catchments”. In: Environmental
Modelling & Software 76, pp. 20–36.
Bennett, Neil D, Barry FW Croke, Giorgio Guariso, Joseph HA Guillaume, Serena H
Hamilton, Anthony J Jakeman, Stefano Marsili-Libelli, Lachlan TH Newham, John P
Norton, Charles Perrin, et al. (2013). “Characterising performance of environmental
models”. In: Environmental Modelling & Software 40, pp. 1–20.
Bergstrand, Marie, Sara-Sofia Asp, and Göran Lindström (2014). “Nationwide hydrological
statistics for Sweden with high resolution using the hydrological model S-HYPE”. In:
Hydrology Research 45.3, pp. 349–356.
Brooks, Stephen P and Andrew Gelman (1998). “General methods for monitoring conver-
gence of iterative simulations”. In: Journal of computational and graphical statistics 7.4,
pp. 434–455.
Carman, Phillip C (1939). “Permeability of saturated sands, soils and clays”. In: The Jour-
nal of Agricultural Science 29.2, pp. 262–273.
Cloke, HL and Florian Pappenberger (2009). “Ensemble flood forecasting: A review”. In:
Journal of hydrology 375.3-4, pp. 613–626.
Cuo, Lan, Thomas C Pagano, and QJ Wang (2011). “A review of quantitative precipitation
forecasts and their use in short-to medium-range streamflow forecasting”. In: Journal
of hydrometeorology 12.5, pp. 713–728.
Davolio, S, MM Miglietta, T Diomede, C Marsigli, A Morgillo, and A Moscatello (2008). “A
meteo-hydrological prediction system based on a multi-model approach for precipitation
forecasting”. In: Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 8.1, pp. 143–159.
English, Stephen, Tony McNally, Niels Bormann, Kirsti Salonen, Marco Matricardi, An-
dras Moranyi, Michael Rennie, Marta Janisková, Sabatino Di Michele, Alan Geer, et al.
(2013). “Impact of satellite data”. In.
GCA (2019). Adapt now: A global call for leadership on climate resilience. World Re-
sources Institute.
Gelman, Andrew and Donald B Rubin (1992). “Inference from iterative simulation using
multiple sequences”. In: Statistical science 7.4, pp. 457–472.
Göber, Martin, CA Wilson, Sean F Milton, and DB Stephenson (2004). “Fairplay in the
verification of operational quantitative precipitation forecasts”. In: Journal of Hydrology
288.1-2, pp. 225–236.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
56
==PAGE:64==
Gouweleeuw, BT, J Thielen, G d Franchello, APJ De Roo, and R Buizza (2005). “Flood
forecasting using medium-range probabilistic weather prediction”. In: Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences 9.4, pp. 365–380.
Haghizadeh, Ali, Safoura Siahkamari, Amir Hamzeh Haghiabi, and Omid Rahmati (2017).
“Forecasting flood-prone areas using Shannon’s entropy model”. In: Journal of Earth
System Science 126.3, pp. 1–11.
Hamill, Thomas M (2001). “Interpretation of rank histograms for verifying ensemble fore-
casts”. In: Monthly Weather Review 129.3, pp. 550–560.
Hamill, Thomas M and Josip Juras (2006). “Measuring forecast skill: is it real skill or is it
the varying climatology?” In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society: A
journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography
132.621C, pp. 2905–2923.
Henriksen, Hans Jørgen, Martin Olsen, and Lars Troldborg (2013). “Klimaekstremvand-
føring: Klimaeffekter på hydrologi og afstrømning”. In: Danmarks og Grønlands Geolo-
giske Undersøgelse 29.
Hersbach, Hans (2000). “Decomposition of the continuous ranked probability score for
ensemble prediction systems”. In: Weather and Forecasting 15.5, pp. 559–570.
Hill, Mary C (2000). “Methods and guidelines for effective model calibration”. In: Building
partnerships, pp. 1–10.
Jacobs, AFG and HAR De Bruin (1998). “Makkink’s equation for evapotranspiration ap-
plied to unstressed maize”. In: Hydrological processes 12.7, pp. 1063–1066.
Jain, Sharad Kumar, Pankaj Mani, Sanjay K Jain, Pavithra Prakash, Vijay P Singh, De-
siree Tullos, Sanjay Kumar, SP Agarwal, and AP Dimri (2018). “A Brief review of flood
forecasting techniques and their applications”. In: International Journal of River Basin
Management 16.3, pp. 329–344.
Jasper, Karsten, Joachim Gurtz, and Herbert Lang (2002). “Advanced flood forecasting
in Alpine watersheds by coupling meteorological observations and forecasts with a dis-
tributed hydrological model”. In: Journal of hydrology 267.1-2, pp. 40–52.
Johnson, Christine and Neill Bowler (2009). “On the reliability and calibration of ensemble
forecasts”. In: Monthly Weather Review 137.5, pp. 1717–1720.
Kavetski, Dmitri, Fabrizio Fenicia, and Martyn P Clark (2011). “Impact of temporal data
resolution on parameter inference and model identification in conceptual hydrological
modeling: Insights from an experimental catchment”. In: Water Resources Research
47.5.
Knoben, Wouter JM, Jim E Freer, and Ross A Woods (2019). “Inherent benchmark or
not? Comparing Nash–Sutcliffe and Kling–Gupta efficiency scores”. In: Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences 23.10, pp. 4323–4331.
Koch, Julian and Raphael Schneider (2022). “Long short-term memory networks enhance
rainfall-runoff modelling at the national scale of Denmark”. In: GEUS Bulletin 49.
Kuraś, Piotr K, Markus Weiler, and Younes Alila (2008). “The spatiotemporal variability
of runoff generation and groundwater dynamics in a snow-dominated catchment”. In:
Journal of Hydrology 352.1-2, pp. 50–66.
Lewis, John M (2005). “Roots of ensemble forecasting”. In: Monthly weather review 133.7,
pp. 1865–1885.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
57
==PAGE:65==
Lindström, Göran, Charlotta Pers, Jörgen Rosberg, Johan Strömqvist, and Berit Arheimer
(2010). “Development and testing of the HYPE (Hydrological Predictions for the Envi-
ronment) water quality model for different spatial scales”. In: Hydrology research 41.3-4,
pp. 295–319.
Morris, Max D (1991). “Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experi-
ments”. In: Technometrics 33.2, pp. 161–174.
Mostafaie, Abdolrahman, Ehsan Forootan, A Safari, and Maike Schumacher (2018). “Com-
paring multi-objective optimization techniques to calibrate a conceptual hydrological
model using in situ runoff and daily GRACE data”. In: Computational Geosciences 22.3,
pp. 789–814.
Najafi, Mohammad Reza, Hamid Moradkhani, and Thomas C Piechota (2012). “Ensemble
streamflow prediction: climate signal weighting methods vs. climate forecast system
reanalysis”. In: Journal of Hydrology 442, pp. 105–116.
Nalbantis, Ioannis (1995). “Use of multiple-time-step information in rainfall-runoff mod-
elling”. In: Journal of Hydrology 165.1-4, pp. 135–159.
Nester, T, J Komma, A Viglione, and G Blöschl (2012). “Flood forecast errors and ensem-
ble spread—A case study”. In: Water Resources Research 48.10.
Olsson, Jonas, B Charlotta Pers, Lisa Bengtsson, Ilias Pechlivanidis, Peter Berg, and
Heiner Körnich (2017). “Distance-dependent depth-duration analysis in high-resolution
hydro-meteorological ensemble forecasting: A case study in Malmö City, Sweden”. In:
Environmental Modelling & Software 93, pp. 381–397.
Park, Seong Ho, Jin Mo Goo, and Chan-Hee Jo (2004). “Receiver operating characteris-
tic (ROC) curve: practical review for radiologists”. In: Korean journal of radiology 5.1,
pp. 11–18.
Pechlivanidis, IG and Berit Arheimer (2015). “Large-scale hydrological modelling by us-
ing modified PUB recommendations: the India-HYPE case”. In: Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences 19.11, pp. 4559–4579.
Pedersen, Niels Lagergaard and Kaj Sand-Jensen (2007). “Temperature in lowland Dan-
ish streams: contemporary patterns, empirical models and future scenarios”. In: Hydro-
logical Processes: An International Journal 21.3, pp. 348–358.
Pers, Charlotta (2017). HYPE Sourceforge Discussion Forum. https://sourceforge.net/p/
hype/discussion/1818967/thread/73b56663/?limit=25#3b55.
Santos, Léonard, Jafet CM Andersson, and Berit Arheimer (2022). “Evaluation of param-
eter sensitivity of a rainfall-runoff model over a global catchment set”. In: Hydrological
Sciences Journal just-accepted.
Scherrer, Simon C, Christof Appenzeller, Pierre Eckert, and Daniel Cattani (2004). “Anal-
ysis of the spread–skill relations using the ECMWF ensemble prediction system over
Europe”. In: Weather and Forecasting 19.3, pp. 552–565.
Sechu, Gasper L, Bertel Nilsson, Bo V Iversen, Anders B Møller, Mette B Greve, Lars
Troldborg, and Mogens H Greve (2022). “Mapping groundwater-surface water interac-
tions on a national scale for the stream network in Denmark”. In: Journal of Hydrology:
Regional Studies 40, p. 101015.
Seneviratne, Sonia, Neville Nicholls, David Easterling, Clare Goodess, Shinjiro Kanae,
James Kossin, Yali Luo, Jose Marengo, Kathleen McInnes, Mohammad Rahimi, et al.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
58
==PAGE:66==
(2012). “Changes in climate extremes and their impacts on the natural physical envi-
ronment”. In.
Simonin, David, Clive Pierce, Nigel Roberts, Susan P Ballard, and Zhihong Li (2017).
“Performance of Met Office hourly cycling NWP-based nowcasting for precipitation fore-
casts”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 143.708, pp. 2862–
2873.
Smith, PJ, Florian Pappenberger, Fredrik Wetterhall, J Thielen Del Pozo, Blazej Krzeminski,
Peter Salamon, Davide Muraro, Milan Kalas, and Calum Baugh (2016). “On the oper-
ational implementation of the European Flood Awareness System (EFAS)”. In: Flood
forecasting. Elsevier, pp. 313–348.
Smith, WO, Paul D Foote, and PF Busang (1929). “Packing of homogeneous spheres”.
In: Physical Review 34.9, p. 1271.
Ter Braak, Cajo JF (2006). “A Markov Chain Monte Carlo version of the genetic algo-
rithm Differential Evolution: easy Bayesian computing for real parameter spaces”. In:
Statistics and Computing 16.3, pp. 239–249.
Verkade, JS, JD Brown, P Reggiani, and AH Weerts (2013). “Post-processing ECMWF
precipitation and temperature ensemble reforecasts for operational hydrologic forecast-
ing at various spatial scales”. In: Journal of Hydrology 501, pp. 73–91.
WMO (2012). Guidelines on ensemble prediction systems and forecasting.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
59
==PAGE:67==
A
Workflow
Figure A.1: Flow chart of the work process in this thesis, from data collection and modelling to
calibration and validation of results.
Figure A.1 is a conceptualization of the steps in the working process from the collection,
sorting and handling of data, post-processing of the data, the setup and calibration of the
HYPE-model and to the validation and analysis of results. A more detailed description
of each step in the conceptual workflow chart can be seen in Table A.1, which gives an
overview of the initial purpose of the project.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
60
==PAGE:68==
Table A.1: A more detailed and concrete description of the steps in the conceptual workflow
Steps
Description of work process in steps
1.1
Selection of a suiting catchment from the CAMELS-DK dataset by fitting
attributes.
The intention is to investigate model performance in a nat-
ural catchment, without major lakes or dams, and a relatively unaltered
stream. The .shp-file from the CAMELS-DK dataset and the corresponding
attributes are used as geographical input in the HYPE model.
1.2
The daily time-step 10x10km spatial resolution precipitation and tempera-
ture data, and the daily time-step 20x20km observed PET data as well as
the observed daily aggregated discharge from the CAMELS-DK dataset will
be used to obtain model and parameter understanding.
1.3
An initial daily time-step HYPE model will be set up for the selected catch-
ment, and the fitting amount of parameters and hydrological response units
are tested, model stability and water balance is assured in this step. One-
at-a-time sensitivity testing of parameters is done preliminary to automatic
calibration.
2.1 & 2.2
Conversion of the model from daily to hourly timestep is done with the use
of DMI’s ‘ClimateGridDK’ hourly observed precipitation and temperature in
a 1x1km spatial resolution as forcing input. Rescaling of time-dependent
parameters is investigated. This will serve as the baseline performance of
the HYPE model’s ability to predict streamflow.
3
The hourly timestep HYPE model will be validated on a validation period
where data availability corresponds to the calibration period.
4.1
The COMEPS NWP ensemble forecasts and the deterministic NWP fore-
cast is fed into the HYPE model. For each HYPE simulation with NWP
forecasts as forcing input, a starting state will be loaded. This starting start
will be a model state from the validation period.
4.2
The HYPE model is run with deterministic and probabilistic NWP data for
select events in the validation period, where observed streamflow is also
available, to give an insight into the predictive power of the HYPE model in
streamflow forecasting.
5
Evaluation of the quality of peak flow prediction from the NWP COMEPS
data and the observed ClimateGridDK as climate forcing data within the
HYPE modelling framework. Identification of patterns, trends, bias in the
results. Comparison of KPI’s against benchmark techniques such climatol-
ogy and persistence.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
61
==PAGE:69==
B
COMEPS Perturbations
Figure B.1: The perturbation scheme for perturbations in the COMEPS ensemble, with
perturbations in the initial conditions (SLAF, RF), and in the model parameterization
(shallow convection, turbulence). From Feddersen, H. (2019), ”DMI’s ensemblesystem
COMEPS”, Unpublished document.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
62
==PAGE:70==
C
Parameter runoff response
Figure C.1: Example of the runoff response to increasing and decreasing the recession
coefficients from soil layers 1 and 3 to the stream, rrcs1 and rrcs2, the recession to the
aquifer, rcgrwst, the correction parameter for return flow, aqretcor, and the percolation
from layer 2 to layer 3, mperc2.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
63
==PAGE:71==
D
Water storage & transfer in HYPE
Figure D.1: The change of precipitation, infiltration, groundwater inflow and outflow, soil
groundwater level, soil moisture and runoff generation from the three soil layers over time.
A daily timestep calibration with 2 HRU’s.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
64
==PAGE:72==
E
Auto-calibration/Manual calibration
Table E.1: A distribution of parameters that were automatically calibrated, and parameters
that were manually calibrated. The majority of the parameters that were found to be
sensitive in the scaled sensitivity analysis, were auto-calibrated.
Parameter
Manual calibration
Automatic calibration
Recession & percolation
rrcs1
X
rrcs2
X
rrcs3
X
rcgrwst
X
aqretcorr
X
srrcs
X
mperc1
X
mperc2
X
Water storage
wcfc1
X
wcfc2
X
wcfc3
X
wcep1
X
wcep2
X
wcep3
X
wcwp1
X
wcwp2
X
wcwp3
X
cmlt
X
epotdist
X
Infiltration
macrate
X
mactrinf
X
mactrsm
X
srrate
X
Delay
rivvel
X
damp
X
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
65
==PAGE:73==
F
Evapotranspiration over soil depth
Figure F.1: In illustration from SMHI of the decay of potential evapotranspiration through-
out the soil layers.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
66
==PAGE:74==
G
MST observed streamflow data flaws
(a) Linear interpolation between points where
observed streamflow data is lacking.
(b) Streamflow peak that the observed hourly
data from MST failed to measure.
Figure G.1: Flaws in hourly observed streamflow data from MST.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
67
==PAGE:75==
H
18 member ensemble forecast with
peak attenuation
Figure H.1: Ensemble of forecasts issued 56-53, 44-41, 32-29 and 20-17 hours before
the streamflow peak shown in the MST observed data, with peak attenuation.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
68
==PAGE:76==
I
COMEPS and ClimateGridDK
precipitation February & March 2020
Figure I.1: COMEPS mean and COMEPS median of all forecast horizons and Climate-
GridDK 1x1 km observed precipitation in mm/day for the period of February and March
2020.
(a) Mean precipitation at Lead time = 50.
(b) Median precipitation at Lead time = 50.
Figure I.2: Mean and median forecasted precipitation at 50 hours of lead time in mm/day
for the period of February and March 2020.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
69
==PAGE:77==
J
Parameter scaling issues
Figure J.1: A simple example of the outflow from a linear reservoir of 5000 m3 with a rate
of 0.1 m3· day−1, for the linearly scaling method described in equation 4.1 and the correct
scaling described in equation 4.2.
Figure J.2: The effect of using simple linear scaling, or correctly scaling outflows from
linear reservoirs as described in equation 4.2.
Evaluation of the quality of DMI’s COMEPS ensemble product as hydrological model forcing
70
