==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Plan and goal recognition
Ask Dörge Kunding (s174266)
Asbjørn Pedersen Kaad (s174282)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis addresses goal and plan recognition. It does so by specifying a multi-
agent domain, namely the kitchen domain. Throughout the thesis, two prob-
abilistic models are constructed using Bayesian inference that tries to describe
how collaborative agents in this domain behave. The models are compared to
previous related works that also operate in a variant of the kitchen domain. The
approach used by this thesis differentiates itself from previous approaches by
considering more specific and small sub-goals that it names tasks. These are
intended for a single agent to complete by themselves instead, which differs from
earlier approaches, where this was not the case. One of the novel concepts in-
troduced in this thesis is how it has support for agents that change their task.
This is done without re-doing every single calculation whenever it is likely that
an agent has switched to a new task. Instead, the model tries to accommodate
this by updating its probability that the agent has a specific task. The models
introduced contains multiple parameters that can be configured for each agent,
to make the best predictions possible. It was attempted to find good parameter
values for a few agents, some developed as part of this thesis and some not. By
doing so, many experiments were conducted and valuable takeaways presented,
suggesting how to further improve the proposed models.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The supervisor for the thesis was Thomas Bolander. The thesis was developed
starting from the January 24, 2022 to June 24, 2022. Both participants have
used 30 ECTS on this thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 24, 2022
Ask Dörge Kunding (s174266)
Asbjørn Pedersen Kaad (s174282)
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Domain Specification
2
2.1
State Fluents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Action Schemas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Joint actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Theory
12
3.1
Plan & goal recognition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Tasks
18
4.1
Milestone tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Auxiliary tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Agent Profiling
34
5.1
Introducing probabilities to the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Maintaining task probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
An extended model for task prior probabilities
. . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Predicting actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Model fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Analysis
48
6.1
Test Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2
Evaluating the fit of the basic model on a single agent . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Evaluating the basic model on multiple simple agents . . . . . . . . 52
6.4
Evaluating the extended model on extended simple agent
. . . . . 53
6.5
Evaluating the extended model on more complex agents . . . . . . 53
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
7
Future work
57
8
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
60
A
Finding solutions in milestone graph
61
B
Derivative of MSE
63
B.1
Derivatives related to P(tf = t|s) for basic model . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.2
Derivatives related to P(t|s) for extended model
. . . . . . . . . . 65
C
Test levels
67
C.1 Training levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
C.2 Control levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
C.3 Preference training level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
If robots and AI are to become a prevalent part in everyday life, be it self driving
cars or smart light systems, it is not enough for these robots to be able to
just navigate the environment while solving problems on their own. No, if they
are to become a more prevalent part of society, they also need the ability to
collaborate with other agents be that humans or other AIs. Since this is the case,
more traditional cooperation approaches like the ones used for robots working
in warehouses cannot be used as these generally rely on either having some
sort of central coordinator or having some prior coordination policy. Instead to
coordinate with other actors, the agent needs some sort of understanding of the
plans and intentions of other agents, so that it can create a plan for itself which
is consistent with the other actors’ plans. To do this the agent needs a concept
of theory of mind[PW78].
Theory of mind is the ability to attribute goals and intentions to other agents.
One way of doing this is by interpreting the actions of other agents and deter-
mining what goals these would help them achieve. Like how if a human might
think that a human walking towards a fridge has the goal of getting something
from said fridge. Another could be by using inferences about general tendencies.
An example of this could be how it is easily assumed that cars driving during
the evening congestion are going home as opposed to in the morning where they
would be assumed to be going to work. The methods used to generate these goal
assignments are generally referred to as plan and goal recognition algorithms and
this is the focus of this thesis.
This thesis will discuss how the goals of agents can be recognized in a 2D
domain where multiple agents have to work together to solve a set of partially
ordered hierarchical tasks. Here the domain used in the thesis will first be in-
troduced after which the general theory of goal recognition will be discussed
together with some previous works in a similar domain. Then the concept of
tasks will be introduced which leads into the construction of the model itself.
Lastly some tests will be performed on the model to gauge its performance and
from the acquired information possible improvements or modifications will be
discussed.
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 2
Domain Specification
The kitchen domain has been developed for this thesis and will be used as an
example throughout this report. It is heavily inspired by the domain presented in
the Too Many Cooks paper by Rose E. Wang and Sarah A. Wu [Wu+20] which
in turn was inspired by the game overcooked[Ltd16].
Figure 2.1: Example of a kitchen environment with two agents. In this picture
the counters can bee seen as the beige fields and the floor is the
gray fields. The @ marks the delivery station. With the blue circles
representing agents. The item(s) which needs to be delivered can
be seen in the bottom.
In this setting all the agents work together to create one or more food items
in a 2D-grid world representation of a kitchen. The goal of the agents is to create
and deliver these items in as few steps as possible. While solving the problem, the
agents are not permitted to directly communicate with each other and instead
the agents have to rely on some other system to try and predict what the other
==PAGE:9==
2.1 State Fluents
3
agents are doing. Each square of this kitchen is then either a floor where agents
can walk, a counter where ingredients can be placed or a delivery station where
items are delivered. Furthermore there are is a special type of counter, named
cutting boards where ingredients can be cut. Each counter can contain at most
one item at a time and only the goal items can be delivered on the delivery
station. Counters, delivery stations and cutting boards cannot be moved in this
domain.
There is a finite number of ingredients/items on the map, which means that
in some cases the goal may become unsolvable if a wrong action is taken. As an
example if the goal is to deliver a whole tomato and there is only one tomato,
then if an agent cuts that tomato into slices the problem becomes unsolvable.
Each level will have its own list of items which needs to be delivered for the level
to be solved.
Figure 2.2: In this figure an example recipe for making a salad can be seen.
The actions used to make the items are marked with arrows and
the name of the action.
The agents can only move in the four cardinal directions and they move one
square at a time. Beside move actions, the agents can use the combine action to
combine two items to create a new item and they can use the cut action to cut
an item on a cutting board thus creating a new item. In addition to these two
actions, the agent also has an action to pickup items from counters as well as an
action to put down an item on a counter. Each agent can only carry one item at
a time. The final action that the agents can perform is the deliver action where
the agents deliver one of the goal items to a delivery station. A more formal and
specific definition of the actions can be found in section 2.2.
2.1
State Fluents
To clearly define the kitchen domain, a formal definition of the kitchen domain
will be stated in Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) in the form of
==PAGE:10==
2.1 State Fluents
4
action schemas[RN10]. Normally PDDL uses a programming like syntax but in
this thesis a more logically oriented syntax will be used for better readability.
In PDDL each state is represented with a conjunction of fluents. For example,
Light(On, Bathroom) ∧Light(Off, LivingRoom) could represent the state of
the lights in a one room apartment. A thing to note here is that the closed world
assumption is used when representing a state, which means that it is assumed
that if something is not explicitly stated as true in the state description then
it must be false. Due to this, a state containing negative fluents is not seen as
correct as these fluents are superfluous and should just be removed. Furthermore,
the unique names assumption is used which for example means that Bathroom
and LivingRoom are distinct objects as they have distinct names. Lastly the
state At(Home(Tom), Ask) is not allowed as it uses a function within a fluent.
By doing this, a state can either be treated like a conjunction of fluents which
can then be manipulated with logical inference or it can be treated like a set
which can be manipulated with set operations.
Actions are described by a set of action schemas. From these schemas it can
be gathered what actions are possible to execute in any given state as well as
what the resulting state of executing a given action on a given state will look like.
As an example the action schema for an action about moving to another room
is shown below:
Action:Move(p, from, to)
Precondition:At(p, from) ∧Person(p) ∧Room(from) ∧Room(to)
Effect:¬At(p, from) ∧At(p, to)
As can be seen above, a single action schema consists of three parts: the
action itself and its variables, the precondition of the action and the effect of the
action. Here the precondition determines if the action is applicable, that is to
say if the action can be used in given a state. An action a is applicable in state
s if the precondition of a is satisfied by s. The effect describes how the state is
modified by using the action and it can be split into two parts: the add list and
the delete list. The add list consists of all the positive fluents found in the effect
and when the action is applied to a state, the fluents in the add list are added
to the old state to create the new state. The delete list is the opposite of the
add list, it contains all the negative fluents and when the actions is applied to a
state, these fluents are removed from the state.
The goal is defined just like a precondition, consisting of a conjunction of
literals which may be positive or negative and may contain variables. An ex-
ample goal could be something like: At(p, LivingRoom) ∧Person(p). With the
goal here being to get a person into the living room. A given instance is then
considered solved when a sequence of actions leading to a state that entails the
goal is found.
As this is a commonly used framework, this will hopefully make it easier for
other research to create models for the domain which can then be compared with
==PAGE:11==
2.1 State Fluents
5
the model proposed in this thesis. It may also help showing how some of the
modelling used in this domain can be used in other domains if they contain similar
structures in their action schemas. This is done to not make the descriptions of
the states take up more space than what is necessary. However, before these are
presented, the necessary fluents will be explained below.
At(z, x, y) This is true when object z is at location (x, y) and it is used for all
the movable objects such as agents and items but not for static ones like
the floor. This is done to emphasise that these two types of objects are
fundamentally different.
F ree(x, y) This is true when there are no movable objects at location (x, y).
As such both At(z, x, y) and Free(x, y) cannot be true at the same time
for a given location (x, y).
Item(i) This fluent is used to specify if object i is an item and therefore can
be used in recipes.
Agent(a) This is used to denote that object a is an agent. As each agent is
only supposed to be on one tile at a time, then if an object a is marked as
an agent, it should appear in one At fluent exactly.
AgentF ree(a) This is used to denote that agent a is free and therefore is able
to pick up an item.
AgentCarrying(a, i) This is used to denote that agent a is carrying item i.
This fluent is used such that only the agent position has to be updated
when moving an agent carrying an item, and not the item position as well.
Neighbor(ax, ay, bx, by) This is true if location (ax, ay) is a neighbor to field
(bx, by). In the kitchen domain it is assumed that if Neighbor(ax, ay, bx, by)
is true then so is Neighbor(bx, by, ax, ay). The effect of this is that when
an agent can move from one field to another it is always guaranteed to be
able to move back again.
F loor(x, y) Is used to denote that location (x, y) contains a floor tile and that
as such agents can move into this tile.
Counter(x, y) Is used to denote that location (x, y) contains a counter and
that as such items can be placed on this tile. In the kitchen domain used
in this thesis, a location cannot both contain a counter and a floor.
CuttingBoard(x, y) Is used to denote that location (x, y) contains a Cutting-
Board and that as such items can be cut when placed on this tile. In the
kitchen domain if the field contains a cutting board it should also contain
a counter.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 State Fluents
6
DeliveryStation(x, y) Is used to denote that location (x, y) contains a deliv-
ery stations. In the kitchen domain a delivery station is seen as its own
type of entity and therefore it cannot be placed in the same tile as a floor
or counter.
Combinable(i1, i2, i3) Is used to denote that item i1 can be combined with i2
into i3. Like with the neighbor fluent, if Combinable(i1, i2, i3) is true then
so should Combinable(i2, i1, i3) be.
Cuttable(i1, i2) If this fluent is true then by using a cutting board i1 can be
converted into i2.
Goal(g, i) Symbolize the objectives in an instance of the kitchen domain. Here
g is a goal index unique to each goal, and i is the item to be delivered.
By having a goal index associated with the fluent, it allows for multiple
fluents of the same goal item. For example, if fluents Goal(0, Tomato) and
Goal(1, Tomato) are both true, then two tomatoes should be delivered.
When no more goal fluents are true, the objective has been reached, and
the state is therefore a goal state.
Figure 2.3: An example initial state.
The state shown in figure 2.3 can be seen described with fluents below.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 State Fluents
7
s0 =At(Agent1, 1, 1) ∧At(Agent2, 3, 1) ∧At(Lettuce, 0, 3) ∧At(Tomato, 1, 3) ∧At(Plate, 1, 0)
Agent(Agent1) ∧Agent(Agent2) ∧Item(Lettuce) ∧Item(Tomato) ∧Item(Plate)
∧Item(CutLettuce) ∧Item(CutTomato) ∧Item(LettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Item(PlatedLettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Cuttable(Lettuce, CutLettuce) ∧Cuttable(Tomato, CutTomato)
∧Combinable(CutLettuce, CutTomato, LettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Combinable(CutTomato, CutLettuce, LettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Combinable(Plate, LettuceTomatoSalad, PlatedLettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Combinable(LettuceTomatoSalad, Plate, PlatedLettuceTomatoSalad)
∧Goal(0, PlatedLettuceTomatoSalad) ∧CuttingBoard(4, 1) ∧DeliveryStation(0, 1)
∧Free(1, 1) ∧Free(1, 2) ∧Free(3, 1) ∧Free(3, 2) ∧Free(1, 2) ∧Free(3, 2)
∧AgentFree(Agent1) ∧AgentFree(Agent2)
∧Table(0, 0) ∧Table(1, 0) ∧Table(2, 0) ∧Table(3, 0) ∧Table(4, 0) ∧Table(2, 1)
∧Table(0, 2) ∧Table(2, 2) ∧Table(4, 2) ∧Table(0, 3) ∧Table(1, 3) ∧Table(2, 3)
∧Table(3, 3) ∧Table(4, 3) ∧Floor(1, 1) ∧Floor(1, 2) ∧Floor(3, 1) ∧Floor(3, 2)
In this state the neighbors have not been listed in order to make the state
take up less space but there should be a pair of neighbor fluents for each two
squares bordering each other.
To run agents in this domain it has been implemented into the MAvis system
[Tho21]. The following show some further limitations on the starting states (in
addition to the limitations stated for each state fluent):
• A given location (x, y) is neighbor to the locations (x + 1, y), (x −1, y)
,(x, y + 1) and (x, y −1).
• A floor can only neighbor locations which are floors, counters or delivery
stations. As such they cannot touch the edge of the map and need to be
contained within a perimeter of counters and delivery stations.
• Agents can only start on floors and may not start on top of each other.
• Only one instance of each agent is allowed on the level.
• Items can only start on counters which do not contain a cutting board and
only one item is allowed per counter.
• A location can only be one of the three following types: counter, floor or
delivery station.
The goal can formally be defined as g = ¬Goal(g, i), i.e. a goal state is one
without any true Goal fluents. During the thesis it is generally assumed that
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Action Schemas
8
levels are solvable as otherwise the actions of the agents become meaningless as
they will never complete the goal.
2.2
Action Schemas
Which actions that each agent can perform and when they are applicable is
provided in action schemas. These will now be presented.
2.2.1
Do nothing
In some cases it might make sense for an agent to do nothing. This is achievable
by using the NoOp action that has no falsifiable precondition.
Action : NoOp
Precondition : true
Effect : true
2.2.2
Move around
The following action schema allows the agent to move around.
Action : Move(a, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧Free(dx, dy)
∧Floor(sx, sy) ∧Floor(dx, dy)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy) ∧Neighbors(dx, dy, sx, sy)
Effect : ¬At(a, sx, sy) ∧At(a, dx, dy) ∧¬Free(dx, dy) ∧Free(sx, sy)
To illustrate this an example using a small state only containing two neigh-
boring floors and an agent is used. While this is not a legal state, it is suﬀicient
to illustrate how performing an action affects it. The fluents describing the state
can be seen below:
s0 =Floor(1, 1) ∧Floor(1, 2) ∧Neigbors(1, 1, 1, 2) ∧Neigbors(1, 2, 1, 1) ∧
Agent(Agent) ∧At(Agent, 1, 1) ∧Free(1, 2) ∧AgentFree(Agent)
To apply Move(Agent,1,1,1,2) to s0 first all the preconditions are checked
and since they are all true in s0 the next step can be done. The next step is to
apply the effect of the action to the state and by doing this, the following state
is reached:
s1 =Floor(1, 1) ∧Floor(1, 2) ∧Neigbors(1, 1, 1, 2) ∧Neigbors(1, 2, 1, 1) ∧
Agent(Agent) ∧At(Agent, 1, 2) ∧Free(1, 1) ∧AgentFree(Agent)
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Action Schemas
9
This state is reached by first removing all the negated fluents in the effect
from the old state and then adding the fluents which are true in the effect to the
new modified state. In this case the At(Agent, 1, 1) and Free(1, 2) fluents were
removed and the At(Agent, 1, 2) and Free(1, 1) fluents were added.
2.2.3
Interacting with items
To actually do some cooking, items will need to be interacted with. This means
picking them up from/putting them down on a counter. These two interactions
are encoded in the PickUp and PutDown action schemas. These have no side
effects other than moving the item onto the agent. There are two types of recipes,
one where two items are combined, and one where a single item is cut into another
item. The first of the two is encoded by the Combine action schema, and the
latter is encoded by the Cut action schema. The last action schema is Deliver
which achieves the goal if the agent performing the action carries the correct
item and performs the action at a neighboring delivery station.
Action : PickUp(a, i, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧Counter(dx, dy)
∧AgentFree(a) ∧Item(i) ∧At(i, dx, dy)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy)
Effect : ¬At(i, dx, dy) ∧AgentCarrying(a, i) ∧¬AgentFree(a) ∧Free(dx, dy)
Action : PutDown(a, i, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧Free(dx, dy)
∧AgentCarrying(a, i) ∧Item(i)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy)
∧Counter(dx, dy)
Effect : ¬AgentCarrying(a, i) ∧AgentFree(a) ∧At(i, dx, dy) ∧¬Free(dx, dy)
Action : Combine(a, si, oi, di, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧AgentCarrying(a, si)
∧Item(si) ∧Item(oi) ∧At(oi, dx, dy) ∧Item(di)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy) ∧Counter(dx, dy) ∧Combinable(si, oi, di)
∧¬CuttingBoard(dx, dy)
Effect : ¬AgentCarrying(a, si) ∧¬At(oi, dx, dy)
∧At(di, dx, dy) ∧AgentFree(a)
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Joint actions
10
Action : Cut(a, si, di, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧Item(si) ∧At(si, dx, dy) ∧Item(di)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy) ∧CuttingBoard(dx, dy) ∧Cuttable(si, di)
Effect : ¬At(si, dx, dy) ∧At(di, dx, dy)
Action : Deliver(a, g, i, sx, sy, dx, dy)
Precondition : Agent(a) ∧At(a, sx, sy) ∧Item(i) ∧AgentCarrying(a, i) ∧Goal(g, i)
∧Neighbors(sx, sy, dx, dy) ∧DeliveryStation(dx, dy)
Effect : ¬AgentCarrying(a, i) ∧AgentFree(sx, sy) ∧¬Goal(g, i)
2.3
Joint actions
Each agent chooses their action independently from each other. They cannot
pick an action with an Agent(a, sx, sy) precondition unless they themselves
are agent a. One action from all agents in a time step will then be combined into
a joint action, e.g. A|B|C where A is the action submitted by agent 0, B by agent
1 and C by agent 2. Assuming the precondition of each action is true, the
effect will be applied to the current state. The interpretation of a joint action
is that all actions will be applied/performed at the exact same time as each other.
This, however, could lead to weird behavior like an item being duplicated or two
agents being at the same position. To avoid these inconsistencies, actions where
the effect changes the state to one where the precondition of another action
is no longer true is called conflicting and will be replaced with a NoOp action.
This is illustrated in figure 2.4 where both agents try to pick up the tomato on
the counter between them. Both their actions have the fluent At(Tomato, 2, 1) as
a precondition, but the effect of each of their actions contains ¬At(Tomato, 2, 1).
Applying one of the actions would render the other one invalid, and they are
therefore conflicting and both actions are replaced with NoOp.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Joint actions
11
Figure 2.4: Agent 0 attempts to PickUp(0, Tomato, 2, 1, 1, 1) and agent 1 at-
tempts to PickUp(1, Tomato, 2, 1, 3, 1).
Put in words, both at-
tempt to pick up the same tomato, resulting instead in NoOp ac-
tions for both.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
During this section of the thesis, the general meaning of plan and goal recogni-
tion will be discussed as well as how some previous projects have went about
recognizing the goals of other agents. The projects that will be discussed are all
implemented in a domain quite similar to the one proposed in this thesis, where
agents are working cooperatively together to solve a problem in a kitchen do-
main. The focus during the discussion of the other projects will be on how they
do the actual goal recognition and not so much what they do with the results
of the goal recognition. In general during the thesis there will also be a focus
on collaborative play, meaning that the algorithms looked at and proposed will
for the most part assume other agents to be collaborative and that as such other
agents try to reach a solution to the levels they are put in.
3.1
Plan & goal recognition
As mentioned in the introduction, the area of plan and goal recognition is about
observing the actions of agents and to make inferences about what it is trying
to do from these observations. The easiest way of doing this is to either use a
central coordinator which makes task assignments for all agents or by having the
agents communicate their intentions to each other. And if this is coupled with
agents having complete knowledge of the other agents decision making process,
then even the need to consider previous observations can be eliminated as they
can just simulate what the other agent would do. But this method has some very
strict requirements of the agents, first of all the agents all need to think of the
problem in the same overarching way. For example they all need to agree what
it means to be assigned to a task. Another requirement is that the algorithms
of all involved agents must be known beforehand as they cannot just simulate
an agent they don’t know. As the model proposed in this thesis should allow
for playing with agents without knowing exactly how they think, this general
approach cannot be employed and a more sophisticated plan and goal recogni-
tion solution must instead be found. This also means that the idea of perfectly
predicting what another agent is going to do needs to be abandoned as without
having complete knowledge of the other agents thought processes this cannot
realistically be accomplished. To find an approach which works in the kitchen
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Plan & goal recognition
13
domain, a look into areas of plan and goal recognition is necessary. Here the
area of plan and goal recognition can be roughly separated into the three levels:
Activity recognition, plan recognition and goal recognition[RG21].
• Activity recognition: This is the most low level and least abstract area
of plan & goal recognition. The task is here for the observer to determine
what action an agent is currently performing by using sequences of sensor
inputs. In this way these algorithms can be seen a bit like labeling functions.
Since the actions performed by the agents are already clearly labeled and
observable by all other agents in the kitchen domain, this area of plan &
goal recognition does not need to be handled by a model operating in this
domain.
• Goal recognition: This area is about taking in a sequence of actions and
from these actions trying to infer what goal the agent is working towards.
In most of the literature, the goal considered here is the final overarching
goal of the agent. Since all the agents share the same public goal in the
kitchen domain, there is no need to try and predict the overall goal of an
agent. But since the problem of making a recipe can comfortably be split
into sub-goals by making each required step of a recipe a goal in it self, then
goal recognition algorithms can be used to infer what sub-goal an agent is
working towards.
• Plan recognition: Plan recognition goes one step further from goal recog-
nition and tries to predict the specific plan an agent is employing to reach a
goal. The areas of plan recognition and goal recognition are tightly linked
as to recognize a plan, the goal first needs to be known. Similarly, an intu-
itive way of doing goal recognition is to determine if the observed actions
correspond to a plan for a given goal.
Of these three areas, goal recognition is the main focus of this thesis as
inferring the goals of other agents gives enough information to be useful and since
it is less specific than a concrete plan it should be easier or faster to compute.
3.1.1
Representing domain knowledge
Within goal recognition there are two schools of thought when it comes to repre-
senting domain knowledge[RG21]. These are implicit representation and explicit
representation. In implicit representation there is only a description of the initial
state, the goal and the actions which can be performed. Other than this, implicit
representation contains no further restrictions on how an agent may accomplish a
goal. A typical way of representing a domain while using this approach could be
a Markov decision process or with PDDL like in this thesis. Explicit representa-
tion contains the information of implicit representation but on top of this it also
contains information about what specific plans an agent is allowed to employ to
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Related works
14
achieve a goal. These predetermined plans are usually stored in what is referred
to as a plan library. Algorithms employing this approach often represent the
domain using grammars, trees or plan graphs. The benefit of using an explicit
representation is that the amount of plans which are considered is limited and
that as such it is much easier to evaluate what goal an agent is trying to reach
by matching its observations to a plan in the plan library. Though this is also
the main weakness of explicit representation as it can only consider plans in this
library thus it cannot predict agents which think out of the box that is the plan
library. Additionally, building a plan library requires a high degree of domain
knowledge and as such an algorithm using an explicit approach cannot easily be
used on a new domain. Furthermore, the size of the plan library might become
very large for domains containing complex plans.
As for the representation chosen for this thesis it mainly takes an implicit
approach bit om some areas an explicit approach is used to simplify the problem.
The area where it can be considered explicit is when sub-goals are made and
then assigned to agents. If the sub goals which are considered for each agent is
limited in any way this may lead to exclude certain plans from being possible.
The reason for not considering all sub-goals all the time is one of performance as
estimating the cost of a sub-goal with many prerequisite sub-goals can be very
expensive and designing a good heuristic for this is also very complicated.
3.2
Related works
In this section the goal recognition algorithms of two Collaborative planners used
in a domain similar to the one used in this thesis will be examined.
3.2.1
Bayesian delegation
Bayesian delegation(BD) planner was proposed in the paper Too many cooks:
Bayesian inference for coordination multi-agent collaboration[Wu+20].
This
planner uses Bayesian inference to make a probability distribution of what sub-
goals the other agents are working on. To do this it uses sub-task allocations,
where a sub-task allocation is defined as a mapping between all agents and a set
of sub-tasks such that each agent is assigned to one sub-task. ta is then defined
as the set of all possible sub-task allocations. The types of sub-tasks used in
Bayesian delegation represents the item transformations which have to be made,
such as cutting, combining or delivering items. In this way the sub-tasks are
inherently partially ordered as some sub-tasks will have to be completed before
other sub-tasks can be completed. For instance to make plated sliced tomato
via combination, a tomato may have to be cut first in the case where no sliced
tomato exists in the level. In this case, the existence of the items plate and sliced
tomato is considered a prerequisite for the combine sub-task. When constructing
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Related works
15
ta only sub-tasks which have their prerequisite fulfilled are used. This has the
effect of greatly limiting what sub-tasks must be considered at any given time
but with the downside that it puts a limit to how elaborate plans it can consider.
The probability distribution of the task assignments in ta given a history of
actions, P(ta|H0,T ), is then computed via Bayes rule. Here H0,T is the history
of actions H0,T = [(s0, a0), ···, (sT , aT )] along T time steps, with st and at being
respectively the state and action of all agents at time step t.
P(ta|H0,T ) ∝P(ta)P(H0:T |ta) = P(ta)
T
∏
t=0
P(at|st, ta)
(3.1)
Where P(ta) is the prior over ta and P(at|st, ta) is the probability to use the
actions at at time step t for all agents. From this equation, it can be seen that
the likelihood of a given ta is proportional to how likely the agents’ actions were
given ta. P(at|st, ta) is then computed via the following equation.
P(at|st, ta) ∝
∏
i:T ∈ta
exp(β × Q∗
Ti(st, ai))
(3.2)
Here β is a rationality factor which determines with what level of confidence
the model can predit the agent.Q∗
Ti is then agent i’s future reward toward the
completion of sub-task Ti when using action ai. The intuition behind (3.2) is
that the probability of a joint action given a task assignment is proportional
to how likely each individual agent is to perform its specified action given the
same task assignment. Here it is assumed that an action is likely given a task
assignment if it has a high reward and the agent is rational.
The prior P(ta) is computed from the map state, where P(ta) = 0 in all
cases where ta contains a sub-task which has unfulfilled prerequisites. In the
other cases P(ta) will be proportional to an estimation of how how fast the
sub-tasks in ta can be solved under the given assignment. This means that a
sub-task assignment is more likely the faster it can be solved compared to the
other assignments. Notice that P(ta) is therefore not static, and varies with
the current state. This seems like the mechanism used for changing the task
assignment when sub-tasks have been completed.
While the test performed in the paper showed promising results when it came
to the accuracy of the model, further testing shows that the model may have some
issues with the time it takes to find solutions. Though it is hard to tell if this
caused by the goal recognition part or if it caused by the planning part of BD. A
possible culprit for this might be the fact that the number of task assignments in
ta grows exponentially with the number of agents, as this is making an already
large problem even larger.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Related works
16
3.2.2
Active goal mirroring
The Active goal mirroring(AGM) planner is proposed in the thesis Using Ac-
tive Plan Recognition to Solve Online Multi-Agent Collaboration Problems[DB22].
AGM uses the same idea of sub-tasks as the Bayesian delegation planner, with
the difference that it finds the plans of the agents one agent at a time. Two
different goal recognition algorithms are considered in this thesis namely online
goal mirroring)[MB16] and Plan Recognition as Planning(PRaP) [RG09]. With
online goal mirroring being the final choice due to it being designed for online
domains like the kitchen domain. As both online goal mirroring and PRaP oth-
erwise are based on the same ideas of comparing observations to an optimal plan,
only the final choice of Online Goal Mirroring will be discussed in this section.
Online goal mirroring relies on the assumption of having an online domain
where the observed action sequence O gets a new observed action at each time
step t. In this way the size of Ot will always be equal to t. The likelihood of the
agents following a goal g at time t is then computed via the formula:
P(g|Ot) = η ·
cost(mg)
∆+ cost(mg)
(3.3)
Where mg is the optimal plan for achieving goal g from the initial state. mg
is then the optimal plan for achieving goal g from the current state at time t after
the observation sequence has been applied and ∆is the cost of the plan specified
by the observation sequence. Finally η is a normalisation factor over the other
possible goals. In this way the cost of an optimal plan which does not take into
account the observations is compared to one where observations are taken into
account. Doing it this way has the benefit that mg only needs to be calculated
once at the start of goal recognition and that ∆can be computed in constant
time by adding the cost of the last observed action to the previous ∆. Leaving
mg as the only major computation which needs to be performed at each time
step for each goal.
The version of online goal mirroring used in AGM has then been altered to
work in a multi agent domain where agents will select multiple goals one at a time
during a level. To make the algorithm work in a multi agent domain a change
to how mg and mg are calculated is proposed. Here the goal recognition is done
one agent at a time as opposed to Bayesian delegation where the task-assignment
for all agents is found all at once. With mg being changed to the optimal plan
where all agents work together on goal g. For the next part, first let a denote the
agent on which goal recognition is currently being performed. mg(g) is then the
optimal plan for g where the agent a is bound to its observations and all other
agents are allowed to plan freely. That is to say given an observation sequence
Ot then for the first t steps of mg(g) agent a will follow the matching action
sequence of Ot and after time t it is free to plan. Finally, a modified way of
scoring the goals is proposed as only the most likely goal is needed for the AGM
algorithm, where the most likely goal for an agent is found via the formula:
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Related works
17
arg min
g∈G′ (cost(mg) −cost(mg))
(3.4)
Where G′ are the available sub-tasks.
To deal with agents changing goals or the set of possible goals changing, it
is proposed to recompute the goal distribution using a new initial state when-
ever a sub-goal is achieved. Here the state in which the sub-goal has just been
accomplished will be the new initial state for the goal recognition algorithm.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4
Tasks
The way that this thesis models an agents behavior assumes that each agent has
a task assigned to it. In the research literature the concept of a task is usually
referred to as a goal or subgoal.
However, the term goal is also used for the
overall objectives (i.e. which items to be delivered). Therefore the term task
is instead used to avoid confusion. Generally, a task can be any action either
partially or completely specified in terms of its parameters, e.g. Cut(a = 0, si =
Tomato, di = SlicedTomato). Note that the action’s precondition does not
have to be satisfied for it to be a task. Take a look at the state presented in
figure 4.1. A perfectly valid task for agent 0 in this state could be Cut(a =
0, si = Tomato, di = SlicedTomato).
Figure 4.1: An example task for agent 0 in this state could be Cut(a = 0, si =
Tomato, di = SlicedTomato). This indicates that agent 0 wants
to cut the tomato into sliced tomato.
A task is completed whenever an action of the same type is performed (e.g.
Cut) and with the same parameters.
Going back to the previous example,
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Milestone tasks
19
the task could be completed by the action Cut(a = 0, si = Tomato, di =
SlicedTomato, sx = 1, sy = 1, dx = 0, dy = 1) although this would first re-
quire the agent to go pick up the tomato and put it down on the cutting board.
The model of an agent that this thesis proposes further limits which tasks an
agent can be assigned. This is to instead deal with a smaller and more man-
ageable portion of tasks. This of course limits the applicability of the model, as
some agents might attempt to do a task not considered by this thesis. Overall,
the model categorizes its considered tasks into two types: milestone tasks and
auxiliary tasks.
As explained in section 3.2, both Bayesian Delegation and Active Goal Mir-
roring divides the overall objective into subgoals. It is not guaranteed that a
single agent can complete a subgoal by itself. For instance when the level is fully
divided into two rooms and more than one agent must work on the subgoal in
order to complete it. In the two previous works, this is solved by using multi
agent planners during the recognition process. This thesis aims to instead solve
this issue by considering more specific tasks which then can be solved by a single
agent, and instead handle teamwork by splitting a subgoal into parts which can
be completed by just one agent. The motivation for having more specific single-
agent tasks, as opposed to more general multi-agent subgoals, is to produce a
more usable prediction result and to produce these results quicker as single agent
planning is generally faster than multi agent planning. When outputting a prob-
ability distribution across all assignable tasks, it was deemed more useful to be
able to see that an agent probably intends to move an item to a specific location
rather than the vague: The agent assists in solving this subgoal. An agent us-
ing the model proposed by this thesis will hopefully better be able to see which
tasks are required for something to be done, and get a clearer overview of what
it itself needs to do, since it can rely on the fact that each agent can solve their
task completely by themselves. Take a look at the example in figure 4.2. The
figure illustrates how what would be considered a single subgoal in the Bayesian
Delegation and Active Goal Mirroring papers is instead considered two tasks in
this thesis. With this approach in mind, this model assumes the following:
An agent solves the task completely on its own
as if the other agents were not present.
(4.1)
4.1
Milestone tasks
Milestone tasks distinguishes themselves from auxiliary tasks by the way they are
found/generated. In order to find which milestone tasks an agent can be assigned
according to the model, first a graph called the milestone graph is constructed.
This graph will then be used to filter out tasks that are either pointless to overall
objective or make the goals unsolvable (it is assumed that agents would not want
to do these tasks). This graph is a tuple M = ⟨V, E⟩. Here V is a set of item
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Milestone tasks
20
Figure 4.2: Example of teamwork by more specific tasks. The picture to the
left illustrates an auxiliary task and the one to the right illustrates
a milestone task.
vertices where an item vertex is a tuple ⟨I, CI⟩. I is a type of item (e.g. tomato)
and CI is an integer representing how many instances of the item is in the current
state. E is a set of milestone vertices. A milestone vertex represents a specific
recipe and is a tuple ⟨A, U, V ⟩where A is an action type (e.g. Combine), U
is a list of item types (e.g. [SlicedTomato, Plate]) and V is an item type (e.g.
PlatedSlicedTomato). By the naming of item vertices and milestone vertices, it
might seem like this is no graph at all, as none of the components of the graph
is named an edge. However, it is in fact a graph, since U of a milestone vertex
describe its edges to item vertices that will be referenced as its children and V of
the milestone vertex describe an edge to an item vertex that will be known as its
parent. The milestone graph represents the items in the current state and how
they can be processed (either combined or cut) into other items. The children of
a milestone vertex represents the items used in the process and the parent the
item produced. An example of a milestone graph can be seen in figure 4.3. In
the levels used by this thesis, it is normally possible to combine items in many
different orders, e.g. sliced tomato could be combined with a plate, and then the
plated sliced tomato could be combined with lettuce leaves to produce plated
tomato lettuce. Or the ingredients could be combined in a different order. In the
example in figure 4.3, only a subset of the normally allowed recipes have been
included to enforce a specific combination order and thereby better visualize the
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Milestone tasks
21
graph.
The example milestone graph can be written in tuple form as:
G = ⟨{⟨Lettuce, 1⟩, ⟨Tomato, 2⟩, ⟨Onion, 1⟩, ⟨Plate, 2⟩, ⟨LettuceLeaves, 0⟩,
⟨SlicedTomato, 0⟩, ⟨SlicedOnion, 0⟩, ⟨TomatoLettuce, 0⟩,
⟨TomatoOnion, 0⟩, ⟨PlatedTomatoLettuce, 0⟩, ⟨PlatedTomatoOnion, 0⟩},
{⟨Cut, [Lettuce], LettuceLeaves⟩, ⟨Cut, [Tomato], SlicedTomato⟩,
⟨Cut, [Onion], SlicedOnion⟩,
⟨Combine, [LettuceLeaves, SlicedTomato], TomatoLettuce⟩,
⟨Combine, [SlicedTomato, SlicedOnion], TomatoOnion⟩,
⟨Combine, [Plate, TomatoLettuce], PlatedTomatoLettuce⟩,
⟨Combine, [Plate, TomatoOnion], PlatedTomatoOnion⟩}⟩
(4.2)
4.1.1
Constructing the milestone graph
To build this graph from a given state, first create an item vertex for each Item
fluent in the state. In the example used so far, Item(Lettuce), Item(Tomato),
Figure 4.3: Example of the milestone graph for a simple level (using a subset
of all recipes).
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Milestone tasks
22
Item(Onion) and Item(Plate) are all the true Item fluents. The count for these
vertices should be how many items of that type is present in the state, i.e. the
combined number of At(z = I) and AgentCarrying(i = I) fluents true in the
state. If one of the created item vertices by now has a count of zero, they will
be removed again from the graph. Then for each recipe that has not yet been
added to the graph, see if item vertices exist for all the ingredients needed and if
that is the case, add the recipe to the graph by adding a milestone vertex. If the
recipe is a cut recipe on the form Cuttable(i1, i2), the milestone vertex to add
should be ⟨Cut, [i1], i2⟩. If instead the recipe is a combine recipe on the form
Combinable(i1, i2, i3) then the milestone vertex should be ⟨Combine, [i1, i2], i3⟩.
Regardless of the type of recipe considered, verify that an item vertex exists for
the product of the recipe, i.e. if the added milestone vertex is ⟨A, U, V ⟩ensure
that an item vertex exists in the graph with I = V .
If this is not the case,
add it with count 0. Looping through each recipe and adding the corresponding
milestone vertices should be repeated until no changes are made to the graph.
This procedure for generating the milestone graph ensures that recipes that have
no chance of being used (because the ingredients don’t exist and cannot be made)
does not clutter the graph.
4.1.2
Using the milestone graph
The milestone graph is used to obtain all the Cut, Combine and Deliver tasks
for an agent considered by the model in any given state. To do this, first a list of
possible milestone tasks is created. Then the unsolvable milestone tasks of this
list will be filtered out.
4.1.2.1
Getting list of possible milestone tasks
To get the list of possible milestone tasks for an agent q, first check for each Goal
fluent whether the item to be delivered is currently present in the state by looking
up the appropriate item vertex and determining whether the count is greater than
zero. If this is the case, then it will be considered a possible milestone task to
deliver that item. In the example used so far (figure 4.3), plated tomato lettuce
is a goal, i.e. Goal(0, PlatedTomatoLettuce) is true. The item vertex in question
is therefore ⟨PlatedTomatoLettuce, 0⟩. Had the count been greater than 0, then
Deliver(a = q, g = 0, i = PlatedTomatoLettuce) would be considered a possible
milestone task.
To explain how Cut and Combine tasks are found, first the concept of a solu-
tion is explained. Conceptually, a solution to a milestone graph is an explanation
of how to achieve the goal items. More formally, a solution is a set of tuples on
the form ⟨M, CM⟩where M is a milestone vertex and CM is how many times it
has been used in the solution. An example of all solutions for a milestone graph
can be seen in figure 4.4. Notice that once again, only a subset of the recipes
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Milestone tasks
23
Figure 4.4: A milestone graph (using a subset of all recipes) with goal item
marked in green and all solutions to it.
normally used has been included, to not clutter the graph. In the figure, the item
vertex marked green illustrates the only item to be delivered in the state. As can
be seen in the figure, there are 3 possible ways to produce the plated tomato let-
tuce such that it can be delivered. If there had already existed a plated tomato
lettuce in the state, the solutions presented would still be solutions, however,
the empty set would then also be a solution. Interestingly, by introducing an
additional goal item, namely the lettuce leaves, the number of solutions drops
to 1, as a solution must provide all goal items once all the milestone vertices
associated with it have been applied. This has been illustrated in figure 4.5.
The possible Cut and Combine milestone tasks are generated from all mile-
stone vertices that are part of a solution and whose children all have count at
least equal to the number of edges going from that child to the milestone vertex.
Put in other words, all the prerequisite items must exist in the state for a mile-
stone vertex to be considered as a potential milestone task and it must not be
pointless or make the overall objective unsolvable. The question now becomes,
how to determine if a milestone vertex is part of a solution? The approach chosen
by this thesis is to generate all possible solutions, iterate through them and list
all the milestone vertices part of any of them. The algorithm used to generate all
possible solutions is not particularly clever and is essentially a bruteforce algo-
rithm that traverses the graph for the first goal to find all solutions for it. Each
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Milestone tasks
24
Figure 4.5: A milestone graph (using a subset of all recipes) with 2 goal items
marked in green and all solutions to it.
solution found will trigger a recursive call to find solutions on a now modified
graph starting from the next goal. The exact algorithm will not be presented
here, but pseudocode can be found in appendix A. The most notable thing about
the algorithm is that a maxmimum search depth must be specified. This is the
case because the domain allows for possible cycles in the graph, which would
otherwise cause infinite recursion and never terminate.
4.1.2.2
Solving each milestone task with A*
This thesis wishes to find an optimal plan for each milestone task using A* by
using an admissible heuristic. To do this, two assumptions have been made to
limit how much time is spent on finding the cost. The constraint that the children
of a considered milestone vertex must have counts at least equal to the number of
edges going to the milestone vertex, is a limitation introduced to make it easier
to find the cost of a the task. The constraint can be formulated as the following
assumption:
An agent can only be assigned a task
if all items used to complete it already exist in the state
(4.3)
Without this assumption the time spent finding the plans can quite quickly
escalate due to the fact that the kitchen domain in essence is both a path finding
problem and a combinatorics problem, both of which are not easy problems. Here
the combinatorics problem refers to finding the order in which the recipes should
be made. The assumption essentially limits the problem to just a path finding
problem. One more assumption is used in combination with the one stated above,
to make the heuristic used admissible:
It is always optimal using existing items needed for a task
instead of producing them as part of the task.
(4.4)
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Milestone tasks
25
Assumption 4.3 is a quite heavy assumption as it reduces the models predictive
power for agents thinking ahead. Take the example shown in figure 4.6. Here
there is only one milestone task considered by the model due to assumption
4.3, namely a Cut(a = 0, si = Tomato, di = SlicedTomato) task. Using only
milestone tasks as explained so far, the model would be unable to predict with
certainty the behavior of an optimal agent. This is because an optimal agent
would want to pick up the plate and move it closer to the cutting board as it
knows it will have to combine the plate with the sliced tomato after cutting the
tomato. I.e. the agent’s actions would actually correspond to the optimal plan for
the Combine(a = 0, si = SlicedTomato, oi = Plate, di = PlatedSlicedTomato)
task. Unfortunately, assumption 4.3 makes the model unable to assign that task
to the agent, as the sliced tomato does not yet exist. In other words, the assump-
tion (4.3) enforces an explicit structure to the plans the model can recognize.
Therefore the model can be thought of as using explicit representation as talked
about in section 3.1.1 when it comes to the high level plans it can consider.
The other assumption (4.4) might also seem heavy at first, as the needed
item might exist but simply be placed so far away that it would be more optimal
solving the task by simply producing that item closeby rather than fetching the
item far away.
This is for instance the case in the example shown in figure
4.7. Here the optimal plan for task Combine(a = 0, si = SlicedTomato, oi =
Plate, di = PlatedSlicedTomato) would actually be to cut/slice the tomato, and
then combine the newly sliced tomato with the plate. Therefore, this breaks the
assumption that the heuristic used by the A* search relies upon. This, however,
is likely not as big of a problem for the model, as the model would in this case
also always consider the task Cut(a = 0, si = Tomato, di = SlicedTomato). The
model would therefore be able to predict the behavior of an optimal agent by
simply modelling a sequence of tasks instead of a single task.
The entire reason for these two assumptions in the first place is to be able to
write a fairly simple heuristic that is admissible. Without these assumptions, it
would not be admissible. The heuristic for each type of task can be seen below:
• Combine: If the agent has one of the items to be combined in their hand,
the heuristic is simply the shortest distance to one of the other items to
combine it with plus 1 (as the agent also has to perform the Combine
action). If the agent does not have one of the items in their hand, the
heuristic instead finds the shortest distance between all pairs of items to be
combined and adds it to the shortest distance to any item to be combined.
Again, 1 is added as the agent also has to perform the Combine action.
Please note that distance between two counters in this case refers to the
number of floor tiles an agent would have to travel to get from the first
counter to a neighboring floor tile of the second counter, i.e. pretend the
agent starts on the counter itself. The distance between two neighboring
counters surrounded by floor tiles would therefore be 2.
The following
example illustrates the heuristic (figure 4.8).
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Milestone tasks
26
Figure 4.6: A case where the only milestone task the model considers for the
agent (Cut(a = 0, si = Tomato, di = SlicedTomato)) is subopti-
mal compared to the task Combine(a = 0, si = SlicedTomato, oi =
Plate, di = PlatedSlicedTomato).
Figure 4.7: A case where the optimal plan to task Combine(a = 0, si =
SlicedTomato, oi = Plate, di = PlatedSlicedTomato) breaks as-
sumption 4.4.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Milestone tasks
27
Figure 4.8: Examples of the heuristic for the task:
Combine(a = 0, si =
SlicedTomato, oi = Plate, di = PlatedSlicedTomato).
The op-
timal plans (cost: 6 and 7) have been indicated with a green line
for move actions and green text for other actions..
• Cut: The heuristic used for a Cut task is actually the minimum value of
three other (sub-)heuristics:
1. If there is a reachable cutting board with the item to be cut already
on it, then this sub-heuristic is simply equal to the distance the agent
must travel to get to the closest such cutting board plus one (as the
agent also has to perform the Cut action). If there is no reachable
cutting board with the item to be cut already on it, the sub-heuristic
is instead ∞.
2. If there is a reachable cutting board with the wrong item on it, this
sub-heuristic will be either the shortest distance the agent must travel
to reach such a cutting board plus 5 or the shortest distance the agent
must travel to reach the correct item to cut plus 5 (as the agent must
pick up the wrong item, put it down somewhere else, pick up the
correct item, put it down on the cutting board and cut it).
The
largest of these two options is picked. If instead there is no reachable
cutting board with the wrong item on it, this sub-heuristic is ∞.
3. This sub-heuristic is the same as the second sub-heuristic, except the
cutting boards in question is the ones without any item on.
Also,
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Milestone tasks
28
instead of adding 5, only 2 is added (as the agent has to put down the
item and then cut it).
Figure 4.9: Example of the heuristic for the task:
Cut(a
=
0, si
=
Tomato, di = SlicedTomato). The optimal plan (cost: 5) has been
indicated with a green line for move actions and green text for other
actions..
• Deliver: If the agent is carrying the item to be delivered, then the heuristic
will simply be the distance to the closest delivery station plus 1 (to perform
the Deliver action). If the agent is not carrying the item to be delivered,
instead the shortest distance to the correct item is compared to the shortest
distance to the delivery station. The heuristic will be the biggest of the
two distances plus 2 (as the agent will need to pick up the item and deliver
it).
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Milestone tasks
29
Figure 4.10: Examples of the heuristic for the task: Deliver(a = 0, g = 0, i =
PlatedSlicedTomato). The optimal plans (cost: 5 and 10) have
been indicated with a green line for move actions and green text
for other actions..
The above heuristic explains how the A* search finds an optimal plan for a
single agent assigned to a single task. However, as stated by assumption 4.1,
it is assumed that the agent solves a task as if other agents were not present.
A question has not yet been answered, namely: If the A* search should ignore
the other agents, what to do with the items they carry? There are two straight-
forward approaches: Either they should not be considered part of the state (i.e.
they should also be ignored) or they should instead be moved to a nearby free
counter. In this thesis, the second approach has been chosen, as the first leads
to the unfortunate case where a task all of a sudden becomes unsolvable simply
because an agent temporarily picks up an item needed by the task. The chosen
approach has been formulated as the following assumption:
Placing items carried by other agents than the one assigned a task
in the initial state on the closest free counter that the agent cannot interact with
will not change the optimal plan of the task.
(4.5)
One of the details of the assumption is that an item carried by a different
agent cannot be placed on a counter that the agent about to solve the task can
interact with. The reason for this is that it would remove applicable actions
from the agent solving the task, which becomes problematic as the model then
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Auxiliary tasks
30
doesn’t think it is possible for the agent to perform all actions that it can actually
perform. An example of how the state will be transformed can be seen in figure
4.11.
Assuming that the mentioned transformation doesn’t change the optimal plan
is, however, a heavy assumption. The two main drawbacks (/situations where
the assumption breaks) are:
1. The model might incorrectly deem a task assignable for an agent, as it
thinks the agent can use the item currently carried by another agent. How-
ever, if that agent never puts down the item or intends to use the item
itself then the agent is actually not able to complete the task.
2. The cost of a task found by the A* search might in fact not be optimal if
the plan found relies on an item originally carried by another agent to be
put down earlier than it is possible for the original agent carrying the item.
Additionally, perhaps the agent carrying the item could put down the item
at a more suitable spot (rather than the closest free counter) which could
lower the cost of the optimal plan for a task.
In the future a better way of doing this may be by trying to predict where the
agent will put down the item or what it will use the item for.
4.2
Auxiliary tasks
In addition to milestone tasks, the concept of auxiliary tasks is also used in this
thesis. This concept is actually unique to this thesis compared to the related
works described in section 3.2. In both Bayesian Delegation and Active Goal
Mirroring, the way agents solve a level where teamwork is required, is by assigning
multiple agents to the same subgoal. This thesis instead relies on auxiliary tasks.
The thesis defines a single type of auxiliary task, namely a PutDown task with
the agent, item and destination parameters specified. The only auxiliary tasks
that the model considers assignable to an agent are the ones that would improve
an items position. This is illustrated in figure 4.12.
In order to rank how good a counter is for an item, the distances from the
counter to all places where the item could be used in a recipe are determined and
the shortest of those distances are selected as the rank of the counter. For cutting
recipes, this will be the distance to the closest cutting board. For combine recipes,
this will be the distance to the closest item to combine it with. The algorithm for
finding the distance between two counters is in this case allowed to cross over 1
wide counters. In the figure, the rank of each counter has been written on top of
it. Each counter with a better (/smaller) rank than the tomato’s start position
has been highlighted to indicate that these are the improved positions. In the
case where there are multiple items of the same type, e.g. many tomatoes, the
smallest rank of any of the items’ start positions is used when determining which
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Auxiliary tasks
31
Figure 4.11: Example of how a multi-agent state is transformed into a single
agent state by removing agents and displacing the items carried
by them. The image to the left is before the transformation. The
image on the right is after the transformation..
counters will improve the item. This has been illustrated in figure 4.13. The
reason for choosing the smallest rank among the start positions of the items is
to ensure that no matter which item is moved to one of the improved positions,
it will always be improved.
If the item is carried by the agent, any counter
would be considered an improvement. Notice, that only reachable items are ever
considered when determining PutDown tasks for an agent. The rank of any
unreachable item will therefore not affect the PutDown tasks assignable to an
agent. Which PutDown tasks this model assumes are assignable to an agent has
been summarized in the following assumption:
An agent can only be assigned a PutDown task
if any reachable item of the correct type would be improved
by being put down at the specified destination.
(4.6)
As previously stated in assumption 4.1, this model assumes that each agent
solves a task by itself. Therefore, only PutDown tasks for reachable improved
positions are considered assignable for an agent, as it would otherwise not be able
to solve it alone. In the example shown in figure 4.13, no tomato-PutDown tasks
would therefore be assignable to agent 0 as it cannot reach any of the improved
positions. However, lettuce-PutDown tasks would be assignable to agent 0.
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Auxiliary tasks
32
Figure 4.12: The distances to cutting board for each counter allowing jumps
over 1 wide counter. The improved positions for the tomato have
been highlighted.
4.2.1
Solving auxiliary tasks with A*
Solving auxiliary tasks operate under the same assumptions stated in section
4.1.2.2. With these assumptions, it is possible to make a fairly simple admissible
heuristic that can be used with A* search: For each item of the correct type in
the state, the distance from the agent to that item (which would be 0 when the
agent carries it) is added to the distance from the item to the position where it
should be put down. The heuristic is then simply the smallest value across all of
these plus 1 (as the agent has to perform the final PutDown action). This has
been illustrated in figure 4.14.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Auxiliary tasks
33
Figure 4.13: The first image illustrates the improved positions of the top-right
tomato. The second image illustrates the improved positions of
the other tomato. The second image is also the final set of im-
proved positions.
Figure 4.14: Example of the heuristic for the task:
PutDown(a = 0, i =
Tomato, dx = 0, dy = 1). The optimal plan (cost: 7) has been
indicated with a green line for move actions and green text for
other actions..
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5
Agent Profiling
In this section the model proposed in the thesis will be fleshed out. The model
itself is inspired by the proposed model in the report about Goal Recognition
For Intelligent Light Control[DB18] as well as the model used by the Bayesian
delegation agent proposed in the Too Many Cooks paper[Wu+20]. In both of
these works an approach based on Bayesian inference is used and the same is the
case for this thesis.
When doing goal recognition, several factors can come into play. For example
if a driver sees a pedestrian walking towards a pedestrian crossing while appearing
to scan the road for cars, the driver might assume the pedestrian has a goal to
cross the road and therefore the driver might stop the car in anticipation of this.
But the pedestrian could just walk past the crossing without crossing the road
which then might lead the driver to think that the pedestrian has another goal
and was just looking out of curiosity. From this it can be gathered that goal
recognition is not just deductive reasoning as the observer cannot be certain
about the prediction in most cases and as such it makes sense to use some sort
of probabilistic reasoning in the model. The resulting probability distribution of
tasks produced by the model can then be interpreted by an AI agent similar to
how the Bayesian Delegation agent just uses the most likely goal as the actual
goal when making its plans.
The main part of the model is founded on two main principles:
• The current task of an agent can be predicted using the agents base pref-
erences for different tasks.
• The actions performed by an agent can be used to predict the task the
agent is currently trying to achieve.
The intuition behind the first principle is that humans have general preferences
which can be determined prior to looking at the current state. The thought is
then that these preferences will affect what tasks are chosen and that as such
it would be beneficial to model these. Especially in a domain like the kitchen
where a human may not be trying its best to find the most optimal solution
to the overall problem. An example of this could be that a person may have a
dislike of cutting onions and therefore prefer other tasks.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Introducing probabilities to the model
35
The intuition behind the second principle is then that the actions performed
by an agent are highly dependent on the task they are trying to accomplish and
that due to this, it is possible to make inferences about an agents selected task
from its observed actions. This principle is then used together with the idea that
agents will try to use the most effective action sequence to achieve a task. This
allows the model to decipher which tasks an action infers.
5.1
Introducing probabilities to the model
The desired output of the model is the probability distribution across all tasks
for an observed agent, i.e. how likely the agent is to be pursuing a certain task
t based on its observed actions a1 · · · an and all the states observed s0 · · · sn.
This probability distribution P(t|a1 · · · an, s0 · · · sn) will therefore be the starting
point. The symbols used to express this probability distribution will briefly be
explained:
• t is an abbreviation for the statement: The observed agent is assigned task
t.
• a1 · · · an is an abbreviation for: The actions a1, a2, ... and an were per-
formed by the observed agent in the given order.
• s0 · · · sn is an abbreviation for: These states were observed in the given
order, i.e. s0 was observed as the initial state, then after applying each
agent’s action to it, s1 was observed and so on.
By using Bayes’ rule followed by the chain rule, the following relation can be
made (here a1 · · · an has been abbreviated as a1,n and s0 · · · sn as s0,n):
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) = P(a1,n, s0,n|t)P(t)
P(a1,n, s0,n)
= P(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(s0,n|t)P(t)
P(a1,n, s0,n)
(5.1)
With Bayes’ rule, it can be seen that P(s0,n|t)P(t) = P(t|s0,n)P(s0,n). After
substituting this into the formula, the fact that P(a1,n|s0,n)P(s0,n) = P(a1,n, s0,n)
(this is simply the definition of conditional probability) can be used to substitute
P (s0,n)
P (a1,n,s0,n) with
1
P (a1,n|s0,n):
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) = P(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(t|s0,n)P(s0,n)
P(a1,n, s0,n)
= P(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(t|s0,n)
P(a1,n|s0,n)
(5.2)
Using the law of total probability on the denominator will make it clear how
it simply serves the purpose of normalizing the numerator. For brevity, it will
therefore be written as a normalization factor α as seen in equation 5.3.
==PAGE:42==
5.1 Introducing probabilities to the model
36
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) =
P(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(t|s0,n)
∑
t′∈T P(a1,n|s0,n, t′)P(t′|s0,n) = αP(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(t|s0,n)
(5.3)
The model proposed by this thesis assumes that an agent chooses a task in
the initial state. Later in section 5.2 it will be mentioned how it is modelled that
an agent changes their task, however, for now it is assumed that the prior task
probability only depends on the initial state, i.e. P(t|s0,n) = P(t|s0):
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) = αP(a1,n|s0,n, t)P(t|s0)
(5.4)
Note that whenever a single state is used in a probabilistic context as above,
it refers to the statement: The state was observed as the initial state.
This
formula can be related back to the two intuitions introduced in the start of this
chapter. As here P(t|s0) can be seen as the agent’s chance to pick a task given
its base preference for that task in the initial state. P(a1,n|s0,n, t) is then related
to the other intuition as this is used to say that if the chance for action sequence
a1,n is high given task t then t is more likely to be the task the agent is assigned
to. Thus using the actions performed by the agent to predict its goals.
The above formula can be used to find the probability distribution of all
tasks, but it is still not complete as neither P(a1,n|s0,n, t) nor P(t|s0) have been
defined.
To define the first of the two, let a be an abbreviation for: The observed
agent is going to perform the action a. With this symbol explained, it should be
clear that P(a|s, t) is the probability that an observed agent is going to perform
action a given the initial state s and task assignment t. This will now be used to
rewrite P(a1,n|s0,n, t), as the probability that the observed agent first performs
action a1 in the initial state, then a2 in the next state and so on. Note that to
do this, it is assumed that an action does not depend on previous actions:
P(a1,n|s0,n, t) = P(a1|s0, t)P(a2|s1, t) · · · P(an|sn−1, t)
(5.5)
This can be transformed into the following recursive definition:
P(a1,n|s0,n, t) =
{
1
n = 0
P(an|sn−1, t)P(a1,n−1|s0,n−1, t)
n > 0
(5.6)
The above equation holds and can be proven by induction. In the base case
where n = 0, the probability is 1, as a1,n in this case refers to an empty action
sequence. If it holds when n = i, it will also hold when n = i + 1. This can be
seen by inserting (5.5) instead of P(a1,i|si, t):
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Introducing probabilities to the model
37
P(a1,i+1|s0,i+1, t) =
{
1
i + 1 = 0
P(ai+1|si, t)P(a1,i|s0,i, t)
i + 1 > 0
= P(ai+1|si, t)P(a1|s0, t)P(a2|s1, t) · · · P(ai|si−1, t)
(5.7)
As seen above, if the recursive definition holds for n = i, it also holds for
n = i + 1, as it will then be equivalent to multiplying each individual action
probability together which is the exact definition in (5.5).
Next it will be explained how this model assumes that the probability of an
agent’s next action is given by the following:
P(a|s, t) = αte−β(1+Vt(T (s,a)))
(5.8)
Here the function T(s, a) is defined as the state achieved by the observed
agent performing action a in state s. It is assumed that all other agents but
the observed agent does nothing when applying this transformation.
αt is a
normalization factor equal to 1 over the sum of e−β(1+Vt(T (s,a))) for all possible
actions. The Vt function is the cost of task t starting from the provided state,
where the cost is simply the length of the plan determined using A* search
as explained in sections 4.1.2.2 and 4.2.1. β is a parameter of the model which
determines the rationality of an agent. This thesis will later in section 5.5 explain
how this parameter among others can be determined for each agent such that
the model predicts the agent’s behavior as best as possible. Intuitively, if β > 0
then the formula assigns a bigger probability to an action if it lowers the cost
of the task. Similarly, an action that instead increases the cost of a task will be
given a smaller probability. How much the actions lowering the cost are favored
will depend on the β parameter. The higher the β parameter, the more it will be
assumed that the agent follows the optimal plan found. If β = 0 then it makes no
difference whether an action is aligned to the optimal plan or not. Interestingly,
if β < 0 then large probabilities will be assigned to actions that increase the cost
function.
Before task probabilities can be calculated, it is necessary to define P(t|s), i.e.
the probability of a task given an initial state s. To do this, first let AT (s) be
the set of all assignable tasks to the observed agent. The procedure for finding
these have been explained in chapter 4:
AT (s) = {t | t is assignable to the observed agent in s}
(5.9)
Additionally, the function Assign can be used to determine if a specific task
is assignable to the observed agent in a state, as it is defined as follows:
Assign(t, s) =
{
1
if t ∈AT (s)
0
otherwise
(5.10)
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Maintaining task probabilities
38
As these functions now have been specified, a definition for P(t|s) can be
put forth. This next equation illustrates how this model assumes the probability
distribution is for tasks given the initial state s:
P(t|s) = α2 · σ(t, s) · Assign(t, s) · Pref(t)
(5.11)
Here Pref(t) refers to a non-negative predetermined preference the agent
has for a specific task. In states with a lot of counters, it is likely that a lot of
PutDown-tasks will be assignable to an agent, simply because there are many
places that would improve an item. σ(t, s) is introduced into the above formula
to help prevent a task from becoming very unlikely just because there exist many
tasks of a different type. To make sure that the definition defines a valid probabil-
ity distribution, i.e. all probabilities sum to 1, α2 is defined as the normalization
factor that ensures this. The intuition behind (5.11) is that the agent will have
high probability to have a task assigned if its preference is comparatively higher
than for the remaining assignable tasks. Notice how only the assignable tasks
will have a probability greater than zero.
As mentioned σ(t, s) is designed to not let the sheer number of a specific type
of task trump out the probabilities of the other tasks. It therefore scales each
task probability with 1 over the number of actions with the same type:
σ(t, s) =



1
∑
t′∈AT (s) SameActionT ype(t,t′)
t ∈AT (s)
0
otherwise
(5.12)
In the case where there are many tasks of the same action type, e.g. many
PutDown tasks, they will each be less likely to be assigned an agent compared
to the case where only few of the same action type exist.
5.2
Maintaining task probabilities
The equations explained in the previous section all describe how the model as-
sumes an agent behaves. One of the underlying principles in those equations is
that an agent starts by picking a task (with some probability P(t|s0)) and then
sticks to that task forever. In previous works such as AGM this is handled by
simply resetting the model when a goal is completed which is an easy way of
dealing with the issue but it can be computationally heavy or information can
be lost during resets. Therefore, this is not ideal as the tasks suggested by this
thesis are rather small and specific meaning that many resets would have to be
made. It is instead assumed that an agent picks a task, sticks to it until it is
either completed by the agent or no longer assignable to the agent (maybe be-
cause someone else completed the task). At this point the agent will then pick
a new task. A graphical representation of the decision making process assumed
by the model can be seen in figure 5.1.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Maintaining task probabilities
39
Figure 5.1: Decision diagram for the modelled agents.
To add support for this, equation 5.4 will be rewritten to a recursive definition
by first inserting (5.7) into it:
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) =
{
αP(t|s0)
n = 0
αP(an|sn−1, t)P(a1,n−1|s0,n−1, t)P(t|s0)
n > 0
(5.13)
Notice that P(a1,n−1|s0,n−1, t)P(t|s0) is exactly the definition for (5.4) ex-
cept it is missing a normalization factor.
This justifies the substitution with
1
αx P(t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1) where αx is the normalization factor used in P(t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1):
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) =
{
αP(t|s0)
n = 0
αP(an|sn−1, t) 1
αx P(t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
n > 0
(5.14)
αx does not depend on any single task and neither does α. Therefore all α
factors can be combined with
1
αx into a single α′ that will simply be defined as
the normalization factor, i.e. the factor that will normalize the rest such that
the sum across all tasks equals 1:
P(t|a1,n, s0,n) = α′ ·
{
P(t|s0)
n = 0
P(an|sn−1, t)P(t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
n > 0
(5.15)
So far, whenever t has been used as a probabilistic event, it has referred
to the statement: The observed agent is assigned task t. However, a bit more
nuance is needed to properly express that an agent can switch task.
It can
no longer be assumed that the agent has stuck to its task after performing an
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Maintaining task probabilities
40
action. The symbol tw is therefore introduced and refers to the task that the
observed agent had while performing its most recent action. To avoid confusion,
the symbol tf is also introduced referring to the task assigned to the agent after
performing its action, i.e. its future task. Equation (5.15) actually expresses the
probability that the observed agent had the task t while performing its action
and not necessarily after it performed the action. A situation where it might
not stick to its task after performing its action could be when the action taken
would finish the task, as in this situation the task might no longer exist after the
action is applied. Rewriting (5.15) using the tw and tf symbols the following is
therefore achieved:
P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n) = α′ ·
{
P(tf = t|s0)
n = 0
P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
n > 0
(5.16)
The question then becomes, how is P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) calculated? Concep-
tually, it has so far been calculated as P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) = P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n),
but this will no longer be the case as the agent might change task. Instead it
will be defined as follows:
P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) = P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t)P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
+ P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n)P(tf = t|sn)
(5.17)
In the above, stick refers to the statement: The observed agent sticks to its
task after performing its most recent action. Intuitively, the equation expresses
that there are 2 reasons for the agent to have a task t after it performed its
action: Either the agent stuck to the task it had while performing its action
(with probability P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t)), or it picked the task as it decided
not to stick to its previous task. Notice that in the latter case, it chooses the
task t in the same manner as it did initially, as if the current state is the initial
state.
Since the model assumes an agent sticks to its task until it is no longer
assignable to the agent or the agent completes the task, P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t)
should be defined in such a way that it is 0 when it is no longer assignable and
0 when the action performed completes the task. To help define this mathemat-
ically, the function Compl is used to determine if an action would complete a
task:
Compl(t, a) =
{
1
if action a completes t
0
otherwise
(5.18)
This definition can then be used together with the Assign function to specify
==PAGE:47==
5.3 An extended model for task prior probabilities
41
the probability for sticking to a task:
P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) =
{
0
n = 0
Assign(t, sn) · (1 −Compl(t, an))
n > 0 (5.19)
The case where n = 0 above is set to 0. It does not really make a difference
what the value is set to in this case, at it only affects whether a task is picked
via the base case in (5.16) or via the second term in (5.17). Regardless of the
value, P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) will end up being P(tf = t|s0). The only mentioned
formula that has yet to be defined is P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n). It will be defined by
first inverting it, i.e. expressed as 1 minus the probability that the observed
agent is going to stick to their task. Using this together with the law of total
probability, it can be rewritten as:
P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) = 1 −P(stick|a1,n, s0,n)
= 1 −
∑
t∈T
P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) · P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
(5.20)
In the above, T is used to denote all possible tasks. However, only the tasks
assignable to the agent in sn−1 can possibly have a positive P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
value as this probability concerns the task the observed agent had while perform-
ing its last action. A final definition for P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) can therefore be
made where T = AT (sn−1):
P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) = 1−
∑
t∈AT (sn−1)
P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) · P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
(5.21)
Please note that the law of total probability is only applicable when the
events summed over (in this case AT (sn−1)) is not the empty set. A definition
therefore ought to be found for P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) when AT (sn−1) = ∅. In this
case, there are no tasks for the agent to stick to, so it makes sense to define
P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) = 1 to guarantee that an agent will then pick a task again
in the future when a task might be assignable to it. Since (5.21) already equals
1 in this case, there is no need to alter the definition further.
5.3
An extended model for task prior probabilities
This section aims to extend the model addressed so far in the previous sections
by proposing a new definition for P(t|s). The previous definition will be referred
to as the basic model and will later be compared to the extended model put forth
in this section.
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Predicting actions
42
The main intuition that the extended model tries to address is that agents
might prefer to be assigned a task that is easy for it to complete. For example,
if it is right next to a tomato and a cutting board, it might prefer to cut the
tomato rather than walking far away to complete a different task only to walk
back later to cut the tomato. The new definition for P(t|s) used by the extended
model is therefore as follows:
P(t|s) = α2 · σ(t, s) · Assign(t, s) · eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s)
(5.22)
The only difference from the earlier definition (5.11) is that Pref(t) has been
replaced with eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s) (notice that α2 is defined to normalize the rest
such that the sum across all tasks equals 1). ϕ and ψ are then two parameters
of the model that can be tuned for each agent. Recall that Vt(s) is the cost
of the optimal plan found using A* as explained in sections 4.1.2.2 and 4.2.1.
A high ϕ compared to ψ therefore indicates an agent that would rather stick
to its preferences instead of doing a task that can be solved quickly. In other
words, an agent with a high ϕ value is picky about the order in which it does its
tasks. Therefore ϕ has also been named the pickiness parameter. If instead ψ is
high compared to ϕ then the agent would more often be assigned a task that it
can complete quickly. This parameter has been named the eﬀiciency parameter.
It might seem weird to introduce a ϕ parameter when the model could simply
adjust each preference individually and achieve the same result. However, this
is done because there are quite a lot of preferences and determining them in a
rigorous way would be more time consuming. By having ϕ, then as long as the
ratios between the preferences are correct, the desired outcome can be achieved
by simply fitting a single parameter.
Even though there are cases where it is optimal for an agent to pick the task
it can finish most quickly, like the case described earlier about cutting the nearby
tomato early instead having to return and do it later, it is not always the case.
This is in particular prevalent when considering auxiliary tasks. It might be the
case that an item can be improved by simply moving it a single counter closer to
where it should be used. If the model assigns high eﬀiciency to an agent, it would
therefore think that the agent would move the item a single counter at a time
even though this would be far from optimal. It seems unlikely that most agents
would exhibit this behavior, so it is therefore not immediately evident whether
this extended model actually has significantly greater predictive power than the
basic model, hence why they will be compared later.
5.4
Predicting actions
Although the main focus of the model is to predict which task an agent is cur-
rently assigned (i.e. P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n)), it can also be used to predict the next
action of the agent. In fact this is needed when determining the parameters for
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Model fitting
43
an agent, as the predicted action can then be compared to the actual action
made. The exact approach used to tune the parameters will be explained in sec-
tion 5.5. For now, it will be explained how to predict the next action of an agent.
The probability to find an expression for is P(a|a1,n, s0,n), i.e. the probability
that the agent will perform an action given its observed actions and the observed
states. By using the law of total probability, the following can be achieved:
P(a|a1,n, s0,n) =
∑
t∈T
P(a|a1,n, s0,n, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n)
(5.23)
In order for P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) > 0, the task t must be assignable to the
observed agent in sn. Here T can therefore be replaced with AT (sn). Recall that
the model has previously assumed that an action does not depend on previous
actions, and that it is only determined by the state in which it is performed and
the task assignment of the agent. This explains why P(a|a1,n, s0,n, tf = t) can
safely be replaced with P(a|sn, tf = t). Also note that the law of total probability
cannot be used, when summing over the empty set. An alternative definition for
P(a|a1,n, s0,n) must therefore be given in this case:
P(a|a1,n, s0,n) =





∑
t∈AT (sn)
P(a|sn, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n)
AT (sn) ̸= ∅
IsIdleAction(a)·10+1
∑
a′∈AA(s)(IsIdleAction(a′)·10+1)
otherwise
(5.24)
In the above definition, AA(s) is used. This refers to the set of all applicable
actions for the observed agent in state s.
As might be clear from the above
definition, this thesis assumes that an agent picks a random applicable action
when it has no assignable tasks. Idle actions are defined to be Move and NoOp
actions. IsIdleAction is therefore 1 whenever the provided action is either a
Move or a NoOp action and 0 otherwise. This means that it weighs all applicable
actions, but heavily prefers Move and NoOp actions. An agent behaving like
the model suggests would therefore in the case where it has no assignable task
primarily walk around randomly.
5.5
Model fitting
This section will explain a way to determine the parameters of the model(s)
proposed in this thesis, i.e. all the task preferences, the rationality and in the
case of the extended model the pickiness and eﬀiciency. This is done to allow
the model to accurately describe a broader segment of agents, as it can adjust
the parameters to fit the individual agents. This is instead of the model just
using a set of fixed parameters which seems to have been the case for the related
==PAGE:50==
5.5 Model fitting
44
works mentioned in section 3.2. One of the main challenges in determining these
parameters is that at no point in time is it known what the actual/true task
assignment of an agent is. In fact, the agent might not even think using the
concept of tasks at all. Instead fitting of the parameters must be based on the
observed actions. While working on this thesis, the priority has been on fitting
the rationality, pickiness and eﬀiciency parameters. As a result, the preferences
have been determined differently from the rest.
5.5.1
Agent’s preference parameters
Normally the model assumes that an agent sticks to a task until it is completed
or no longer assignable, however when determining the agent’s preferences, a new
assumption is used: If an agent is assigned a task, it will remain assigned until it
completes it. This assumption is only used when approximating the preferences
of an agent. The approach used to determine the preference parameters only
considers milestone tasks, and assumes a preference of 10 for any auxiliary task.
Every time the observed agent is about to perform a Cut, Combine or Deliver
action, it is recorded which milestone tasks are assignable to it. For each of these
milestone tasks t, X(t) will be calculated as follows (w is used to represent the
milestone task that the agent actually completes by performing the action and s
represents the state in which the agent is about to perform the action):
X(t) =
{
1 −
1
|AT (s)|
t = w
1
|AT (s)|
otherwise
(5.25)
The average of every time X(t) is calculated for a task will be used to deter-
mine the preference of the task. This is simply done by scaling the X(t) values
such that the average of X(t) across all values becomes 10. The intention behind
the definition of X(t) is that when a task is completed by the agent, and it could
have completed many other tasks, it will get a large preference. If instead it
completes a task where it had very few other options, it will not lead to a large
preference.
The benefit of the approach explained above is that it is really fast to compute.
Unfortunately, the conducted experiments that tests this approach (they will be
presented in section 6.2) show that it is not good at approximating the prefer-
ences. A better approach would therefore probably be to train the preferences
similarly to how the remaining parameters are trained.
5.5.2
Fitting the basic model
The basic model only has a single adjustable parameter outside of the task prefer-
ences, namely the rationality parameter. To compute the rationality of an agent
one way would be to simply test how different values of this parameter affects the
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Model fitting
45
performance of the model when profiling an agent. This might have been a vi-
able solution when fitting the basic model, but as the parameters in the extended
model also has to be fitted, a more eﬀicient training method should be used in
order to minimize training time. This is because the model would need to be
tested for each pairing of parameters which would lead to an exponential increase
in running times of the training when increasing the amount of parameters. Due
to this it was instead decided to use gradient descent[FR22], as this method is
both fairly easy to implement and it allows for a linear increase in training time
when the amount of parameters are increased (as opposed to exponential). To
use this method, a cost function first needs to be defined as gradient descent
works by minimizing this cost function. In this instance, the mean squared error
of the difference between the predicted action probabilities and the actions the
agent took during the solution of an entire level is used as the cost function (the
correct action i.e. action i that the agent actually performed in state i −1 has
been denoted as qi. n denote the number of observations):
MSE(β) = 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
SE(a, s0,i, β)
(5.26)
SE(a, s0,i, β) =
{
(1 −Pβ(a|q1,i, s0,i))2
if a = qi+1
(Pβ(a|q1,i, s0,i))2
otherwise
(5.27)
P(a|a1,n, s0,n) is defined in (5.24) and although it is not explicitly stated,
it actually implicitly depends on β.
To more explicitly indicate that β is a
parameter of that probability, Pβ is used.
The intuition behind gradient descent is that the value of this cost function
should be minimized and that an eﬀicient way of minimizing this would be to
follow the gradient of the function. The next step is therefore to differentiate
MSE according to β, i.e:
dMSE(β)
dβ
= 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
dSE(a, s0,i, β)
dβ
(5.28)
Finding the derivative of MSE is a tedious task and takes up quite a lot of
space. How the derivatives of MSE and all of the probability functions (that
are used to define MSE) are calculated can be seen in appendix B.
Since the gradient/derivative expresses how a small increase in the parameter
(in this case β) would change the function, gradient descent works by changing
the parameter a bit in the direction that lowers the cost/error function. If the
gradient is positive, this would mean lowering the parameter. When the gradient
is negative, it would mean increasing the parameter. If the parameter is changed
too much in a single step, there is a risk of overshooting the minimum of the
error function.
What is typically done is therefore to change the parameter
proportionally to how big the gradient is:
==PAGE:52==
5.5 Model fitting
46
βn = βn−1 −s · dMSE(βn−1)
dβ
(5.29)
In the above, s is the step length used during training. A big step length
changes the parameter faster but at the risk of overshooting the minimum. In
all the tests conducted in this thesis, the step length has been set to 1.
Another risk when using the gradient descent algorithm is to find a local
minimum of the error function and not the global minimum. When training on
a set of replays, they have been processed in a random order to hopefully reduce
the risk of finding a local minimum.
To train the model using fewer data points, gradient descent could be applied
directly to the SE and updating the rationality parameter after each action. This
would have the benefit of allowing for much faster training but at the same time it
would also increase the chance of overfitting as it would be highly biased towards
the last couple of actions. The issue with this is that agents may have different
behavior during the start of a level compared to at the end, due to the different
tasks which have to be performed at these stage(cut at start and deliver at end).
One way of solving this would be to scramble the order in which training is
performed on the actions but the issue with this is that then training needs to
performed after a level is complete in which case MSE could just be used. Since
this is the case, it was decided to just go with MSE as it inherently takes into
account how a change affects the whole level.
How well the basic model describes the examined agents will be discussed in
chapter 6.
5.5.3
Fitting the extended model
Just as for the basic model, gradient descent has been used to fit the extended
model. The difference here is just that the extended model involves an additional
2 parameters, namely pickiness (ϕ) and eﬀiciency (ψ).
The cost function is
essentially the same as before, but it now depends on all 3 parameters:
MSE(β, ϕ, ψ) = 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
SE(a, s0,i, β, ϕ, ψ)
(5.30)
SE(a, s0,i, β, ϕ, ψ) =
{
(1 −Pβ,ϕ,ψ(a|q1,i, s0,i))2
if a = qi+1
(Pβ,ϕ,ψ(a|q1,i, s0,i))2
otherwise
(5.31)
Just as with the basic model, the parameters will be modified based on the
derivative. Notice that the derivative in question is the partial derivative only
considering each parameter (this is why the time complexity of the gradient
descent scales linearly with the number of parameters trained):
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Model fitting
47
βn = βn−1 −sβ · dMSE(βn−1, ϕn−1, ψn−1)
dβ
(5.32)
ϕn = ϕn−1 −sϕ · dMSE(βn−1, ϕn−1, ψn−1)
dϕ
(5.33)
ψn = ψn−1 −sψ · dMSE(βn−1, ϕn−1, ψn−1)
dψ
(5.34)
As seen above, the step length does not have to be the same for each param-
eter. However, in this thesis a step length of 1 has been used for all of them, i.e.
sβ = sϕ = sψ = 1. Again, please refer to appendix B to see how these derivates
are found. Like with the basic model, experiments have been conducted to assess
how well the extended model predicts the actions of an agent. This analysis can
be seen in chapter 6.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6
Analysis
6.1
Test Agents
In this section the agents used during the evaluation of the models are briefly
described.
6.1.1
Simple Agent
This agent has been developed for this thesis. It is based on the same concept
of tasks presented in chapter 4, i.e.
milestone tasks and auxiliary tasks, but
it doesn’t pick and execute them exactly how the models suggest. This is on
purpose, as it makes it more interesting to see if the models can actually predict
its behavior. One of the main differences is that it only picks an auxiliary task
if it has no assignable milestone tasks. When picking which task to work on, it
does so by weighing each task by its preference and then picks a random task
according to this weight. The difference here from how the basic model suggests
picking a task, is that σ(t, s) is not part of selecting a task. Additionally, it can
(based on configuration) also estimate the cost of solving each task and divide
the weights associated with the task by this cost estimate.
If this feature is
enabled, the simple AI should therefore demonstrate characteristics similar to
what the extended model attempts to predict. Another difference between the
simple AI and the models are that the simple AI only estimates the optimal plan,
by dividing the task into steps when picking it. For example, when considering
the task Cut(a = 0, si = Tomato, di = SlicedTomato), it might decide on the
following steps:
1. Put down incorrect item
2. Pick up incorrect item from cutting board
3. Put down incorrect item
4. Pick up correct item
5. Put down correct item at cutting board
6. Cut the item at the cutting board
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Evaluating the fit of the basic model on a single agent
49
Each of the steps found will be solved greedily without considering the cost of
all the steps together. In the example above, it would therefore put down the
item at the closest free counter. From there it would then move to the closest
cutting board and pick up the item from it, and so on. It is therefore pretty fast
at determining what to do, but it does not necessarily follow the true optimal
plan. However, it is not completely irrational either. Lastly, it can be configured
to perform random Move or NoOp actions with a probability of 1
5 each time
step. This might be needed in multi-agent levels as agents otherwise might enter
a dead- or live-lock.
6.1.2
Bayesian Delegation
To test the model on an artificial agent which is not created by the authors of
this paper, the Bayesian Delegation planner from the Too many cooks[Wu+20]
paper was used. This planner also uses more complex logic when choosing ”tasks”
compared to the simple agent as it can take into account what other agents are
doing.
Though one issue with using this agent is that it was designed for a
slightly different domain where items are automatically put back into the hand
of an agent after Cut or Combine action.
Additionally, multiple agents can
interact with the same counter/item at the same time, as the actions are applied
one after the other as opposed to how it is done in the kitchen domain. As such,
a small transformation has been applied to the solution sequences produced by
the BD agents, where the other agents have been set to do NoOp actions when
extra actions have to be used. Due to this, the model might find the BD agents
slightly more irrational than it normally would as these NoOp actions are not
optimal.
6.1.3
Human Agent
To evaluate the performance of the model on more complex solutions, a human
agent has also been used to make some solutions. Here the human was given
as much time as wanted to find the most optimal solution to the problem and
the human was allowed to control all agents at a time. This should allow for
more complex plans than either the simple agent or BD can produce and should
hopefully simulate very good teamwork.
6.2
Evaluating the fit of the basic model on a single
agent
To evaluate how well the model is able to fit to an agent, four different ways
have been experimented with.
In all the scenarios the fit is made on a data
==PAGE:56==
6.2 Evaluating the fit of the basic model on a single agent
50
set containing the runs of one simple agent on a set of 8 different levels where
the agent runs each level 10 times. To rate how well the fit works the trained
model is then used to predict the same agent during 10 runs of each of the
two levels TomatoHeaven level and Long Level.
The levels used can be seen
in appendix C. The agent used is the simple AI set to be 10 times more likely
to cut a tomato compared to another task. In the first fit, the model is just
trained on the training observations. For the second fit, the agent preferences
are first found by letting the agent run a special level designed to highlight it’s
preferences.
The preferences found from these runs are then used to fit the
rest of the parameters on the normal levels.
In the third fit, the preference
parameters have been manually set to match the agent’s known preferences and
then the rationality parameter is trained on the training levels. In this way the
third fit should theoretically be the best achievable fit. The last fit is used as a
performance baseline where the agent is set to have no preferences for any type
of task.
Figure 6.1: This graph shows how the mean squared error changes as the mod-
els are trained. To make the graph less cluttered the baseline fit
has been omitted.
From figure 6.1 it can be seen that the fitted models appears to have very
similar performance. It can also be seen that the MSE is brought quite far down
after just five levels. But to get a more clear result, the data from the control
levels will need to be analyzed and these can be seen in the table below.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Evaluating the fit of the basic model on a single agent
51
Standard Pref
Special Level Pref
Correct Pref
No Pref
Average MSE
0.200
0.200
0.194
0.199
β
3.233
3.244
3.126
3.250
Table 6.1: Results from preference evaluation. Start values for the parameters:
β = 0.5.
From this table it can be seen that the difference between the different pref-
erences is actually very small with the fit using the correct preferences looking
slightly better. The low difference is likely caused by the fact that the agent
is very rational and as such after just one action, the model can make a very
strong prediction about what task the agent is trying to solve. Also since the
agent only has a preference for one task it makes some sense that the effect of
this preference is not that huge. Due to this, it may seem like even having a
preference is useless, but here it is important to remember that the optimal path
to two different tasks can be very similar, and in this situation the preferences
can act as the tie breaker for what task is actually being done. This would be
important for an AI which uses the model to recognize tasks of other agents. But
since the cost function is described based on action probabilities and not task
probabilities, the preferences will not matter. This is because they only affect
the outcome of a few actions (as illustrated in figure 6.2). Regardless of which
task the agent has assigned, the action prediction will always be that the agent
will move to the right.
Figure 6.2: Showcase of what the basic model (β = 0.5, no preferences) thinks
the task of an agent is.
Another observation is that the method proposed for approximating the pref-
==PAGE:58==
6.3 Evaluating the basic model on multiple simple agents
52
erences seems to be performing very poorly, as the performance when using this
feature is nearly indistinguishably from the performance of the baseline where
the preferences are just ignored. As such using another way to generate the pref-
erences is realistically needed. Here the most obvious choice is to generate the
preferences using gradient descent as is done with the other parameters. The last
observation which can be made is that the dynamic task reassignment method
used by the model looks to be working quite well, considering that the model is
able to get such a low alpha when multiple tasks are performed by each agent.
6.3
Evaluating the basic model on multiple simple
agents
In this section the performance of the basic model will be tested when multiple
agents are present on a level. Here the model is first trained on a several levels
with each level containing two agents, for each of these levels 10 solutions were
generated. As for the two agents, one is running with deadlock avoidance mean-
ing it will sometimes use a random action to avoid deadlocks. The other agent
runs without deadlock avoidance. The model is supplied with the real prefer-
ences of the two agents before training, this is done to make the effect of having
multiple agents the main performance factor. The model is then evaluated by
running the trained model on set of control levels. The results of which can be
seen in the table below.
Rationality
MSE
Agent 0
1.543
0.391
Agent 1
0.979
0.582
Table 6.2: Results from multi agent evaluation. Agent 1 has lower rationality
as it is employing the random action method used to avoid deadlocks.
Start values for the parameters: β = 0.5.
From this table it can be seen that the model has a harder time of making
predictions when there are multiple agents. This is likely made worse by the
agents used during this test being quite bad at resolving conflicts with each
other. But even then, it still offers decent predictive powers considering that the
MSE when just giving equal chance to each actions would be about 0.8 (assuming
that at each time step 5 options are available).
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Evaluating the extended model on extended simple agent
53
6.4
Evaluating the extended model on extended
simple agent
For this test, the same setup is used as in the previous test, but this time the
agents will now prefer tasks that have smaller estimated cost (see section 6.1.1 for
explanation). Here two models are trained: one basic model and one advanced.
Both models have been supplied the agents preferences for the different actions.
The results from the control maps can be seen in the table below.
Basic Model
Extended Model
Extended Model (β set to 1.335)
Rationality
1.335
1.208
1.335
Eﬀiciency
0.112
0.112
Pickiness
0.413
0.413
MSE
0.315
0.328
0.302
Table 6.3: Results from extended model evaluation. Start values for the param-
eters: β = 0.5, ϕ = 0.0, ψ = 0.0.
As can be seen in the table it was found that when fitting the extended model
it had a tendency to find a lower rationality which in turn leads it to score a MSE
worse than the basic model. One possible reason, for why the rationality had
a tendency to be lower, could be that the rationality simply did not influence
MSE as much, now that both eﬀiciency and pickiness could also be adjusted
to minimize the MSE. So to find out if the extended model actually can work
better, a version was tried which used the same rationality as found from the
basic model and with these parameters, the extended model was in fact able to
make better predictions than the basic model. Had the data set been bigger (or
perhaps with a bigger step length), fitting the extended model should result in
higher rationality than what was achieved in this test. Since the rationality seem
to increase slower when fitting the extended model, it might be beneficial to first
train a basic model and then train an extended model using the rationality factor
from the simple model. As for why the MSE is lower for both models in this test
compared to the previous multi-agent test: This is likely caused by the agents
having less conflicts with each other as they prefer to do tasks which are closer
to themselves.
6.5
Evaluating the extended model on more
complex agents
To see how well the model works on more elaborate agents which employ more
complex decision making processes, a fit on a solution by the Bayesian Delega-
==PAGE:60==
6.5 Evaluating the extended model on more complex agents
54
tions planner and a fit by a human agents have been made. The goal here is to
see how if the model is still able to make sensible predictions for these agents
and to highlight places where improvements maybe could be made.
6.5.1
Bayesian Delegation
The training for this evaluation was performed on the following levels.
• Full divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
• Open divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
• Open divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
• Partial divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
These were each included 6 times in the training set, to allow for slightly longer
training time. The resulting parameters were then recorded and used to see how
well the profile fits on the following control levels:
• Full divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
• Partial divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
During the training it was assumed that the agents had no specific task pref-
erences.
Extended Model
Rationality
0.728
Eﬀiciency
0.364
Pickiness
0.500
MSE
0.695
Table 6.4: Results from modelling the BD agent. Start values for the param-
eters: β = 0.5, ϕ = 0.5, ψ = 0.0. Notice that all preferences were
set to 10, which explains why pickiness did not move away from its
initial value of 0.5.
Looking at these results, it can be seen that MSE is even higher than the
agent which performed random actions 20% of the time. The reason for this
could be that the BD agent is breaking the assumption that an agent can change
its mind or that it is showing teamwork too advanced for the model to recognize.
When that is said, the MSE is also affected by the fact that the BD agent was
originally run in a different domain and as such it is sometimes set to perform
NoOp actions to keep the plan of the two agents synchronized. Another reason
for cause for this could be the fact that the BD agents sometimes performs put
==PAGE:61==
6.5 Evaluating the extended model on more complex agents
55
down tasks where the item is put down in what the model would rate as a worse
position. Since these worse positions are pruned, the model will therefore not
recognize these goals which may lead to high MSE values.
6.5.2
Human agent
7 different levels were used when testing the human agent:
• Full divider (agents: 2, goal: plated sliced tomato)
• Full divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
• Open divider (agents: 2, goal: plated sliced tomato)
• Open divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
• Open divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
• Partial divider (agents: 2, goal: plated sliced tomato)
• Partial divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
These were each included 6 times in the training set, to allow for slightly longer
training time. The resulting parameters were then recorded and used to see how
well the profile fits on the following control levels:
• Full divider (agents: 2, goal: plated tomato lettuce)
• Partial divider (agents: 2, goals: plated sliced tomato, plated lettuce leaves)
The results of this test have been summarized in table 6.5.
Extended Model
Rationality
1.316
Eﬀiciency
0.194
Pickiness
0.500
MSE
0.590
Table 6.5: Results from modelling the human/optimal agent. Start values for
the parameters: β = 0.5, ϕ = 0.5, ψ = 0.0. Notice that all pref-
erences were set to 10, which explains why pickiness did not move
away from its initial value of 0.5.
Surprisingly the model got a better MSE for this agent type compared to
Bayesian Delegation. This is surprising since Bayesian Delegation should theo-
retically think in a way more closely related to the model than the human agent.
But when comparing to the simple agents, it still shows that the model is not
==PAGE:62==
6.5 Evaluating the extended model on more complex agents
56
really able to capture the plans of this human agent. This is likely caused by the
agents anticipating what tasks need to be performed in the future and starting
these tasks before their preconditions are met. An example of this can be seen
in figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Example of the human agent doing a task not assignable according
to the model: PutDown(a = 0, i = Plate, dx = 0, dy = 4).
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Future work
As seen in the previous chapter, the models are better at predicting some agents
in some situations. For instance, it is definitely best when only a single agent
is in the state. This makes sense as one of the assumptions the models make is
that other agents can safely be ignored when determining the cost of a task. As
previously explained, this is a pretty big assumption, in part because it forces a
transformation of multi-agent states into single agent states. One way to improve
the models would be to find a better transformation, or even better, remove the
assumption that other agents can be ignored when solving a task and instead try
to take into account what other agents would do.
In the analysis chapter, it was also mentioned how the cost function (MSE)
is not ideally defined, as it concerns action probabilities instead of the intended
output of the model, namely the task probabilities. Maybe a different cost func-
tion, or a different fitting method could alleviate this problem. A different fit-
ting method for the task preferences definitely seem necessary, as the current
approach to training these does not perform well.
In the models, when P(tf = t|s) is calculated, it is done using a weighing
function σ(t, s) (in addition to the other parameters of the model). Currently,
this weighs each task with the same type, e.g. Cut, PutDown, etc. equally. Per-
haps a better definition for this function could be found. Especially considering
PutDown-tasks where some destinations are clearly better than others. Maybe
the eﬀiciency parameter in the extended model could also be redefined to not
only take into account the cost of solving a task, but also how beneficial the
task would be to solve (or a new parameter could be introduced taking this into
account). This would be to avoid making the model predict that an agent would
move an item one step at a time. Aside from this, there are also plenty of other
parameters that could be introduced and experienced with. Just to name a few:
• Frugality: The agent’s tendency to re-use items that exist in the state as
opposed to producing new ones
• Stubbornness: How persistent an agent is once it has picked a task. I.e.
will it be likely to stick to a task, even if other agents are working on the
same task?
• Farsightedness: How far an agent can think ahead. If it can think far ahead,
it might be able to start working on a task, that will later allow it to work
==PAGE:64==
7 Future work
58
an a task it has a high preference for.
The models will probably need a few altercations in order to support the above
mentioned parameters, but exactly how these could be implemented and used
would be interesting to experiment with.
The way tasks are defined in this thesis, could also be changed and experi-
mented with. One easy modification would be to generate more specific tasks
for milestone tasks. Currently they do not specify where the Cut, Combine or
Deliver actions should take place as opposed to PutDown tasks. Knowing this
would probably improve the model, as it would provide more information to
the consumer of the model. The tasks could also be changed more drastically,
by completely redefining what a task is. The probabilistic model explained in
this thesis is agnostic to how a task is actually defined. As long as AT (s) and
Compl(t, a) can be defined for the tasks, it would still work. One problem with
the models that could probably be solved more elegantly this way is what to
do, when an agent has no task. As of now, it has somewhat arbitrarily been
decided that the model assumes agents to walk around randomly. Maybe this as-
sumption could be removed by redefining the tasks and ensuring that the agents
always had at least one task available. An example of a task not conforming to
the current definition of a task, could be a random walk task that when assigned,
the agent would simply walk around randomly with no other objective.
The pool of assignable tasks could also be increased by lifting some of the
assumptions concerning tasks. In particular, the assumption that the necessary
items must exist in the state before the task is available could open the possibility
for larger tasks (that an optimal agent might pursue). Another way would be to
lift the assumption that agents are not assigned a milestone task if it would be
pointless to the overall objective or malicious. This could interestingly open the
possibility of profiling malicious agents, which have not been considered by any
of the previous projects in this domain or similar domains.
One of the key features of the model is the ability to model an agent that
switches tasks. This has been done by defining a P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) func-
tion. However, this is at the moment either 1 or 0. It could be interesting to
experiment with other conditions that might influence an agent to stick to its
task or not. Another interesting way of extending the models, would be to model
that agents uses task recognition on each other and act according to their results.
This could work well with P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t), as an agent might have
a probability of switching tasks if it sees that other agents are likely working
on the same task. Modelling agents that use task recognition also opens up for
the possibility of predicting which tasks would soon be completed and therefore
assigning future tasks based on this. For instance, if an agent recognizes that
another agent is about to cut a tomato. Then maybe it should be possible to
allow the agent to pick a task combining the sliced tomato with a plate. Even
though the sliced tomato does not yet exist.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
During this thesis, a goal recognition algorithm has been proposed which uses
Bayesian inference to predict an agents actions.
While the evaluation of the
models shows that it is possible for the models to quite accurately predict the
actions of some agents, it also highlights some issues with the models. As such
it shows that it is possible to split multi-agent subgoals into smaller single-agent
tasks. However, for this to work smoothly, the models have to be able to assign
agents to tasks whose items are not present in the state at the time the task is
first assigned. The evaluation also highlights some issues with how the agents are
trained in that it is hard to measure how well the tasks themselves are assigned
to the agents. On the positive side, it did show that the method proposed for
dynamically reassigning tasks during a level work.
As such while the models contain some issues, they also contain some inter-
esting attributes which can be further built upon.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[DB18]
Andrea Dittadi and Thomas Bolander. “Smart Innovation Project
with Shade: Goal recognition for intelligent light control.” 2018.
[DB22]
Emil Damsbo and Jacob Bruun. “Using Active Plan Recognition to
Solve Online Multi-Agent Collaboration Problems.” Master’s thesis.
DTU, February 2022.
[FR22]
Gene Kogan Francis Tseng and Andreas Refsgaard. How neural net-
works are trained. 2022. url: https://ml4a.github.io/ml4a/how_
neural_networks_are_trained/.
[Ltd16]
Ghost Town Games Ltd. Overcooked oﬀicial website. 2016. url: https:
//ghosttowngames.com/overcooked/.
[MB16]
Gal A. Kaminka Mor Vered and Sivan Biham. “Online Goal Recogni-
tion through Mirroring: Humans and Agents.” In: The Fourth Annual
Conference on Advances in Cognitive Systems (2016).
[PW78]
David Premack and Guy Woodruff. “Does the chimpanzee have a the-
ory of mind?” In: Behavioral and brain sciences 1(4):515–526 (1978).
[RG09]
Miquel Ramírez and Hector Geffner. “Plan Recognition as Planning.”
In: International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence (2009).
[RG21]
Sarah Keren Reuth Mirsky and Christopher Geib. Introduction to
Symbolic Plan and Goal Recognition. 1st edition. Morgan & Claypool
publishers, 2021.
[RN10]
Stuar Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Ap-
proach. 3rd edition. Prentice Hall, 2010.
[Tho21]
Mathias Kaas-Olsen Thomas Bolander Mikkel Birkegaard Andersen
Andreas Garnæs Lasse Dissing Hansen Martin Holm Jensen. Mavis:
Multi-Agent Visualisation Tool. 2021. url: https://github.com/
MAvis-DTU/mavis.
[Wu+20]
Sarah A. Wu et al. “Too many cooks: Coordinating multi-agent col-
laboration through inverse planning.” In: Topics in Cognitive Science
(2020). doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12525. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/tops.12525.
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Finding solutions in
milestone graph
To find all solutions using the milestone graph, a call to the function Solutions-
ForItem is made. This finds all solutions for a single item, creates new graph for
each solution it finds corresponding to the original but with the solution applied.
This graph is then handed to the ContinuationFn provided to it. The Solu-
tionsForItem will then combine each resulting solution from the continuation
function with the solution that was used to made the graph. The pseudo-code
for the primary algorithms can be seen below.
Algorithm 1 Finding all solutions
Require: Milestone graph:
graph, Goal items:
goals, Max solution depth:
maxDepth
Ensure: All possible solutions (in a maximum depth)
function Solutions(graph, goals, maxDepth)
if goals is empty then
return [{}]
end if
function ContinuationFn(graph′, maxDepth′)
return Solutions(graph′, goals[1..], maxDepth′)
end function
return SolutionsForItem(graph,
maxDepth,
goals[0],
Continua-
tionFn)
end function
==PAGE:68==
A Finding solutions in milestone graph
62
Algorithm 2 Finding solutions for an item
Require: Milestone graph: graph, Max solution depth: maxDepth, Item to
find solutions for: item, Function used to find solutions for more items (takes
as parameters: a milestone graph, and max depth): ContinuationFn
Ensure: All possible solutions (in a maximum depth) for the item combined with
the solutions for other items achieved from calls to the continuation function
function SolutionsForItem(graph, maxDepth, item, ContinuationFn)
solutions ←[]
if HasPositiveItemCount(graph, item) then
graph′ ←NewGraphWithOneLessOf(graph, item)
solutions ←ContinuationFn(graph′, maxDepth)
end if
if maxDepth = 0 then
return solutions
end if
for m ∈graph.E where m.V = item do
subSolutions ←MilestoneSolutions(graph, m, 0, maxDepth −1)
for s ∈subSolutions do
graph′ ←ApplySolutionToGraph(graph, s)
nextSolutions ←ContinuationFn(graph′, maxDepth)
for s′ ∈nextSolutions do
solutions ←solutions+ CombineSolutions(s, s′)
end for
end for
end for
end function
Algorithm 3 Finding all solutions using a milestone vertex
Require: Milestone
graph:
graph,
Milestone
vertex:
m,
Child
index:
childIndex, Max solution depth: maxDepth
Ensure: All solutions using a milestone vertex. I.e. all possible ways to generate
the children items (starting from child with index childIndex)
function MilestoneSolutions(graph, m, childIndex, maxDepth)
if |m.U| = childIndex then
return [{⟨m, 1⟩}]
end if
function ContinuationFn(graph′, maxDepth′)
return MilestoneSolutions(graph′, m, childIndex+1, maxDepth′)
end function
return SolutionsForItem(graph, maxDepth, m.U[childIndex], Con-
tinuationFn)
end function
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B
Derivative of MSE
This appendix will list how the derivates of MSE and all the functions used in
its definition will be calculated. Note that many of the functions will be differ-
entiated the same regardless of which parameter is used. Instead of duplicating
many definitions by writing
df
dβ ,
df
dϕ and
df
dψ. These will be written as f ′ if the
definition would look the same regardless of parameter. For instance, the defi-
nition for MSE is one of the two following depending on whether the basic or
extended model is used:
MSE(β, ϕ, ψ) = 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
SE(a, s0,i, β, ϕ, ψ)
(B.1)
MSE(β) = 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
SE(a, s0,i, β)
(B.2)
Differentiating this will look very similar for both models, so it will be notated
like the following:
MSE′ = 1
n
∑
i∈[0,n]
∑
a∈AA(si)
SE′(a, s0,i)
(B.3)
Differentiation of SE will then be given by:
SE′(a, s0,i) =
{
−2(1 −P(a|q1,i, s0,i))P ′(a|q1,i, s0,i)
if a = qi+1
2P(a|q1,i, s0,i)P ′(a|q1,i, s0,i)
otherwise
(B.4)
To calculate this, P ′(a|q1,i, s0,i) must be defined:
P ′(a|q1,n, s0,n) =





∑
t∈AT (sn)
(
P ′(a|sn, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n)
+ P(a|sn, tf = t)P ′(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n)
)
AT (sn) ̸= ∅
0
otherwise
(B.5)
Next P ′(a|s, tf = t) will be calculated:
==PAGE:70==
B Derivative of MSE
64
P ′(a|s, tf = t) = e−β(1+Vt(T (s,a))) (α′
t −αtβ′(1 + Vt(T(s, a))))
(B.6)
In the above, notice how it includes β′. When differentiating with respect to β
then β′ = 1 otherwise it is 0. Next up is the normalization factor αt. Remember
that this is defined as the factor that normalizes the rest across all actions, such
that it sums to 1. First this definition will be written up mathematically, as it
helps when differentiating it:
αt(s, β) =
1
∑
a∈AA(s) e−β(1+Vt(T (s,a)))
(B.7)
Now that a definition has been stated, it will be differentiated:
α′
t(s, β) = β′
∑
a∈AA(s) (1 + Vt(T(s, a)))e−β(1+Vt(T (s,a)))
(∑
a∈AA(s) e−β(1+Vt(T (s,a)))
)2
(B.8)
The next derivative that will be defined will be P ′(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n):
P ′(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) = P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t)P ′(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
+ P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n)P ′(tf = t|sn)
+ P ′(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n)P(tf = t|sn)
(B.9)
When differentiating P(tf = t|a1,n, s0,n) as has been done above, one of the
terms would contain P ′(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t), however it is always 0 (as the
stick probability does not depend on either β, ϕ or ψ) and that term has therefore
not been included.
P ′(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) = 0
(B.10)
Similarly, the terms multiplied with P ′(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t) when differen-
tiating P(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) has also been left out:
P ′(¬stick|a1,n, s0,n) = −
∑
t∈AT (sn−1)
P(stick|a1,n, s0,n, tw = t)P ′(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n)
(B.11)
The next function whose derivative will be found is P(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n):
P ′(tw = t|a1,n, s0,n) =











P ′(tf = t|s0)
n = 0
α′ ·
(
P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P ′(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
+ P ′(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
)
+ (α′)′P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
n > 0
(B.12)
==PAGE:71==
B.1 Derivatives related to P(tf = t|s) for basic model
65
In the above definition, (α′)′ refers to the normalization factor α′ differenti-
ated. The parenthesises have been added in attempt to make it less confusing
(as a ′ symbol is already used in naming of the factor). Like with αt, a definition
of α′ will be given first, as this makes it more clear to differentiate. Remember
that α′ is defined to normalize P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1) across
all tasks such that the sum equals 1:
α′(a1,n, s0,n) =
1
∑
t∈AT (sn−1) P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1) (B.13)
Differentiating this, achieves the following:
(α′)′(a1,n, s0,n) = −
∑
t∈AT (sn−1)
(
P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P ′(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
+ P ′(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
)
(∑
t∈AT (sn−1) P(an|sn−1, tf = t)P(tf = t|a1,n−1, s0,n−1)
)2
(B.14)
The only missing derivatives all relate to P(t|s), so they will differ depending
on the basic model is used or the extended model.
B.1
Derivatives related to P(tf = t|s) for basic
model
In the basic model, P(tf = t|s) does not depend on any of the parameters β, ϕ
or ψ. It will therefore always just be 0:
P ′(tf = t|s) = 0
(B.15)
Notice that P(tf = t|s) does depend on the task preferences. If these were to
be fitted using gradient descent like the other parameters, the above definition
would not be 0.
B.2
Derivatives related to P(t|s) for extended
model
For the extended model the derivative of P(tf = t|s) is given below:
P ′(tf = t|s) = σ(t, s)Assign(t, s)eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s) (
α2(ϕ′Pref(t) −ψ′Vt(s)) + α′
2
)
(B.16)
==PAGE:72==
B.2 Derivatives related to P(t|s) for extended model
66
Like for the basic model, it has not been differentiated with respect to the
task preferences. Instead these have been considered constant. Also note that ϕ′
will equal 1 when differentiating with respect to ϕ and 0 otherwise. The same is
the case for ψ′ it is just 1 when differentiating for ψ and 0 otherwise. The only
term left to differentiate is α2. First a definition will be given, as it then will be
easier finding the derivative:
α2(s) =
1
∑
t∈AT (s) σ(t, s)eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s)
(B.17)
The derivative can now be found:
α′
2(s) = −
∑
t∈AT (s) σ(t, s)(ϕ′Pref(t) −ψ′Vt(s))eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s)
(∑
t∈AT (s) σ(t, s)eϕP ref(t)−ψVt(s)
)2
(B.18)
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX C
Test levels
C.1
Training levels
These levels were used as training levels in evaluations using the simple agent.
Figure C.1: Two versions of this level exist the one shown here and one with a
single agent. The level is called sections.
==PAGE:74==
C.1 Training levels
68
Figure C.2: Two versions of this level exist the one shown here and one with a
single agent. The level is called Tomato Heaven Tables.
==PAGE:75==
C.1 Training levels
69
Figure C.3: Six versions of this level exist as it can have 3 different recipes and
contain either one or two agents. The level is called Open divider.
==PAGE:76==
C.1 Training levels
70
Figure C.4: Three versions of this level exist as it can have 3 different recipes.
It only has the option of two agents as 1 agent alone cannot solve
the level. The level is called Full divider.
==PAGE:77==
C.1 Training levels
71
Figure C.5: Six versions of this level exist as it can have 3 different recipes
and contain either one or two agents. The level is called Partial
divider.
==PAGE:78==
C.2 Control levels
72
C.2
Control levels
These two levels were used as control levels in evaluations using the simple agent.
Figure C.6: Two versions of this level exist the one shown here and one with a
single agent. The level is called Tomato Heaven.
Figure C.7: Two versions of this level exist the one shown here and one with a
single agent. The level is called Long level.
==PAGE:79==
C.3 Preference training level
73
C.3
Preference training level
Figure C.8: This is the level used specially to train the parameters.
