==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MSC. ENG. THESIS FOOD TECHNOLOGY
BIODOSEMETRY OF BACTERIAL INACTIVATION
USING UV-C ON MILK WITH DIFFERENT FAT
CONTENT
ROSA DE NOVA- S193148
SUPERVISORS:
LISBETH TRUELSTRUP
TINA BECK
KASPER ESPEKVIST
JUNE 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Rosa de Nova s193148
1
Acknowledgements
Major thank you to Lisbeth Truelstrup for leading with care and sharpness throughout the project.
Thank you to Tina Beck for patience and guidance with the modeling.
Thank you to Pia Engelsmann for the guidance in the lab.
Thank you to Kasper Espekvist for guidance using Lyras pilot unit.
Thank you to Anna Herrero for the support and understanding.
Thank you to H˚akan Vigre for being the head of my studies and giving me guidance and support when things
weren´t very straight forward.
Thank you Bjørn Nielsen from the SU office, for believing in me and allowing the economics means to finish
my studies.
Thank you Kathrine Hougaard for making a safe space where I felt heard at DTU.
I would like to thank the whole village that brought me here. I did the walk but I felt your support all the
way through Kaja Plucinska, Dianne Kim, Carlotta Citerni, Linn Gillberg, Luca Silvioli, Ken Rodstand, Emilie
Haze, Valerio Tafinolli, Andr´e Alv´es, Pedro Montoya, Gustavo Segat, Marcelo Far´es, Noelia Kiaora, Jean
Luxe, Lise Lotte, Alba Prat, Frank M¨uller, Sergio Romero, Nina Rasmussen, Damai, Ema Rogobete, Dessuki,
Lidia Leonte, Fani Draskovic, Fachy Linda, Anca Vladoiu, Piotr Rajewicz, Hanna Krozer, Shanna Bannan, and
always and forever Fergus Jones.
i
==PAGE:3==
Rosa de Nova s193148
2
Abstract
Lyras S/A has developed an inline UV-C treatment pilot unit to assess the viability of replacing heat treatment
pasteurization of milk with novel technology UV-C treatment. It was studied the inactivation kinetics of two
microorganism at risk of contamination in dairy plants, namely Lactococcus cremoris and Pseudomonas fluo-
rescens in four different types of milk based on their fat content, skimmed milk, semi-skimmed milk, whole
milk and cafe milk. The unit had technical limits of such as the capacity of the deposit of 26 L capacity and
maximum pressure in pumps of 6 bar.
The different fat content in milk affected the operational process parameters of Lyras pilot unit. The increased
viscosity of the product required a stronger shear force from the pumps. The energy applied was dissipated in
the fluid as heat. Which lead to a difference of temperature between the coils. Subsequently fluid dynamics
were affected in each coil of the unit.
Bench scale test assess the UV-C sensitivity of Lactococcus cremoris is 0.5743 cm2/mJ and D-value 1.24
mJ/cm2. Pseudomonas fluorescens has a higher sensitivity with an inactivation rate of 0.8231 cm2/mJ and
D.value of 1.08 mJ/cm2.
Based on the observed log reduction after flowthrough UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot unit a log-linear in-
activation model is developed for both organism. However the data set for L.cremoris was incomplete and
inferences have to be taken with caution. P.fluorescens followed clearly a first order inactivation and dose
delivery in Lyras pilot unit.
ii
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Contents
1
Acknowledgements
i
2
Abstract
ii
3
List of abbreviations and symbols
1
4
List of Tables
3
5
Introduction
4
6
Aim and objectives
5
7
Light germicidal effect
6
7.1
Light, electromagnetic energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
7.2
Germicidal effect of UV-C light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
7.2.1
Photoprotection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
8
Characteristics of the microorganisms used in this study
11
8.1
Lactococcus cremorissp. nov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
8.2
Pseudomonas fluorescensDSM 50090 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
9
Milk
13
10 Regulatory frame
17
11 Lyras pilot unit
18
12 Bench scale testing UV-C dose
21
12.1 Model for microbial inactivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
13 Materials and methods
25
13.1 Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
13.2 Cell culture and harvest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
13.3 Microbial enumeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
13.4 Lyras UV-C pilot unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
13.5 Pre-trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
13.6 Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
13.7 Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens 500090
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
13.8 Collimated beam apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
14 Data analysis
35
15 Results
36
15.1 Pre-trials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
15.1.1 Results Bacterial pellet storage stability using L.Cremoris
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
15.1.2 Process parameters Lyras pilot-unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
15.2 Flowthrough UV-C exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
15.3 UV-C dose estimation using collimated beam apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
15.4 Bacterial inactivation modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
16 Discussion and conclusion
63
References
68
17 Appendix A
72
17.1 Collimated beam apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
iv
==PAGE:6==
3
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
Rosa de Nova s193148
3
List of abbreviations and symbols
Abbreviation
meaning
UV
Ultraviolet light
CFU/ml
Colony formin units per milliliter
UV-C
Ultraviolet light C spectrum
UV-T
Ultraviolet light transmittance
mJ m−2
mili Joules per meter squared
−A254
Absorbance at 254 nano meters wavelengh
E0
Fluence rate
T
Thiamine
A
Adenine
G
Guanine
C
Cystosine
U
Uracyl
CDP
Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
6-4PPs
Pyrimidine photoproducts
-OH
Activated hydroxyl radical
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
dsRNA
Double stranded RNA
bp
Base pair
NER
Nucleotide excision repair
LAB
Lactic acid bacteria
WHM
Whole milk
SKM
Skimmed milk
SSKM
Semi-skimmed milk
CM
Cafe milk
J/L
Joule per liter
UVI
Ultraviolet irradiation
CPD
Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer
GG-NER
Global genome nucleotide excision repair
TC-NER
Transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair
UVI
Ultraviolet irradiation
SLR
Specific log reduction
mJ cm−2
Milli-Joule per square centimeter
mW/s-cm2
Milli-Watt per second per square centimeter
Page 1 of 74
==PAGE:7==
3
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Re
Reynolds number
ρ
Fluid density
V
Velocity
d
Flow length
µ
Fluid viscosity
Euv)
Total applied UV
Ln
Number of UV sources
P
Output power
V
Volumetric fluid
De
Dean number
BHI
Brain Heart infusion media
RMSE
Root square mean error
ANOVA
A one-way analysis of variance
RED
Reduction equivalent dose
I
Adjusted irradiance
(E0)
Lamp output
Page 2 of 74
==PAGE:8==
4
LIST OF TABLES
Rosa de Nova s193148
4
List of Tables
Table 1
Physical-chemical status of whole cow milk
Table 2
Relative particle sizes in milk
Table 3
Relative particle sizes in milk
Table 4
Density of different milk fat content at different temperatures
Table 5
Viscosity of milk at various temperature
Table 6
Cell culture and harvest lab set up
Table 7
Plating and counting survivors colonies lab set up
Table 8
Cell distribution test, table presenting sample name, time, place and type
Table 9
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris sample collection biological test1
Table 10
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris sample collection biological test2
Table 11
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens sample collection biological test1
Table 12
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens sample collection biological test2
Table 13
Collimated beam apparatus set up: dimension of petri dish where sample were placed
Table 14
L.cremoris collimated beam light apparatus biological test1
Table 15
L.cremoris collimated beam light apparatus biological test2
Table 16
P.fluorescens50090 collimated beam light apparatus biological test1
Table 17
P.fluorescens50090 collimated beam light apparatus biological test2
Table 18
Lyras pilot unit process parameters when keeping motor speed at 75% using SKM, SSKM, WHM and CM
Table 19
Results Lyras pilot unit flowthrough test, De number, Euv−c , UV-Dosesur face and log reduction L.cremoris
Table 20
Results of flowthrough test, De number, Euv−c , UV-Dosesur face and log reduction P.fluorescens
Table 21
UV-C RED estimation for Lyras pilot unit for microorganism L.cremoris
Table 22
UV-C RED estimation for Lyras pilot unit for microorganism P.fluorescens
Page 3 of 74
==PAGE:9==
5
INTRODUCTION
Rosa de Nova s193148
5
Introduction
Safety during food processing is one of the main concerns. Milk is a rich medium containing all the nutrients
that promote microbial growth, thus, microbial contamination is the primary source of biological hazards in the
dairy industry. The standard practice to ensure product safety is applying heat treatment of different intensities
and time. This is a resource intense process and there are significant chemical reactions taking place in the
milk that affect its quality, such as loss of subtle aroma and flavors components, loss of vitamins and natural
antioxidants, the loss of texture and freshness, denaturation of proteins [1], accumulation of Maillard reactions
products which are already detectable after exposure at at 62°C, or the formation of the disaccharide lactulose
when heated above 110°C [2]. The continued implementation of strategies to improve and strengthen milk
process optimization is of vital importance within the dairy industry. Changing consumer demand patterns are
leading food production. Emerging drivers such as health and wellness, safety, ethically sourced, social impact,
carbon footprint and sustainability are added to the classic drivers of price, taste and convenience[3]. In order
to optimize production processes it has to be done without compromising on quality and safety.
UV-C light with a wavelength of 200 to 280nm has a germicidal effect due to it´s absorbance by DNA.
Fostering this ability as a means to control microorganisms, specifically pathogens, to prevent microorganisms
from replicating is a compelling tool. UV-C germicidal technology is less energy demanding and more targeted
than heat treatment [4]. To replace pasteurization with this novel technology as dry, non-thermal, non-ionizing,
and non- chemical, it’s efficacy has to be validated due to the nature of light. Its behaviour is affected when
passing through different matrices such as air, water, opaques fluids, different particles, among other factors[5].
Advancements in reactors designs enable for foods with low transmittance to be treated with UV-C. Lyras
is a Danish company that is developing an in-line UV-C equipment, in which by creating a turbulent flow in a
coil, irradiates it with multiple light sources to ensures uniform treatment of all the particles in suspension.
To implement such technology, one first has to warrant food safety using predictive microbiology tools based
on inactivation kinetics of different microorganism after UV-C exposure in Lyras´ pilot unit. This can be as-
sessed via biodosemetry studies challenging Lyras flowthrough unit with target microorganisms and comparing
the log reductions obtained in this system with with the log reductions obtained at an applied known UV-C dose
using a collimated beam apparatus in batch mode. The UV sensitivity of the studied microorganism it deter-
mined as an inactivation rate constant expressed as specific log reduction from a plotted UV-C dose–response
curve based on the tests. The inactivation rate is is used to determine the UV-C dose applied for each exposure
in Lyras pilot unit[5]. The flow through test in Lyras pilot are done using milk with different fat content, to
study if they exhibit different kinetics of microbial inactivation due to the changing UV-transmittance and flow
properties lead by variance in viscosity and turbidity [6].
Page 4 of 74
==PAGE:10==
6
AIM AND OBJECTIVES
Rosa de Nova s193148
6
Aim and objectives
The aim of this project is to explore the efficacy of Lyras pilot unit for UV-C bacterial inactivation in milk with
different fat contents and assess it´s feasibility as a replacement to heat treatment pasteurization.
The research questions to be evaluated are the following:
• Do different types of milk affect the operational process parameters of Lyras pilot unit?
• What is the UV-C sensitivity of Lactococcus cremoris and Pseudomonas fluorescens and their D-values?
• Is it possible to develop a mathematical model characterizing the different inactivation kinetics of the
studied organism in Lyras pilot unit?
Research study design The research conducted to realized the aim of this project is based on literature
review, experimental tests in Lyras pilot unit and in laboratory, divided in four main sections
• Pre-trials were the process parameters to run further test in Lyras pilot units are established.
• UV-C treatment flowthrough test using Lyras pilot unit and model organism L.cremoris and P.fluorescens
in four types of milk with different fat contents. Log reduction plots after UV-C exposure are enumerated by
means of colony forming unit per milliliter assay (CFU/ml).
• Biodosemetry assay using a collimated beam light apparatus in batch mode and suspending the model
organisms in 0,9% saline solution to identify their UV-C sensitivity and determine the equivalent UV-reduction
dose in Lyras pilot unit.
• Statistical analysis and microbial inactivation kinetics modeling to assess the capability of Lyras pilot unit
to disinfect a continuous flow of milk with different fat content, inoculated with microorganisms Lactococcus
Cremoris, Pseudomonas fluorescense 500090 using data inferred from the biodosemetric experiments.
Page 5 of 74
==PAGE:11==
7
LIGHT GERMICIDAL EFFECT
Rosa de Nova s193148
7
Light germicidal effect
7.1
Light, electromagnetic energy
Particles behave different to exposure to electromagnetic energy depending on the wavelength range. The
intensity of the effect is measured by the absorbance and determines the probability of the receiving molecule
to change the electronic configuration, to converse into radiant energy, rotation and vibration[4].
Ultraviolet light (UV) has a germicidal effect since it gets absorbed by DNA and RNA, specifically the UV-C
spectrum from 200 to 280nm wavelenght, picking at 257nm.
Figure 1: Electromagnetic spectrum focusing in ultraviolet light range [? ]
Light is transmitted at a constant speed in a vacuum of 2.994x108 m/s getting slower when entering different
mediums. Each medium has a different refractive index, when lights travels from one medium to other two
effects occur. First some light is going to be reflected back from the interface, such as the angle of incidence
is the same as the angle of reflection. The second effect is the change of direction or refraction that the light
takes, when the angle to the normal of the surface is less that the angle of incidence [7].
The transmittance of UV light in a medium (UV-T) is the defined as the percent of transmittance when the
path length is 1cm and the wavelength 254nm. UV-T is affected by the absorption and scattering of light in
a medium. Therefore the UV-T directly affects UV-C irradiance passing through and, subsequently, microbial
inactivation capability. Low values of UV-T will decrease the UV intensity delivered to the microbial cells [8].
UV-T is calculated as presented in equation 1
UV−T = 100T = 100×10−A254
(1)
where −A254 is the absorbance at 254nm in 1cm path length. Absorbance and transmittance are measured
with a spectrophotometer.
The emittance of the light source (W/m2) is the radiant energy per unit area of the lamp [7].
When irradiance rate is integrated overtime is estimated the UV dose, the units are mJ/m2
F =
Z
E0dt
(2)
Page 6 of 74
==PAGE:12==
7
LIGHT GERMICIDAL EFFECT
Rosa de Nova s193148
where E0 is the irradiance rate.
When a photon is absorbed, this can cause changes in the surface molecule going from ground state into
excited state, which can cause different effects. Such as fluorescence, when the molecule returns to ground
state after emitting a photon, or the conversion of the excited state into a different one longer lived. The effect
that is being studied in this project is when the excited molecule undergoes chemical transformation such as
fission or re-arrangement [5]. UV-C inactivation of microorganism is considered a mechanical disinfection
method that arises from photochemical processes [7].
7.2
Germicidal effect of UV-C light
UV-C light has a germicidal effect when prompts structural changes that affect the abilities of the microorgan-
ism to replicate, even though it can be metabolically alive. The lesions created affect mainly the pyrimidines
bases, thymine and cytosine, resulting in cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) between two adjacent pyrim-
idines, and pyrimidone photoproducts (6-4PPs) [9]. The microbial inactivation degree is correlated to the UV-C
dose which is a function of irradiation over time [4].
DNA is composed of phosphate and hydroxyl groups covalently linked forming a backbone where 4 nu-
cleotides are hydrogen linked forming a complex structure. Single-ring pyrimidine thiamine(T) hydrogen pairs
with double-ring purine adenine(A) and purine guanine(G) with pyrimidine cytosine(C). Hydrogen bonds have
5% strength compared to covalent bonds, G-C are coupled by three hydrogen bongs and T-A by two, thus
making them the weakest link of the structure. Moreover, pyrimidines (thymine, cytosine, and uracil) absorb
about ten times more energy from UV than purines[10]. RNA has a similar structure to DNA except that T is
replaced by the pyrimidine bases uracil(U) and is generally found single stranded, although it exists as dou-
ble stranded were the bases pairs in U-A, G-C formations. Similarly to thymine, uracil tends to form dimer
when excited with UV-C. Single stranded RNA is particularly susceptible to UV-C since has a more unstable
structure[4]. Proteins are also affected by UV light, peptides bond absorb electromagnetic energy peaking at
280nm, although there is already absorption at 240nm wavelength [4]
UV-C can prompt the dimerisation of thymines (from DNA and proteins) and uracils (from RNA and pro-
teins), that are found next to each other, cross-linked or with adjacent proteins, as can be seen in ??
The photochemical changes to CPDs disrupts the DNA structure, impacting on the microbial ability to repli-
cate or transcribe, due to the nature of prokaryotes genomes which coding sequences can constitute more than
80% of their genome [3].
Page 7 of 74
==PAGE:13==
7
LIGHT GERMICIDAL EFFECT
Rosa de Nova s193148
(a) Photodynamics of dimerization, UV excitation in the singlet state ΠΠ∗, then decays into the singlet ηΠ∗state. All
energy is converted internally to form a thymine double hydrogen bond as seen in the right figure.
(b) Cross-link between adjacent nucleotides
(c) DNA/RNA thymine dimerization with adjacent protein from cytoplasm of capsid of a virus.
Figure 2: Three different pyrimidine thymine dimer configuration [4]
The relative inactivation response of a microorganism is defined by the ability of the UV-C light to be ab-
sorbed and cause photochemical changes. The DNA sequence of the bases and shape impacts on the probability
of dimerization, neighbouring cyclobutane pyrimidines thymine and cytosine having a higher score[3]. The ra-
tio between CPD and (6–4)PP lesions was found to be around 3:1[11]
7.2.0.1
Photoproducts formation
Ozone can be generated by UV emitting light when propagates at wavelengths below 200 nm, such as 185
nm, where oxygen and organic compounds can oxidized and become ozone.
Ozone is an unstable gas and when it decays it loses one of the three oxygen molecules than becomes an
activated hydroxyl radical (-OH) with very strong oxidising effect to other particles. Ozone production can be
restricted by coating the UV lamps with doped quartz, which completely filter out unwanted wavelengths [12].
Activated hydrogen radicals can also be generated when photocatalysis occurs. In liquid media photons
can excite water molecules and create an electron-hole pairs which releases an -OH known as reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Their oxidative stress capability that can lead to lipid peroxidation and DNA fragmentation
(author?) [13].
Other photoproducts are also formed that can contribute to cell death, for instance photohydration reactions,
when cytosine and uracil bond with water molecules which occurs independent to wavelength exposure[4].
Page 8 of 74
==PAGE:14==
7
LIGHT GERMICIDAL EFFECT
Rosa de Nova s193148
7.2.1
Photoprotection
Evolution has promoted various mechanisms that protect DNA from UV-C exposure by hindering its access to
membranes and structure, in addition of having DNA repair mechanisms[7].
7.2.1.1
DNA genome, conformation and structure
The nature of the double stranded DNA makes it more stable and able to withstand higher UV dosage, due
to the stronger kinetics keeping together the nucleotides and protecting it to exposure to irradiation with its
conformational shape. Moreover, it has two complementary templates that allow replication and transcription,
easing the ability of microorganisms to bypass the photo induced mutations[7]. Double stranded RNA (dsRNA)
also benefits from the same features and DNA. dsRNA production is species dependent and lactic acid bacteria
produce them in large numbers [14].
Nucleotides assumes a loosely twisted overall conformation, with no defined direction[15].Although there is
temporal dynamics on chromosomes based on conditions such as temperature, humidity, and on the cell cycle
and developmental stage [16]. DNA can be found in mainly three DNA geometrical structures, A, B and Z.
Conformation A has single 11 base pairs (bp) per helical turn. Conformation B has single 10 bp per turn,
associated to lower humidity. DNA-Z has 12 bp per turn and the backbone pathway has a zig-zag alternation,
becoming a sixfold helix with two bp per step and no twelvefold helix [17]. The formation of photoproducts
requires an structural rearrangement within the helix. DNA-A conformation is more compact and has an in-
creased helix stiffness, which in combination with a more “unfavorable” orientation of the pyrimidine bases
due to the stacking and the grooves dimensions, provides a higher resistance to UV-C lesions[11]
The topology of DNA is somewhat dynamic responding to environmental stress, gene regulation and expres-
sion and cell stage[18]. This is mediated with proteins that open DNA helix for replication such the replicon,
DNA supercoiling control with DNA topoisomerases, and other small nucleotide-binding proteins. The last
group are a diverse and abundant nucleoid-binding proteins that bridge, wraps and bends to drastically change
DNA structure and bring together, promote, and regulate functions and gene expression. They are not specific
to bacterial strain, there is a wide variety of them and generally are small in size, containing ≤100 amino
acid residues. In the figure bellow a few examples can be seen, such as protein HU introduces 90°degree an-
gles, protein IHF introduces a U-turn and changes the backbone trajectory, SMC complexes forms a ring that
bring together distant loci,H-NS can oligomerize and spread along DNA, ChIP binds to hundred of different
sites. Nucleoid-binding proteins vary depending on growth phase and environmental conditions adjusting chro-
mosome organization to the specific needs. For example, in stationary phase, the Escherichia coli DNA has
fewer loops than in exponential phase and each loop has more relaxed DNA; however, on the cellular level, the
nucleoid becomes significantly more compact in stationary phase [16].
Page 9 of 74
==PAGE:15==
7
LIGHT GERMICIDAL EFFECT
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 3: Nucleoid-associated proteins with DNA binding, HU introduces 90°degree angles, IHF introduces a
U-turn and changes the backbone trajectory, SMC complexes forms a ring that bring together distant loci, and
Fis is another protein that introduces conformational changes. [16]
DNA topology is also affected by the process of transertion, when translation and insertion of proteins to the
membrane is coupled, DNA is moved closer to the cell membrane and a few nucleotides are pulled [16].
The specific CG content of a microorganism also provides a higher DNA protecting against photo induced
damage due to the higher favorable stacking energy compared to AT or AU pairs [19].
7.2.1.2
Light and dark DNA repair mechanism
There are two main mechanisms that reverse the photo induced mutations. The first is called light repair
and is the photoreactivation process initiated by DNA photolyases which catalyze the pyrimidine dimers by the
same process that prompted the dimerization [7].
The second mechanism is called dark repair and is the repair of DNA using a series of enzymes. UV damage
is repaired faster in transcriptionally active DNA than in the whole genome [9]. There is a wide range of DNA
enzymatic mediated repair mechanism, being the main nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathways, where
specific proteins recognize the DNA damage, cleave the mutation in both sides and excise the oligonucleotide.
DNA endogenous reparative and ligation mechanism culminates the fixing of mutations. NER consist of two
different pathways diverging how the mutations are been recognized, global genome nucleotide repair (GG-
NER) and transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER), although both pathways share many of
the participant repair enzymes. GG-NER is transcription independent, removing mutations from non-actively
transcribe genome or non-coding regions. TC-NER repair mutation in active genes that are being transcribed.
Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) are the mainly mutation responsible for UV inactivation. 6-4PPs are
rapidly repair by NER pathways due to it´s higher affinity. CPDs are a poor substrate for NER pathways repair
enzyme, therefore are removed at lower rates [20].
There are other DNA repair mechanisms such as mismatch proofreading, and translesion synthesis where
DNA polymerase switches to transleasion polymerase and replicates past DNA lesions [9].
UV-C may affect repair enzymes by lowering their affinity to substrate with changes in their topology, or
Page 10 of 74
==PAGE:16==
8
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MICROORGANISMS USED IN THIS STUDY
Rosa de Nova s193148
even have damaged their pathway in the DNA to these proteins be transcribed or translated during/after UV-C
irradiation[7].
7.2.1.3
Membranes and photo shielding mechanisms
Microorganism have developed an array of mechanisms to protect against UV-C exposure such as membranes
and nucleocapsids that lower the number of photons reaching the DNA. In the cytoplasm the transmittance is
lowered by being tightly packed. In addition of having photon absorbing dark-proteins and other chemical
groups in molecules called chromophores [7] and other molecules photo-antioxidants such as phenolics proan-
thocyanidins, cyanidin-3-(6’-p-coumaroyl) glucoside, and melanin [21]. Chromophores have a high absorbance
at 253.7 nm, and can be found in the cytoplasm or cell wall of bacteria, in the capsid of viruses, and the coat
and cortex of spores. Dark proteins are proteins with high probability to absorb UV-C light due to high molar
absorptivity of their amino acids, being the highest tryptophan, tyrosine, cystine, phenylalline followed by his-
tidine and acetylalanine. The absorption of UV in any surrounding complex of proteins will reduce the density
of photons reaching DNA, therefore providing photoprotection. [7]. Fungal spores are among the most resistant
microbes, backed with melanin-containing dark pigmented conidia [16].
A decisive factor for UV-C disinfection efficacy is particle size and particle aggregates which greatly impact
the fluence reaching the microorganism by providing means of shielding[8]. L.cremoris the microorganism
studied in this project has a tendency for bacterial clumping or aggregation [22]. The other microorganism
studied, P.fluorescens, have been found to form biofilms recruiting L.cremoris and in dairy plants where they
show commensalism. Biofilms offer photoprotion with the extracellular matrix [23].
7.2.1.4
UV Scattering
Microorganism shape drives also UV scattering thought mechanism of reflection, refraction and diffraction
of photons where they pass unabsorbed. Diffraction of photons happens around the edges where the pathway
of the incident, or even other photons, are affected [7]. Light scattering effect increases when the size of
microorganism approaches the irradiated wavelength and the effect is reduced when the refractive index of the
microorganisms is closer to the refractive index of the media. Most microorganism have a refractive index
between 1.05 and 1.08 indicating that light scattering is not dependent on the protein content [7].
8
Characteristics of the microorganisms used in this study
Organic life is structured by the functioning of the central dogma, where genes are transcribed and translated
and genome are replicated. In prokaryotes the genome is not enclosed in a nucleus and related gens are clustered
in operons. Transcription and translation are often coupled. The whole biological system depends on the
translations and proper functioning of enzymes to lower the activation energy of a chemical reaction and thereby
facilitate processes of growth, and repair. UV-C is considered a DNA repression tool, since it acts by creating
road blocks or change DNA topology, which leads to a loss of function.
Replication occurs at a fast rate when the cells are in exponential growth, and at much lower rate when cells
are in stationary phase. In stationary phase regulatory mechanism initiates replication when a certain cell mass
Page 11 of 74
==PAGE:17==
8
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MICROORGANISMS USED IN THIS STUDY
Rosa de Nova s193148
ratio has been reached, specific for each microorganism. Cells switch to maintenance metabolism and stress
protection when in stationary phase [24].
UV-C irradiation creates photoproducts that change the topology of the DNA and RNA which impairs the
affinity of the different enzymes to perform their functions, contributing to microorganism inactivation [7].
8.1
Lactococcus cremorissp. nov
L. cremorissp. nov is lactic acid bacteria (LAB). A gram positive, cocci shape, and average size of 0.5 -
1.5 μm, mesophile, non-sporulation and non-motile bacterium. It is an aerotolerant anaerobic microorganism,
although in the presence of oxygen and heme has the ability to switch to aerobic respiration with the aid of
their synthesized vitamin K2. Bacterial growth occurs between temperature ranging from 10 to 37 ◦C, being
30 ◦C their optimal temperature. The doubling time in logarithmic growth is around 1,5-2h and optimal pH of
7.4 [25]. Stationary phase is reached with starvation or acidity pH 6.6 and lower. [26]
It is a homofermentative LAB, produces lactic acid up to 0.8% in milk, and has galactose metabolism. It
tolerates salt concentrations between 2-4% [27] and has a proteolitic activity, which is fundamental for cell
density and lactic acid production [22].
The taxonomic classification of L.cremorissp. nov has been recently elevated to a group from Lactococcus
lactis spp. cremoris based on lower than 95–96% average nucleotide identity of coding regions and values
and lower than 70% DNA-DNA hybridization, tools used to measure the genetic similarity between DNA
sequences. Moreover, L. cremoris chromosome is 120 kb longer than subspecies lactis [28] it has 2.3Mbp and
its AT percent is 64.5%. 86% of the genome code for protein, 1.4% for RNA, and 12.6% for noncoding region.
[28] .
L. cremoris is not considered pathogenic, the origin is from plant material and the bacterium has become
adapted to thrive in dairy substrate. It is widely used in the dairy industry thanks to the production of volatile
flavour compounds and texture, and for production of organic acids and the bacteriocin nisin that prolongs the
shelf life of products. [22].
The relevance of studying the UV-C inactivation dose for L. cremoris lays in its widespread presence in dairy
plants and high risk of contaminating product [5].
8.2
Pseudomonas fluorescensDSM 50090
P. fluorescens DSM50090 is a gram negative, rod shape with a cell length of 1-2μm and width between 0,3-
0,6μm. It is an aerobic and psychrotrophic bacterium. It is found ubiquitously in the environment, where it has
a commensal relationship with plants. Its optimal growth temperature at 25-37◦C, even though can survive at
0◦C. Generation time in log phase in optimal conditions is 7.69 minutes, 10 min at 25◦C, and is 48 minutes at
5◦C. Tolerates a pH range between 5.4 to 8.2 and its optimum is 6.5 and 7 [29].
P. fluorescens chromosome has 7.1 Mbp that translate into 87 RNA’s and 6137 proteins, among them super-
oxidases and catalases to protect them against oxidative stress. 5.7% of its genome contributes to secondary
metabolism, including the antibiotic mupirocin. The AT content in P. fluorescens is 39.8%. The name fluo-
Page 12 of 74
==PAGE:18==
9
MILK
Rosa de Nova s193148
rescens is given because under UV light their siderophores glow green. Siderophores receptors are located in
the outer membrane [30].
Being a ubiquitous organism and due to its robust adaptation capability, it is able to use a grand variety of
substrates including hydrocarbon molecules, fatty acids, proteins and oil, they are a risk in the dairy industry.
Moreover, they produce heat stable lipases and preoteases that drive milk spoilage, therefore it is considered
an opportunistic spoilage bacteria. Pseudomonas fluorescens is a microorganism associated with food spoilage
(author?) [31][32].
9
Milk
In this project we are assessing the impact of different fat content on milk and it´s effect in bacterial inactivation
by UV-C treatment. In table 3 can be seen the composition of whole cow milk, where all the components remain
the same, except for the fat content. Whole milk (WHM) has ≥3.5% fat, semi-skimmed milk (SSKM) with
1.5–1.8% , while skimmed milk (SKM) contains ≤0 .5% fat content, as defined by Regulation (EC) 1234/2007.
Lastly, cafe milk (CM) contains around 8% fat content.
Based in literature, the refractive index of milk versus its fat content can be described as a linear function.
However, the change of the refractive index is a function of the fat contents of the milk since the increment
are rather small. For instance the refractive index reported at 633 nm is 1.3463, 1.3467 and 1.3475 for SKM,
SSKM and WHM, respectively. [33].
Fluid chemical composition and concentration of dissolved and suspended solids determine whether the
product is transparent, semitransparent or opaque. Optical properties, including absorption and scattering,
along with the design of the UV systems, are the major factors affecting UV microbial inactivation in fluids
with high absorptive properties or low UVT [5].
Table 2: Physical-chemical status of whole cow milk [34]
Moisture
Fat
Proteins
Lactose
Minerals
Average composition
87,5%
3,8%
3,4%
4,8%
0,8%
Emulsion type oil/water
X
Colloidal suspension
X
True solution
X
X
The second factor to decrease transmittance is turbidity affected by particle content and association, as
clumping of microorganisms. Particles can absorb and scatter UV light based on their size, shape and compo-
sition as well as provide shielding to microorganism [8].
Page 13 of 74
==PAGE:19==
9
MILK
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 3: Relative particle sizes in milk [34]
Size (mm)
Type particles
10−2 to 10−3
Fat globules
10−4 to 10−5
Casein- calcium phosphates
10−5 to 10−6
Whey proteins
10−6 to 10−7
Lactose, minerals and substances in true solution
Rheological physical properties of the fluid, such as viscosity and density, affect the shear stress needed or
momentum transfer, and define flow pattern and particles diffusion in the UV-C system. The rate of diffusion
of the particles in a heterogeneous solution depends on the temperature, being directly related. Viscosity is
increased with fluid density derived by increased proportion of fat globules in milk [35].
Table 4: Density of different milk fat content at different temperatures [35]
Temperature
SKM
WHM
CM
5◦C
1.036 Kg/L
1.033 Kg/L
1.031 Kg/L
10◦C
1.035 Kg/L
1.032 Kg/L
1.030 Kg/L
20◦C
1.033 Kg/L
1.029 Kg/L
1.024Kg/L
38◦C
1.026 Kg/L
1.022 Kg/L
1.014 Kg/L
Fluid dynamics are impacted by the viscosity of product and consequently, UV-C dose received by the
bacterium.
Viscosity measures the friction between particles as they slide into one another. A Newtonian fluid is when
viscosity is independent of the shear rate, SKM and SSKM share this category. Fat content in milk drives the
non-Newtonian fluid behaviour, particularly the fat profile. The most abundant fatty acids in milk are myristic,
palmitic, stearic which are solid at room temperature, and oleic acids, liquid at room temperature. Increased
viscosity is defined as increased resistance to shear strain when applied a shear stress. There is a tendency
to laminar fluid hydrodynamics with increased viscosity, thus limiting the reach of the UV-C treatment to the
particles in suspension. Viscosity in milk is reduced with increased temperature as it approaches to a point of
coagulation of proteins, when sharply then becomes a viscoelastic product [34]. In table 5 viscosity values at
different temperatures can be seen for SKM, WHM and CM.
Table 5: Viscosity of milk at various temperature [35]
Temperature (◦C)
SKM
WHM
CM
5
0.00325 Pas/s
0.00396 Pas/s
0.00421 Pas/s
10
0.00247 Pas/s
0.00281 Pas/s
0.00303 Pas/s
15
0.00210 Pas/s
0.00246 Pas/s
0.00268 Pas/s
20
0.00179 Pas/s
0.00213 Pas/s
0.00246 Pas/s
25
0.00154 Pas/s
0.00186 Pas/s
0.00202 Pas/s
Factors to impact UV-C effectiveness are UV-C transmittance, absorption of particles at 254 nm in the so-
lution such as vitamin C, number of suspended particles, and aggregates [8], below a schematic representation
Page 14 of 74
==PAGE:20==
9
MILK
Rosa de Nova s193148
of UV-C effluence and dose effect in low transmittance media can be seen. The UV absorbance (A) strongly
influences the UVC dose delivery to microorganisms. The UV absorbance is a function of the concentration of
an absorber of electromagnetic radiation (c), extinction coefficient (ε), or molar absorptivity of the absorbing
species (L/mol/cm), which is a measure of the amount of light absorbed per unit concentration absorbance or
optical density, and path length of light (d). The absorption coefficient of whole milk is 290cm−1, where 90%
of the absorption occurs at 1 mm [5]
Figure 4: Schematic illustration of concept of UV-C energy-fluence and dose effect in low transmittance media
[5]
The company Lyras had analysed the relation of fat content and absorbance in milk and there is a positive
relation. At 0.5 mm cream with 38% fat has an absorption of 0.2, whole milk 3,5% fat of 0.2, and skim milk
0,3% fat of 0.1, as can be seen in the graph below
Figure 5: Absorption of cream 38% fat, WHM 3,5% fat, and SKM 0,3% fat. Lyras A/S
A standard diagram of milk processing in a dairy plant is presented in Figure ??. The milk is tested before
entering the processing line. A common practice is the simple Resazurin test, a colorimetric assay to quan-
tify microbiological load and assess quality of the milk. A log¡4 CFU/ml is acceptable and log¡3CFU/ml is
preferably. During milk production further contamination can occur [31].
Page 15 of 74
==PAGE:21==
9
MILK
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 6: Schematic representation of dairy plant production line. 1: Balance tank; 2: product feed pump; 3:
flow controller; 4: PLATE HEAT EXCHANGER; 5: separator; 6: constant pressure valve; 7: flow transmitter;
8: density transmitter; 9: regulating valve; 10: shutoff valve; 11: check valve; 12: homogenizer; 13: booster
pump; 14: holding tube; 15: flow diversion valve; 16: process control [34]
In order to UV-C treatment to replace heat treatment pasteurization, after UV-C operational dose is estab-
lished, the effects on product constituent and stability of the suspension has to be consider[5].
Figure 7: Factors influencing UV-C treatment as replacement of heat treatment step pasteurization [8]
EFSA panel assessing the safety of using UV treatment to prolong shelf life of milk after pasteurization
has acknowledged that a UV dose of 1045 J/L is not considered to pose any new nutritional safety concern.
Unsaturated lipids are prone to undergo light induced oxidation, and in milk they are found as milk fat and
phospholipids in the globule membrane of milk fat, which leads to off-flavours to the product. EFSA assessed
that when compared to a control, lipids oxidations products such as peroxides, volatiles organic compounds,
cholesterol oxides, triobarbituric acid reactive substances and free fatty acids where not higher after UV-C
Page 16 of 74
==PAGE:22==
10
REGULATORY FRAME
Rosa de Nova s193148
treatment of milk, thus not presenting a safety concern[36].
Proteins are also susceptible to oxidation for UV exposure. A metric for protein oxidation is methionine
sulfone which had increased but the variance is small enough not to show unfavourable changes in protein
oxidation markers or methionine in milk [36].
Vitamin C peaks absorbance is in the UV-C range and from tests conducted in the master´s thesis of Lasse
Houe Hansen there is an initial linear loss followed by a tail section for UV-doses ≥96.0 J/m2. In his study there
is confirmation of no enzyme alkaline phosphatase inactivation when applied UV-C dose up to 192.0 J/m2. The
same results are presented in the bachelors thesis of Morten Drabæk Voskjær and Emil Rye Anderson where a
relationship between UV-C dose and loss of lipase activity could not be established.
EFSA 2016.4370 assessed that after treatment with a dose of 1045 J/L the nutrient composition, including
riboflavin and vitamin B12, showed no relevant reductions, except for a rise of vitamin D3 by the conversion
derived by UV-C light of the pro-vitamin present in milk 7-dehydrocholesterol [36].
Vitamin C has a high UV light absorbance within the germicidal wavelength. Vitamin A, B2, B12, D, E, K,
carotenes, fructose, sucrose, and glucose, absorb UV in the range of 240–360 nm [8].
10
Regulatory frame
The European Food and Safety Agency (EFSA) establish the parameter for safety in foodstuffs. COMMIS-
SION REGULATION (EU) No 2073/2005 and No 365/2010 has some specific limits for the most pathogenic
microorganism in milk products placed on the market during their shelf life, Staphylococcal enterotoxins should
not be detected in 25 g, and entero-bacteriaceae a maximum detection of 10 CFU/ml.
For UV-C treatment to replace pasteurization process has to achieved compared log reduction, which aims
for a log reduction of 5, representing inactivation of 99.999% of viable microorganism of the species regulated
in No 2073/2005 and No 365/2010 [37]. However, for spoilage species a preservation reduction equivalent
UV-C dose of Hgerm it has to be established with the amount of UV-C energy in what has to be delivered to
obtain the target log reduction [5].
For UV-C treatment to be approved an assessment that includes microbiological, chemical, and toxicological
safety, possible changes in composition and nutrition content, allergenicity, and dietary exposure has to be filed
, to the national competent authority (in Denmark the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration). It has to be
granted an approval as novel food, new production processes, due to the fact that microbial inactivation using
UV-C in low transmittance media is a technology that doesn´t have a significant history prior to May 1997
(Regulation (EC) 258/97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients). In January 2016 EFSA had declared the
safety of using UV light applied after pasteurization in order to extend the shelf life (j.efsa.2016.4370).
In 2009 Food and drug administration in the United States (FDA) has approved the use of UV-pasteurized
water for the dairy industry following the technical requirements for low-pressure mercury lamp, UV dose of
186 mJ/cm2 or a 4-log reduction of adenovirus and for medium-pressure lamp a UV dose at 120 mJ/cm2 or a
4-log inactivation of adenovirus[5].
Page 17 of 74
==PAGE:23==
11
LYRAS PILOT UNIT
Rosa de Nova s193148
11
Lyras pilot unit
The most significant technical factor to impact delivery of UV-C dose are reactor design, mixing efficacy and
flow rate[8] Lyras UV-C pilot unit uses a low-pressure amalgam lamp that uses 224W for an output of 253,7nm
wavelength mainly. The other wavelengths are filtered out to minimize photo-oxidation and other unwanted
effects and reactions. The lamps are placed inside of a box on the lateral of the walls emitting irradiation
perpendicular to the flow. For a homogeneous treatment to the particles suspended, the fluid passes through a
coil with high surface to volume ratio and creates a turbulent flow.
Lyras pilot unit is a scaled down version of their industrial design. It is approximately 4m2 and consist of an
inlet tank, two adjustable pumps and two coils of 4mm in diameter and 100 cm length, radius of curvature of
the coil is 24mm. It uses a multi point light source, continuous low-pressure mercury lamps 24 W UVC main
output at 253,7 nm. The system can be batch or continuous. The flow comes from the inlet, passes through
pump1 into coil1 a aseptic sample can be taken from aseptic1 after treatment in coil1, or a sample can be taken
from faucet1. The fluid continues to pump2 where it reaches coil2, and after treatment an aseptic sample can
be taken from aseptic2 or from faucet2 before reaching the outlet. Below in figure 8 there is an outline of the
different parts of Lyras UV-C pilot unit, where the fluidic pathway can be followed. The intake of fluid to the
unit is via the inlet in the deposit, where pump1 conducts it to coil1. Here the fluid has received half of the
UV-C treatment and reaches the port of needle sampling, where can be taken a sample (aseptic 1), or right next
to it there is faucet1, for non-aseptic samples. The fluid continues through valve2, where is pumped into coil2
then reaching to the port where samples can be taken. After coil2 the fluid is expected to have received the
full UV-C treatment. The samples can be taken aseptically using a needle in aseptic2 or non-aseptically by the
faucet next to it, before the fluid leaves the unit through the outlet.
Figure 8: The flow comes from the inlet, passes through pump1 into coil1 a aseptic sample can be taken from
aseptic1 after treatment in coil1, or a sample can be taken from faucet1. The fluid continues to pump2 where
it reaches coil2, and after treatment aseptic sample can be taken from aseptic2 or from faucet2 before reaching
the outlet. Lyras pilot-unit Lyras S/A
Lamp intensity and pump pressure can be managed on a control screen. The objective is to pump the fluid
Page 18 of 74
==PAGE:24==
11
LYRAS PILOT UNIT
Rosa de Nova s193148
in such flow intensity that reaches turbulent hydrodynamics condition. Low flow rates mean higher residence
time of particles in coils and lower UV-irradiation exposure since only one layer is treated. A Reynolds number
of Re¡2000 means the flow is laminar, transient flow when 2000¡Re¡4000, and turbulent flow when Re¿4000.
However for Newtonian liquids (namely SKM and SSKM) a Re¿2000 is considered already turbulent flow.
The latest indicator ensures all the particles are statically similar exposed to the UV-C fluence; in addition
of allowing further calculations to treat the sample as a near-transparent solution. Viscosity affects Re, and
temperature impacts viscosity [5].
Re = ρVd
µ
(3)
where Re is Reynolds number, ρ is the fluid density, V is the characteristic velocity, d is the characteristic
flow length, and µ is the fluid viscosity.
Lyras pilot unit uses a helicoid, where there are secondary forces that increase mixing and heat transfer. The
secondary flow is created by the adverse pressure gradient generated from the curvature of the coil, resulting in
a decrease in velocity close to the convex wall, and increase velocity in the concave wall.
Figure 9: Graphical representation of secondary flow of fluid passing through a coil [5]
Therefore, a more precise metric to predict fluid dynamics in Lyras pilot unit is Dean number:
DE = Re
 
D
2Rc
(4)
Where Re is Reynolds number D is the diameter (for non-circular geometry) and Rc is the radius of curvature
of the path of the fluid.
De <40 indicates a unidirectional flow, De between 40 60 to 64 75 suggests evidence of some secondary
flow. De > 64 75 means that the two Dean vortices are merged into a primary dynamic instability. De >75 200,
there is second turbulences where the vortices merge and pair splitting. De >400 means fully turbulent flow.
Page 19 of 74
==PAGE:25==
11
LYRAS PILOT UNIT
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 10: Computational fluid dynamics simulated accumulated UV-dose for a suspended particle flowing
through the coil. The unit for the scaling is in J/m2. From Lyras A/S
Lyras pilot unit uses a continuous low mercury lamps, which are readily available, have a low cost and a
lifetime up to 18000 h. Lamp reaches a temperature around 40◦C and the main energy loss is in the form
of heat. There is a distribution of exposure time of particles while passing through the coils. Lyras used
computational fluid dynamics to predict the configuration, flow patterns and trajectory of particles exposed to
the treatment to evaluate UV fluence [5].
Figure 11: Cross-sectional view of a UV-reactor chamber of the Lyras pilot unit. Two coils, are surrounded
by 12 UV- lamps. The shading represents the emitted UV-light towards the coils, where the darkest shading
represent the area with least UV intensity to the coils surface. From Lyras A/S
Flow-through test in Lyras pilot unit are carried out in a continuous manner and is reported the UV-C energy
(Euvc) to allow as the interconversion between units J/L and J/m2.
Page 20 of 74
==PAGE:26==
12
BENCH SCALE TESTING UV-C DOSE
Rosa de Nova s193148
EUVC = PUVC
˙V
= J/L
(5)
Where P is power (W), and V is the volumetric flow rate (m3s).
UVDosesurface = UVsur faceintensity∗residencetime = J/m2
(6)
Equation 6 estimates the UV-C dose reaching the surface of the coils.
During the flow-through tests, samples are collected to determine the log inactivation of the test microorgan-
isms. The log removal is then found for each sample treated with UV light by comparing the log of the final
concentration with the log of the initial concentration [31]
Speci ficLogRemoval = log(initialconc.)−log(finalconc.)
(7)
12
Bench scale testing UV-C dose
At the present there is no methods to know the UV-C dose received by the microorganism suspended in milk
in Lyras pilot unit. Thus, it is needed a biodosemetry study to asses the UV-C dose for bacterial inactivation
kinetics, this is done using a bench scale testing UV-C collimated beam apparatus 12.
Figure 12 show a common batch UV system setup. The UV light source is installed at a adjustable distance
to the sample to treat. It is a batch system, and the light is collimated using a cylindrical tube to ensure the
electromagnetic radiation has incident parallel rays to the sample, minimizing the light spread as it propagates.
This way guarantying the fluence on the surface is equal to the incidence light. The sample is placed under the
collimator and is stirred with a magnetic stirrer to create a turbulent flow so that all molecules are statistically
equally exposed to UV-C treatment. Irradiance UVI (W/cm2) and contact time (s) are measured [38].
Figure 12: Bench scale testing UV-C collimated beam apparatus to measures UV-C dose [39]
Page 21 of 74
==PAGE:27==
12
BENCH SCALE TESTING UV-C DOSE
Rosa de Nova s193148
UV-C dose is then calculated:
UV −CDose = timeexposure ∗UVIrradiance
(8)
UV-C dose is in mJ cm2 or mW/s-cm2.
The test is carried out in high transmittance, non UV-C absorbent, homogeneous, transparent, solution of
9% NaCl where the harvested cells are resuspended. Correction factors to calculate the UV-C irradiance which
reaches the bacteria, are computed in, such as water factor, petri dish where the sample is placed factor, reflec-
tion factor and divergent factor to account for the loss of energy between the lamp and the suspended cells. E0
is the irradiance coming from the lamp, is assessed by measuring the incidence irradiance from the center of
the collimated beam light using a radiometer.
Petri dish factor (ff actor) adjust for the variation in the incidence irradiance on the surface area of the petri
dish. It is calculated as the ratio of the average incidence irradiance over the area of the petri dish and the
irradiance on the center of the dish[39].
f factor = averageincidenceirradianceoverdif ferentpointspetridish
incidenceirradiancecenterpetridish
(9)
The reflection factor includes the refraction index when the incident beamed light passes from one medium
to another and the portion of light that is reflected back when reaching the interface. It is calculated based on
the refractive indices of air and water or air and water and the incident light passing through to the sample is
0.975[39].
The media matrix, in this case water accounts for it´s own factor of absorbance while the beam while passes
through it.
Water factor = 1−e−a×l
a×l
(10)
where a is absorption coefficient at 254 nm (cm1), l is the vertical path length of the water in sample.
The divergence factor has to be accounted for the light beam passing thought the collimator since the aper-
ture becomes a diffracting object, turning into a secondary source for the propagating wave. It accounts for
the divergence generated when light goes through different mediums with different refractive indices and the
distance from the light source and the petri dish [39].
Divergence factor =
L
L+l
(11)
where L is the length from the UV lamp to the irradiated sample and l is the depth of the water in the petri
dish.
Finally, the adjusted irradiance (I) can be calculated by multiplying all the correction factor with the measured
lamp output (E0)
Page 22 of 74
==PAGE:28==
12
BENCH SCALE TESTING UV-C DOSE
Rosa de Nova s193148
I = E 0∗Re flection factor ∗Petridishfactor ∗Water factor ∗Divergencefactor
(12)
The UV-C dose -response function is plotted as Log (N0/N) versus UV dose.
N0 is the initial microbial concentration CFU/ml, N is the number of microorganism capable of replication
after certain UV-C dose.
A regression analysis is developed for each UV-C dose-response curve such as:
UVdose = A∗log(N0/N)
(13)
A is the linear slope from the plot.
The UV sensitivity response of the tested microorganism (cm2/mJ) is expressed as an inactivation rate D10uv
value (mJ/cm2)
D10uv = log(10)/A
(14)
Based on the collimated beam apparatus results a reduction equivalent dose (RED) is estimated for Lyras
pilot unit continuous flow when degree of inactivation are equivalent. RED in mJ/cm2 is a value between the
minimum and average in the dose distribution [5].
For a more precise RED, the collimated beam apparatus and Lyras pilot unit should use the same lamp source,
similar flow mixing conditions and same transmittance product [5]. Due to technical limitations in the design
of the collimated beam apparatus the same mixing conditions can not be replicated, since it is used an electrical
stirrer employing a rotating magnet.
For the application of pasteurization of milk, when is established an specific log reduction (SLR) that wants
to be achieved is calculated as the following equation:
Duv.design = SLRxD10uv
(15)
12.1
Model for microbial inactivation
To describe and predict biological safety during food processing is important to have a model for the inactivation
kinetics.
There is linear relationship between bacterial inactivation and UV-C dose, described as a first order kinetics,
longer exposure higher inactivation rates, as stated by the equation bellow
log Inactivation = log10
Nt
N = −k×UV dose
(16)
Page 23 of 74
==PAGE:29==
12
BENCH SCALE TESTING UV-C DOSE
Rosa de Nova s193148
Where Nt is the microbial concentration CFU/ml after UV-C treatment, N is the initial concentration, and
k-value is the inactivation constant (cm2/mJ). A high k-value indicates a high sensitivity to UV-C .
The first-order inactivation rate constants are determined by regression analysis between log inactivation and
UV-dose required. Linear regression identifies the equation that produces the smallest difference between all
of the observed values and their fitted values [5].
.
Page 24 of 74
==PAGE:30==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
13
Materials and methods
13.1
Bacteria
Lactococcus Lactis - txid1359- Orla Jensen 1919- Li et al 2021
Pseudomonas fluorescens - DSM50090- Mugila 1895
13.2
Cell culture and harvest
Cell culture and harvest for the different tests were done following a systematic approach, as can be seen in table
6. Centrifugation to harvest cells for tests cell stability and collimated beam light are performed using QIAGEN
4-15C. Centrifugation to pellet cells for flowthrough tests were done using IEC-Centra-8R to accommodate the
larger volume. The stomacher used to minimize cell agglomeration is an InterscienceBagMix.
Table 6: Cell culture and harvest lab set up
Cell culture
Harvest
Re-suspension
Cell stability pre-trial L.cremoris
1%glucose+ BHI media,
dark 48h 30°C
centrifuge 17 minutes 4500 rpm
Maximum
recovery
solution
Flow trough test1 L.cremoris
1%glucose+ BHI media,
48h 30°C dark
centrifuge 17 min 4500 rpm, stomacher
2 min
Milk different types
Flow trough test2 L.cremoris
1%glucose+ BHI media,
dark 48 h 30°C dark
centrifuge 17 min 4500 rpm, stomacher
2min
Milk different types
Flow trough test1 P.fluorescens
1%glucose+ BHI media,
dark 48 h 30°C dark
centrifuge 17 min 4500 rpm, stomacher
2 min
Milk different types
Flow trough test2 P.fluorescens
1%glucose+ BHI media,
dark 48 h 30°C dark
centrifuge 17 min 4500 rpm, stomacher
2 min
Milk different types
Collimated beam test1 P.fluorescens
BHI media, overnight
centrifuge 5 min 4500 rpm
0.9%NaCl solution
Collimated beam test2 P.fluorescens
BHI media, overnight
centrifuge 5min 4500 rpm
0.9%NaCl solution
Collimated beam test1 L.cremoris
BHI media, overnight
centrifuge 5 min 4500 rpm
0.9%NaCl solution
Collimated beam test2 L.cremoris
1%glucose+ BHI media,
dark 48 h 25°C
centrifuge 5 min 4500 rpm
0.9%NaCl solution
Glucose: Merck catalog number 1.08342.2500 Milk powder: Fluka catalog number 70166 Sodium chloride
(NaCl): Merck catalog number 1:06404.1000 Brain heart infusion (BHI): Becton Dickinson catalog number
237500
Media was autoclaved at 121°C for 20 minutes before inoculation.
13.3
Microbial enumeration
Platting to count survivors colonies was done as presented in table 7. Flowthrough test were at higher risk
of contamination when collecting samples and maneuvering the unit, thus was chosen as platting technique
pour and spreading plate, where the morphology of the colonies was more apparent and was easier to discern
between model microorganism and contaminants.
Page 25 of 74
==PAGE:31==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 7: Plating and counting survivors colonies lab set up
Type
Detection Limit
Media
Incubation time
Cell pellet stability pre-trial L.cremoris
Spot plating 3x 10μmL
1.5 log CFU/ml
M17 agar
48h 30°C, dark
Cell mixing pre-trial L.cremoris
Spot plating 3x 10μmL
1.5 log CFU/ml
M17 agar
48h 30°C, dark
Flowthrough bio1 L.cremoris
Spot plating 3x 10μmL
1.5 log CFU/ml
M17 agar
48h 30°C, dark
Flowthrough bio2 L.cremoris
Spread plating 250μml
0.6 log CFU/ml
1% lactose+ MPC agar
48h 30°C, dark
Flowthrough bio1 P.fluorescens
Pour plating 250μml
0.6 log CFU/ml
MPC agar
24h 25°C, dark
Flowthrough bio2 P.fluorescens
Pour plating 250μml
0.6 log CFU/ml
MPC agar
24h 25°C, dark
Collimated beam test1 P.fluorescens
Spot plating 3x 10μml
1.5 log CFU/ml
MPC agar
24h 25°C, dark
Collimated beam test2 P.fluorescens
Spot plating 3x 10μml
1.5 log CFU/ml
MPC agar
24h 25°C, dark
Collimated beam test1 L.cremoris
Spot plating 3x 10μml
1.5 log CFU/ml
MPC agar
48h 25°C, dark
Collimated beam test2 L.cremoris
Spot plating 3x 10μml
1.5 log CFU/ml
M17 agar
48h 25°C, dark
M17 agar Oxoid catalog number CM0785 (Oxoid is now a part of Thermo Fisher Scientific) M17 agar is
a dehydrated bacterial growth medium with pancreatic digest of casein, peptone, beef extract, ascorbic acid,
magenisium sulfate, disodium-beta-glycerophophate and agar.
MPC agar Oxoid catalog number CM0325 (Oxoid is now a part of Thermo Fisher Scientific) MPC is a
dehydrated bacterial growth media with casein enzymic hydrolysate, yeast extract, dextrose and agar.
The different agar media were autoclaved before preparing the petri dished, which were done inside of and
laminar flow.
Colonies were counted after incubation and converted into log CFU/ml. Log reductions were calculated by
subtracting the log CFU/ml at a given dose from the initial log CFU/ml obtained at the start of the experiment.
13.4
Lyras UV-C pilot unit
13.5
Pre-trial
A series of tests were run prior to flowthrough experiments in order to assess process parameters of Lyras pilot
unit.
13.5.0.1
Bacterial pellet storage stability using L.Cremoris
Lab technician gives the strain from the collection of research group DTUFood Lisbeth Truelstrup.
L. cremoris was used as inoculum 250 mL with Brain Heart infused (BHI) + 1% glucose media and incubated
for 42 hours (h) at 30°degrees. Cells were pelleted, washed with maximum recovery diluent, and centrifuged
again for 10 min. The excess of reagent was removed carefully and the pellet of cells was re-suspended in
eppendorf tubes with 20 mL of maximum recovery diluent, and stored at 5°C refrigerator inside a dark ice-
bucket. The durability of the viability of cells was assessed at T0: after 42 h incubation, T1:6 h, T2:24 h, T3:30
h, T4:48 h and T5: 54 h of storage respectively. The resulting CFU/ml was determined by platting technical
replicates in serial dilutions on M17 and enumeration after 48 h incubation at 30 °C in the dark.
Page 26 of 74
==PAGE:32==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
13.5.0.2
Particle residence time in coils
Flowthrough test was carried out at constant volumetric flow for the different types of milk in order to make
inferences about the effects of fat content. Lyras pilot unit allow to modulate the process parameter to reach
a constant flow via the motor speed (%) in conjunction of modulating the pressure in each independent pump.
The technical limiting factor are the pumps, with a maximum pressure of 6.5Bars and operational limit of 6Bar
The motor the speed was kept constant 75%, and was being monitored the pressure of each pump. The order
of pouring the milk in the deposit/inlet was from lower fat content to highest. Lyras pilot unit was running
with water until was reached steady conditions. The test was run using a solution of milk saturated with food
colorant as a tracer, to estimate the residence time distribution (RTD) of each type of milk type, SKM, SSKM,
WHM and CM. First 3L of milk type were added to the systems via the inlet. Then 2L of colored milk and
was measured the time it took for each coil to be color saturated. Followed with 3L of the same type of milk to
remove any color particles from the coils before repeating the same process with the next type of milk.
13.5.0.3
Cell distribution in Lyras pilot-unit deposit and coils
L. cremoris is used as inoculum in a volume of 2000 mL growth media. The pelleted cells were stored at 5°C
refrigerator inside a dark ice-bucket overnight. The following day the cells are resuspended in 1 L in SSKM and
homogenized to brake cells agglomerates with a stomacher. 10 L of SSKM were poured in the deposit of Lyras
pilot unit, the re-suspended cells were added and topped with 10 L more of SSKM. The tank was thoroughly
hand-mixed. While, Lyras pilot unit was running with water to reach steady conditions of volumetric flow of 65
L/h. Then, it was switched to the fluid in the deposit of the unit. Temperature was monitored at inlet and outlet,
as pressure of each pump. Samples were taken as seen in table 13.5.0.3. The resulting CFU/ml was determined
by plating technical replicates after serial dilutions on M17 agar plates and enumeration was done after 48 h
incubation at 30 °C in the dark.
The experiment was repeated with changes in the position of the outlet in an attempt to minimize the pressure
difference between pump1 and pump2. The outlet was lifted to the same plane as pump2 in the pilot unit to add
hydrostatic pressure. Cell harvesting, Lyras pilot unit operational process, samples collection and plating were
kept equal. The resulting CFU/mL was determined by plating technical replicates after serial dilutions on M17
and enumeration was done after 48 h incubation at 30 °C in the dark.
13.6
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris
L. cremoris was inoculated in a volume of 1.5 L of growth media. The cells were pelleted and stored at 5°C in
a refrigerator inside a dark ice-bucket overnight. The following day the cells were resuspended in 1 L SSKM
and homogenized to brake cells agglomerates using a stomacher. Twenty-one L of SSKM were poured into
the deposit of Lyras pilot unit, with the re-suspended cells and the tank is thoroughly mixed. Steady state was
reached in Lyras pilot unit with running water at volumetric flow of 65 L/h. Then, it was switched to inlet
through the deposit. Temperature was monitored in the inlet and outlet, as the pressure of each pump. Samples
were taken as presented in table 9 below. The resulting CFU/ml was determined by plating technical replicates
after serial dilutions on M17 and enumeration was done after 48 h incubation at 30 °C in the dark.
Page 27 of 74
==PAGE:33==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 9: Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris sample collection biological test1
Sample
Running time
UV-C settings
Place
E0
SKM
A
0s
O
Tank
0
B
120s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
C
220 s
35 W/m2
Aseptic2
350 mW/m2
D
320s
25 W/m2
Aseptic2
250 mW/m2
E
420s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
F
520s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
WHM
A
0s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 mW/m2
B
120s
90 W/m2
Aseptic2
900 mW/m2
C
240 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
D
360 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
E
480 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
F
500 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
G
620 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
H
740 s
13 W/m2
Aseptic2
130 mW/m2
I
860 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
Running time refers to flowthrough running time of Lyras pilot unit. UV-C settings are the setting in the
monitor of Lyras pilot unit UV-C effect is after being irradiated only in coil1 when samples are taken in aseptic1
or faucet1, receiving half of the treatment, or when samples are taken from aseptic2 or faucet2, where samples
have received the full treatment.
A biological duplicate with SKM, SSKM, WHM and CM was carried out. It was inoculated a volume of
1500 ml per type of milk, a total of 6000 ml. Cell harvesting and Lyras operational process parameters were
kept equal. The coils of Lyras pilot unit were washed between tests with 18 L of boiling water and running
them through the system with UV-C lights on.
Samples were taken as presented in Table 10. The resulting CFU/ml was determined by plating technical
replicates after serial dilutions on 1% lactose+MPC agar plates and enumeration after 48 h incubation at 30 °C
in the dark.
Page 28 of 74
==PAGE:34==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 10: Flow-through Lyras pilot unit L. cremoris sample collection biological test2
Sample
Running time
UV-C settings
Place
E0
SKM
A
0 s
O W/m2
Tank
0 mW/m2
B
158 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
C
241 s
60 W/m2
Aseptic2
600 mW/m2
D
356 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
E
476 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
F
596 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
G
714 s
13 W/m2
Aseptic2
130 mW/m2
H
814 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
SSKM
A
0 s
O W/m2
Tank
0 mW/m2
B
120 s
90 W/m2
Aseptic2
900 mW/m2
C
179 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
D
288 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
E
401 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
F
520 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
G
645 s
13 W/m2
Aseptic2
130 mW/m2
H
745 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
WHM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 mW/m2
B
124 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
C
180 s
35 W/m2
Aseptic2
350 mW/m2
D
274 s
25 W/m2
Aseptic2
250 mW/m2
E
343 s
14 W/m2
Aseptic2
140 mW/m2
F
438 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
CM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 W/m2
B
100 s
100 W/m2
Aseptic2
1000 mW/m2
C
166 s
75 W/m2
Aseptic2
750 mW/m2
D
230 s
50 W/m2
Aseptic2
500 mW/m2
E
340 s
35 W/m2
Aseptic2
350 mW/m2
F
460 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
G
580 s
14 W/m2
Aseptic2
140 mW/m2
H
640 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
13.7
Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens 500090
P.fluorescense500090 was used as inoculum to a volume of 6000 ml growth media. The cells were pelleted and
stored at 5°C refrigerator inside a dark ice-bucket overnight. The following day the cells were resuspended in
1 L of the different types of milk, they were homogenized in a stomacher. While, it was reached steady state in
Lyras pilot unit using water. Then, each type of milk with the inoculum was poured with 21L of milk into the
deposit of Lyras pilot unit and thoroughly hand mixed. The order for each test was SKM, then SSKM, followed
by WHM and lastly CM. The coils of Lyras pilot unit were washed between tests with 18 L of boiling water
and running them through the system with UV-C lights on. Flowthrough tests were at volumetric flow of 65L/h.
Temperature was monitored in the inlet and outlet, as the pressure in each pump.
Samples were taken as presented in table 11. The resulting CFU/ml was determined by plating technical
replicates after serial dilutions on MPC agar plates and enumeration was done after 24 h incubation at 25 °C in
the dark.
Page 29 of 74
==PAGE:35==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 11: Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens sample collection biological test1
Sample
Running ime
UV-C settings
Place
E0
SKM
A
0 s
O
Tank
0
B
120 s
110 W/m2
Aseptic2
110O MW/m2
C
230 s
85 W/m2
Aseptic2
85W/m2
D
330 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
70 W/m2
E
430 s
50 W/m2
Aseptic2
50W/m2
F
520 s
40 W/m2
Aseptic2
40W/m2
G
630 s
30W/m2
Aseptic2
30W/m2
H
730 s
20W/m2
Aseptic2
20W/m2
I
840 s
15W/m2
Aseptic2
15W/m2
J
920 s
0W/m2
Aseptic2
0W/m2
SSKM
A
0 s
O
Tank
0
B
120 s
110 W/m2
Aseptic2
110W/m2
C
230 s
85 W/m2
Aseptic2
85W/m2
D
330 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
E
430 s
50 W/m2
Aseptic2
500 mW/m2
F
520 s
40 W/m2
Aseptic2
400 mW/m2
G
630 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
H
730 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
I
840 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
J
920 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
WHM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 W/m2
B
120 s
110 W/m2
Aseptic2
1100 mW/m2
C
220 s
85 W/m2
Aseptic2
850 mW/m2
D
330 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
E
430 s
50 W/m2
Aseptic2
500 mW/m2
F
520 s
40 W/m2
Aseptic2
400 mW/m2
G
637 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
H
757 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
I
840 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
J
920 s
0W/m2
Aseptic2
0W/m2
CM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 mW/m2
B
120 s
110 W/m2
Aseptic2
1100 mW/m2
C
220 s
85 W/m2
Aseptic2
850 mW/m2
D
320 s
70 W/m2
Aseptic2
700 mW/m2
E
430 s
50 W/m2
Aseptic2
500 mW/m2
F
520 s
40 W/m2
Aseptic2
400 mW/m2
G
640 s
30 W/m2
Aseptic2
300 mW/m2
H
800 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
I
980 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
J
1060 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
A biological replicate was done using 26L of each type of milk. Cell harvesting, inoculum preparation and
flowthrough process parameters were kept equal.
Samples were taken as presented in table 12. The resulting CFU/mL was determined by plating technical
replicates after serial dilutions on MPC agar plates and enumeration was done after 24 h incubation at 25 °C in
the dark.
Page 30 of 74
==PAGE:36==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 12: Flow-through Lyras pilot unit P.fluorescens sample collection biological test2
Sample
Running time
UV-C settings
Place
E0
SSKM
A
0s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 W/m2
B
120s
110W/m2
Faucet1
550 mW/m2
C
135 s
110 W/m2
Faucet2
1100 mW/m2
D
172s
70 W/m2
Faucet1
350 mW/m2
E
199 s
70 W/m2
Faucet2
700 mW/m2
F
286 s
46 W/m2
Aseptic1
230 mW/m2
G
306 s
46 W/m2
Aseptic2
460 mW/m2
H
401 s
28 W/m2
Aseptic1
140 mW/m2
I
429 s
28 W/m2
Aseptic2
280 mW/m2
J
537 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic1
100 mW/m2
K
554 s
20 W/m2
Aseptic2
200 mW/m2
L
670 s
16 W/m2
Aseptic1
80 mW/m2
M
963 s
16 W/m2
Aseptic2
16W/m2
N
980 s
12 W/m2
Aseptic1
60 mW/m2
O
1077 s
12 W/m2
Aseptic2
120 mW/m2
P
1180 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
WHM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 W/m2
B
90 s
110 W/m2
Faucet2
1100 mW/m2
C
217 s
80 W/m2
Faucet2
800 mW/m2
D
340 s
60 W/m2
Aseptic2
600 mW/m2
E
438 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
F
536 s
35 W/m2
Aseptic2
350 mW/m2
G
628 s
25 W/m2
Aseptic2
250 mW/m2
H
736 s
18 W/m2
Aseptic1
90 mW/m2
I
802 s
18 W/m2
Aseptic2
180 mW/m2
J
1000 s
14 W/m2
Aseptic1
70 mW/m2
K
1038 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
L
1090 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
CM
A
0 s
0 W/m2
Tank
0 W/m2
B
147 s
110 W/m2
Aseptic2
1100 mW/m2
C
248 s
80 W/m2
Faucet2
800 mW/m2
D
330 s
60 W/m2
Aseptic2
600 mW/m2
E
424 s
45 W/m2
Aseptic2
450 mW/m2
F
535 s
35 W/m2
Aseptic2
350 mW/m2
G
637 s
25 W/m2
Aseptic2
250 mW/m2
H
724 s
18 W/m2
Aseptic1
60 mW/m2
I
773 s
18W/m2
Aseptic2
180 mW/m2
J
923 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic1
75 mW/m2
K
1000 s
15 W/m2
Aseptic2
150 mW/m2
L
1090 s
0 W/m2
Aseptic2
0 mW/m2
13.8
Collimated beam apparatus
The cells were cultured and harvested as presented in table 6. Then they were re-suspended in 300 ml of 0,9%
sodium chloride, until they reached an optical density at 600nm wavelength of 0,1. Twenty ml of suspended
cells were added to each petri dish and placed under the collimated beam UV light apparatus (DTU Environ-
ment, Lyngby, Denmark). Light source was generated with OSRAM Germicidial Mercury Lamps with 254
nm wavelength output (Puritec HNS 8W, G5, G8T5/OF, RG3, Italy) and was turned on for 30 min prior to
run the tests in order to stabilize the lamp output intensity. A quarts filter was placed after the lamp to ensure
Page 31 of 74
==PAGE:37==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
only 254nm wavelength pass through. UV light was measured using as a detector UVX radiometer (UVP,
California, US) in the middle of the exposure field and centered to the beam of light, at 34.24 cm distance from
the light source, the sensor of the radiometer is at 0.86 cm from the base where the petri dish is placed. The
incident light of the lamp was collimated with a tube. Mixing of the particles in the samples was created using
a sterilized magnetic stirrer, the speed was controlled to not create a vortex in the media. Stirring was initiated
2 s before UV-C irradiation. To regulate time of exposure (s) a piece of cardboard was used as shutter. A new
petri dish was used for each exposure, with each exposure time done in triplicates. Samples were exposed to
UV-C irradiation from highest to lowest dose (mJ/m−2).
Table 13: Collimated beam apparatus set up: dimension of petri dish where sample were placed
Parameter
Value
Diameter (cm)
5
Plastic thickness (cm)
0,1
Surface area (cm2)
19,63
Volume (cm3)
20
Water depth in petri dish (cm)
0,76
Table 14: L.cremoris collimated beam light apparatus biological test1
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,016
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,111
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,99
Divergent factor
0,97
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,10
Desired UV-C dose (mJ/cm2)
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1,2 mJ/cm2
10 s
1,8 mJ/cm2
15 s
2,4 mJ/cm2
20 s
3,6 mJ/cm2
34 s
4,9 mJ/cm2
47 s
6,1 mJ/cm2
58 s
9,1 mJ/cm2
86 s
Page 32 of 74
==PAGE:38==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 15: L.cremoris collimated beam light apparatus biological test2
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,017
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,113
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,99
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,11
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1,2 mJ/cm2
12 s
1,8 mJ/cm2
17 s
2,4 mJ/cm2
23 s
3,6 mJ/cm2
34 s
4,9 mJ/cm2
47 s
6,1 mJ/cm2
58 s
9,1 mJ/cm2
86 s
Table 16: P.fluorescens50090 collimated beam light apparatus biological test1
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,001
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,110
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
1
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,10
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1,2 mJ/cm2
12 s
1,8 mJ/cm2
17 s
2,4 mJ/cm2
23 s
3,5 mJ/cm2
34 s
4,7 mJ/cm2
46 s
6 mJ/cm2
57s
9 mJ/cm2
86 s
Page 33 of 74
==PAGE:39==
13
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 17: P.fluorescens50090 collimated beam light apparatus biological test2
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,01
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,112
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,99
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,11
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1,2 mJ/cm2
12 s
1,8 mJ/cm2
17 s
2,3 mJ/cm2
23 s
3,5 mJ/cm2
34 s
4,7 mJ/cm2
46 s
6 mJ/cm2
57 s
9 mJ/cm2
86 s
Page 34 of 74
==PAGE:40==
14
DATA ANALYSIS
Rosa de Nova s193148
14
Data analysis
Data analysis is performed with GraphPad Prism9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Data is pre-
sented as means ± standard error of mean (SEM). Confidence interval is established at 95% for all the statistical
analysis.
14.0.0.1
Bacterial pellet stability
Bacterial pellet stability analysis was performed by descriptive statistics and simple linear regression De-
scriptive statistics display the mean, standard error of mean and coefficient of variation, which shows the extent
of variability in relation to the mean of the population. Linear regression, represents a line that minimizes the
sum of the squared errors. This is complemented with a residual plot where the deviations of data from the
model are depicted. The p-value of the linear regression analysis assess the statistically significant relationship
between each predictor variable and the response variable. When p-value <0,05 the null hypothesis of not
variance can not be rejected.
14.0.0.2
Pre-trials process parameters
To asses the process parameters in Lyras pilot unit the variables pressure, volumetric flow and temperature
were monitored. It was performed descriptive statics analysis, followed by a comparative analysis between
performance parameters for the different types of fat content in milk.
Particle residence time was assessed visually and assumed an uncertainty of ±3s
To assess the effectiveness of adding hydrostatic pressure to outlet to reduce difference of pressure between
pumps was assessed with descriptive statistics and T-test. A p-value<0,05 indicates that the null hypothesis of
not variance can not be rejected.
14.0.0.3
Cell mixing
To assess cell distribution during flowthrough, hence particle distribution through deposit and coils was
performed a linear regression and plotting of the residuals.
14.0.0.4
UV-C dosesur face delivered to coil1 and coil2
Variance of UV-C dosesur face delivered to cells in coil1 or coil1+coil2 were assessed with a one-way anal-
ysis of variance (ANOVA).
It was complemented with a T-test were the control was coil1+coil2 (full treatment) and coil1 (half treatment)
was assessed if there is variance
14.0.0.5
Lyras flowthrough tests
Page 35 of 74
==PAGE:41==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Lyras flowthrough tests was analyzed with descriptive statistics, and TWO-WAY ANOVA, where the vari-
ables of fat content and UV-C settings of Lyras pilot unit were cross-checked.
14.0.0.6
Biodosimetry assay
Dose response log inactivation are graphed and k-values are assessed with log linear regression when fol-
lowing a first order kinetics inactivation pattern.
Outliers are remove using the method ROUT methods, which combines a robust regression and outlier re-
moval.
14.0.0.7
Mathematical model fitting
To assess a good fit of the linear model is required a R2¿0,9.
The assess the impact of the UV-C settings in Lyras pilot unit, UV-dosesur face and RED UV-C delivered
to each model organism in the different types of milk is done a multivariate analysis of correlation. Parson´s
r value, 1¿r¡0.5 positive strong correlation. 0.5¿r¡0 positive weak correlation. r=0 no correlation. 0¿r¡-0.5
negative weak correlation and -0.5¿r¡-1 strong negative correlation.
15
Results
15.1
Pre-trials
15.1.1
Results Bacterial pellet storage stability using L.Cremoris
This test allowed us to assess the time frame where the flowthrough experiments in Lyras pilot unit could be
run safely with cultured stable cells in stationary phase.
The hypothesis to test is if there were changes in the viability of the pelleted cell population after 48 hours
of cold dark storage. Null hypothesis stated that there were no relationship between cell stability and storing
time.
Page 36 of 74
==PAGE:42==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 13: Cell pellet stability stored in cold dark environment over time
The pelleted cells show a fluctuation over time of 0.4% coefficient of variation. During 48h the average log
CFU/ml is 11.04 ± 0.02, with a minimum of 10.98 log CFU/ml, and maximum of 11.09 log CFU/ml.
Linear regression model analysis provides a p-value of 0,77. The residual plot show a normal distributed
curve, satisfying the assumption of the normality of the residuals by not showing any patterns in the value of
the residuals as times move along during 48h of cold storage.
Figure 14: Residual plot of observation from cell stability test
It can be inferred that there is no significant variance (p¿0,05) of the pelleted cell populations stored in a
cold dark environment for 48h. The results are coherent with literature which suggest that L.cremoris has they
maintain their protein synthesis capacity during starvation for 6 days [26].
This information was important when preparing for the flowthrough test indicating that the cells could be
harvested and stored the day prior to the inactivation experiments with a high certainty that the population was
stable and not in exponential growth, as the inactivation dynamics of the microorganism changes in the different
states.
Page 37 of 74
==PAGE:43==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
15.1.2
Process parameters Lyras pilot-unit
The hypothesis to test was if running Lyras pilot unit at constant speed motor of 75% the process parameters
changed with the different fat content in milk. It was monitored volumetric flow, pressure in each pump, the
residence time distribution of particles in each coil, and temperature of inlet and outlet.
Lyras pilot unit technical critical limits are the pumps pressure, set to 7bar, above it, their durability declines
exponentially (Lyras A/S). A safety buffer of 6.5 bar was established, and operational limit of 6bar. Resident
time distribution is assessed visually when the coils are fully color saturated, therefore it is considered an
uncertainty of ±3s. Table 19 presents a summary of the parameters monitored:
Table 18: Lyras pilot unit process parameters when keeping motor speed at 75% using SKM, SSKM, WHM
and CM
Skim milk
semi skim milk
whole milk
Cream milk
Volumetric flow (L/h)
73 ± 1.6
68 ± 20
63 ± 2.30
66 ± 3.10
Pump1 (bar)
4.9 ± 0.1
5.4 ± 0.2
5.6 ± 0.4
5.8 ± 0.4
Pump2(bar)
4.5 ± 0.1
4.8 ± 0.1
4.9 ± 0.2
5.2 ± 0.2
Residence time distribution coil1 (s)
29± 3
41 ± 3
35 ± 3
43± 3
Residence time distribution coil2 (s)
32± 3
35 ± 3
36 ± 3
34 ± 3
Table 19: Process parameters of Lyras pilot unit when keeping constant motor speed at 75% using different
types of fat content in milk.
From the Table 19 can be observed that there is an increase of viscosity, paired to increased fat content in
milk. Milk fat is displayed as suspended globule as the dispersed phase of the oil/water solution [41]. Milk
with higher fat content (WHM and CM) display a more viscous fluid behaviour, increasingly resisting the act
of deformation or flow, and requiring a higher shear stress force applied by the pumps, thus resulting in an
increased of pressure needed. SKM needs 6,25% less pressure to achieve 7,35% faster volumetric flow than
SSKM. WHM uses 3,7% more pressure in pump1 and 2,8% in pump2 for a 2,94% lower volumetric flow
compared to SKKM.CM needs 3,75% increased pressure in pump1 and 6,12% in pump2 to reach a volumetric
flow 4,55% lower than SSKM.
The operational limit of maximum pump pressure of 6Bar demanded to adjust the process parameters, and
run further experiments at a constant volumetric flow of 65 L/h for all types of milk.
The stimulus-response technique by impulsion, using a food color saturated milk solution as a tracer, was
applied to estimate the residence time distribution. At 65 L/h residence distribution time for SKM is 25±3 s
coil1 and 28±3 s coil2, SSKM 39±3 s coil1 and 33±3 s coil2, WHM 35±3 s coil1 and 36±3 s coil2, CM 44±3 s
coil1 and 35±3 s coil2. Residence time in the coils increases paired with the increased fat content in the milk.
Compared to SKM, SSKM and WHM increased an average residence time of 9,5% and 13% for CM.
Particle mixing in the deposit and coils of Lyras pilot unit was assessed after reaching steady conditions at
volumetric flow of 65 L/h, using SSKM, L.cremoris without engaging the UV-C cassette. Volumetric flow,
temperature in inlet and outlet and pressure in each pumps were monitored while taking samples to check cell
distribution over time running the unit.
Page 38 of 74
==PAGE:44==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 15: Volumetric flow monitored during pre-
trial SSKM flowthrough in Lyras pilot unit with no
UV-C treatment
Figure 16: Temperature monitored during pre-trial
SSKM flowthrough in Lyras pilot unit with no UV-
C treatment
Temperature in inlet is 6.7±1.3 °C and coefficient of variance of 20%, which is explained by filling the
deposit with product stored in cold 5°C and temperature over time rises since the deposit/inlet does not have a
refrigeration system.
Temperature in outlet 22±2.8 °C and coefficient of variation 13%. The difference of temperature between
inlet and outlet is explained by fluid mechanics. A viscous fluid is unable to store any deformation energy
when applied shear stress during the pumping, which leads to flowing of the liquid through the pathways and
the deformation energy is dissipated as heat, resulting in a rise of temperature[41]. The thermal exposure
difference between inlet and outlet is 15,5 ±2,7 ◦C. The increased temperature from outlet to inlet explain a
lower residence time distribution in coil2. Higher temperature decreases viscosity.
There is a constant difference of pressure between pump1 and pump2. The pressure needed to pump the fluid
from the inlet to coil1 is higher since the fluidic pathway is longer and there is a quite accentuated bend, as can
be seen in the diagram of the pilot unit in Figure 8.
The hypothesis tested was that if lifting the outlet, just after coil2, would introduce hydrostatic pressure,
reducing the difference of pressure between pumps.
Page 39 of 74
==PAGE:45==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 17: Graphical representation of pressure monitoring of pump1 and pump2 of running of Lyras pilot unit
with added hydrostatic pressure to the outlet and without
Without changing position of outlet the average pressure of pump1 is 5.4±0.02bars and pump2 4.9±0.02
Adding hydrostatic pressure to outlet, pump1 is 4.9±0.03bars and pump2 4.4±0.04 bars.
A t-test comparing the pressure difference between pumps while running the pilot unit is performed. The
control is the difference between pumps without adding pressure, and the treated column compared against is
the difference between pumps when is added hydrostatic pressure
Figure 18: Graphical representation of pressure difference between pumps of Lyras pilot unit with treatment
(added hydrostatic pressure) and without
T-test show a P-value of 0.023 showing significant variance (p¡0.05). The added hydrostatic pressure reduced
significantly the difference of pressure applied by the pumps in each coil of Lyras pilot unit. Therefore, further
Page 40 of 74
==PAGE:46==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
flowthrough test were set up lifting the outlet to the same plane as coil2.
It was assessed particle mixing and cell homogenization during flowthrough in Lyras pilot unit using mi-
croorganism L.Cremoris without UV-C exposure. Samples were taken as shown in Table 20. The hypothesis
to be tested was if there is a variance of cell distribution over time in the deposit and coils. The first sample,
taken directly from the deposit is considered an outlier and is been removed since it hasn’t passed through the
flowthrough system.
Figure 19: Graphical representation of cell mixing through the coils of Lyras pilot unit flowthrough
The distribution of cells over time shows and extent of variability in relation to the mean of the population
of 3.1%, known as the coefficient of variation. Throughout the whole deposit the average log CFU/ml is 6.81±
0.05, with a minimum of 6.45 log CFU/ml, and maximum of 7.12 log CFU/ml.
The plot of the residuals shows a pattern of distribution of the observations over time. Which can be explained
by how the inoculum was added in the deposit of Lyras pilot unit. Cell inoculum was homogenized with a
stomacher before adding to the deposit. The deposit was filled in the following fashion, first 10L milk, then the
1L of the homogenized cells inoculum, and topped with another 10L of milk. The mixing in the deposit was
done by hand in circular motions. The first samples shown are samples from the bottom of the deposit being
introduced to the system by the inlet. And the last observations are from the top of the container.
Figure 20: Graphical representation of residuals of linear regression of cell mixing in Lyras pilot unit
Linear regression analysis provides a p-value of 0,008. It shows that the cells slightly precipitated to the
bottom. However the predominance of cells remained in suspension in the center of the deposit, where the
maximum 7.12 log CFU/ml is found. The minimum values of 6.45 log CFU/ml are from the top of the deposit.
Page 41 of 74
==PAGE:47==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
It can be inferred that the cells remain in suspension in a moderate homogenized distribution through the
deposit, inlet and the two coils of Lyras pilot unit.
L.cremoris has a tendency to cell aggregation, however with the assay to count colonies in petri dish plates
can not be assess if this situation happened during the test. Bacterial aggregate show up as a single colony when
plated.
It proceed to test the hypothesis of a difference of UV-DOSEsur face between the two coils using P. Flores-
cence in WHM. This is done by taking samples from aseptic1 for coil1 and aseptic2 for coil2 after the product
being expose to same UV-C settings in Lyras pilot unit.
Figure 21: Comparison of UV-C treatment after exposure coil1 and after exposure to coil1+coil2 in Lyras pilot
unit
After doing a one-way ANOVA shows an overall P value of 0,9988, which is quite large, indicating that the
observations do not give any reason to assume that the means differ among the different UV-treatments. The
results are based in 3 observations with technical replicates. Counts of colonies were within limits of detection
25-250 CFU/ml.
It can be inferred that there is not enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis, therefore assessing that
particles receive the same treatment in coil1 and coil2 of Lyras pilot unit.
The unit has maximum volume capacity of of 26 L, and a minimum UV-C settings of 12 W/m2, which
conditions the number of samples being able to collect when running the unit at constant volumetric flow of
65 L/h considering the specific particle residence time for each type of milk. This information allowed us to
take more samples, where UV settings are kept the same but E0 is half treatment when the sample is collected
from aseptic1 or faucet1, and E0 is full treatment when the sample is collected in aseptic2/faucet2. This way
allowing to collect more samples to develop a more robust model for predicting the inactivation kinetics of the
model organism.
Page 42 of 74
==PAGE:48==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
15.2
Flowthrough UV-C exposure
15.2.0.1
L.cremoris
Process parameters were monitored during flowthrough tests. For SKM the average inlet temperatures is
6.5±0.6 ◦C, outlet of 25.4±1.9 ◦C with an average difference of 18.7◦C. Pump1 average 4.58±0.02 bars, pump2
is 4.24±0.16 bars, average difference of 0.34 bars, average flow is 63.88±0.99 L/h.
For SSKM the average inlet temperatures is 5.9±0.3 ◦C, outlet of 25.3±1.9 ◦C with an average difference of
19.4◦C. Pump1 average 4.93±0.05 bars, pump2 is 4.45±0.05bars, average difference of 0.48 bars, average flow
is 65.17±0.40 L/h.
For WHM the average inlet temperatures is 6.1±0.3 ◦C, outlet of 23.0±1.7 ◦C with an average difference of
19.8◦C. Pump1 average 5.20±0.13 bars, pump2 is 4.70±0.08bars, average difference of 0.5 bars, average flow
is 67.00±1.30 L/h.
For CM the average inlet temperatures is 6.5±0.1 ◦C, outlet of 27.9±0.3 ◦C with an average difference of
21.4◦C. Pump1 average 4.9±0.06 bars, pump2 is 5.22±0.04 bars, average difference of 0.68 bars, average flow
is 65.33±0.04 L/h.
Figure 22: Monitoring of pressure, volumetric flow and temperature of biological replicate1 L.cremoris
flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit
Figure 23: Monitoring of pressure, volumetric flow and temperature of biological replicate2 L.cremoris
flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit
The average temperature difference between coil1 and coil2 increases as the fat content in milk increases
due to rise of pressure needed to maintain a quasi constant volumetric flow, with a variance not being statically
significant of 1,9%. The increased fat content in milk is paired with an increased difference of pressure between
pumps and difference of temperature between inlet and outlet. The difference of pressure between pumps
increases 30.1% in SSKM compared with SKM, and with it the difference temperature between coil1 and coil2
of 3.24%. There is an increase of pressure difference of 32.5% and temperature of 5.34% for WHM versus
SKM. There is an increase of pressure difference of 50.6% and temperature of 12.44% for CM versus SKM.
There might be fraction of heat transfer due to the running of the UV-C treatment over time. As mentioned
the extended use of the LPM lamps reach a temperature of 40◦C. Lyras pilot unit has integrated a fan system
to dissipate the heat generated but there is a possibility that there is a gradient of heat transfer from the light
source to the coil surface and to the product.
Page 43 of 74
==PAGE:49==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 24: Graphical representation of Lyras pilot unit parameters variance based on different types of milk
with L.cremoris
The change of temperature affects fluid dynamics, it may affect the exposure of particles to the treatment
by having different flows dynamics, from unidirectional laminar to fully turbulent flow. It is assessed by the
De number for each coil based on the change of density and viscosity of the product due to the variance of
temperature between coils.
Below the log reduction of L.cremoris after UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot unit is presented. All observations
were within limits of detection. FDA establishes the suitable colony counting range is 25-250 CFU/ml [42]
and the calculated limit of detection based on the platting technique is 0.6 log CFU/ml. Log(N0)for SKM is
6.88±0.12, SSKM 6.49, WHM 6.82±0.01 and CM 7.05.
Figure 25: Log reduction of L.cremoris in flowthrough test Lyras pilot unit
SKM and SSKM have a similar log reduction., SKM had an average of 3,309, SSKM of 3,313. The variance
between means is 3,5%, which is not statically significant, thus making the treatment to SKM comparable
to SSKM. WHM has an average if 2,63 and CM of 2,68, having a variance of 4%, which is not statically
significant, allowing WHM and CM to be treated as analogous low transmittance substrates. The variance
Page 44 of 74
==PAGE:50==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
between means of SKM-SSKM and WHM-CM is 67±3% making them quite distinctive groups.
At UV-setting of 45-50 W/m, SKM and SSKM achieved a log reduction of 4.36 and WHM and CM of 3.65
and 3.41 respectively. It is followed by a tailing effect in all the different types of milk. SKM and SSKM
achieved 0.83±0.17 log reduction more compared to WHM and CM. The higher efficacy of UV-C treatment
in SKM and SSKM is also present in the tail. SKM and SSKM median was 3.71±0.05, 75% percentiles of
4.34±0.02 and maximum of 4.41±0.01 log reduction. WHM and CM had a median of 2.901±0.02, their 75%
percentiles was 3.66±0.03 and maximum of 3.70±0.03 log reduction.
It appears as the inactivation kinetics are affected by changes in the physico-chemical composition of the
milk. After certain exposure the organism shows a distribution of resistances, suggesting a residual population
after treatment.
Page 45 of 74
==PAGE:51==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 20: Results Lyras pilot unit flowthrough test, De number, Euv −c , UV-Dosesur face and log reduction
L.cremoris
UV-C settings
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
SKM
70
29
59
10.7 J/L
15400 mJ/m2
4.41 ±0.04
60
29
59
9.2 mJ/L
13200 mJ/m2
4.25 ±0.24
45
29
59
6.9 mJ/L
9900 mJ/m2
3.75±0.08
35
29
59
5.3 mJ/L
7700 mJ/m2
4.18±0.07
30
29
59
4.6 mJ/L
6600 mJ/m2
3.31±0.01
25
29
59
3.8 mJ/L
5500 mJ/m2
3.41±0.57
15
29
59
2.3 mJ/L
3300 mJ/m2
3.10±0.88
0
29
59
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
SSKM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
90
29
59
13.8 mJ/L
22500 mJ/m2
4.30 ±0.37
70
29
59
10.7 mJ/L
17500 mJ/m2
4.43 ±0.43
60
29
59
9.2 mJ/L
15000 mJ/m2
4.43±0.12
45
29
59
6.9 mJ/L
11250 mJ/m2
4.37±0.30
30
29
59
4.6 mJ/L
7500 mJ/m2
3.72 ±0.41
25
29
59
3.8 mJ/L
6250 mJ/m2
3.57 ±0.07
15
29
59
2.3 mJ/L
3750 mJ/m2
2.81±0.26
0
29
59
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
WHM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
90
24
51
13.8 mJ/L
32400 mJ/m2
3.59±0.6
70
24
51
10.7 mJ/L
25200 mJ/m2
3.29±0.20
45
24
51
6.9 mJ/L
16200 mJ/m2
3.65±0.64
35
24
51
5.3 mJ/L
12600 mJ/m2
2.77±0.07
25
24
51
3.8 mJ/L
9000 mJ/m2
3.20±0.12
20
24
51
3.0 mJ/L
7200 mJ/m2
2.18±0.02
15
24
51
2.3 mJ/L
5400 mJ/m2
2.95±0.09
0
24
51
0 mJ/L
0J/m2
0
CM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
100
23
49
15.3 mJ/L
32000 mJ/m2
3.18 ±0.43
70
23
49
11.5 mJ/L
24000 mJ/m2
3.79 ±0.32
50
23
49
7.6 mJ/L
16000 mJ/m2
3.41±0.54
35
23
49
5.3 mJ/L
11200 mJ/m2
3.09±0.10
20
23
49
3.0 mJ/L
6400 mJ/m2
2.92 ±0.02
15
23
49
2.3 mJ/L
4800 mJ/m2
2.41±0.40
0
23
49
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
De number indicates that all the types of milk have a unidirectional flow in coil1 since De <40, and there
was evidence of secondary flow in coil2 since De were between 40 and 60. In Figure 9 can be seen a graphical
representation of a secondary flow. The secondary flow splits the unidirectional flow with a diameter of 4 mm
into two vortexes of 2 mm each, this condition happens in WHM and CM. For SKM and SSKM behaving like
Page 46 of 74
==PAGE:52==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Newtonian fluids and being independent to the shear stress can be considered as having turbulent flow. The
absorption of cream with 38% fat is 0.2, same as WHM 0.2, and SKM is 0.1 in the first 0.5m. Transmittance of
effluence for the first 1mm is 79.4% for SKM and SSKM, and 63.1% for WHM and CM.
The turbulent flow of SKM and SSKM allows to considered as all the particles received statically the same
exposure and at 7500 mJ/m2 they have an specific log reduction of 4.18 and 3.72 respectively. It requires an
increment of 220% UV-dosesur face, 16500 mJ/m2, to achieve a log reduction of 3.65±0.64 for WHM, and 3.41
for CM. The increased viscosity difficult particle mixing in coil1, where there is unidirectional laminar flow.
The increased turbidity lowers transmittance allowing UV-C treatment to only the first layer of 0.5 mm, when
the coil radius is 2 mm. In coil2 has been achieved two vortexes of 1 mm radius each, doubling the exposure
of particles to the surface. The lower log reduction achieved in WHM and CM is explained by the increase in
fat content, were reflexion and refractive indices are increased and possibly bacterial shielding, hindering the
inactivation capability.
A two-way ANOVA assessing the effect of fat in the change of log inactivation estimated that the fat content
in milk accounted for 31,41% of the total variance, p-value of 0,0004. The effect is considered extremely
significant, it was the driver of the difference of treatment between SKM-SSKM substrate and WHM-CM
substrate.
UV settings accounted for 55,11% of the total variance and the p-value is 0,0005. Being the effect considered
as the main driver for the variance of bacterial log reduction over time.
It was intended to repeat the test with more observations and points at lower exposures in order to make a
more robust modeling in the biodosemetry assay but it was not possible due to technical problems with the unit
that stopped working.
15.2.0.2
P.fluorescens
Process parameters were monitored during flowthrough tests.
For SKM the average inlet temperatures is 13.5±0.5 ◦C, outlet of 26.4±1.0◦C with an average difference of
14.60◦C. Pump1 average 4.19±0.01 bars, pump2 is 3.93±0.09 bars, average difference of 0.26 bars, average
flow is 64.67±0.07 L/h.
For SSKM the average inlet temperatures is 9.06±0.7 ◦C, outlet of 24.6±0.8 ◦C with an average difference
of 15.56◦C. Pump1 average 4.67±0.06 bars, pump2 is 4.33±0.02 bars, average difference of 0.35 bars, average
flow is 64.82±0.90 L/h.
For WHM the average inlet temperatures is 8.2±0.3 ◦C, outlet of 26.7±1.9 ◦C with an average difference of
18.5◦C. Pump1 average 5.72±0.05 bars, pump2 is 5.10±0.06 bars, average difference of 0.62 bars, average flow
is 64.00±0,80 L/h.
For CM the average inlet temperatures is 8.9±0.6 ◦C, outlet of 26.8±0.9 ◦C with an average difference of
17.92◦C. Pump1 average 5.89±0.8 bars, pump2 is 5.29±0.70 bars, average difference of 0.60 bars, average flow
is 65.67±1.60 L/h.
Page 47 of 74
==PAGE:53==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 26: Monitoring of pressure, volumetric flow and temperature of biological replicate1 P.fluorescens
flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit
Figure 27: Monitoring of pressure, volumetric flow and temperature of biological replicate2 P.fluorescens
flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit
As expected average temperature difference between coil1 and coil2 increases as the fat content in milk
increases while the unit is operated at constant volumetric flow. The difference of pressure between pumps
increases 25.7% in SSKM compared with SKM, and with it the difference temperature between coil1 and coil2
of 7.1%. There is an increase of pressure difference of 26.6% and temperature of 20% for WHM versus SKM,
and pressure difference of 56,3% and temperature of 19,5% when compared CM versus SKM.
Figure 28: Graphical representation of Lyras pilot unit parameters variance based on different types of milk
with P.fluorescens
Bellow in Figure 29 is presented the log reduction of P.fluorescens after UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot unit.
Outliers have been removed due to the increased uncertainty when CFU in plates were below the detection limit
of 0,6 log CFU/ml. Log(N0) for SKM is 7.22, SSKM 7.13±0.12, WHM 7.03±0.26 and CM 7.39±0.33.
Page 48 of 74
==PAGE:54==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 29: Specific log inactivation of P.fluorescens in Lyras pilot
At UV-setting of 40 W/m2 SKM had reached a log reduction of 5.22, SSKM of 5.74, WHM 4.51 and CM
of 3.7. CM has the lowest response to UV-treatment, its median log reduction is 2.37, 2.37, 75% percentile,
and maximum of 4.67. WHM median is 3.32, 75% percentile 4.86 and maximum 6.84 log reduction. SSKM
median of 3.44, 75% percentile 5.74 and maximum 7.05. SKM median of 5.22, 75% percentile 5.85 and
maximum 6.22. It can be inferred that increased fat content has an effect in the inactivation kinetics but there
is continuous inactivation, less than a tailing effect.
Table 21: Results of flowthrough test, De number, Euv−c , UV-Dosesur face and log reduction with L.cremoris
UV-C settings
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
SKM
110
29
59
16.9 mJ/L
24200 mJ/m2
6.22±0.12
85
29
59
13.0 mJ/L
18700 mJ/m2
5.97±0.23
50
29
59
7.6 mJ/L
11000 mJ/m2
5.75±0.8
40
29
59
6.1 mJ/L
8800 mJ/m2
5.22±0.2
30
29
59
4.6 mJ/L
6600 mJ/m2
5.22±0.1
20
29
59
3.0 mJ/L
4400 mJ/m2
4.05±0.48
15
29
59
2.3 mJ/L
3300 mJ/m2
3.22 ±0.3
0
29
59
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
SSKM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
110
29
59
16.9 mJ/L
27500 mJ/m2
7.31±0.1
85
29
59
13.7 mJ/L
21250 mJ/m2
5.30±0.6
55
29
59
8.4 mJ/L
13750 mJ/m2
5.47±0.3
50
29
59
7.0 mJ/L
12500 mJ/m2
5.75±0.1
46
29
59
6.1 mJ/L
11500 mJ/m2
6.13±0.3
40
29
59
5.3 mJ/L
10000 mJ/m2
5.22±0.05
Page 49 of 74
==PAGE:55==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
35
29
59
6.4 mJ/L
8750 mJ/m2
3.44±0.O6
28
29
59
5.3 mJ/L
7000 mJ/m2
3.32±0.1
23
29
59
3.5 mJ/L
5750 mJ/m2
2.61±0.08
20
29
59
3.0 mJ/L
5000 mJ/m2
3.58±0.4
16
29
59
2.4 mJ/L
4000 mJ/m2
1.99±0.08
15
29
59
2.3 mJ/L
3750 mJ/m2
3.22±0.4
14
29
59
2.1 mJ/L
3500 mJ/m2
1.89±0.54
12
29
59
1.8 mJ/L
3000 mJ/m2
1.44±0.8
10
29
59
1.5 mJ/L
2500 mJ/m2
0.89±0.1
0
29
59
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
WHM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
110
24
51
16.9 mJ/L
39600 mJ/m2
6.85±0.3
80
24
51
12.3 mJ/L
28800 mJ/m2
6.82±0.1
70
24
51
10.7 mJ/L
25200 mJ/m2
4.96±0.11
60
24
51
9.2 mJ/L
21600 mJ/m2
4.39±0.3
50
24
51
7.6 mJ/L
18800 mJ/m2
4.83±0.04
45
24
51
6.9 mJ/L
16200 mJ/m2
4.20±0.64
40
24
51
6.1 mJ/L
14400 mJ/m2
3.59±0.13
30
24
51
4.6 mJ/L
10800 mJ/m2
3.36 ±0.27
25
24
51
3.8 mJ/L
9000 mJ/m2
3.20±0.56
20
24
51
3.0 mJ/L
7200 mJ/m2
3.28±0.26
18
24
51
2.6 mJ/L
6480 mJ/m2
1.94±0.34
15
24
51
2.3 mJ/L
5400 mJ/m2
1.49±0.07
12
24
51
1.8 mJ/L
4320 mJ/m2
0.40±0.09
9
24
51
1.3 mJ/L
3240 mJ/m2
0.01±0.23
6
24
51
0.9 mJ/L
2160 mJ/m2
0.12±0.3
0
24
51
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
CM
De Coil1
De Coil2
Euv−c
UV-Dosesur face
Log reduction
110
23
49
16.9 mJ/L
35200 mJ/m2
5.63±0.19
70
23
49
10.8 mJ/L
22400 mJ/m2
5.33±0.09
50
23
49
7.7 mJ/L
16000 mJ/m2
3.48±0.9
40
23
49
6.2 mJ/L
12800 mJ/m2
3.18±0.2
35
24
51
5.4 mJ/L
11200 mJ/m2
3.42±0.08
30
23
49
4.6 mJ/L
9600 mJ/m2
3.09 ±0.07
25
24
51
3.8 mJ/L
8000 mJ/m2
2.18±0.91
Page 50 of 74
==PAGE:56==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
18
24
51
2.8 mJ/L
5760 mJ/m2
2.00±0.37
14
23
49
2.2 mJ/L
4480 mJ/m2
0.69±0.3
10
24
51
1.5 mJ/L
3200 mJ/m2
0.67±0.9
6
24
51
0.9 mJ/L
1920 mJ/m2
0.09±0.02
0
23
49
0 mJ/L
0 mJ/m2
0
SKM and SSKM have turbulent flow making more effective the delivery of treatment due to all the particles
being exposed to the surface of the coils. A UV-C dosesur face of 4400 mJ/m2 achieved log reduction of 4.5 at
for SKM and a log reduction of 3.58 with UV-C dosesur face 500J/m2.
The same situation occurred with WHM and CM as in the previous tests. In coil1 there is unidirectional
flow and in coil2 there are evidences of two vortex, doubling the exposure of particles to the surface compared
to coil1. For WHM and CM a UV-DOSEsur face of 14400 mJ/m2, achieves a log reduction of 3.59 and 3.48
respectively.
A two-way ANOVA analysis suggests that fat content accounts for 4.778% of the total variance, p-value of
0.0001, however the effect is not the main driver of the variance in log reduction of P.fluorescens.
UV settings accounts for 87.64% of the total variance, p-value is below 0.0001. This effect is considered
extremely significant and the leading effect driving variance of log reduction over time.
The increased turbidity paired with the increased fat content in milk has a direct correlation in the inactivation
kinetics by lowering the efficacy of UV-C treatment in P.fluorescens. However the most influential factor for
the log reduction is UV-C exposure, which may suggest that microorganism has a high sensitivity to UV-C light
exposure.
Biodosimetry assays will establish the UV-C dose received by the microorganisms for each log.reduction in
Lyras pilot unit.
15.3
UV-C dose estimation using collimated beam apparatus
15.3.0.1
L.cremoris
The plot of dose response to UV-C treatment is done with data from biological triplicates and technical
triplicates. The last two observations are bellow detection limit of 1.5 log CFU/ml. log(N0) is 7.44±0.11.
Page 51 of 74
==PAGE:57==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 30: Graphical representation of log reduction versus UV-dose in collimated beam apparatus for
L.cremoris
The last observation has a wide standard deviation of log 0.64. The second last observation had a standard
deviations of log 0.20. The data was below detection limit, therefore has a higher uncertainty attached to them.
The plot of dose response of L.cremoris to UV-C treatment follows first order kinetics, linearly related, to
higher dose higher inactivation. The 25% percentile has a log reduction of 1.62, median of 2.19, 75% of 4.35
and a maximum of 5.16.
The residual plot do not show a discernible pattern and R is 0.91, rendering the model a good fit.
Figure 31: Graphical representation of residuals of linear regression of L.cremoris
Collimated beam light tests estimates a D-value for L.cremoris of 1.24 mJ/cm2
The inactivation constant for L.cremoris is 0.5743 cm2/mJ, which reflects the sensitivity of the microorgan-
ism to UV-C light. With the inactivation constant is calculated UV-C RED estimation for Lyras pilot unit. RED
upper limit is at the average log reduction, RED lower limit is in the lower end of standard deviation of the log
reduction, and RED lays in between these two points.
Page 52 of 74
==PAGE:58==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 22: UV-C dose RED estimation for Lyras pilot unit for microorganism L.cremoris
SKM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
4.41±0.04
7.68 mJ/cm2
7.61 mJ/cm2
7.64 mJ/cm2
4.25±0.24
7.40 mJ/cm2
6.98 mJ/cm2
7.19 mJ/cm2
3.75±0.08
6.53 mJ/cm2
6.39 mJ/cm2
6.46 mJ/cm2
4.18±0.07
7.28 mJ/cm2
7.16 mJ/cm2
7.22 mJ/cm2
3.31±0.01
5.76 mJ/cm2
5.75 mJ/cm2
5.75 mJ/cm2
3.41±0.57
5.94 mJ/cm2
4.95 mJ/cm2
5.44 mJ/cm2
3.10±0.88
5.40 mJ/cm2
3.87 mJ/cm2
4.63 mJ/cm2
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
SSKM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
4.30±0.10
7.49 mJ/cm2
7.31 mJ/cm2
7.40 mJ/cm2
4.43±0.60
7.71 mJ/cm2
6.67 mJ/cm2
7.19 mJ/cm2
4.43±0.30
7.71 mJ/cm2
7.19 mJ/cm2
7.45 mJ/cm2
4.37±0.30
7.61 mJ/cm2
7.44 mJ/cm2
7.52 J/cm2
3.72±0.30
6.48 mJ/cm2
5.96 mJ/cm2
6.22 mJ/cm2
3.57±0.05
6.22 mJ/cm2
6.13 mJ/cm2
6.17 mJ/cm2
2.81±0.06
4.89 mJ/cm2
34.79 mJ/cm2
4.84 mJ/cm2
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
WHM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
3.59±0.60
6.25 mJ/cm2
5.21 mJ/cm2
5.73 mJ/cm2
3.29±0.02
5.73 mJ/cm2
5.38 mJ/cm2
5.55 mJ/cm2
3.65±0.64
6.36 mJ/cm2
5.24 mJ/cm2
5.80 mJ/cm2
2.77±0.07
4.82 mJ/cm2
4.70 mJ/cm2
4.76 J/cm2
3.20±0.12
5.57 mJ/cm2
5.45 mJ/cm2
5.51 mJ/cm2
2.28±0.02
3,97 mJ/cm2
3.94 mJ/cm2
3.95 mJ/cm2
2.95±0.09
5.14 mJ/cm2
4.98 mJ/cm2
5.06 mJ/cm2
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
CM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
3.18±0.43
5.54 mJ/cm2
4.79 mJ/cm2
5.16 mJ/cm2
3.79±0.32
6.60 mJ/cm2
6.04 mJ/cm2
6.32 mJ/cm2
3.41±0.54
5.94 mJ/cm2
5.00 mJ/cm2
5.47 mJ/cm2
3.09±0.10
5.38 mJ/cm2
5.21 mJ/cm2
5.29 J/cm2
2.92±0.02
5.08 mJ/cm2
5.05 mJ/cm2
5.07 mJ/cm2
2.41±0.40
4.20 mJ/cm2
3.50 mJ/cm2
3.85 mJ/cm2
Page 53 of 74
==PAGE:59==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
In Lyras pilot unit using SKM to achieve a log reduction of 3.27±0.15 had received a RED 5.28±0.58 mJ/cm2,
and for a log 4.15±0.28 a RED 7.13±0.49 mJ/cm2.
In SSKM to achieve a log reduction of 3.36±0.48 had received a RED 5.74±0.78 mJ/cm2, and for a log
4.38±0.06 a RED 7.39±0.14 mJ/cm2. In WHM to achieve a log reduction of 2.66±0.34 had received a RED
4.61±0.58 mJ/cm2, and for a log 3.43±0.22 a RED of 5.53±0.34 mJ/cm2. In CM to achieve a log reduction of
2.66±0.36 had received a RED 4.46±0.86 mJ/cm2, and for a log 3.36±0.31 a RED 5.56±0.52 mJ/cm2.
RED is the dose reached to the microorganism, regardless of the increased turbidity, lower particle exposure
in laminar flow, lower transmittance or increased reflection of the product.
15.3.0.2
P.fluorescens
The plot of dose response to UV-C treatment is done with data from biological triplicates and technical
triplicates. The last two observations are bellow detection limit of 1.5 log CFU/ml. log(N0) is 7.28±0.24.
Figure 32:
Graphical representation log reduction versus UV-dose in collimated beam apparatus for
P.fluorescens
Dose response plot shows clearly a linear relation The 25% percentile has a log reduction of 0.68, median of
1.91, 75% percentile of 4.33 and a maximum of 7.11.
The plot of dose response of P.fluorescens UV-C to treatment follows first order kinetics, linearly related, to
higher dose higher inactivation.
Page 54 of 74
==PAGE:60==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
The residual plot do not show a discernible pattern and R is 0.97, rendering the prediction a good fit.
Figure 33: Graphical representation of residuals of linear regression of P.fluorescens
Collimated beam light tests estimates a D-value for P.fluorescens of 1.0845 mJ/cm2.
The inactivation constant for P.fluorescens is 0.8231 cm2/mJ, used to calculate UV-C RED estimation for
Lyras pilot unit.
Table 23: UV-C RED estimation for Lyras pilot unit for microorganism P.fluorescens
SKM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
6.22±0.12
7.56 mJ/cm2
7.41 mJ/cm2
7.48 mJ/cm2
5.97±0.23
7.25 mJ/cm2
6.97 mJ/cm2
7.11 mJ/cm2
5.75 ±0.20
6.99 mJ/cm2
6.74 mJ/cm2
6.86 mJ/cm2
5.22±0.10
6.34 mJ/cm2
6.22 mJ/cm2
6.28 mJ/cm2
4.05 ±0.03
4.92 mJ/cm2
4.88 mJ/cm2
4.90 mJ/cm2
3.22±0.30
3.91 mJ/cm2
3.55 mJ/cm2
3.73 mJ/cm2
0 ±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
SSKM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
7.31±0.10
8.88 mJ/cm2
8.76 mJ/cm2
8.82 mJ/cm2
5.30±0.60
6.44 mJ/cm2
5.71 mJ/cm2
6.07 mJ/cm2
5.47±0.30
6.65 mJ/cm2
6.28 mJ/cm2
6,46 mJ/cm2
5.75±0.10
6.99 mJ/cm2
6.86 mJ/cm2
6.93 J/cm2
6.13±.0.30
7.45 mJ/cm2
7.08 mJ/cm2
7.22 mJ/cm2
5.22±0.05
6.34 mJ/cm2
6.28 mJ/cm2
6.31 mJ/cm2
3.44±0.06
4.18 mJ/cm2
4.11 mJ/cm2
4.14 mJ/cm2
3.32±0.10
4.03 mJ/cm2
3.91 mJ/cm2
3.97 J/cm2
2.61±0.08
3.17 mJ/cm2
3.07 mJ/cm2
3.12 mJ/cm2
3.58±0.40
4.35 mJ/cm2
3.86 mJ/cm2
4.11 mJ/cm2
Page 55 of 74
==PAGE:61==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
1.99±0.08
2.42 mJ/cm2
2.32 mJ/cm2
2.37 mJ/cm2
3.22±0.40
3.91 mJ/cm2
3.43 mJ/cm2
3.67 J/cm2
1.89±0.54
2.30 mJ/cm2
1.64 mJ/cm2
1.97 mJ/cm2
1.44±0.08
1.75 mJ/cm2
0.78 mJ/cm2
1.26 mJ/cm2
0.89±0.01
1.08 mJ/cm2
0.96 mJ/cm2
1.02 mJ/cm2
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
WHM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
6.85±0.30
8.32 mJ/cm2
7.96 mJ/cm2
8,14 mJ/cm2
5.26±0.10
6.39 mJ/cm2
6.27 mJ/cm2
6.33 mJ/cm2
4.96±0.11
6.03 mJ/cm2
5.89 mJ/cm2
5.96 mJ/cm2
4.83±0.30
5.87 mJ/cm2
5.50 mJ/cm2
5.69 mJ/cm2
4.20±0.04
5.10 mJ/cm2
5.05 mJ/cm2
5.08 mJ/cm2
3.59±0.64
4.36 mJ/cm2
3.58 mJ/cm2
4.97 mJ/cm2
3.36±0.13
4.08 mJ/cm2
3.92 mJ/cm2
4.00 mJ/cm2
3.20±0.27
3.89 mJ/cm2
3.56 mJ/cm2
3.72 mJ/cm2
3.28±0.56
3.98 mJ/cm2
3.30 mJ/cm2
3.64 mJ/cm2
1.94±0.26
2.36 mJ/cm2
2.04 mJ/cm2
2.20 mJ/cm2
1.49±0.34
1.81 mJ/cm2
1.40 mJ/cm2
1.60 mJ/cm2
0.4±0.07
0.49 mJ/cm2
0.40 mJ/cm2
0.44 mJ/cm2
0.01±0.09
0.01 mJ/cm2
0,01 mJ/cm2
0,01 J/cm2
0.12±0.30
0.12 mJ/cm2
0.15 mJ/cm2
0.15 mJ/cm2
0 ±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
CM- Log reduction Lyras pilot unit
Upper limit RED
Lower limit RED
RED
5.63±0.19
6.84 mJ/cm2
6.61 mJ/cm2
6.72 mJ/cm2
5.33±0.09
6.48 mJ/cm2
6.37 mJ/cm2
6.42 mJ/cm2
3.48±0.9
4.23 mJ/cm2
4.12 mJ/cm2
4.17 mJ/cm2
3.18±0.20
3.86 mJ/cm2
3.62 mJ/cm2
3.74 J/cm2
3.42±0.08
4.16 mJ/cm2
4.06 mJ/cm2
4.11 mJ/cm2
3.09±0.07
3.75 mJ/cm2
3.67 mJ/cm2
3.71 mJ/cm2
2.18±0.19
2.65 mJ/cm2
2.42 mJ/cm2
2.53 mJ/cm2
2.00±0.31
2.43 mJ/cm2
2.05 mJ/cm2
2.24 mJ/cm2
0.69±0.30
0.84 mJ/cm2
0.47 mJ/cm2
0.66 J/cm2
0.67±0.09
0.81 mJ/cm2
0.70 mJ/cm2
0.76 mJ/cm2
0.09±0.02
0.11 mJ/cm2
0.09 mJ/cm2
0.10 mJ/cm2
0±0
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
0 mJ/cm2
Page 56 of 74
==PAGE:62==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
In Lyras pilot unit, when was achieved a log reduction of 3.65±0.59 in SKM the P.fluorescens is estimated a
RED of 4.32±0.83 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 5.79±0.42 a RED of 6.94±0.51 mJ/cm2. In SSKM when was
achieved a log reduction of 0.89 P.fluorescens was estimated a RED of 1.08 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 7.31
a RED of 8.82 mJ/cm2. WHM when was achieved a log reduction of 1.49 P.fluorescens was estimated a RED
of 1.81 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 4.2 a RED of 5.69 mJ/cm2. CM when was achieved a log reduction of
2.18 P.fluorescens was estimated a RED of 2.53 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 5.33 a RED of 6.72 mJ/cm2.
RED is the dose reached to the microorganism, regardless of the increased turbidity, lower particle exposure
in laminar flow, lower transmittance or increased reflection of the product.
15.4
Bacterial inactivation modeling
15.4.0.1
L.cremoris inactivation modeling
L.cremoris had incomplete data set to make an accurate modeling. The protocol to take samples at early
exposures had been eventually developed, allowing to take observations at lower UV-C settings in Lyras pilot
unit. It was not possible to re-do the test due to technical difficulties of Lyras pilot unit.
Page 57 of 74
==PAGE:63==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 34: Biodosemetry estimation of UV-C dose delivered in Lyras pilot unit to L.cremoris
Based on the observations gathered a linear inactivation occurs and the estimated the inactivation rates in
Lyras pilot unit for L.cremoris is SKM, k-value of 0.5722 cm2/mJ (R2 0.98), SSKM is 0.5930 cm2/mJ(R2
0.99), 0.6105 cm2/mJ for WHM (R2 0.97) and 0.5992 cm2/mJ for CM (R2 0.99).
The plot of residuals shows observation are taken from doses 0 and from 4 to 8 mJ/cm2.
Page 58 of 74
==PAGE:64==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 35: Plot of residuals of linear regression modeling for the biodosemetry estimation of UV-C dose deliv-
ered in Lyras pilot unit to L.cremoris
Based on the observations the inactivation kinetics of L.cremoris follows a log.linear relationship, the fitting
of the model is validated with an R2¿0.9. However, residual plot shows the lack of observations at early doses.
There were evidences from the outcome of the different results that L.cremoris didn’t have a uniform UV-
C treatment. There is the possibility of a shoulder and indications of a tailing effect. This effect can not be
assessed in the model due to the lack of observations in lower points of UV-C treatment from Lyras pilot unit.
15.4.0.2
P.fluorescens inactivation modeling
The observations for the biodosemetry modeling of P.fluorescens were more accurate and precise. It was able
to implement a protocol to take more samples and at early points of UV-treatment in Lyras pilot unit. Therefore,
there was more robust data to make the predictive inactivation kinetics of the microorganism.
Page 59 of 74
==PAGE:65==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 36: Biodosemetry estimation of UV-C dose delivered in Lyras pilot unit to P.fluorescens
Based on the observations gathered a linear inactivation occurs. The estimated inactivation rates in Lyras
pilot unit for P.fluorescens are SKM, k-value of 0.8320 cm2/mJ (R2 0.99), SSKM is 0.8184 cm2/mJ(R2 0.99),
0.8352 cm2/mJ for WHM (R2 0.99) and 0.8257 cm2/mJ for CM (R2 0.99).
The plot of residuals don’t exhibit any pattern specific. Residuals are randomly distributed in narrow range
between -0.15 and 0.25 from the fitted line.
Page 60 of 74
==PAGE:66==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figure 37: Plot of residuals of linear regression modeling for the biodosemetry estimation of UV-C dose deliv-
ered in Lyras pilot unit to P.fluorescens
Based on the observations the inactivation kinetics of P.fluorescens follows a log.linear relationship, the
fitting of the model is validated with an R2¿0.9 and by residual plot.
P.fluorescens follows a log.linear inactivation kinetics with at a constant rate, k-value 0.8278±0.0074 for all
the types of milk.
15.4.0.3
Lyras pilot unit UV-C settings and dose delivery in different types of milk
To understand the structural makeup underlying patterns within UV-C settings in Lyras pilot unit, UV-
DOSEsur face at the coils and RED for each microorganism in the different types of milk is done a correlation
multivariate analysis. Which allows to assess patterns and correlations between several variables simultane-
ously—allowing for a deeper understanding of the dose delivery and inactivation kinetics when Lyras is running
a flowthrough UV-treatment at constant volumetric flow of 65 l/h.
A Pearson correlation coefficient was computed to assess the linear relationship between UV-settings in Lyras
pilot unit and UV-Dosesur face and established a perfectly positive linear correlation of 1:1 It showed some pat-
terns between intensity of dose delivery from the surface of the coils, UV-Dosesur face, to the microorganism,
RED, based on the type of milk and target microorganism.
The dose delivery to L.cremoris it is affected by the change of fat content in milk. The correlation coefficients
between UV-Dosesur face and RED are SKM 0.85, SSKM 0.76, WHM 0.67 and CM 0.62. They maintain a
strong correlation (r¿0.5), however the increased turbidity, viscosity and lower transmittance of the medium
Page 61 of 74
==PAGE:67==
15
RESULTS
Rosa de Nova s193148
interfere with the dose delivery to the target organism lowering the score to 22% WHM versus SKM and 28%
with CM.
The dose delivery to P.fluorescens is no affected by the change of fat content in milk. The correlation
coefficients between UV-Dosesur face and RED are SKM 0.79, SSKM 0.76, WHM 0.92 and CM 0.93, which
is an increment of 16% of CM versus SKM and 15% for WHM.
Page 62 of 74
==PAGE:68==
16
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Rosa de Nova s193148
16
Discussion and conclusion
The operational parameters of Lyras pilot were affected by the fat content of milk.
There is an increased viscosity in the fluid due to the profile of fat globules in cow milk, the most abundant
are myristic, palmitic, stearic fatty acids which are solid at room temperature. The increased viscosity requires
a stronger shear stress achieving lower shear rates. SKM needs 6,25% less pressure in pumps to achieve 7,35%
faster volumetric flow than SSKM. WHM uses 3,7% more pressure in pump1 and 2,8% in pump2 for a 2,94%
lower volumetric flow compared to SKKM. CM needs 3,75% increased pressure in pump1 and 6,12% in pump2
to reach a volumetric flow 4,55% lower than SSKM.
Residence time of particles in the coils increased paired with the increased fat content in the milk. Compared
to SKM, SSKM and WHM had a longer particle average residence time of 9,5% and 13% with CM. This effect
is explained by the increased viscosity, and with it the increased resistance to deformation which forces the
fluid through the fluidic pathway and coils of the unit.
The running of Lyras pilot unit displayed a thermal exposure difference between inlet and outlet of 15,5
±2,7 ◦C elucidating why there was a lower residence time distribution in coil2 compared to coil1. Higher
temperature decreases viscosity. The variance in temperature between coils affects their fluid dynamics. The
increased temperature in outlet is due to the dissipation of energy, applied as shear force in the pumps, as heat.
There is a difference of pressure driving the product from inlet to coil1 and from coil1 to coil2 due to the
design of Lyras pilot unit. There is a big pipe bend from the inlet to coil1, thus pump1 requiring 10% more
shear stress force to maintain steady flow system. The hypothesis of adding hydrostatic pressure to pump2 was
tested by lifting the outlet to the same plane. After observing that it had an statically significant effect, it was
proceeded to run the flowthrough tests with the new set up in the unit.
The technical operation limitations of the pumps of 6bar required to run flowthrough test at constant volu-
metric flow of 65 L/h, which affected the fluid flow dynamics of non-Newtonian fluids, WHM and CM. In coil1
there was a unidirectional laminar flow and in coil2 there were evidences of a flow with two vortex.
The difference of flow in the coils was due to the difference of temperature between coils which led to a
decrease of viscosity in WHM and CM, enough to double the exposure of particles to the surface of coil2.
Newtonian fluids SKM and SSKM were considered to have turbulent flow since their deformation is indepen-
dent to the shear force.
Cell inoculum and particle mixing in deposit and coils was tested after reaching the steady state of Lyras
pilot unit. The results showed that particles stayed in suspension with a minor fall to the bottom of the deposit.
The main factor was the mixing method of the inoculum in the deposit. L.cremoris has a tendency to bacterial
clamping, although the method of counting survival colonies in petri plates, is not able to detect it, since the
bacterial aggregate grows as one colony.
It was studied if there was a variance of UV-C treatment between coil1 (half treatment) and coil1+coil2(full
treatment). The results didn’t show a statistical significant difference, subsequently the protocol by which
the samples are taken from the unit was updated. This allowed to take more observations in order to make a
more robust biodosimetry assay of Lyras UV-C treatment and the microbial inactivation kinetics of the model
Page 63 of 74
==PAGE:69==
16
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Rosa de Nova s193148
organism.
A further test could be to increase the temperature of the product in the inlet for WHM and CM. To lower
the viscosity and increasing De number in coil1, changing from unidirectional to two vortex, and test if UV-C
treatment delivered by Lyras pilot unit is more effective due to the increased exposure of particles to the surface
of the coils.
During running flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit fouling was apparent in the coils, which negatively
impacted the UV-C dose irradiated to the particles. This problem can be addressed with a film coating of the
coils with food grade teflon AF2400, which has optical clarity and low refractive index (Biogeneral S/A). It
is recommended since the requirements to validate UV-C treatment unit are to monitored output irradiance,
number of lamps, cleaning and life time, temperature of the product, UV-DOSEsur face, exposure time, and
any variability of surface characteristics[5].
Flowthrough tests in Lyras pilot unit with L.cremoris showed that UV-C treatment in SKM and SSKM had
similar log reductions. The mean log reduction of SKM was 3,309 and SSKM 3,313, in the other hand the mean
log reduction of WHM and CM was 2,63 and 2,68 respectively. The variance between means of SKM-SSKM
and WHM-CM was 67±3% making them quite distinctive groups. L.cremoris had a similar response to UV-C
treatment in Newtonian liquids SKM and SSKM and similar response in non-Newtonian fluids WHM and CM.
At UV-setting of 45-50 W/m, SKM and SSKM achieved a log reduction of 4.36 and WHM and CM of
3.53±0.17. It was followed by a tailing effect in all the different types of milk. The tailing effect could be as-
sessed when their percentiles were studied. For instance, SKM and SSKM median 3.71±0.05, 75% percentiles
of 4.34±0.02 and maximum of 4.41±0.01. And WHM and CM had a median of 2.901±0.02, their 75% per-
centiles was 3.66±0.03 and maximum of 3.70±0.03 The tailing effect suggested that there was a distribution of
resistance to the treatment and the possibility of residual population.
The two-way ANOVA analysis to assess the effect of the variables fat content and UV-C setting in the
inactivation kinetics, estimated that 31,41% of variance of log reduction in the different types of milk was due
to the fat content and 55,11% to UV-C settings.
L.cremoris the inactivation kinetics are affected by fluid dynamic altered by increased viscoelastic behaviour
paired with the increased fat content. Newtonian fluids SKM and SSKM, where all the particles received the
same exposure due to turbulent flow in the coils, the UV-C treatment had a higher inactivation capability.
When it was calculated the De number to study the flow dynamics in Lyras pilot unit coils showed that at
65 L/h volumetric flow, WHM and CM had unidirectional flow in coil1 and two vortex in coil2. This situation
hinder the intensity of the propagation of the treatment applied to WHM and CM due to their lower penetration
depth of UV-C light, increased reflection, refraction and turbidity which increases scattering and interference
with dose delivery. The lower transmittance of the medium in conjunction to the lower exposure of the particles
to the surface of the coils being irradiated resulted in a lower inactivation capability. Which was conveyed by a
log reduction 0,8±0,2log CFU/ml lower compared to SKM and SSKM.
The response to treatment of P.fluorescens in flowthrough test in Lyras pilot unit was at UV-setting of 40
W/m2 SKM had reached a log reduction of 5.22, SSKM of 5.74, WHM 4.51 and CM of 3.7. CM had the
lowest response to UV-treatment. When it was studied their percentiles the median log reduction of CM is
2.37, 75% percentile 3.92 and maximum of 4.67. WHM median was 3.32, 75% percentile 4.86 and maximum
Page 64 of 74
==PAGE:70==
16
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Rosa de Nova s193148
6.84 log reduction. SSKM median of 3.44, 75% percentile 5.74 and maximum 7.05 log reduction. Lastly SKM
median was 5.22, 75% percentile 5.85 and maximum 6.22 log reduction. It could be inferred that the increased
fat content had an effect in the inactivation kinetics but there was a continuous inactivation, less than a tailing
effect.
Flow dynamics affected dose delivery. SKM and SSKM with turbulent flow in the coils required a lower
intensity of UV-Dosesur face. For instance, a UV-Dosesur face of 4400 mJ/m2 was enough to achieve a log
reduction of 4.5 for SKM and for a log reduction of 3.58 a UV-Dosesur face of 500J/m2. De number for WHM
and CM suggested a unidirectional flow in coil1, while there was evidences of two vortex in coil2, doubling
the exposure of particles to the surface compared to coil1. For WHM and CM a UV-DOSEsur face of 14400
mJ/m2, achieved a log reduction of 3.59 and 3.48 respectively.
A two way ANOVA hinted that UV-settings accounted for a 87.64% of the total variance in log reductions of
P.fluorescens. The difference of log reduction between types of milk could be explained by the flow dynamics
in Lyras pilot units at 65 L/h volumetric flow. WHM and CM in coil1 had unidirectional flow limiting the
exposure of the particles and the microorganism to the surface of the coil being irradiated.
Biodosemetry assay with collimated beam light apparatus established that L.cremoris sensitivity to UV-C
light is 0.5743 cm2/mJ and P.fluorescens is 0.8231 cm2/mJ.
P.fluorescens DNA with 7,1 Mbp and AT content 39.8%, has substantially higher sensitivity to UV-C than
L.cremoris, 2,3 Mbp and AT content 64.5%. This is contrary to what was expected from literature, that draws a
direct correlation between UV sensitivity and molecular weight of the genome and AT content of the microor-
ganism. The relation is that, the smaller a DNA molecule, and the higher the AT content is, the probability of a
photon hit resulting in inactivation is higher[7].
It has been reported that gram-positive bacteria are more resistant to UV-C light [5]. In addition, it is a
possibility that L.cremoris was a diploid strain, since there have been reported cases, in which it would increase
their UV resistance[43]. However, other biodosimetry studies carried in the research team of Lisbeth Truelstrup,
P.fluorescens showed a higher sensitivity to UV-C light than the other organisms gram negative and same family,
for instance P.panacis sensitivity to UV-C light is 0.6787 cm2/mJ.
The high UV effluence sensitivity of P.fluorescens could be partially elucidated to various reasons. Based
on visual assessment of the colonies in plates the strain used in this project were smooth P.fluorescens, which
are more sensitive to UV than rough colonies [44]. The robustness to different substrates and fast generation
time of 10 min at 25◦C, and 48 min at 5◦C, may have prompted the organism to change from stress-fighting
mode reached in stationary phase to adaption to fast replicating, lag phase into log growth. In this phase the
microorganism is more vulnerable to UV-C irradiation. DNA structure is more exposed with replications forks
happening, they might have ongoing from 4 to 16 at the same time due to their fast-replicating nature [43]. Dark
repair mechanism TC-NER is also more active in this stage, but it’s amino acid configuration is also a UV-C
target. Moreover, antibiotics are known to be photoreactive and P.fluorescens produce antibiotic mupirocin
which may increase their UV sensitivity [45]. P.fluorescens has located it’s siderophores receptors in the outer
membrane, which makes them fluorescent under UV light, but might make them more sensitive to the effect
of UV-C. A high sensitivity of P.fluorescens to UV lysis of membrane has been described after UV-C exposure
[46].
Biodosemetry study of UV-C dose response and inactivation of L.cremoris established a log.linear relation-
Page 65 of 74
==PAGE:71==
16
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Rosa de Nova s193148
ship, first order kinetics, where higher UV-C dose achieved higher log inactivation. The 25% percentile has a
log reduction of 1.62, median of 2.19, 75% of 4.35 and a maximum of 5.16. D-value of 1.24 mJ/cm2. A RED
was estimated for Lyras pilot unit. SKM to achieve a log reduction of 3.27±0.15 a RED 5.28±0.58 mJ/cm2 was
estimated, and for a log reduction of 4.15±0.28 a RED 7.13±0.49 mJ/cm2. In SSKM to achieve a log reduction
of 3.36±0.48 a RED 5.74±0.78 mJ/cm2 was estimated, and for a log reduction of 4.38±0.06 a RED 7.39±0.14
mJ/cm2. In WHM to achieve a log reduction of 2.66±0.34 was estimated a RED 4.61±0.58 mJ/cm2, and for a
log 3.43±0.22 a RED of 5.53±0.34 mJ/cm2. In CM to achieve a log reduction of 2.66±0.36 had received a RED
4.46±0.86 mJ/cm2, and for a log reduction of 3.36±0.31 a RED 5.56±0.52 mJ/cm2.
The results from the biodosemetry assay in collimated beam apparatus established that the inactivation of
P.fluorescens to UV-C treatment had a linear relation. The 25% percentile had a log reduction of 0.68, median
of 1.91, 75% percentile of 4.33 and a maximum of 7.11. Collimated beam light tests estimates a D-value
for P.fluorescens of 1.0845 mJ/cm2. RED in Lyras pilot unit, was estimated and to achieve a log reduction
of 3.65±0.59 in SKM the P.fluorescens had received a RED of 4.32±0.83 mJ/cm2, and for a log reduction of
5.79±0.42 a RED of 6.94±0.51 mJ/cm2. In SSKM when a log reduction of 0.89 P.fluorescens had received a
RED of 1.08 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 7.31 a RED of 8.82 mJ/cm2. In WHM when was achieved a log
reduction of 1.49 P.fluorescens was estimated a RED of 1.81 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of 4.2 a RED of 5.69
mJ/cm2. CM a log reduction of 2.18 P.fluorescens was estimated a RED of 2.53 mJ/cm2, and log reduction of
5.33 a RED of 6.72 mJ/cm2
R2 values ¿0.9 suggested that log.linear model of inactivation kinetics was fit to predict the response of
L.cremoris to UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot. However, the plot of residuals showed that the data set to build
the model upon was incomplete, since there were observation only from doses 0 and from 4 to 8 mJ/cm2. It
was intended to repeat the test but due to technical problems with Lyras pilot unit was not possible. A Parson´s
correlation analysis suggested that dose delivery to L.cremoris was affected by the change of fat content in
milk. The correlation coefficients between UV-Dosesur face and RED were for SKM 0.85, SSKM 0.76, WHM
0.67 and CM 0.62. They maintain a strong correlation (r¿0.5), however the increased turbidity, viscosity and
lower transmittance of the medium interfere with the dose delivery to the target organism lowering the score to
22% WHM versus SKM and 28% with CM due to flow dynamics in Lyras pilot unit at 65 L/h.
The response to UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot to P.fluorescens is a log.linear, validated with R2¿0.9 and
residual plot. In all the different types of milk P.fluorescens had a constant rate, k-value, of 0.8278±0.0074
A Parson’s correlation analysis between variables suggested that the dose delivery to P.fluorescens was not
affected by the change of fat content in milk. The correlation coefficients between UV-Dosesur face and RED
are SKM 0.79, SSKM 0.76, WHM 0.92 and CM 0.93, which is an increment of 16% of CM versus SKM and
15% for WHM. Which is explained by the high sensitivity of the bacterium to UV-C light. It requires a quite
low dose that was able to be transmitted by Lyras pilot unit with unidirectional and two vortex flow dynamics
in the coils.
In conclusion, the different fat content in milk affects the operational process parameters of Lyras pilot unit.
The increased viscosity of the product requires a stronger shear force from the pumps. The energy applied
by the pumps to the fluid to conduct it through the system is dissipated as heat. Which lead to a difference
of temperature between the coils. This difference is intensified with the increased viscosity in the product.
Subsequently fluid dynamics are affected in each coil. At a constant volumetric flow of 65 L/h for WHM and
CM, in coil1 there is unidirectional laminar flow and in coil2 there are evidences of two vortex.
Page 66 of 74
==PAGE:72==
16
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Rosa de Nova s193148
Bench scale test assess the UV-C sensitivity of Lactococcus cremoris is 0.5743 cm2/mJ and D-value 1.24
mJ/cm2. Pseudomonas fluorescens has a higher sensitivity with an inactivation rate of 0.8231 cm2/mJ and
D.value of 1.08 mJ/cm2.
Based on the observed log reductions after UV-C treatment in Lyras pilot unit and their inactivation rates a
log-linear inactivation model is developed for both organism. However the data set for L.cremoris was incom-
plete and inferences have to be taken with caution. P.fluorescens followed clearly a first order inactivation and
dose delivery in Lyras pilot unit.
Page 67 of 74
==PAGE:73==
REFERENCES
Rosa de Nova s193148
References
[1] MJ Lewis and HC Deeth. Heat treatment of milk. Milk processing and quality management, pages
168–204, 2009.
[2] In´es Birlouez-Aragon, Pascal Sabat, and Nicolas Gouti. A new method for discriminating milk heat
treatment. International Dairy Journal, 12(1):59–67, 2002.
[3] Leonor Palmeira, Laurent Gu´eguen, and Jean R Lobry. Uv-targeted dinucleotides are not depleted in
light-exposed prokaryotic genomes. Molecular biology and evolution, 23(11):2214–2219, 2006.
[4] Wladyslaw Kowalski. Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation handbook: UVGI for air and surface disinfection.
Springer science & business media, 2010.
[5] Tatiana Koutchma. Validation of Food Preservation Processes Based on Novel Technologies. Elsevier,
2021.
[6] E Battistelli, P Bruscaglioni, A Ismaelli, L Lo Porto, and G Zaccanti. Separation and analysis of for-
ward scattered power in laboratory measurements of light beam transmittance through a turbid medium.
Applied optics, 25(3):420–430, 1986.
[7] James R Bolton and Christine Anne Cotton. The ultraviolet disinfection handbook. American Water
Works Association, 2011.
[8] Daniela Fenoglio, Mariana Ferrario, Mercedes Garc´ıa Carrillo, Marcela Schenk, and Sandra Guerrero.
Characterization of microbial inactivation in clear and turbid juices processed by short-wave ultraviolet
light. Journal of Food Processing and Preservation, 44(6):e14452, 2020.
[9] George A Garinis, James R Mitchell, Michael J Moorhouse, Katsuhiro Hanada, Harm de Waard, Dimitri
Vandeputte, Judith Jans, Karl Brand, Marcel Smid, Peter J van der Spek, et al. Transcriptome analysis
reveals cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers as a major source of uv-induced dna breaks. The EMBO journal,
24(22):3952–3962, 2005.
[10] Wilma K Olson, Manju Bansal, Stephen K Burley, Richard E Dickerson, Mark Gerstein, Stephen C
Harvey, Udo Heinemann, Xiang-Jun Lu, Stephen Neidle, Zippora Shakked, et al. A standard reference
frame for the description of nucleic acid base-pair geometry. Journal of molecular biology, 313(1):229–
237, 2001.
[11] Lal Mohan Kundu, Uwe Linne, Mohamed Marahiel, and Thomas Carell.
Rna is more uv resistant
than dna: The formation of uv-induced dna lesions is strongly sequence and conformation dependent.
Chemistry–A European Journal, 10(22):5697–5705, 2004.
[12] Holger Claus. Ozone generation by ultraviolet lamps. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 97(3):471–476,
2021.
[13] Essaid Ait Barka, Siamak Kalantari, Joseph Makhlouf, and Joseph Arul. Effects of uv-c irradiation on
lipid peroxidation markers during ripening of tomato (lycopersicon esculentum l.) fruits. Functional Plant
Biology, 27(2):147–152, 2000.
Page 68 of 74
==PAGE:74==
REFERENCES
Rosa de Nova s193148
[14] Tadaomi Kawashima, Akemi Kosaka, Huimin Yan, Zijin Guo, Ryosuke Uchiyama, Ryutaro Fukui,
Daisuke Kaneko, Yutaro Kumagai, Dong-Ju You, Joaquim Carreras, et al. Double-stranded rna of in-
testinal commensal but not pathogenic bacteria triggers production of protective interferon-β. Immunity,
38(6):1187–1197, 2013.
[15] Esteban Toro and Lucy Shapiro. Bacterial chromosome organization and segregation. Cold Spring Harbor
perspectives in biology, 2(2):a000349, 2010.
[16] Anjana Badrinarayanan, Tung BK Le, and Michael T Laub. Bacterial chromosome organization and
segregation. Annual review of cell and developmental biology, 31:171–199, 2015.
[17] RE Dickerson, HR Drew, BN Conner, ML Kopka, and PE Pjura. Helix geometry and hydration in a-dna,
b-dna, and z-dna. In Cold Spring Harbor symposia on quantitative biology, volume 47, pages 13–24. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1983.
[18] Ryosuke L Ohniwa, Kazuya Morikawa, Joongbaek Kim, Toshiko Ohta, Akira Ishihama, Chieko Wada,
and Kunio Takeyasu. Dynamic state of dna topology is essential for genome condensation in bacteria.
The EMBO journal, 25(23):5591–5602, 2006.
[19] Peter Yakovchuk, Ekaterina Protozanova, and Maxim D Frank-Kamenetskii. Base-stacking and base-
pairing contributions into thermal stability of the dna double helix. Nucleic acids research, 34(2):564–574,
2006.
[20] Jean Cadet, Anne-Ga¨elle Bourdat, C´edric d’Ham, Victor Duarte, Didier Gasparutto, Anthony Romieu, and
Jean-Luc Ravanat. Oxidative base damage to dna: specificity of base excision repair enzymes. Mutation
Research/Reviews in Mutation Research, 462(2-3):121–128, 2000.
[21] Agostina Aramburu, Evelyn L Bonifazi, Lia N Gerschenson, Ana M Rojas, and Maria F Basanta. Sweet
cherry (prunus avium) fibers extracted from microwave-and steam-blanched recovered fruits: photo-
antioxidant activity in milk proteins. Bioactive Carbohydrates and Dietary Fibre, 24:100247, 2020.
[22] Michiel Wels, Lennart Backus, Jos Boekhorst, Annereinou Dijkstra, Marke Beerthuyzen, Roland J Siezen,
Herwig Bachmann, and Sacha AFT van Hijum. Draft genome sequences of 11 lactococcus lactis subsp.
cremoris strains. Genome Announcements, 5(11):e01739–16, 2017.
[23] J Kives, D Guadarrama, B Orgaz, A Rivera-Sen, J Vazquez, and C SanJose. Interactions in biofilms of
lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris and pseudomonas fluorescens cultured in cold uht milk. Journal of Dairy
Science, 88(12):4165–4171, 2005.
[24] Thomas Kelly and A John Callegari. Dynamics of dna replication in a eukaryotic cell. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 116(11):4973–4982, 2019.
[25] S Srilaorkul, L Ozimek, and ME Stiles. Growth and activity of lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris in ultrafil-
tered skim milk. Journal of Dairy Science, 72(10):2435–2443, 1989.
[26] Sieze Douwenga, Rinke J van Tatenhove-Pel, Emile Zwering, and Herwig Bachmann. Stationary lacto-
coccus cremoris: Energetic state, protein synthesis without nitrogen and their effect on survival. Frontiers
in microbiology, 12:794316–794316, 2021.
Page 69 of 74
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
Rosa de Nova s193148
[27] Yue Liu, Nikolaos Charamis, Sjef Boeren, Joost Blok, Alisha Geraldine Lewis, Eddy J Smid, and Tjakko
Abee. Physiological roles of short-chain and long-chain menaquinones (vitamin k2) in lactococcus cre-
moris. bioRxiv, 2021.
[28] Ting Ting Li, Wen Li Tian, and Chun Tao Gu. Elevation of lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris to the
species level as lactococcus cremoris sp. nov. and transfer of lactococcus lactis subsp. tructae to lactococ-
cus cremoris as lactococcus cremoris subsp. tructae comb. nov. International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology, 71(3):004727, 2021.
[29] Ossama Dimassi, Marwa Rizq, Raymond Akiki, Fatima El Hajj, Mohammad Rached, and Issam Kad-
doura. Generation time, d and z-values of pseudomonas fluorescens under different temperature, water
activity and ph conditions.
[30] Xiang Zhao, Shao-Xing Chen, Zhi-Xiong Xie, and Ping Shen.
Isolation, identification and over-
siderophores production of pseudomonas fluorescens sp-f. Wei Sheng wu xue bao= Acta Microbiologica
Sinica, 46(5):691–695, 2006.
[31] Baskar Vairamohan, Gary Hunter, Cecilia Arzbaecher, Raymond Ehrhard, James A Goodrich, and John
Hall. Innovative uv-c led disinfection systems for drinkingwater treatment. In 2021 IEEE Conference on
Technologies for Sustainability (SusTech), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2021.
[32] S Rajmohan, CER Dodd, and WM Waites. Enzymes from isolates of pseudomonas fluorescens involved
in food spoilage. Journal of applied microbiology, 93(2):205–213, 2002.
[33] AJ J¨a¨askel¨ainen, K-E Peiponen, and JA R¨aty. On reflectometric measurement of a refractive index of
milk. Journal of dairy science, 84(1):38–43, 2001.
[34] Pieter Walstra, Pieter Walstra, Jan TM Wouters, and Tom J Geurts. Dairy science and technology. CRC
press, 2005.
[35] Niamh Burke, Krzysztof A Zacharski, Mark Southern, Paul Hogan, Michael P Ryan, and Catherine C
Adley. The dairy industry: process, monitoring, standards, and quality. Descriptive Food Science, 162,
2018.
[36] EFSA NDA Panel. (efsa panel on dietetic products, nutrition and allergies), 2016. scientific opinion on
the safety of uv-treated milk as a novel food pursuant to regulation (ec) no 258/97. 2016.
[37] Lisbeth Meunier-Goddik and S Sandra. Liquid milk products— liquid milk products: Pasteurized milk.
2011.
[38] Lisbeth Truelstrup Sabrine Thyssen. The effect of uv- treatment of recycled water in food processing
plants. 2019.
[39] James R Bolton and Karl G Linden. Standardization of methods for fluence (uv dose) determination in
bench-scale uv experiments. Journal of environmental engineering, 129(3):209–215, 2003.
[40] Harold J Morowitz. Absorption effects in volume irradiation of microorganisms. Science, 111(2879):229–
230, 1950.
[41] ML Herrera and RW Hartel. Effect of processing conditions on physical properties of a milk fat model
system: Rheology. Journal of the American Oil Chemists’ Society, 77(11):1189–1196, 2000.
Page 70 of 74
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
Rosa de Nova s193148
[42] Larry Maturin and JT Peeler. Bam: Aerobic plate count. US Food and Drug Administration: Silver
Spring, MD, USA, 2001.
[43] Ole Michelsen, Flemming G Hansen, Bjarne Albrechtsen, and Peter Ruhdal Jensen. The mg1363 and
il1403 laboratory strains of lactococcus lactis and several dairy strains are diploid. Journal of bacteriology,
192(4):1058–1065, 2010.
[44] A El-Sabeh, H Greppin, and F Chodat. Sensitivity to uv and photorestoration of the r and s type of
pseudomans flourescens mig. Experientia, 23(10):875–876, 1967.
[45] JONATHAN T LORD, VINCENT A ZIBOH, GARY BLICK, JOSEPH POITIER, ISMET KUR-
SUNOGLU, and NEAL S PENNEYS. The effects of photosensitizing antibiotics and ultraviolet irra-
diation on the biosynthesis of prostaglandins. British Journal of Dermatology, 98(1):31–38, 1978.
[46] Cheryl A Whistler, Virginia O Stockwell, and Joyce E Loper. Lon protease influences antibiotic pro-
duction and uv tolerance of pseudomonas fluorescens pf-5. Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
66(7):2718–2725, 2000.
Page 71 of 74
==PAGE:77==
17
APPENDIX A
Rosa de Nova s193148
17
Appendix A
17.1
Collimated beam apparatus
Table 24: L.cremoris biological test1
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,332
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,112
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,85
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,09
Desired UV-C dose (mJ/cm2)
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
2,5 mJ/cm2
28 s
5 mJ/cm2
56 s
7,5 mJ/cm2
83 s
10 mJ/cm2
111 s
12,5 mJ/cm2
139 s
15 mJ/cm2
167 s
Table 25: L.cremoris biological test2
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,673
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,113
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,72
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,08
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
2,5 mJ/cm2
33 s
5 mJ/cm2
64 s
7,5 mJ/cm2
97 s
10 mJ/cm2
130 s
12,5 mJ/cm2
162 s
15 mJ/cm2
194 s
Page 72 of 74
==PAGE:78==
17
APPENDIX A
Rosa de Nova s193148
Table 26: P.fluorescens50090 biological test1
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,349
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,110
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,84
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,09
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1 mJ/cm2
12 s
1,5 mJ/cm2
17 s
2 mJ/cm2
23 s
3 mJ/cm2
34 s
4 mJ/cm2
46 s
5 mJ/cm2
57s
7,5mJ/cm2
86 s
Table 27: P.fluorescens50090 biological test1
Parameter
Value
Absorbance 0,9% Sodium chloride suspension (254nm)
0,354
Irradiance measured with radiometer (mW/cm2)
0,112
Reflection factor[39]
0,975
Petri factor
0,99
Water factor [40]
0,84
Divergent factor
0,98
Average fluence rate (mW/cm2)
0,09
Desired UV-C dose
Calculate exposure time
0 mJ/cm2
0 s
1 mJ/cm2
12 s
1,5 mJ/cm2
17 s
2 mJ/cm2
23 s
3 mJ/cm2
34 s
4 mJ/cm2
46 s
5 mJ/cm2
57 s
7,5 mJ/cm2
86 s
Page 73 of 74
==PAGE:79==
17
APPENDIX A
Rosa de Nova s193148
Figures/CORRELATION ANALYSIS.png
Figure 38: Correlation score between Lyras pilot unit UV-C setting, UV-Dosesur face at the coils, and RED
delivered to L.cremoris and P.fluorescens in SKM, SKKM, WHM and CM
Page 74 of 74
