==PAGE:1==
Faculty of DTU Bioengineering
Technical University of Denmark
July 1, 2022
Faculty of DTU Bioengineering
Technical University of Denmark
July 1, 2022
Technical University of Denmark
M.Sc. Project in collaboration with Arctic Therapeutics
Proteomic analysis and biomarker assay
development on plasma samples from individuals
suffering from Hereditary cystatin C amyloid
angiopathy
Thorbjorg Katrin Davidsdottir (s202048)
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS AND BIOMARKER
ASSAY DEVELOPMENT ON PLASMA
SAMPLES FROM INDIVIDUALS SUFFERING
FROM HEREDITARY CYSTATIN C AMYLOID
ANGIOPATHY
Thorbjorg Katrin Davidsdottir (s202048)
35 ECTS thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of a
Master of Science degree in Biotechnology
Supervisors
Erwin Schoof
Hakon Hakonarson
Faculty of DTU Bioengineering
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, July 2022
==PAGE:4==
Proteomic analysis and biomarker assay development on plasma samples from individuals
suffering from Hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy
35ECTS thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of a M.Sc. degree in Biotechnology
Copyright © 2022 Thorbjorg Katrin Davidsdottir (s202048)
All rights reserved
Faculty of DTU Bioengineering
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
2800, Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Telephone: 45 25 25 25
Bibliographic information:
Thorbjorg Katrin Davidsdottir (s202048), 2022, Proteomic analysis and biomarker assay
development on plasma samples from individuals suffering from Hereditary cystatin C
amyloid angiopathy, M.Sc. thesis, Faculty of DTU Bioengineering, Technical University
of Iceland.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy (HCCAA) is a genetic disease caused by
the point mutation L68Q in the cystatin C gene (CST3). The disease leads to amy-
loid deposits in arteries of the central nervous system that cause brain hemorrhage
and carriers of the mutation have an average life expectancy of 30 years. N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC) is an FDA approved drug that is mostly prescribed for treatment of
acetaminophen overdose. One property of NAC is the ability to inhibit and disrupt
amyloid formation, and has therefore been suggested as a food supplement to prevent
HCCAA progression. Using well known methods of proteomics, mass spectrometry
(MS) and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), the aim of the project was
to evaluate if there are any changes in the proteome in plasma samples from HC-
CAA patients before and after treatment with NAC and try to discover a biomarker
which could be used as an indicator for the disease, or the disease progression. The
results from the 2-DE analysis were inconclusive since more time would have been
needed to say with confidence which proteins spots are up- or down-regulated and
to identify by MS the proteins of interest. The whole sample MS data showed that
nearly 30% of proteins found to be statistically significant belong to the protein
class defense/immunity which was down-regulated with time. This gave rise to the
hypothesis that with NAC intake, the risk of further brain hemorrhage is decreased,
decreasing brain edema and swelling and in return immune response is reduced.
Angiogenin (ANG), belonging to biological processes angiogenesis and vascular de-
velopment was also down-regulated, which could indicate that NAC has positive
effects on the vascular system but whether or not the impact is direct remains un-
known. Additionally, the MS data also showed that CST3 abundance increases when
comparing control vs. treated which was expected.
v
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This master’s thesis was carried out in collaboration with Arctic Therapeutics, lo-
cated in Akureyri, Iceland, in the time period from January 3rd 2022 to July 3rd
2022. The thesis covers 35 ECTS credits which is equal to 6 months full time work.
It is submitted as a partial fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
degree in Biotechnology. The project was supervised by Associate Professor Erwin
M. Schoof and Dr. Hakon Hakonarson. The thesis is structured as a scientific arti-
cle, containing an introduction with the relevant literature review, summarizing the
purpose and aim of the thesis, a methods section, a results section introducing the
most important findings of the study, discussion and finally a conclusion and a sec-
tion on future work. It is assumed that the reader has some fundamental knowledge
relevant to the content of the thesis.
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xiii
Abbreviations
xiv
Acknowledgments
xvi
1. Introduction
1
1.1. Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2. Theoretical background
7
2.1. Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1.
Biomarker Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2.
Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3.
Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2. Western Blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3. Methods and Material
15
3.1. Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2. Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
vii
==PAGE:8==
3.3. 2D Gel Electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4. 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5. Western Blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4. Results
22
4.1. Mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2. 2D Gel Electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3. 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4. Western Blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5. Discussion
33
5.1. Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6. Conclusions
42
7. Future Perspective
44
References
46
A. Appendix
55
viii
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.
Native and dimeric structure of human cystatin C (hCC). (a) The
native structure of hCC. (b) The Domain-swapped dimer of hCC. The
site of the L68Q mutation are emphasized by the red dots (Janowski
et al., 2001). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.
The main steps for the mass spectrometry sample preparation in this
project.
Starting with the sample lysis where proteins are broken
apart to peptides, then the decomposition of the sample into liquid
using trypsin/LysC mix, and finally the C18 stage tipping to desalt
and clean up the sample. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.
The main steps of mass spectrometry. Starting with introducing the
previously prepared sample. The sample first goes through an ion
source, then a mass selection system and finally reaches a mass analyzer. 10
4.
2D gel electrophoresis. First the protein sample is loaded onto IPG
strip in an IEF gel where the protein gets separated by its isoelectrical
point (pI). The IPG strip is then transferred to an SDS-PAGE gel
where the protein gets separated by its molecular weight. . . . . . . .
12
ix
==PAGE:10==
5.
2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis. The internal standard is made
by pooling together Control and Treated.
Each sample is labeled
with different fluorescent color, Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5. The samples are
mixed together and loaded onto IPG strip. The end result is imaged
at different wavelengths to identify each sample. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.
Western blot. First the sample is seperated by size on SDS-PAGE,
then blotted onto PVDF membrane. After the blotting, the mem-
brane is incubated with primary and secondary antibodies for visual-
ization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7.
The main steps of the mass spectrometry procedure.
. . . . . . . . .
17
8.
The main steps of the 2D gel electrophoresis procedure. . . . . . . . .
18
9.
The main steps of the 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis procedure. .
19
10.
The main steps of the western blot procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
11.
A flow chart showing the essential steps used to analyze and filter the
data from the MS.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
12.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins
(approach 1) according to their (A) molecular function and (B) bio-
logical process. Categorizations were based on information provided
by PantherDB. A total of 4 groups for molecular function and 11 for
biological process are shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
x
==PAGE:11==
13.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins
(approach 1) according to their protein class. Categorizations were
based on information provided by PantherDB. A total of 8 groups for
protein class are shown.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
14.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins
(approach 2) according to their (A) molecular function and (B) bio-
logical process. Categorizations were based on information provided
by PantherDB. A total of 3 groups for molecular function and 8 for
biological process are shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
15.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins
(approach 2) according to their protein class, there was no pathway
information found. Categorizations were based on information pro-
vided by PantherDB. A total of 3 groups for protein class are shown.
27
16.
2-DE results for individual 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
17.
2-DE results for individual 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
18.
2D-DIGE results for individuals 010 and 011. The composite is the
overlay figure from the iBright scanner that shows Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5
together. Cy2 is the internal standard which is a pool from control
(first visit) and treated (last visit), Cy2 is the control (first visit) and
Cy5 is the treated (last visit). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
xi
==PAGE:12==
19.
Relative expression for the 13 spots with p < 0.05 from the one-way
ANOVA test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
20.
Western blot results. It shows both high molecular weight cystatin C,
around 130 kDa and low molecular cystatin C, around 13 kDa. (A)
Shows the results for individuals 010, 011, 012, and 017 for both first
visit and last visit. (B) Shows the results for individuals 018 and 019
for both first visit and last visit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
21.
Relative cystatin C expression. (a) Shows the results for high molec-
ular weight cystatin C, (b) shows the results for low molecular weight
cystatin C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
xii
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
1.
Experimental setup for the 2D-DIGE. The internal standard, labeled
with Cy2, is a pool of first and last visit from each individual. The
samples labeled with Cy3 are thought of as the control (not-treated,
first visit) and samples labeled with Cy5 are the treated ones (last
visit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.
Information about the 16 participants from the clinical trial. . . . . .
55
3.
Sample concentration, measured with nanodrop after sample prepa-
ration for mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.
Protein concentration obtained from the Bradford Protein Assay.
. .
57
5.
Information about the proteins found to be statistically significant
from the MS data. Includes gene IDs, KEGG pathway, p-value and
information about protein class. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
xiii
==PAGE:14==
Abbreviations
2-DE
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
2D-DIGE
Two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis
Aβ peptide
Amyloid β-peptide
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ANG
Angiogenin
AP
Alkaline phosphatase
APP
Amyloid precursor protein
ATI
Arctic Therapeutics International
BCIP
5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate p-toluidine
BSA
Bovine Serum Albumin
CAA
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
CNS
Central nervous system
CST3
The Cystatin C gene
CysC
Cystatin C
ESI
Electrospray ionization
hCC
Human cystatin C
HCCAA
Hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy
HMW
High-molecular weight
xiv
==PAGE:15==
HPLC
High performance liquid chromatography
IEF
Isoelectric focusing
IPG
Immobilized pH gradient
ICH
Intracerebral hemorrhages
LC
Liquid chromatography
LC-MS
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
LMW
Low-molecular weight
MALDI
Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization
MS
Mass Spectrometry
m/z
Mass to charge
NAC
N-Acetyl Cystein
NBT
Nitroblue Tetrazolium Chloride
pI
Isoelectric point
PVDF
Polyvinylidene fluoride
SDS-PAGE
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
TOF
Time of Flight
xv
==PAGE:16==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost I would like to express my gratitude to both of my supervisors,
Erwin Schoof and Hakon Hakonarson.
I would like to thank Erwin for helping
me almost every step of the way while performing the project, giving me solutions
when I thought that this project would not work, giving me continuous guidance
and helpful discussions. I would like to thank Hakon for giving me the opportunity
to work on this challenging project, for always being willing to help, pointing me
in the right direction with my analysis and experimental work. I would also like
to thank the staff members at Arctic Therapeutics and other advisors connected
to ATI. Both for helping me set up experiments and some of the analysis, and for
continuous support. I would also like to thank the staff at DTU Proteomics Core for
helping me with my mass spectrometry. Last but not least I would like to thank my
family and friends for always believing in me, their constant support and motivation.
xvi
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
Hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy (HCCAA) is a very rare, autosomal dom-
inant disease that was first described in 1935 by a physician in the northwest of
Iceland. Many years later it was discovered that individuals suffering from the dis-
ease had amyloid deposits in their arteries of the central nervous system (CNS).
Later, protein purified from the amyloid was found to be protein called Cystatin C
(cysC). It is a point mutation in the cysC gene (CST3) that is associated with the
development of HCCAA. Currently there are 15 families, with 266 known or inferred
carriers of the disease in Iceland (Palsdottir et al., 2006; Palsdottir et al., 2008).
Cystatin C is a low-molecular weight protein, approximately 13.3 kDa, that
consists of 120 amino acid residues and belongs to family II of the cystatin protein
superfamily (cystatins C, S, SN, SA, D, E/M, and F). The CST3 is about 4.3
kb long and is located on chromosome 20 in humans like most members of the
cystatin family (Schnittger et al., 1993). Human cystatin C (hCC) contains four
Cys residues forming two characteristic disulfides. CysC serves as a inhibitor of
cysteine proteinases which are enzymes that degrade proteins. For example, cysC is
a high-affinity inhibitor of cathepsins B, H, K, L, and S, that are involved in many
physiological processes and have been linked to a variety of human diseases (Turk
et al., 2012). hCC consists of five-stranded anti-parallel β-sheet that wraps around
1
==PAGE:18==
a long α-helix (Janowski et al., 2001). The L68Q mutation causes destabilization
in the packing between the β-sheet and the α-helix, which allows the molecule to
open up and interact with another open hCC, forming dimers. Additionally, through
propagated domain swapping, long chains of molecules can be built, in which the
free domain of each molecule interacts with a new hCC monomer, resulting in high-
molecular weight (HMW) oligos.
This destabilization leads to the formation of
pathogenic fibrillar agreggates, known as amyloid fibrils (March et al., 2021; Mussap
and Plebani, 2004).
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.: Native and dimeric structure of human cystatin C (hCC). (a) The native
structure of hCC. (b) The Domain-swapped dimer of hCC. The site of the L68Q
mutation are emphasized by the red dots (Janowski et al., 2001).
HCCAA is classified as a cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), which is char-
acterized by amyloid deposition in the walls of arteries, arterioles, and occasionally
in capillaries and veins of the CNS. CAA disorders mostly occur in the elderly and
are commonly associated with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Haglund et al., 2004). It
has also been shown that CAA can contribute to degeneration of neurons in Parkin-
son’s disease (Bertrand et al., 2008). CAA is caused by accumulation of amyloid
2
==PAGE:19==
β (Aβ) peptide in the walls of blood vessels. The Aβ peptide is the product of the
proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP). There are two cleav-
ages necessary to release Aβ from the precursor molecule, the β-secretase cleavage
that takes place in the extracellular domain, and the γ-secretase cleavage that takes
place in the transmembrane region (Thinakaran and Koo, 2008). There are two
major forms of Aβ produced under normal conditions of APP processing that are
40 and 42 amino acid residues in length, Aβ40 and Aβ42 respectively. About 90% of
Aβ in normal individuals are of the shorter residue length, Aβ40. Mutations in the
APP gene can result in altered Aβ levels, either total Aβ levels or the Aβ42 levels
alone. Increase in Aβ42 or in the ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 can be used as an indicator
for AD in individuals as Aβ42 is the more amyloidogenic form of Aβ (Findeis, 2007;
Gralle and Ferreira, 2007).
As mentioned earlier, HCCAA is caused by a point mutation, which is a
type of mutation where one single nucleotide base is added, deleted or changed.
This point mutation is more specifically a missense mutation that leads to a leucine
substitution to glutamine at position 68, L68Q, in the CST3 gene which produces
hCC. This mutation causes accumulation of Aβ peptide in the walls of blood vessels
in the CNS, lymph nodes, spleen, salivary glands, seminal vesicles, and skin since
cysC binds to the Aβ peptide with high affinity.
Most carriers of the mutation
suffer from brain hemorrhage around the age of 20, leading to paralysis, dementia,
and death, with average life expectancy of 30 years (Mussap and Plebani, 2004;
Snorradottir et al., 2017; March et al., 2021; Sastre et al., 2004).
Arctic Therapeutics International (ATI) is a drug discovery and developing
company that has operations in Iceland and USA. The company was founded in
2015 by Hakon Hakonarsson. ATI focuses on identifying the underpinnings of both
3
==PAGE:20==
rare and common genetic diseases to develop novel and innovative therapies. Cur-
rently, there is an ongoing clinical trial at ATI that focuses on developing a drug
for individuals suffering from HCCAA. The clinical trial is currently on phase IIa
and the drug that is being researched at this phase is the FDA approved drug, N-
Acetyl Cysteine (NAC), and its encounter with individuals with HCCAA. NAC is a
derivative of L-cysteine and serves as a precursor in the biosynthesis of endogenous
antioxidant glutathione. It penetrates the blood brain barrier and causes increase
of glutathione levels in the brain. NAC has been used as a supplementary treat-
ment for several disorders, such as poly cystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), asthma,
AD and Parkinson (Mokhtari et al., 2017). NAC is usually prescribed by doctors
to treat acetaminophen overdose, but one property of NAC is its ability to inhibit
and disrupt amyloid formation, therefore it has been suggested to use NAC as food
supplement to prevent HCCAA progression (Jahić et al., 2020). It has been shown
that NAC is able to block cysC amyloid complex aggregation in a cell system and
in skin samples from individuals suffering from HCCAA (March et al., 2021). The
idea about the clinical trial arose from a young girl in Iceland that suffered from
her first hemorrhagic stroke in 2014 at the age of 21 and then another more severe
in 2015. She started taking NAC after the second, more severe hemorrhagic stroke
and since then has not had any major strokes. Since Iceland is a small country, and
HCCAA is mostly from one part of Iceland, the word got out about NAC and people
that knew that they had HCCAA started taking it also. In the clinical trial at ATI
a total of 16 individuals participated in this phase of the clinical trial at ATI. A
little over half of the individuals who participated had already started taking NAC
prior to the start of the clinical trial. However, after the clinical trial started each
person participating, started taking 2400 mg of NAC per day. Blood samples were
taking from the individuals with approximately 2-3 months apart after the clinical
4
==PAGE:21==
trial started and the blood plasma separated from the blood sample and stored.
Human plasma can function as an indicator of physiological or clinical status of a
patient. The changes in plasma protein can reflect the current state of health of
an individual and with proteomic techniques, biomarkers from blood plasma can be
discovered (Kim and Kim, 2007; Geyer et al., 2021; Geyer et al., 2019).
5
==PAGE:22==
1.1. Aim
The aim of the project is to evaluate if there are any changes in the proteome in
plasma samples from 16 HCCAA patients collected during the clinical trial before
and after treatment with NAC. The main goal is to discover a biomarker which could
be used as an indicator for the disease, or the disease progression. The main focus
will be on mass spectrometry and 2D gel electrophoresis, to look for the biomarker.
By using these methods, it is aimed to find a protein that NAC interacts with, either
up-regulates its expression or down-regulates it. Furthermore, with regards to time,
using Western Blot, the cysC amyloid complex will be analyzed to show that NAC
is indeed able to break down the high-molecular weight complexes that form in the
blood vessels of individuals that have the mutation causing HCCAA.
The next phase of the clinical trial at ATI is to research slightly modified
version of NAC that ATI made, a version that crosses the blood brain barrier more
easily and is overall more efficient. So for future perspective, it is beneficial to iden-
tify which protein the original NAC specifically targets, since it is known today that
it reduces these amyloid complexes but it remains unknown by which mechanism it
does so.
6
==PAGE:23==
2. Theoretical background
2.1. Proteomics
Proteomics refers to the study of protein and has been known since 1975. It is
the analysis of the entire protein complement of a cell, tissue, or organism under
a specific conditions. By using proteomics you can study the structure, function,
interaction, and composition of proteins and their cellular activities. Proteomics is
more complicated than genomics since the expression of the proteins is altered ac-
cording to time and environmental conditions, but it provides better understanding
of the structure and function of an organism. Proteomics can analyze the expression
of a protein at different levels and provide information on the molecular mechanisms
of diseases, cellular function, and biomarker discovery (Al-Amrani et al., 2021).
2.1.1. Biomarker Discovery
A biomarker is a biological molecule that is found in blood, tissues, or other body
fluids and can be used to identify condition or disease. It can be used to evaluate
how well the body is responding to a treatment. Biomarkers can be divided into
7
==PAGE:24==
three classes, predictive, prognostic, and diagnostic. Predictive biomarkers can pre-
dict the response to a therapy while prognostic biomarkers can provide prediction
of the clinical outcome. Diagnostic biomarker can indicate if a patient has a specific
disease condition. There are challenges when it comes to biomarker discovery when
using plasma such as protein dynamicity, variation of the patient, and the low abun-
dance of biomarkers in plasma. Both mass spectrometry and a two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis can be used for the discovery of biomarkers (Al-Amrani et al., 2021).
2.1.2. Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a useful analytical tool that can play an important role
in identifying biomarkers in biological fluids. MS measures the mass-to-charge ratio
(m/z) of molecules, or more specifically, individual ions in a sample. Only after the
molecule is converted to a gas-phase ion can the mass be measured. These mea-
surements can be used to find the exact molecular weight of the molecules present
in a sample. The most critical step in the MS analysis is the sample preparation
which often requires conversions of proteins into peptides. The most popular pro-
tease used in MS is trypsin which is a highly specific serine protease that cleaves
at the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine residues. Trypsin is used due to its high
proteolytic activity and its cleavage specificity. However, trypsin is usually not used
alone as the digestion with trypsin is rarely complete. These shortcomings can be
solved by complementing trypsin with LysC, which is a serine endoproteinase that
cleaves peptide bonds at the carboxyl side of lysines.
The use of Trypsin/LysC
has proven to provide multiple benefits for MS analysis like increased number of
peptides, and more accurate protein quantitation (Saveliev et al., 2013). Another
important factor of the sample preparation is the removal of salts and buffers. This
8
==PAGE:25==
can be done using C-18 stagetips that capture hydrophobic peptides, leaving salts
and buffers washed off.
Figure 2.: The main steps for the mass spectrometry sample preparation in this
project. Starting with the sample lysis where proteins are broken apart to peptides,
then the decomposition of the sample into liquid using trypsin/LysC mix, and
finally the C18 stage tipping to desalt and clean up the sample.
A mass spectrometer consists of three main components: ionization source, a mass
isolation system, and a mass analyzer. The ionization source is where the molecules
of interest are converted to gas-phase ions in order for them to be moved around
and manipulated by electric and magnetic fields.
There are two primary meth-
ods of choice for ionization techniques, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
(MALDI) where analyte ions are produced by pulsed-laser irradiation of a sample,
and electrospray ionization (ESI) where analyte ions are produced continuously, the
latter being the one used in this project. An example of mass isolation system is
a quadrupole. The quadrupole allows for mass selection and guides ions with the
desired m/z ratio to the Orbitrap. The mass analyser is where the ionized molecules
are separated by m/z. There are five different types of mass analyser in use that can
be divided into two groups: beam analysers and trapping analysers. The simplest
mass analyser is the time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer which separates ions
based on their velocity. TOF requires a pulse of ions making it compatible with
techniques such as MALDI (Glish and Vachet, 2003; Greco et al., 2018). Another,
newer type of mass analyzer is the Orbitrap which is used in this project. The
9
==PAGE:26==
Orbitrap is an ion trap-based mass analyzer that detects signals for m/z based on
Fourier transforms by oscillating ions in a cylindrical electrode with tapered ends.
Both quadrupole and Orbitrap are present in the Orbitrap-based Mass Spectrome-
ter. After the separation the ions are measured by detectors that can detect single
ions impinging on them. A mass spectrum is the m/z ratios of the ions present in a
sample plotted against their intensities (Hoffmann and Stroobant, 2007).
Figure 3.: The main steps of mass spectrometry. Starting with introducing the pre-
viously prepared sample. The sample first goes through an ion source, then a mass
selection system and finally reaches a mass analyzer.
Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
Liquid chromatography (LC) is a separation technique that is used to separate a
sample into its individual parts.
It is usually used for compounds that are not
volatile, meaning compounds that are not subjected to rapid or unexpected change.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a common LC technique. A
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is therefore a combination of
chromatography (LC or HPLC) for separation coupled to MS for identification and
quantification of both unknown and known active compounds. The most common
ionization source used as interface between the HPLC and the MS are ESI and
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI). The combination of high voltage
and heat for both of the ionization sources mentioned, provide the ionization that
is needed to produce the ions that are generated by the MS system (Hoffmann and
10
==PAGE:27==
Stroobant, 2007; Korfmacher, 2005).
Label-Free Quantitative Proteomics
Label-free shotgun proteomics techniques have increased in popularity since it can
overcome issues that can arise with labeling-based quantification approaches such as
more complicated and time consuming sample preparation and incomplete labeling.
Label-free LC-MS methods are considered attractive for high-throughput quanti-
tative proteomics due to straightforward sample processing, and can therefore be
scaled to a large number of samples which can be useful in biomarker discovery in
studies involving a lot of clinical samples. Label-free quantification therefore sup-
ports more sample groups and can cover more dynamic range of protein abundance.
Label-free quantification in comparison to labeling techniques has both higher dy-
namic range and proteome coverage capabilities.
Regardless of which label-free
quantitative proteomics method is used, they all include the same fundamental
steps, i) sample preparation, ii) sample separation by LC and analysis by MS, and
iii) data analysis. Precursor (MS1) intensity-based label-free quantification is the
most commonly used application for protein quantification in shotgun proteomics
(Sandin et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2020).
2.1.3. Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) is a well known and widely used method
for the study of the proteome and it is based on two orthogonal separation. A 2-
DE can typically resolve hundreds-to-thousands of individual protein species. The
first separation is based on charge where proteins are separated according to their
11
==PAGE:28==
isoelectric point (pI), using denaturing isoelectric focusing (IEF). IEF separates am-
photeric molecules according to their charge as defined by the pKa value. Protein
sample is applied to an immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip and each protein mi-
grates to their pI. The pI is a physicochemical parameter of an amphoteric molecule,
it is defined as the pH where a molecule is in a net neutral charge state. The second
separation is based on molecular mass, using denaturing sodium dodecyl sulfate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (Friedman et al., 2009; Meleady,
2018). SDS-PAGE is commonly used technology to obtain high resolution sepa-
ration of mixture of proteins. SDS-PAGE involves denaturation of the protein in
a sample, with SDS, an anionic detergent that binds to the proteins, resulting in
all the proteins having a negative net charge proportional to their molecular mass
(Nowakowski et al., 2014; Chandel and Pahadiya, 2005).
Figure 4.: 2D gel electrophoresis. First the protein sample is loaded onto IPG strip
in an IEF gel where the protein gets separated by its isoelectrical point (pI). The
IPG strip is then transferred to an SDS-PAGE gel where the protein gets separated
by its molecular weight.
12
==PAGE:29==
Two-Dimensional Difference Gel Electrophoresis
A two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) is a modified version
of 2-DE. It involves pre-labeling the proteins with different fluorescent dyes so the
samples can be mixed together and visualized on a single 2-DE gel to examine
quantitative differential expression of proteins under different conditions. 2D-DIGE
minimizes gel-to-gel variation and greatly improves quantitative analysis of protein
changes compared to 2-DE. The fluorescent dyes, Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5, are matched
for molecular weight and charge and therefore do not result in electrophoretic mobil-
ity shift between two differentially labeled samples (Meleady, 2018; Minden, 2012).
Figure 5.: 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis. The internal standard is made by pool-
ing together Control and Treated. Each sample is labeled with different fluorescent
color, Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5. The samples are mixed together and loaded onto IPG
strip. The end result is imaged at different wavelengths to identify each sample.
2.2. Western Blot
Western Blot is a technique that is used to separate and identify proteins. A mixture
of proteins are separated based on their size by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
13
==PAGE:30==
(PAGE). This technique is used to identify a specific protein from a sample and pro-
vide information about its molecular weight. Once the electrophoresis is finished,
the gel-separated proteins are transferred and immobilized to a polyvinylidene flu-
oride (PVDF) membrane, producing a band for each protein. The membrane is
washed, blocked and incubated with analyte-specific primary antibody specific to
the protein of interest. Another set of antibody, reporter-labeled secondary anti-
body is used against the host species of the primary antibody. (Hnasko and Hnasko,
2015; Yang and Mahmood, 2012).
Figure 6.: Western blot. First the sample is seperated by size on SDS-PAGE, then
blotted onto PVDF membrane. After the blotting, the membrane is incubated with
primary and secondary antibodies for visualization.
14
==PAGE:31==
3. Methods and Material
3.1. Sample preparation
16 individuals participated in the clinical trial at Arctic Therapeutics. Ten patients
had already started taking NAC as a supplement before the trial, the other six
started taking NAC right after the first visit. Both blood samples and urine samples
were taken 4 times with approximately 2-3 months apart, but only the blood samples,
or more specifically the plasma was used in this project. The plasma was separated
from the blood sample by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 10 minutes and stored at
-80°C. To prepare the plasma samples for analysis, the samples were taken from
-80°C and thawed on ice. The samples were spun down twice, first for 20 minutes
at 2000 x g, then for 20 minutes at 10.000 x g. The samples used for the project
were from the first visit and the last visit.
3.2. Mass Spectrometry
The samples were taken out of -80°C and further prepared for MS. The samples were
not depleted from albumin and IgG to ensure no loss of other proteins that might
15
==PAGE:32==
be of interest. The preparation started with sample lysis where 1 µL of plasma was
diluted in 19 µL of lysis buffer (6M GdCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, and 50
mM HEPES pH 8.5). The samples were then boiled at 95 °C for 5 minutes. Using
BioRuptor Pico, the samples were sonicated 5x 30 seconds on / 30 seconds off. After
the lysis step was the sample digestion where 10 µL of samples were diluted 3x by
adding 20 µL of digestion buffer (10% ACN, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) and 6 µL
of 100 ng LysC (Enzyme to protein concentration ratio 1:50), the samples briefly
vortexed and incubated at 37°C for approximately 3 hours. After the incubation
the sample was pulse spun down and diluted further to total 10x by adding 70 µL of
digestion buffer and 3 µL of 100 ng Trypsin (Enzyme to protein concentration ratio
1:100). The samples were briefly vortexed and incubated at 37°C overnight. The
day after the samples were diluted with 2% TFA (1:1), vortexed and spun down for
10 minutes at 21.000 x g. Finally after the sample digestion, there was the C-18
stage tipping where 200 µL pipette tips were packed with two C18 filters and the
StageTip activated using 30 µL MeOH, 30 µL buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) and 2x
30 µL buffer A’ (3% ACN, 1% TFA). The samples were loaded onto the StageTip
at 50 µL aliquots at a time and spun through at 3000 x rpm. The samples were
then washed two times with 100 µL Buffer A (0.1% FA) and eluted with two times
30 µL Buffer B’ (40% ACN, 0.1% FA) into clean 500 µL Protein LoBind Eppendorf
tubes. After the elution, the samples were placed in Speedvac for approximately 60
minutes at 60 °C and then resuspended in 12 µL Buffer A* (2% ACN, 1% TFA) with
iRT peptides. 1 µL of sample was used for Nanodrop Concentration measurements
and 1 µg of sample loaded on MS, the protein concentration for each sample can be
seen in table 3 in the appendix. All statistic data analysis was done using Perseus
v2.0.5.0 from MaxQuant.
16
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7.: The main steps of the mass spectrometry procedure.
3.3. 2D Gel Electrophoresis
The IEF gels were prepared using 0.5 µL of sample, 5 µL IEF sample buffer and 4.5
µL deionized water (dH2O). The samples were loaded onto pH 3-10 IEF gel. The
upper buffer chamber was filled with chilled 200 mL 1X IEF Cathode Buffer which
was prepared using 20 mL Novex™IEF Cathode Buffer (10X), 180 mL dH2O to a
total volume of 200 mL. The lower Buffer Chamber was filled with chilled 200 mL
1X IEF Anode Buffer which was prepared using 20 mL Novex™IEF Anode Buffer
(10X), 980 mL dH2O to a total volume of 1000 mL. The gel was run at 100 V
constant for 1 hour, followed by 200 V constant for 1 hour, finishing with 500 V
constant for 30 minutes. Afterwards, the gel was fixed for 30 minutes with 60.0 g of
Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA), and dH2O to a total volume of 500 mL. The IEF gel
was then incubated in 100 mL of 20% ethanol for 10 minutes. The lanes from the
gel were cut out from the gel for the SDS-PAGE. The strips were incubated in 2
mL SDS sample buffer and 0.5 mL ethanol for 3-5 minutes. The sample buffer was
removed and the strips were rinsed with 1X Running Buffer. The strips were then
placed on NuPAGE™4 to 12%, Bis-Tris, 1.0 mm, Mini Protein Gel. The gel was
run at 125 V constant for about 10 minutes, the filter paper removed, the program
started again and run for about 90 minutes. After the SDS-PAGE, the gel was
stained using PageBlue™Protein Staining Solution (Cat. No. 24620) according to
the manufactures instructions.
17
==PAGE:34==
Figure 8.: The main steps of the 2D gel electrophoresis procedure.
3.4. 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE)
Albumin and IgG was depleted from the samples using Pierce™Albumin/IgG Re-
moval Kit (Cat. No. 89875), according to the manufacturers instructions. Salts
and other buffers were removed using ReadyPrep™2-D Cleanup Kit (Cat. No. 163-
2130) according to the manufactures instruction and resuspended in a lysis buffer
(7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris). The protein concentration was
measured following the Bradford Protein Assay protocol (Bradford, 1976), the pro-
tein concentration for each sample can be seen in table 4 in the appendix. Stock
solution of the CyDye colors was made in the beginning by mixing 5 µL of dimethyl-
formamide (DMF) to the CyDye vials and centrifuging for 30 seconds at 12.000 x
g. To label the proteins, protein sample equivalent to 50 µg was added to a micro-
centrifuge tube with 1 µL CyDye and 4 µL DMF, i.e. 50 µg of protein was labeled
with 200 pmol of dye. The solution was mixed briefly and left on ice for 30 minutes
in the dark. After the 30 minutes, 1 µL of 10 mM lysine was added to the tube
to stop the reaction and the tube left for another 10 minutes on ice in the dark.
After the labeling, equal volume of 2x sample buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4%
CHAPS, 2% Pharmalyte, 2% DTT) was added to solution and the tube left on ice
for another 10 minutes. Next the protein samples that were separated on the same
1st and 2nd dimension gel were pooled together. The experimental setup of the
gels are shown in table 1. Each pooled sample was made up to 140 µL of Rehy-
dration Buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% Pharmalyte, 0.2% DTT)
18
==PAGE:35==
and loaded into each Sample Loading Well on the ZOOM IPGRunner™Cassette.
The ZOOM Strip were guided into the channels of the cassette with the acidic end
(+) going in first. After the strips were loaded, the sample loading well was sealed
with a sealing tape and the cassette incubated for 1 hour at room temperature to
re-hydrate the strips. After the incubation the sealing tape was peeled off the sam-
ple well and the sample well area covered with electrode wick and 600 µL of dH2O
evenly applied to each electrode wick. Next, the cassette was placed into the ZOOM
IPGRunner™for focusing. The outer buffer chamber filled with approx. 600 - 700
mL of dH2O and the run set to 175 V for 15 minutes, 175-2000 V for 45 minutes,
and 2000 V for 30 minutes. After focusing, the cassette was removed from the tank,
the film cover pealed off and the strips removed from the cassette. The strips were
placed into falcon tubes containing 10 mL of Equilibration Buffer (100 mM Tris, 6
M Urea, 30% Glycerol (87%), 2% SDS) with 1% DTT and incubated for 15 minutes.
The buffer was removed, and the strips incubated for another 15 minutes in 10 mL
of Equilibration Buffer with 2.5% acrylamide. After equilibration, the strips were
placed on NuPAGE™4 to 12%, Bis-Tris, 1.0 mm, Mini Protein Gel. 400 µL of 0.5%
agarose solution made up in 1x NuPAGE™MES SDS Running Buffer was added in
top of each strip and the gel placed in XCell SureLock® Mini-Cell with both Lower
Buffer Chamber and Upper Buffer Chamber was filled with 1x NuPAGE™MES SDS
Running Buffer. The gel was run at 200 V for 40 minutes and then imaged using
iBright™FL1500 Imaging System.
Figure 9.: The main steps of the 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis procedure.
19
==PAGE:36==
Table 1.: Experimental setup for the 2D-DIGE. The internal standard, labeled with
Cy2, is a pool of first and last visit from each individual. The samples labeled with
Cy3 are thought of as the control (not-treated, first visit) and samples labeled with
Cy5 are the treated ones (last visit)
# Gel
Cy2
Cy3
Cy5
Gel 1
Standard
010_1
010_3
Gel 2
Standard
011_1
011_4
Gel 3
Standard
012_1
012_4
Gel 4
Standard
017_1
017_4
Gel 5
Standard
018_1
018_4
Gel 6
Standard
019_1
019_4
3.5. Western Blot
Two identical gels were made for each sample. 2 µL of sample was added to 5 µL of
NuPAGE™LDS Sample Buffer (4X) and 13 µL of dH2O, and loaded onto NuPage
Bis tris 4-12% gel. The protein ladder used was PageRuler™Plus Prestained Protein
Ladder (Cat. No. 26620) The gels were run at 200V for 35 minutes. One gel was
stained using PageBlue™Protein Staining Solution (Cat. No. 24620), according
to the manufacturers instruction. The other gel was further prepared for blotting
in iBlot™2 Gel Transfer Device. A new transfer stack, iBlot™2 Transfer Stacks,
PVDF, mini (Ref. No. IB24002), was opened and the bottom stack placed on the
iBlot device. The gel cassette was opened and the gel briefly rinsed with dH2O and
placed on top of the Bottom Stack. A pre-soaked iBlot™Filter Paper was placed
on top of the gel and air bubbles removed using the Blotter Roller. The Top Stack
was then placed on top of the Filter Paper and the Absorbent Pad placed on top of
the Top Stack ensuring that the electrical contacts were aligned with the electrical
20
==PAGE:37==
contacts on the blotting surface of the iBlot device. The iBlot device was gently
closed and the template program P3 (7 minutes, 20V) was used. After the run the
transfer membrane was removed from the stack, washed in dH2O for 5 minutes and
then incubated with blocking buffer, 1% BSA made up in TBS-T for 1 hour shaking.
The blocking buffer was removed and the membrane incubated overnight shaking
with primary antibody, Cystatin C (D6U3E) Rabbit mAb (Cat. No. 24840S) diluted
1:1000 in TBS-T. Afterwards, the membrane was washed 3 times for 10 minutes in
TBS-T and then incubated for 1 hour shaking with secondary antibody, ANTI-
Rabbit IgG (Cat. No. 7054S) diluted 1:30.000 in 1% BSA made up in TBS-T.
Again, the membrane was washed 3 times for 10 minutes in TBS-T and then placed
in a tray and incubated in 10 mL of alkaline phosphatase (AP) substrate buffer for
15 minutes shaking in dark room. 330 µL of Nitroblue Tetrazolium Chloride (NBT),
10 mg/ml dissolved in 70% DMF and 30% dH2O, was added to the AP substrate
buffer and left for 2-3 minutes before also adding 66 µL of 5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl
phosphate p-toluidine (BCIP), 25 mg/ml dissolved in 100% DMF. The membrane
incubated for another 5-20 minutes until the bands appear. The membrane was
washed with dH2O for approximately 5 minutes to stop the reaction.
Figure 10.: The main steps of the western blot procedure.
21
==PAGE:38==
4. Results
4.1. Mass spectrometry
The results from the MS were analysed using Perseus, figure 11 shows the workflow
of how the data was filtered and subjected to statistical tests. Two approached were
taken during the analysis: 1) The samples were divided into 4 groups, control 1 (first
visit for individuals that had never taken NAC prior to the clinical trial), treated
1 (last visit for individuals that had never taken NAC prior to the clinical trial),
control 2 (first visit for individuals that had taken NAC prior to the clinical trial),
and treated 2 (last visit for individuals that had taken NAC prior to the clinical
trial), 2) the samples were divided into two groups, control (first visit) and treated
(last visit).
22
==PAGE:39==
Figure 11.: A flow chart showing the essential steps used to analyze and filter the
data from the MS.
The proteins found to be statistically significant (p < 0.05) in each approach further
analyzed using PantherDB (http://pantherdb.org/). Figures 12 and 13 show the
results from the PantherDB search for approach 1, figures 14 and 15 show the results
for approach 2. The figures show what molecular function, biological process, protein
class, and pathway the proteins found represented.
23
==PAGE:40==
Figure 12.: Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins (approach 1)
according to their (A) molecular function and (B) biological process. Categoriza-
tions were based on information provided by PantherDB. A total of 4 groups for
molecular function and 11 for biological process are shown.
24
==PAGE:41==
Figure 13.: Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representation
of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins (approach 1) ac-
cording to their protein class. Categorizations were based on information provided
by PantherDB. A total of 8 groups for protein class are shown.
25
==PAGE:42==
Figure 14.: Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins (approach 2)
according to their (A) molecular function and (B) biological process. Categoriza-
tions were based on information provided by PantherDB. A total of 3 groups for
molecular function and 8 for biological process are shown.
26
==PAGE:43==
Figure 15.: Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the identified proteins. Representa-
tion of the distribution of statistically significant identified proteins (approach 2)
according to their protein class, there was no pathway information found. Catego-
rizations were based on information provided by PantherDB. A total of 3 groups
for protein class are shown.
4.2. 2D Gel Electrophoresis
Figures 16 and 17 show the results from the 2-DE from first and last visit for two
individuals, number 10 and 11. The figures were not further analyzed since the result
would not have been sufficient. It seems that the protein all migrated to one end of
the gel during the electrophoresis in the first dimension, resulting in the protein all
being located at one end of the second gel.
27
==PAGE:44==
(a) First visit
(b) Last visit
Figure 16.: 2-DE results for individual 10
(a) First visit
(b) Last visit
Figure 17.: 2-DE results for individual 11
4.3. 2D Difference Gel Electrophoresis
Figure 18 shows the results from the 2D-DIGE analysis for individual 010 and 011.
The composite figure is the overlay figure showing Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5 together,
Cy2 is the internal standard that refers to a pool of control and treated, Cy3 is the
control group (first visit), and Cy5 is the treated group (last visit).
28
==PAGE:45==
(a) Individual 010
(b) Individual 010
Figure 18.: 2D-DIGE results for individuals 010 and 011.
The composite is the
overlay figure from the iBright scanner that shows Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5 together.
Cy2 is the internal standard which is a pool from control (first visit) and treated
(last visit), Cy2 is the control (first visit) and Cy5 is the treated (last visit).
The figures were further analysed using MelanieTM Classic/DIGE. The expression of
each spot, control vs. treated, with p < 0.05 from a one-way ANOVA test calculated
in Melanie is presented in figure 19.
29
==PAGE:46==
Figure 19.: Relative expression for the 13 spots with p < 0.05 from the one-way
ANOVA test.
4.4. Western Blot
Figure 20 shows the PVDF membrane from the western blot. Both high molecular
weight (HMW) cystatin C, around 130 kDa, and low molecular weight (LMW)
cystatin C, around 13 kDa can be seen for each individual. Low molecular weight
cystatin C refers to the native form of cystatin C, monomer.
The result is for
individuals 010, 011, 012, 017, 018, and 019.
The number after the individual
number indicated whether it is a sample from the first visit or the last visit, 010_1
being the first visit, 010_4 the last visit and etc.
30
==PAGE:47==
Figure 20.: Western blot results. It shows both high molecular weight cystatin C,
around 130 kDa and low molecular cystatin C, around 13 kDa. (A) Shows the
results for individuals 010, 011, 012, and 017 for both first visit and last visit. (B)
Shows the results for individuals 018 and 019 for both first visit and last visit.
Figure 21 shows the relative cystatin C expression for both high molecular weight
cystatin C and low molecular cystatin C from the PVDF membrane seen above.
The figure of the membrane was analyzed using ImageJ to make the graphs. The
first visit was referred to as a control while the last visit was referred to as treated.
31
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.: Relative cystatin C expression. (a) Shows the results for high molecular
weight cystatin C, (b) shows the results for low molecular weight cystatin C.
32
==PAGE:49==
5. Discussion
The purpose of the project was to identify potential biomarker that could be an
indicator for the progression of HCCAA. The goal was to do a conventional 2-DE,
find an interesting protein spot, cut the spot out and do mass spectrometry of the
gel slice to analyze which protein it was. As can be seen on figures 16 and 17,
the results on the gels were not what was expected. It seems that the protein all
migrated to a high pH in the first dimension, therefore, when running the second
dimension the proteins were all located on one side of the gel which made it hard to
analyze the gel. The most plausible explanation for the protein to all locate on one
side of the gel is that the plasma sample was not pure enough since the samples were
not cleaned from salts and buffers and therefore the IEF might not have worked as it
is very sensitive to impurities. There have been studies that show that simple salts
and buffer salts greatly interfere with the IEF and can result in decreased focusing,
and the proteins failing to migrate to their proper positions in the pH gradient (Wu
et al., 2010; Smejkal and Robinson, 2007). An acetone precipitation and 2D-clean
up kit could have been used to get rid of the impurities from the samples. Another
reason for these abnormal results could potentially be that the plasma samples were
not handled correctly or that it is inefficient to first run IEF gel, cut the gel into
strips and place them on SDS-PAGE gel instead of running the samples on precast
33
==PAGE:50==
IPG strips and then placing the strips on the SDS-PAGE gel, as there was no way
to see if the correct piece of gel was being cut. Nevertheless, it was decided that
a better approach would be to perform 2D-DIGE analysis, both due to the fact
that fewer gels would have to be run, and there would be less variation with image
analysis since samples from both first and last visit could be run together on one
gel. There was a lot of delay getting the products needed to perform the 2D-DIGE
analysis, and for that reason, another approach was taken. It was decided to do
a whole sample MS for each individual, both the first visit and the last visit (32
samples in total). Information about the individuals are shown in table 2 in the
appendix. By taking this approach, the goal was to gain oversight of all proteins
present in the samples and hopefully identify at least one if not more proteins that
would be either up-regulated or down-regulated in connection with NAC intake.
LC-MS analysis showed that a total of 628 proteins were observed in the
plasma samples. The resulting data was further analyzed using Perseus (Tyanova
et al., 2016). As mentioned previously two approaches were taken during the anal-
ysis, approach 1) samples divided into 4 groups with respect to whether individuals
had taken NAC before the clinical trial or not, and whether it was the first or last
visit, approach 2) samples divided into 2 groups, first and last visit. After filtering
based on valid values, a total of 311 proteins met the criteria in approach 1, and
335 in approach 2. The samples remaining in approach 1 were put through a mul-
tiple sample test, ANOVA, which led to a total of 15 proteins having a p-value less
than 0.05 (p < 0.05), meaning that they were found to be statistically significant
between groups. 6 of these 15 were down-regulated, the rest up-regulated. The
samples remaining in approach 2 were put through a paired T-test which resulted in
a total of 5 proteins with p < 0.05, three of which were up-regulated and two that
were down-regulated. The statistically significant proteins from both approaches
34
==PAGE:51==
were further analyzed using PantherDB (Mi et al., 2021). Proteins were distributed
into categories according to their molecular function and biological process (Fig.
12 and 14), and according to their protein class (Fig. 13 and 15). The identified
proteins from approach 1 were characterized by their molecular function (Fig. 12A)
with the most abundant subgroups being catalytic activity (35.7%) and binding
(35.7%). More than half of the proteins (56.7%) categorized by biological process
(Fig. 12B) were grouped into four categories: Cellular process (18.9%), biological
regulation (13.5%), response to stimulus (13.5%), and metabolic process (10.8%).
Most proteins (67.6%) categorized by protein class (Fig. 13) were grouped into four
categories: Defense/immunity protein (26.7%), protein modifying enzyme (14.3%),
protein-binding activity modulator (13.3%), and metabolite interconversion enzyme
(13.3%). The identified proteins from approach 2 were also characterized by their
molecular function (Fig. 14A) and were equally grouped into three groups: Struc-
tural molecule activity (33.3%), binding (33.3%), and molecular transducer activity
(33.3%). The majority of the proteins (79.9%) categorized by biological process (Fig.
14B) were grouped into five categories: Cellular process (20.0%), response to stim-
ulus (20.0%), biological regulation (13.3%), immune system process (13.3%), and
signaling (13.3%). The proteins categorized by protein class (Fig. 15) were grouped
into three categories: Defense/immunity protein (50.0%), cell adhesion molecule
(25.0%), and calcium-binding protein (25.0%).
While waiting for the products needed for the 2D-DIGE analysis, a few western
blots were run on the same 6 samples chosen for the 2D-DIGE. The protocol had
to be adjusted few times in order to achieve good bands and the final result is
shown in figure 20. The figure shows both HMW cystatin C, around 130 kDa, and
LMW cystatin C, around 13 kDa which is what was desired. The analysis of the
gels was performed using ImageJ (Schneider et al., 2012). The data attained from
35
==PAGE:52==
ImageJ was extracted and further analysis and plots were made in excel. What
was expected was that the HMW cystatin C expression should be higher for the
control (first visit) than for treated (last visit). However, that was not the case
for all samples, as figure 21a shows, there seems to be no consistency in whether
levels of HMW cystatin C are lowered for the treated samples. The same goes for
LMW cystatin C, what was expected was that the intensity should be increased
from first visit to last visit, but as shown in figure 21b, there is no indication that
expression of LMW cystatin C is consistently increasing. These samples were not
cleaned nor was albumin and IgG removed which could potentially be the reason for
this result, there was unfortunately not enough time to run another western blot to
see whether it would make a difference to more properly handle the samples before
running them on the gel. A mistake was made by accident while blotting the second
gel, seen in figure 20b, as there were two absorbent pads used. It seems like it did
not impact the results too much as you can still see the bands in the correct places.
It is hard to say exactly why the results are not as expected, but there are a number
of problems that can arise when performing a western blot, even though it is a fairly
simple procedure. These problems can be grouped into five categories: unusual or
unexpected bands, no bands at all, faint bands or weak signal, high background on
the blot, and lastly uneven spots on the blot (Yang and Mahmood, 2012). Repeated
freeze/thaw cycles of the sample as it can have significant effect on the quality of
the protein, and also that in some cases the removal of cellular debris in the sample
can lead to a significant loss of the protein of interest, leading to incorrect results.
The amount of protein that is loaded onto the gels can also lead to inconsistency
between samples (Ghosh et al., 2014). In my opinion, the most likely reason for these
insufficient results are these above mentioned reasons, since the sample used for the
western blot had gone through at least 3-4 freeze/thaw cycles and was centrifuged
36
==PAGE:53==
efficiently (10.000 x g for 20 minutes) to remove the cellular debris. The protein
concentration for each sample was also not determined before loading the samples
onto the gel, therefore, I cannot say with confidence that there was equal amount
of protein in each sample since I did not measure the protein concentration before
running the gels, which can also explain why the intensity of the bands vary in
the way they do and do not correlate with expected results in each case. It also
would have been good to have a loading control since they are essential for proper
interpretation of western blots. Commonly used western blot loading controls are
housekeeping proteins like β-actin, GAPDH, and β-tubulin (Nie et al., 2017).
When the products for the 2D-DIGE arrived, it was decided to run only sam-
ples from 6 out of 16 individuals that participated in the trial due to limited time.
The samples chosen were from individuals 010, 011, 012, 017, 018, and 019, both
first and last visit. The samples were chosen by taking into consideration whether
the patient had taken NAC intake prior to clinical trial or not, 010, 018, and 019
had taken NAC prior to the clinical trial while 011, 012, and 017 had not. This
time, the sample was properly cleaned using a 2D clean up kit, and albumin and
IgG depleted. As previously mentioned, the internal standard, consisting of a pool
of the first and last visit from each individuals was stained with Cy2, the control
with Cy3, and treated with Cy5. Reduction and alkylation are critical steps of pro-
teomics, and normally when performing a 2-DE or 2D-DIGE, the alkylating agent
used is iodoacetamide. Unfortunately, the iodoacetamide was out of stock, so in-
stead, I used acrylamide as an alternative. Acrylamide has been reported several
time as an alternative to iodoacetamide with similar results of alkylation (Sutta-
pitugsakul et al., 2017). Due to limited time, only gels from individual 010, and
011 were analysed using MelanieTM Classic/DIGE (SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinfor-
matics). The analysis resulted in a total of 307 spots, 13 of which had a p value,
37
==PAGE:54==
p < 0.05.
Due to limited replicates and time, it is not possible to tell whether
any difference observed was due to technical variation, inherent biological variation
(between individuals), or induced biological variation. Even though 2D-DIGE de-
creases the effects of technical variability there can still be a number of things that
cause variability that result in difference between spots and gels. Therefore, the
use of normalization and dye swapping techniques to avoid labeling bias, are used
to minimize these variabilities (Anderson et al., 2007). Replicates allow for more
robust data analysis and can be grouped into two main types: technical replicates,
by running another gel with the same sample, or biological replicates, using different
samples from the same treatment group. To identify changes in protein expression is
is essential to use biological replicates, because if there are only technical replicates
in an experiment, it is unrealistic to assume that there are is no biological variability
(Karp et al., 2005). If time had allowed, it would have been beneficial, and even
necessary to have more replicates, both technical and biological, to obtain better
and more reliable results. Each 2D-DIGE gel in this project was run with sample
from only one individual at a time, but what would have been interesting to see is
whether there would have been different results pooling together samples from the
control group and label, and then pooling together the treated group and label, and
run on one gel as that might reduce the risk of biological variability. Also, the sta-
tistical test performed in MelanieTM Classic/DIGE would have been more accurate
of there were more technical replicates, if each strip/gel was done in triplicate rather
then only having one gel from each individual to analyze. Finally, to know which
protein it is that is statistically significant on the gels, it would have been needed
to cut out the protein stain and do MS on it.
Intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH) inevitably result in cerebral edema and
swelling of the brain (Stokum et al., 2016). A robust and rapid immune response
38
==PAGE:55==
immediately follows ICH with the activation of neuroglia and the infiltration of
leukocytes that release proinflammatory factors like IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α. As
early as 6 hours after ICH, lymphocytes are also found in the cerebrospinal fluid,
and there have been reports of neutrophils and monocytes in association to ICH.
Natural killer (NK) cells are large lymphocytes that possess cytotoxic activity and
produce cytokines and chemokines to intensify immune response. NK cells have
been found to contribute to early perihematomal edema (Li et al., 2020; Aronowski
and Zhao, 2011; Mracsko and Veltkamp, 2014). CNS injury also results in distur-
bance of the normal interplay between the immune system and the CNS, therefore
CNS injuries lead to immunodeficiency, leaving individuals that suffer from brain
injuries, more vulnerable to bacterial infections (Meisel et al., 2005). Additionally,
the amyloid desposition that results from the L68Q mutation in HCCAA patients
not only cause brain hemorrhages but also lead to severe vascular damage (Emils-
son et al., 1996). A statistical enrichment test was also done in PantherDB to look
further into the biological process that the statistically significant proteins belonged
to. In total there were 18 different proteins found to be statistically significant from
approach 1 and 2, information about the proteins can be seen in table 5 in the
appendix. I chose to look only at the 15 proteins found in approach 1, where it was
taken into account if the individual had previously taken NAC or not before the
clinical trial as I thought that would give the best outcome. Out of these 15 pro-
teins, 4 proteins belonged to defense/immunity protein class; Immunoglobulin heavy
variable 4-28 (IGHV4-28), low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor
III-A (FCGR3A), neutrophil defensin 1 (DEFA1), and complement factor H-related
protein 4 (CFHR4). Interestingly from the enrichment test, the biological processes
connected to the immune system and had something to do with immune response
or defense, were all be down-regulated with time. Exploratory research, like this
39
==PAGE:56==
project, has no formal hypothesis, but they allow for hypothesis to be generated.
These results can potentially lead to the hypothesis that for individuals with HC-
CAA, by taking NAC and minimizing the risk of future brain hemorrhage; brain
edema and brain swelling decreases, leading to decreased immune response.
One of the statistically significant proteins found was Angiogenin (ANG).
ANG acts as a potent angiogenic protein triggering cell proliferation, and has been
identified as a repair-associated factor in rehabilitation after a stroke. It has been
previously shown that blood ANG levels are increased during rehabilitation therapy
after a stroke and can potentially be used as a biomarker to monitor patient status
ANG, in other words, it can be used as a potential biomarker of recovery from
stroke. ANG levels were reported to decrease between 3-6 months after intensive
rehabilitation therapy (Garcia-Rodriguez et al., 2021; Gabriel-Salazar et al., 2018).
In this study, the biological processes regarding ANG, both angiogenisis and vascular
development, were both down-regulated with time. Whether or not NAC has direct
impact on ANG, would have to be further investigated by looking into the drug-
protein interaction.
Worth mentioning, even though it did not come up as one of the statistically
significant proteins, mainly due to values missing for some of the samples, there was
a trend that showed that CST3 was increased from first visit to last visit, which
is exactly what was expected and can correlate to the fact that NAC is promoting
the decrease of HMW CST3. The more of the HMW CST3 that breaks down to
monomers, the more CST3 abundance should be increased.
40
==PAGE:57==
5.1. Limitations
There were a few limitations during this project. The limitation that had the biggest
impact on all the practical part of the project was the long wait for products,
resulting in reduced time to perform the practical part of the project. On average
the wait for product varied from 2 weeks to 2 months making it difficult to finish all
the practical steps that was desired to do. This long waiting time resulted in fewer
trial and error runs, making the final results not sufficient as not all the samples
could be subjected to both the 2D-DIGE and western blot.
Another limitation
regarding the project was the sample size. As there were only 16 individuals who
participated in this phase of the clinical trial. To look for biomarker, it might have
been more insightful to have a larger sample size as the results might have been
more significant than they were with only 16.
MS-based technology is the only approach that allows for data-driven in-
vestigations like finding a new biomarker, but what challenges MS-based plasma
proteomics is the dynamic range of protein abundance in plasma which can vary by
up to 12 orders of magnitude. To overcome this challenge, plasma prefractionation,
or the depletion of high abundance proteins like albumin and IgG, can be crucial
to provide the opportunity to identify low-abundance proteins in a plasma sample.
Proteins that are likely to be clinically relevant are more likely to be of medium or
low abundance, therefore are more likely to be found in fractionated plasma (Kaur
et al., 2021; Hortin and Sviridov, 2010). It therefore could have been beneficial to
do a high abundant protein depletion on the LC-MS samples as it could have helped
to gain further insight into the low abundance proteins that might have shown more
regulatory effects during treatment.
41
==PAGE:58==
6. Conclusions
In conclusion, more time would have been needed in order to attain conclusive results
from the 2-DE / 2D-DIGE, and the western blot. For the 2D-DIGE, more technical
and biological replicates would have had to been done in order to be able to say with
certainty which proteins are in fact up- or down-regulated, and then the spots found
to be statistically significant would have had to been cut from the gel and analyzed
using MS to be able to identify which protein is in question. For the western blot,
even though the resulting membranes look decent, the results are not quite what
was expected for each case. The samples would most likely have had to be prepared
more efficiently and normalized in a way so that the same amount of protein would
be in each well for each sample for the results to be significant.
However, the results from the MS analysis showed that nearly 30% of proteins
found to be statistically significant belong to the protein class defense/immunity.
This gave rise to the hypothesis that NAC minimizes the risk of future brain hem-
orrhage, therefore decreases brain edema and brain swelling, resulting in decreased
immune response.
If the hypothesis would be investegated further, it could po-
tentially be linked to patient survival. ANG was also found to be a statistically
significant protein, relating to the vascular system. The biological processes related
to ANG, angiogenisis and vascular development, were down-regulated along with
42
==PAGE:59==
the expression of ANG itself with time. Whether or not NAC has direct impact on
ANG, would however have to be further investigated, but it seems that NAC might
possibly have positive effect on the vascular system as well. Additionally, the MS
data also revealed that CST3 abundance increases between the control group and
treated which is what was expected since the HMW CST3 is broken down to CST3
monomers with NAC intake.
43
==PAGE:60==
7. Future Perspective
As the present study was time limited, there are still unanswered questions that can
be addressed in future work. It is clear that the goal to find a specific biomarker
that could be an indicator for the disease progression has not been met. However,
it seems from the results in this project that a single specific biomarker is unlikely
to be found and that more focus should be put towards molecular signatures of
multiple proteins, rather than just on single individual candidates.
The current work was though enlightening as it shows positive results regard-
ing cystatin C and that immune response is decreased after intake of NAC. Further
studies would have to be made to access how the defense/immunity proteins found
to be statistically significant work in regards to HCCAA and NAC. It could be
interesting to look further into the hypothesis made and to investigate if it could
be potentially linked to patient survival. It might also be interesting to explore
whether or not NAC has a direct impact on ANG and therefore the rehabilitation
after stroke.
A lot has been learned from this project that can be used for future work,
regarding both treatment of the samples, the sample size, replicates of samples, etc.
There are plans for continuing this project but with new and improved version of
44
==PAGE:61==
NAC, with more individuals participating in that clinical trial which will hopefully
shed a light on the mechanism behind how NAC is working to reduce high-molecular
weight cystatin C and therefore minimize the risk of future brain hemorrhage for
the carriers of HCCAA.
45
==PAGE:62==
References
Al-Amrani, S., Al-Jabri, Z., Al-Zaabi, A., Alshekaili, J., & Al-Khabori, M. (2021).
Proteomics: Concepts and applications in human medicine. World Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 12(5), 57–69. https://doi.org/10.4331/wjbc.v12.i5.57
Anderson, T. J., Tchernyshyov, I., Diez, R., Cole, R. N., Geman, D., Dang, C. V.,
& Winslow, R. L. (2007). Discovering robust protein biomarkers for disease
from relative expression reversals in 2-D DIGE data. PROTEOMICS, 7(8),
1197–1207. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200600374
Aronowski, J., & Zhao, X. (2011). Molecular Pathophysiology of Cerebral Hemor-
rhage: Secondary Brain Injury. Stroke, 42(6), 1781–1786. https://doi.org/10.
1161/STROKEAHA.110.596718
Bertrand, E., Lewandowska, E., Stepień, T., Szpak, G. M., Pasennik, E., & Modzelewska,
J. (2008). Amyloid angiopathy in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Immunohis-
tochemical and ultrastructural study. [Place: Poland]. Folia neuropathologica,
46(4), 255–270.
Bradford, M. M. (1976). A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of mi-
crogram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding.
Analytical Biochemistry, 72(1-2), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-
2697(76)90527-3
46
==PAGE:63==
Chandel, K. K., & Pahadiya, S. (2005). Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Poly Acrylamide
Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) Technique and Its Applications. 2005, 4.
Chen, L., Zhao, W., He, J., Li, L., Meng, D., Cai, D., Yu, J., Chen, D., Wu, Y.,
& Zhou, T. (2018). Label-Free Quantitative Proteomic Screening of Can-
didate Plasma Biomarkers for the Prognosis of Breast Cancer with Differ-
ent Lymph Node Statuses. PROTEOMICS - Clinical Applications, 12(3),
1700117. https://doi.org/10.1002/prca.201700117
Emilsson, V., Thorsteinsson, L., Jensson, O., & Gudnnundsson, G. (1996). Human
cystatin C expression and regulation by TGF-β1: Implications for the patho-
genesis of hereditary cystatin C amyloid angiopathy causing brain hemor-
rhage. Amyloid, 3(2), 110–118. https://doi.org/10.3109/13506129609014362
Findeis, M. A. (2007). The role of amyloid β peptide 42 in Alzheimer’s disease.
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 116(2), 266–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pharmthera.2007.06.006
Friedman, D. B., Hoving, S., & Westermeier, R. (2009). Chapter 30 Isoelectric Fo-
cusing and Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis. Methods in Enzymology
(pp. 515–540). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(09)63030-5
Gabriel-Salazar, M., Morancho, A., Rodriguez, S., Buxó, X., García-Rodríguez, N.,
Colell, G., Fernandez, A., Giralt, D., Bustamante, A., Montaner, J., & Rosell,
A. (2018). Importance of Angiogenin and Endothelial Progenitor Cells After
Rehabilitation Both in Ischemic Stroke Patients and in a Mouse Model of
Cerebral Ischemia. Frontiers in Neurology, 9, 508. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fneur.2018.00508
Garcia-Rodriguez, N., Rodriguez, S., Tejada, P. I., Miranda-Artieda, Z. M., Ridao,
N., Buxó, X., Pérez-Mesquida, M. E., Beseler, M. R., Salom, J. B., Pérez,
L. M., Inzitari, M., Otero-Villaverde, S., Martin-Mourelle, R., Molleda, M.,
47
==PAGE:64==
Quintana, M., Olivé-Gadea, M., Penalba, A., & Rosell, A. (2021). Functional
Recovery and Serum Angiogenin Changes According to Intensity of Reha-
bilitation Therapy After Stroke. Frontiers in Neurology, 12, 767484. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2021.767484
Geyer, P. E., Mann, S. P., Treit, P. V., & Mann, M. (2021). Plasma Proteomes Can
Be Reidentifiable and Potentially Contain Personally Sensitive and Incidental
Findings. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 20, 100035. https://doi.org/10.
1074/mcp.RA120.002359
Geyer, P. E., Voytik, E., Treit, P. V., Doll, S., Kleinhempel, A., Niu, L., Müller,
J. B., Buchholtz, M.-L., Bader, J. M., Teupser, D., Holdt, L. M., & Mann,
M. (2019). Plasma Proteome Profiling to detect and avoid sample-related
biases in biomarker studies. EMBO Molecular Medicine, 11(11). https://doi.
org/10.15252/emmm.201910427
Ghosh, R., Gilda, J. E., & Gomes, A. V. (2014). The necessity of and strategies
for improving confidence in the accuracy of western blots. Expert Review of
Proteomics, 11(5), 549–560. https://doi.org/10.1586/14789450.2014.939635
Glish, G. L., & Vachet, R. W. (2003). The basics of mass spectrometry in the
twenty-first century. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 2(2), 140–150. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nrd1011
Gralle, M., & Ferreira, S. T. (2007). Structure and functions of the human amyloid
precursor protein: The whole is more than the sum of its parts. Progress in
Neurobiology, 82(1), 11–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2007.02.001
Greco, V., Piras, C., Pieroni, L., Ronci, M., Putignani, L., Roncada, P., & Urbani,
A. (2018). Applications of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in clinical pro-
teomics. Expert Review of Proteomics, 15(8), 683–696. https://doi.org/10.
1080/14789450.2018.1505510
48
==PAGE:65==
Haglund, M., Sjöbeck, M., & Englund, E. (2004). Severe Cerebral Amyloid An-
giopathy Characterizes an Underestimated Variant of Vascular Dementia.
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 18(2), 132–137. https://doi.
org/10.1159/000079192
Hnasko, T. S., & Hnasko, R. M. (2015). The Western Blot [Series Title: Methods in
Molecular Biology]. In R. Hnasko (Ed.), ELISA (pp. 87–96). Springer New
York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-2742-5_9
Hoffmann, E. d., & Stroobant, V. (2007). Mass spectrometry: Principles and appli-
cations (3rd ed). J. Wiley.
Hortin, G. L., & Sviridov, D. (2010). The dynamic range problem in the analysis
of the plasma proteome. Journal of Proteomics, 73(3), 629–636. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jprot.2009.07.001
Jahić, A., Tušek Žnidarič, M., Pintar, S., Berbić, S., & Žerovnik, E. (2020). The effect
of three polyphenols and some other antioxidant substances on amyloid fibril
formation by Human cystatin C. Neurochemistry International, 140, 104806.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2020.104806
Janowski, R., Kozak, M., Jankowska, E., Grzonka, Z., Grubb, A., Abrahamson, M.,
& Jaskolski, M. (2001). Human cystatin C, an amyloidogenic protein, dimer-
izes through threedimensional domain swapping. Nature Structural Biology,
8(4), 316–320. https://doi.org/10.1038/86188
Karp, N. A., Spencer, M., Lindsay, H., O’Dell, K., & Lilley, K. S. (2005). Impact
of Replicate Types on Proteomic Expression Analysis. Journal of Proteome
Research, 4(5), 1867–1871. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr050084g
Kaur, G., Poljak, A., Ali, S. A., Zhong, L., Raftery, M. J., & Sachdev, P. (2021).
Extending the Depth of Human Plasma Proteome Coverage Using Simple
49
==PAGE:66==
Fractionation Techniques. Journal of Proteome Research, 20(2), 1261–1279.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00670
Kim, M.-R., & Kim, C.-W. (2007). Human blood plasma preparation for two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis. Journal of Chromatography B, 849(1-2), 203–
210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2006.11.046
Korfmacher, W. A. (2005). Foundation review: Principles and applications of LC-
MS in new drug discovery. Drug Discovery Today, 10(20), 1357–1367. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03620-2
Li, Z., Li, M., Shi, S. X., Yao, N., Cheng, X., Guo, A., Zhu, Z., Zhang, X., & Liu,
Q. (2020). Brain transforms natural killer cells that exacerbate brain edema
after intracerebral hemorrhage. Journal of Experimental Medicine, 217(12),
e20200213. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20200213
March, M. E., Gutierrez-Uzquiza, A., Snorradottir, A. O., Matsuoka, L. S., Balvis,
N. F., Gestsson, T., Nguyen, K., Sleiman, P. M. A., Kao, C., Isaksson, H. J.,
Bragason, B. T., Olafsson, E., Palsdottir, A., & Hakonarson, H. (2021). NAC
blocks Cystatin C amyloid complex aggregation in a cell system and in skin
of HCCAA patients. Nature Communications, 12(1), 1827. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-021-22120-4
Meisel, C., Schwab, J. M., Prass, K., Meisel, A., & Dirnagl, U. (2005). Central
nervous system injury-induced immune deficiency syndrome. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 6(10), 775–786. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1765
Meleady, P. (2018). Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis and 2D-DIGE [Series Ti-
tle: Methods in Molecular Biology]. In K. Ohlendieck (Ed.), Difference Gel
Electrophoresis (pp. 3–14). Springer New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4939-7268-5_1
50
==PAGE:67==
Mi, H., Ebert, D., Muruganujan, A., Mills, C., Albou, L.-P., Mushayamaha, T., &
Thomas, P. D. (2021). PANTHER version 16: A revised family classification,
tree-based classification tool, enhancer regions and extensive API. Nucleic
Acids Research, 49(D1), D394–D403. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1106
Minden, J. S. (2012). Two-Dimensional Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D DIGE).
Methods in Cell Biology (pp. 111–141). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-405914-6.00006-8
Mokhtari, V., Afsharian, P., Shahhoseini, M., Kalantar, M., & Moini, A. (2017).
A Review on Various Uses of N-Acetyl Cysteine. Cell J (Yakhteh), 19(1).
https://doi.org/10.22074/cellj.2016.4872
Mracsko, E., & Veltkamp, R. (2014). Neuroinflammation after intracerebral hemor-
rhage. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.
2014.00388
Mussap, M., & Plebani, M. (2004). Biochemistry and Clinical Role of Human Cys-
tatin C. Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences, 41(5-6), 467–550.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408360490504934
Nie, X., Li, C., Hu, S., Xue, F., Kang, Y. J., & Zhang, W. (2017). An appropriate
loading control for western blot analysis in animal models of myocardial is-
chemic infarction. Biochemistry and Biophysics Reports, 12, 108–113. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrep.2017.09.001
Nowakowski, A. B., Wobig, W. J., & Petering, D. H. (2014). Native SDS-PAGE:
High resolution electrophoretic separation of proteins with retention of native
properties including bound metal ions. Metallomics, 6(5), 1068–1078. https:
//doi.org/10.1039/C4MT00033A
Palsdottir, A., Helgason, A., Palsson, S., Bjornsson, H. T., Bragason, B. T., Gre-
tarsdottir, S., Thorsteinsdottir, U., Olafsson, E., & Stefansson, K. (2008). A
51
==PAGE:68==
Drastic Reduction in the Life Span of Cystatin C L68Q Carriers Due to Life-
Style Changes during the Last Two Centuries (E. T. Dermitzakis, Ed.). PLoS
Genetics, 4(6), e1000099. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000099
Palsdottir, A., Snorradottir, A. O., & L, T. (2006). Hereditary Cystatin C Amyloid
Angiopathy: Genetic, Clinical, and Pathological Aspects. Brain Pathology,
16(1), 55–59. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3639.2006.tb00561.x
Sandin, M., Chawade, A., & Levander, F. (2015). Is label-free LC-MS/MS ready for
biomarker discovery? PROTEOMICS - Clinical Applications, 9(3-4), 289–
294. https://doi.org/10.1002/prca.201400202
Sastre, M., Calero, M., Pawlik, M., Mathews, P. M., Kumar, A., Danilov, V.,
Schmidt, S. D., Nixon, R. A., Frangione, B., & Levy, E. (2004). Binding
of cystatin C to Alzheimer’s amyloid β inhibits in vitro amyloid fibril forma-
tion. Neurobiology of Aging, 25(8), 1033–1043. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neurobiolaging.2003.11.006
Saveliev, S., Bratz, M., Zubarev, R., Szapacs, M., Budamgunta, H., & Urh, M.
(2013). Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix for enhanced protein mass spectrometry
analysis. Nature Methods, 10(11), i–ii. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.f.371
Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S., & Eliceiri, K. W. (2012). NIH Image to ImageJ:
25 years of image analysis. Nature Methods, 9(7), 671–675. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nmeth.2089
Schnittger, S., Rao, V., Abrahamson, M., & Hansmann, I. (1993). Cystatin C (CST3),
the Candidate Gene for Hereditary Cystatin C Amyloid Angiopathy (HC-
CAA), and Other Members of the Cystatin Gene Family Are Clustered on
Chromosome 20p11.2. Genomics, 16(1), 50–55. https://doi.org/10.1006/
geno.1993.1139
52
==PAGE:69==
Shah, A. D., Goode, R. J. A., Huang, C., Powell, D. R., & Schittenhelm, R. B. (2020).
LFQ-Analyst: An Easy-To-Use Interactive Web Platform To Analyze and Vi-
sualize Label-Free Proteomics Data Preprocessed with MaxQuant. Journal of
Proteome Research, 19(1), 204–211. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.
9b00496
Smejkal, G. B., & Robinson, M. H. (2007). Tris interference in IEF and 2-DE.
ELECTROPHORESIS, 28(10), 1601–1606. https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.
200600583
Snorradottir, A. O., Isaksson, H. J., Ingthorsson, S., Olafsson, E., Palsdottir, A., &
Bragason, B. T. (2017). Pathological changes in basement membranes and
dermal connective tissue of skin from patients with hereditary cystatin C
amyloid angiopathy. Laboratory Investigation, 97(4), 383–394. https://doi.
org/10.1038/labinvest.2016.133
Stokum, J. A., Gerzanich, V., & Simard, J. M. (2016). Molecular pathophysiology of
cerebral edema. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, 36(3), 513–
538. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X15617172
Suttapitugsakul, S., Xiao, H., Smeekens, J., & Wu, R. (2017). Evaluation and opti-
mization of reduction and alkylation methods to maximize peptide identifi-
cation with MS-based proteomics. Molecular BioSystems, 13(12), 2574–2582.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C7MB00393E
Thinakaran, G., & Koo, E. H. (2008). Amyloid Precursor Protein Trafficking, Pro-
cessing, and Function. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 283(44), 29615–29619.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.R800019200
Turk, V., Stoka, V., Vasiljeva, O., Renko, M., Sun, T., Turk, B., & Turk, D. (2012).
Cysteine cathepsins: From structure, function and regulation to new frontiers.
53
==PAGE:70==
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Proteins and Proteomics, 1824(1),
68–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.10.002
Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M. Y., Geiger, T., Mann,
M., & Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive
analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 13(9), 731–740. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nmeth.3901
Wu, H.-C., Chen, T.-N., Kao, S.-H., Shui, H.-A., Chen, W.-J., Lin, H.-J., & Chen,
H.-M. (2010). Isoelectric Focusing Management: An Investigation for Salt In-
terference and an Algorithm for Optimization. Journal of Proteome Research,
9(11), 5542–5556. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr1008256
Yang, P.-C., & Mahmood, T. (2012). Western blot: Technique, theory, and trouble
shooting. North American Journal of Medical Sciences, 4(9), 429. https :
//doi.org/10.4103/1947-2714.100998
54
==PAGE:71==
A. Appendix
Table 2.: Information about the 16 participants from the clinical trial.
Number
Gender
Age
NAC intake prior to clinical trail
Incidence during clinical trial
001
Female
35
None
2x intracerebral hermorrhage
002
Female
50
1800 mg - 3 years
Intracerebral hemorrhage
003
Female
47
1800 mg - 3 years
None
004
Female
39
1200 mg - 3 years
None
005
Female
20
1800 mg - 1/2 year
None
007
Female
35
2400 mg - 3 years
Pregnancy after third visit
008
Male
72
2400 mg - 3 years
None
009
Male
51
1800 mg - 3 years
None
010
Female
31
2400 mg - 3 years
Pregnancy after third visit
011
Male
21
None
Severe cerebral hemorrhage
012
Male
31
None
None
016
Female
31
None
None
017
Male
75
None
None
018
Female
26
1800 mg - 3 years
Severe cerebral hemorrhage
019
Male
65
1800 mg - 3 years
2x intracerebral hemorrhage
022
Male
30
None
None
55
==PAGE:72==
Table 3.: Sample concentration, measured with nanodrop after sample preparation
for mass spectrometry
Sample number
Concentraiton [mg/mL]
Sample number
Concentration [mg/mL]
001_1
1.174
010_3
0.589
001_4
0.968
011_1
0.592
002_1
1.131
011_4
1.630
002_4
0.886
012_1
0.560
003_1
0.953
012_4
0.682
003_4
0.613
N15
0.660
004_1
0.815
016_1
0.703
004_4
0.732
016_4
1.068
005_1
1.031
017_1
0.615
005_4
0.659
017_4
0.707
007_1
1.638
018_1
0.680
007_4
0.811
018_4
0.628
008_1
1.112
019_1
0.798
008_4
0.911
019_4
1.710
09_2
1.039
N21
0.711
09_4
0.895
022_1
0.481
010_1
0.544
022_3
1.596
56
==PAGE:73==
Table 4.: Protein concentration obtained from the Bradford Protein Assay.
Sample number
Protein concentration [µg/mL]
010_1
2411
010_3
1410
011_1
1812
011_4
1657
012_1
1684
012_4
1607
017_1
1654
017_4
1602
018_1
1575
018_4
1567
019_1
1302
019_4
1750
57
==PAGE:74==
Table 5.: Information about the proteins found to be statistically significant from
the MS data. Includes gene IDs, KEGG pathway, p-value and information about
protein class.
Gene Symbol
KEGG pathway
p-value
Protein class
S100A8
IL-17 signaling pathway
4.08 x 10−06
Calcium-binding
FCGR3A
Phagosome; Osteoclast differentiation; Neutrophil extracellular trap formation;
NK cell mediated cytotoxicity; Fc gamma R-mediated phagocytosis; Leishmaniasis;
Staphylococcus aureus infection; Tuberculosis; Systemic lupus erythematosus
0.0339
Defense/immunity
GALE
Galactose metabolism; Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism; Metabolic pathways;
Biosynthesis of nucleotide sugars
0.0261
Metabolite interconversion enzyme
CFHR4
Complement and coagulation cascades
4.14 x 10−06
Defense/immunity
F10
Complement and coagulation cascades
0.0137
Protein modifying enzyme
PROZ
0.0029
Protein modifying enzyme
DEFA1; DEFA1B
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway; Staphylococcus aureus infection;
Transcriptional misregulation in cancer
0.0189
Defense/immunity
KNG1
cGMP-PKG signaling pathway; Sphingolipid signaling pathway;
Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction; Complement and coagulation cascades;
Inflammatory mediator regulation of TRP channels; Regulation of actin cytoskeleton;
Chagas disease; African trypanosomiasis; Pathways in cancer
0.0354
Protein-binding activity modulator
IGHV4-28
0.0032
Defense/immunity
LYZ
Salivary secretion
0.0013
Metabolite interconversion enzyme
CPN2
0.0301
Transmembrane signal receptor
SERPINA10
0.0140
Protein-binding activity modulator
ANG
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
0.0269
RNA metabolism
FN1
0.0234
Extracellular matrix
IQGAP1
Adherens junction; Regulation of actin cytoskeleton; Proteoglycans in cancer
0.0145
Protein-binding activity modulator
KRT1
0.0229
PSG4
0.0138
Cell adhesion molecule
IGLV3-19
0.0362
Defense/immunity
58
