==PAGE:1==
Decellularization of porcine left ventricles
for ECM bio­inks
Master thesis
Biomedical Engineering
30 ECTS
By:
Philip Askøe Bluming (s164254)
Supervisors:
Johan Ulrik Lind
Louise Bundgaard
Kirstine Callø
Technical University of Denmark
24th January 2022 ­ 24th June 2022
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Johan Ulrik Lind for providing guidance throughout the project
and being a big help in times of need.
I would like to thank my second supervisor Louise Bundgaard for assisting me with the proteomics
experiments and helping me understand the theory behind mass spectrometry.
I would like to thank my third supervisor Kirstine Callø for assisting me in obtaining porcine heart
tissue.
I would like to thank my Ph.D. supervisor Sarkhan Butdayev for assisting me with experiments and
always being ready to help me overcome challenges encountered throughout the project.
I would like to thank Ph.D. Carmen Radeke and Postdoc Marko Mihajlovic for assisting in lyophiliza­
tion of the tissue and always being ready to help.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Three­dimensional (3D) engineered heart tissues (EHTs) capable of precisely recapitulating the na­
tive human heart may allow for accurate in vitro assessments of potential cardiotoxicity of therapeu­
tics as well as efficacy of therapeutics designed to treat cardiovascular diseases. The combination
of 3D bioprinting with cardiac decellularized extracellular matrix (cdECM) is a promising method of
developing such an EHT as 3D bioprinting ideally enables close recapitulation of the native heart
tissue structure while cdECM mimics the extracellular matrix (ECM) of the native tissue. However,
current decellularization protocols are not suitable for large­scale production of cdECM as they in­
volve excessive manual labor. In addition, they use treatments with several agents capable of dam­
aging the ECM. Furthermore, cdECM use in EHTs is challenged by variations in ECM composition
between batches of the same donor animal species particularly with differences in age.
In the present study, detergent­based protocols were applied and treatment conditions varied in
an attempt to sufficiently decellularize porcine left ventricles (LVs) derived from adult­ and neona­
tal pigs. The success criteria for sufficient decellularization was defined as <50 ng DNA per mg
dry weight tissue. Both cdECM yield­ and residual DNA content of the samples were calculated.
In some of the protocols blending was used as a method of cutting the LV tissue to increase repro­
ducibility and potential for large­scale production of cdECM when compared to manually cutting.
Potential degradation of ECM composition due to blending was investigated by comparing cdECM
obtained from a sample using blending with one using manual cutting. Both residual cellular­ and
ECM proteins were investigated and compared between three samples where treatment with the
detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was varied between 72h­120h and other conditions kept
the same. Furthermore, a similar analysis was conducted to investigate the effect of a very harsh
decellularization protocol by comparing the 120h SDS protocol with one containing additional mod­
ifications consisting of changing the SDS solution every day, extending Triton X­100 treatment time
from 30 min to 1 h, and adding 75 U/ml Deoxyribonuclease (DNase) I. Both of these analyses were
performed to assess potential damaging effects of decellularization treatments on ECM composi­
tion. Batch­to­batch variation in residual­ cellular and ECM composition between two adult pigs as
well as an adult­ and neonatal pig was assessed. Liquid chromatography­tandem mass spectrom­
etry (LC­MS/MS) was used in all experiments where protein compositions were investigated. Both
qualitative­ and quantitative comparisons of proteins between samples were conducted. Preliminary
gelation experiments of the cdECM was performed by creating pre­gels via pulverization of a subset
of cdECM samples and digesting them in pepsin. Gelation was qualitatively assessed by comparing
viscosity of the mixtures prior to­ and after incubation at 37°C for at least 1 h via visual inspection
and pipetting.
None of the attempted protocols resulted in sufficient decellularization. The lowest DNA concen­
tration (272 ng/mg) was obtained by employing a protocol where the tissue was blended into small
pieces, treated with SDS for 4 d while changing solution every day, treated with Triton X­100 for 30
min, and sterilized in peracetic acid for 4 h. Blending resulted in lower yields than manually cutting
but there were no indications of increased damage to ECM constituents when compared to manu­
ally cutting. There were no indications of increased damage to cellular proteins or ECM constituents
by extending SDS treatment duration from 72h­120h. Application of the very harsh protocol low­
ered the number of cellular+uncharacterized proteins and ECM proteins compared to the less harsh
protocol (100 and 77 vs. 657 and 215, respectively). In addition, it lowered the abundance of all in­
vestigated cellular proteins­ as well as several important ECM constituents (e.g., fibronectin and all
identified laminin subunits) identified in both samples. There was noticeable batch­to­batch vari­
ation in important ECM constituents between the two adult pigs and the adult­ and neonatal pig.
However, there was no indication of larger variations between the latter two than the former two.
Successful gelation was obtained for mixtures with cdECM concentrations of 1%, 1.5%, and 1.76%
(w/v). However, solubilization of the cdECM was incomplete, likely as a result of poor pulverization.
No clear conclusions can be drawn from the results as a lack of replicates made statistical analyses
impossible. In addition, the improper decellularization may have affected many of the outcomes.
Thus, further studies should be conducted within this field.
ii
==PAGE:4==
List of abbreviations
USD=United States Dollar
EHTs=Engineered heart tissues
hiPSCs=Human induced pluripotent stem cells
dECM=Decellularized extracellular matrix
ECM=Extracellular matrix
cdECM=Cardiac decellularized extracellular matrix
3D=Three­dimensional
LVs=Left ventricles
AV=Atrioventricular
APs=Actions potentials
SA=Sinoatrial
CFs=Cardiac fibroblasts
SMCs=Smooth muscle cells
ECs=Endothelial cells
GAGs=Glucosaminoglycans
HA=Hyaluronic acid
RNAs=Ribonucleic acids
2D=Two­dimensional
PDMS=Polydimethylsiloxane
H&E=Hematoxylin and eosin
PAA=Peracetic acid
NaOH=Sodium hydroxide
SDS=Sodium dodecyl sulfate
DNase=Deoxyribonuclease
LC­MS/MS=Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
AUC=Area under curve
ELISA=Enzyme­linked immunosorbent assay
MS=Mass spectrometry
LC­MS=Liquid chromatography­mass spectrometry
HPLC=High­performance liquid chromatography
GuHCL=Guanidine Hydrochloride
PCT=Pressure cycling technology
R=Arginine
K=Lysine
P=Proline
iii
==PAGE:5==
SPE=Solid phase extraction
m/z=Mass­to­charge
MS/MS or MS2=Tandem mass spectrum
DDA=Data­dependant acquisition
DIA=Data­independant acquisition
NaN=Not a number
ID=Identification
GO=Gene ontology
UV=Ultraviolet
PBS=Phosphate buffered saline
PE=Polyethylene
P/E=Penicillin streptomycin
LAF=Laminar flow
EtOH=Ethanol absolute
TCEP=Tris(2­carboxyethyl)phosphine
CAA=Chloroacetamide
TFA=Trifluoroacetic acid
ACN=Acetonitrile
Buffer B=80% ACN and 0.1% TFA in water
Buffer A’=3% ACN and 1% TFA
Buffer A=0.1% formic acid
LC=Liquid chromatography
RSLC=rapid separation liquid chromatography
AGC=Automatic gain control
NCE=Normalized collision energy
FDR=False discovery rate
HCl=Hydrochloric acid
COL6A3=Collagen type VI alpha 3 chain
COL5A3=Collagen type V alpha 3 chain
COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain
COL1A1=Collagen type I alpha 1 chain
COL4A5=Collagen type IV alpha 5 chain
LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta­2
LAMB1=Laminin subunit beta 1
LAMC1=Laminin subunit gamma 1
LAMA3=Laminin subunit alpha 3
iv
==PAGE:6==
LAMA1=Laminin subunit alpha 1
FN1=Fibronectin 1
COL1A2=Collagen type I alpha 2 chain
COL5A1=Collagen type V alpha 1 chain
COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2 chain
COL6A2=Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain
COL6A5=Collagen type VI alpha 5 chain
COL4A2=Collagen type IV alpha 2 chain
scCO2­EtOH=Supercritical carbon dioxide­ethanol co­solvent system
PEVA=Poly (ethylene/vinyl acetate)
LAP=Lithiumphenyl­2,4,6­trimethylbenzoylphosphinate
Ru/SPS=Ruthenium/sodium persulfate
PEG­DA=Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate
rGO=Reduced graphine oxide
CNFs=Cellulose nanofibers
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction and thesis aims
1
2
Background and theory
3
2.1
The native human heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
In vitro cardiac tissue models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
dECM derived from heart tissue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Mass spectrometry­based proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
3D Bioprinted EHTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Materials and methods
21
3.1
Cardiac LV tissue acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Decellularization­, proteomics­, and gelation experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Proteomics analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Gelation experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
33
4.1
Decellularization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Proteomics results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Pre­gel formation­ and gelation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion
65
5.1
Insufficient decellularization ­ potential causes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Establishment of a future decellularization protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Variations between pigs of different ages and batches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Pre­gel formation and gelation findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.5
Limitations of the present study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.6
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Conclusion
75
A Background additional information
82
A.1 cdECM additional information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.2 Proteomics additional background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Bioprinting additional information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B Materials and methods additional information
88
B.1 Overview of decellularization experiments which were not included . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2 Proteomics illustrations for the sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.3 Pre­gel formation and gelation illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C Results not included in report
91
C.1 Decellularization results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.2 Proteomics results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction and thesis aims
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide. This group of diseases can have
many causes including cardiotoxic drugs [1], [2]. Thus, there is a major incentive to develop ther­
apeutics, e.g. in the form of drugs and medicinal products, that are able to treat this group of dis­
eases. Furthermore, it is desirable to accurately be able to screen therapeutics, developed as po­
tential treatments for any health­related condition, for cardiotoxicity during the development pro­
cess [3]. However, development of therapeutics is a long­, strenuous­, and extremely expensive
process. It begins with the investigation of several thousand different therapies each with the poten­
tial to solve a health­related problem. In the pre­clinical phase, the vast majority of these therapies
are deemed either ineffective, unsafe, or both through the use of high­output in vitro assays and in
vivo animal studies. The remaining therapies are tested on humans in clinical trials in a process that
will in many cases last more than a decade, involve thousands of people, and cost hundreds of mil­
lions of United States Dollar (USD). In addition, 30%­50% of animal studies do not predict human
response accurately. This means that several of the remaining therapies will be eliminated during
the clinical trials with possible health­consequences, including cardiotoxicity, for the involved people
as well as a massive loss of money for involved companies. This ultimately forces pharmaceutical
companies to increase costs of approved therapies which makes health­care less accessible and
more expensive for patients [4].
Engineered tissue models may be able to reduce the magnitude of these problems. The aim of
such models is to eliminate therapies that will fail in the clinical trials before they reach this point,
i.e., in the pre­clinical phase. This can be achieved by combining human cells with a physiologi­
cally relevant microenvironment to mimic a particular type of native tissue. Thus, engineered tissue
models ideally constitute in vitro testing platforms that are representative of a given native tissue [4].
Specifically for cardiovascular diseases, engineered heart tissues (EHTs) provide promising such
testing platforms. However, acquisition of sufficient numbers of terminally differentiated primary
human cardiomyocytes is both time­consuming and costly. This problem has been circumvented
by the introduction of patient­specific human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) as these are
readily obtainable and scalable in culture and can be differentiated into cardiomyocytes [5].
Materials such as synthetic polymers and natural polymers have been used in EHTs to recapitulate
the microenvironment chemistry of the native heart. While synthetic polymers offer great control of
physical and chemical characteristics they often have poor bioactivity. In the absence of a bioactive
microenvironment cardiomyocytes differentiated from hiPSCs become functionally immature and
behave similarly to cells at a neonatal stage of development. This is not ideal for EHTs intended to
recapitulate the adult human heart. Natural polymers on the other hand, display great bioactivity [5].
This is particularly the case when using decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) which is easy to
obtain as it can be derived from primary animal tissue. dECM is the resultant product of chemically­
, biologically­, and/or physically treating the tissue so that cellular components are removed and it
mimics the native extracellular matrix (ECM) [4]. Thus, the biochemical makeup of the tissue which
the dECM is derived from is largely preserved [5]. Indeed, EHTs containing cardiac dECM (cdECM)
have been demonstrated to provide better cardiomyocyte differentiation and maturation than EHTs
based on collagen only [6]. Thus, dECM has become a preferred biomaterial for cardiac tissue en­
gineering applications [7].
Method of fabrication is crucial when creating EHTs designed to accurately mimic the native mi­
croenvironment structure. Methods such as casting and electrospinning have been widely em­
ployed in the creation of EHTs but they fail to capture the complexity of the native matrix structure
[8]. Consequently, three­dimensional (3D) bioprinting has emerged as a powerful fabrication tool
as it enables the production of complex EHTs with a controlled architecture which resembles that
1
==PAGE:9==
of the native heart tissue [8], [7]. Furthermore, 3D bioprinting offers fully automated manufactur­
ing [4]. The advantageous aspects of using cdECM and bioprinting in the creation of EHTs make
it interesting to combine the two. However, the use of cdECM is not without challenges. Specif­
ically, protocols for decellularizing heart tissue from a relevant animal source involve substantial
amounts of manual labour and lack specific instructions on how to carry out substeps which limits
reproducibility and potential for large­scale production [9], [10], [5], [6], [11]. In addition, decellular­
ization treatments can damage ECM constituents potentially resulting in reduced benefit from using
the cdECM [4]. Another challenge with the use of cdECM in EHTs is that results derived from using
the EHT may be difficult to replicate as ECM composition has been shown to display batch­to­batch
variations, particularly if donor animal age varies [12], [13].
This thesis will address the aforementioned challenges within this field with the following aims:
1. Establish an experimental protocol for decellularizing porcine left ventricles (LVs). Integrate
methods that may increase reproducibility and facilitate large­scale production of cdECM into
the protocol and evaluate these. Harvest LVs of several neonatal­ and adult pigs to establish
the protocol.
2. Explore residual protein composition of the cdECM, with a specific emphasis on ECM compo­
sition, by conducting label­free shotgun proteomics.
3. Assess differences in protein composition of cdECM derived from different batches of adult
pigs as well as from adult­ and neonatal pigs by conducting label­free shotgun proteomics.
4. Conduct preliminary gelation experiments and qualitatively assess if the cdECM is able to
gelate by thermal cross­linking.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Background and theory
2.1
The native human heart
2.1.1
Human heart physiology and structure
The native human heart is a four­chambered muscular double pump whose main purpose is to cir­
culate blood throughout the body. Together with the blood vessels and the blood, the heart makes
up the circulatory system of the body. The heart is referred to as a double pump because it can be
considered as two pumps which pump blood through two different circuits, namely the pulmonary­
and systemic circulations. The right side of the heart pumps deoxygenated blood through vessels to
the lungs and back to the left side of the heart through the pulmonary circulation (see figure 2.1).
In the lungs, the blood loses carbon dioxide and gains oxygen. The left side of the heart pumps
oxygenated blood through vessels to body tissues and back to the right side of the heart through
the systemic circulation (see figure 2.1). Through the systemic circulation, oxygen and other nutri­
ents are delivered to the tissues by the blood while carbon dioxide and other waste products are
obtained by the blood and removed from the tissues [14].
Figure 2.1: An illustration of the circulatory system which consists of the pulmonary­ and systemic
circulations [14].
The four chambers of the heart are the right­ and left atria as well as the right­ and left ventricles
(see figure 2.2). The atria function as reservoirs, collecting returning blood from the veins before it
enters the ventricles. Blood enters the ventricles with contraction of the atria. The ventricles are the
major pumping chambers of the heart and they eject blood into the circulatory system. Specifically,
the right ventricle pumps blood into an artery known as the pulmonary trunk and the LV pumps
blood into an artery known as the aorta (see figure 2.2). The LV contracts more forcefully than the
right ventricle and it has a thicker wall. This is because the systemic circulation is larger than the
pulmonary circulation and the LV must generate a larger pressure than the right ventricle as a re­
sult. There is a one­way flow of blood through the heart chambers which is ensured by the heart
valves. The heart valves are divided into atrioventricular (AV) valves and semilunar valves. The for­
mer allow blood to flow from the atria and into the ventricles but prevent it from flowing the oppo­
site way. The latter allow blood to flow from the ventricles and into the great arteries but prevent it
from flowing in the opposite direction. The AV valves consist of the tricuspid valve, which is located
between the right atrium and the right ventricle, and the bicuspid valve, which is located between
the left atrium and the LV (see figure 2.2). The semilunar valves are comprised of the pulmonary
3
==PAGE:11==
semilunar valve, located between the right ventricle and pulmonary trunk, and the aortic semilunar
valve, located between the LV and the aorta (see figure 2.2) [14].
Figure 2.2: An illustration of the internal anatomy of the heart [14].
The heart wall is comprised of three layers; the epicardium, the myocardium, and the endocardium
(listed from outermost layer to innermost layer). The epicardium forms the outer surface of the heart
and is composed of simple squamous epithelium, loose connective tissue, and adipose tissue. The
endocardium forms the inner surface of the heart chambers and consists of simple squamous ep­
ithelium and connective tissue. The myocardium is the thick, muscular, middle portion of the heart
and is composed of cardiac muscle cells. This layer is responsible for contraction of the heart cham­
bers. Cardiac muscle cells, also called cardiomyocytes, contain actin­ and myosin filaments (both
are myofilaments) that are organized in such a way that the cells appear as striated. Specifically,
the myofilaments form sarcomeres which represent the basic contractile unit of the striated mus­
cle tissue [14]. Cardiomyocytes are aligned with­ and bound end­to­end to adjacent cells and this
creates an anisotropic tissue architecture. End­to­end binding is facilitated by contacts called inter­
calated discs. These contain gap junctions which enable actions potentials (APs) to pass between
cells. The anisotropic tissue structure increases AP propagation in the direction parallel to the car­
diomyocytes which facilitates efficient electrical and mechanical activation of the atria and ventricles
[15]. Contraction of the four chambers is coordinated by the conduction system of the heart which
is comprised of specialized cardiac muscle cells. This system includes the sinoatrial (SA) node,
the AV node, the AV bundle, right­ and left bundle branches, and the Purkinje fibers. In the healthy
heart an AP originates in the SA node from where it spreads through the rest of the conduction sys­
tem which causes contraction of the four chambers of the heart starting with the atria and ending
with the ventricles [14].
2.1.2
ECM of the human heart
Besides cardiomyocytes the human heart is composed of three other major cell types; cardiac fi­
broblasts (CFs), smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and endothelial cells (ECs). SMCs support the vas­
cular system and ECs form the interior lining of the heart, blood vessels, and valves [16]. CFs pro­
duce most of the ECM of the connective tissue although the other cell types also produce ECM
components in smaller amounts. The ECM of the heart has many roles including providing struc­
tural and mechanical support to the tissue, facilitating force transmission, and regulating different
cellular responses such as differentiation, migration, cell fate decisions, and cell death [17], [18].
The most abundant ECM components in the adult human heart are collagens (types I, III, IV, V, and
VI), non­collagenous glycoproteins (fibronectin and laminin), proteoglycans, glucosaminoglycans
(GAGs), and elastins [17], [19]. The function of these is described in the following:
Collagen: Proteins that provide structure and support to the tissue which enables it to withstand
4
==PAGE:12==
tensile­, compressive­, and repetitive stress without rupture or plastic deformation. There are 28
different types of collagen and they form distinct fibers with varying properties. For instance, col­
lagen type I forms thick rod­like fibers whereas collagen type III forms a fine network of fibers [20],
[17]. Some of the collagen types are comprised of homotrimers (three identical units of polypep­
tide), some heterotrimers (at least one unit of polypeptide differs from the other two), and some both
homo­ and heterotrimers. These trimers are formed by polypeptide chains called alpha chains [21].
Elastin: Proteins that provide elasticity which enables the tissue to regain shape under repetitive
stretching forces. Furthermore, it inhibits the migration and proliferation of SMCs and enhances the
attachment and proliferation of ECs [20].
Fibronectin: An adhesive glycoprotein which associates ECM to cells and bioactive molecules
within the ECM. It accomplishes this by interacting with cell surface receptors, primarily integrins,
via certain binding cites. Modulates cell behaviours (e.g. adhesion, growth, migration, and differen­
tiation), wound healing, and embryonic development [20].
Laminin: An adhesive heterotrimeric glycoprotein that is particularly abundant in the basement
membrane. Several types of laminin exist and each is assembled from three different polypeptides.
The polypeptides are the alpha­, beta­ and gamma chains, which are also called subunits, and mul­
tiple of each exist [22]. Laminin mediates cell­to­ECM and cell­to­cell interactions via cell surface re­
ceptors and secreted macromolecules (e.g. perlecans and collagens). Laminin is important in many
cellular activities including: Adhesion, migration, differentiation, and survival [20], [22].
Proteoglycans and GAGs: Proteoglycans are glycosylated proteins that consist of a core protein
covalently attached to GAGs. GAGs are long, linear chains of disaccharide repeats. At physiologi­
cal pH, proteoglycans and GAGs contain negative charges due to the presence of carboxylate and
sulfate groups. These groups bind water resulting in improved mechanical properties of the tissue
both under shear­ and compressive stresses. Additionally, the GAG components exert a swelling
pressure against the surrounding fibrous network which facilitates molecular transport of growth
factors and cytokines. Certain proteoglycans are also involved in regulation of cellular processes
such as cell growth and migration. One type of GAG, Hyaluronic acid (HA), is nonsulfated and not
linked to a protein core. HA is involved in several biological processes such as water balance, ma­
trix structure, lubrication, cell movement, and differentiation [20].
The heart ECM also contains growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, proteases, protease inhibitors,
and noncoding ribonucleic acids (RNAs) [18].
The following figure illustrates many of the aforementioned ECM components and their interaction
with a cell:
Figure 2.3: An illustration of important ECM components and their interaction with a cell [20].
5
==PAGE:13==
Note that figure 2.3 illustrates a cell and its associated ECM from an arbitrary tissue, not a cell found
in cardiac tissue specifically. GAGs are not explicitly labelled on figure 2.3 but they are seen as the
many side chains linked to core proteoglycan proteins.
The heart ECM is organized into two different spatial regions; the pericellular matrix and the intersti­
tial matrix [18]. The former region is predominantly the basement membrane which is comprised of
type IV collagens, laminins, proteoglycans, fibronectin, and HA. This region promotes polarity, dif­
ferentiation, and migration of cells and separates cells from the interstitial matrix [18], [17]. The pri­
mary constituents of the interstitial matrix are type I and III collagens and this region serves to pro­
vide structural and mechanical support to the tissue [18]. The CFs, as well as the other cell types of
the heart, continuously remodel the ECM by both synthesizing­ and enzymatically degrading ECM
components. This results in the generation of extracellular areas that affect cellular responses such
as cell proliferation and migration [18].
2.2
In vitro cardiac tissue models
2.2.1
Cardiac tissue model applications
There are two potential drug­screening applications of cardiac tissue models:
1. They can function as in vitro testing platforms which can be used to assess the effectiveness
and safety of new therapeutics designed to treat cardiovascular diseases.
2. They can function as in vitro testing platforms that can assess potential cardiac toxicity asso­
ciated with new therapeutics designed to treat any disease, i.e., not only cardiovascular dis­
eases.
As mentioned in chapter 1, application 1. is highly useful as effective treatments for cardiovascular
disease are needed and current development of therapeutics is both unsafe for the people involved
in clinical trials in addition to being extremely expensive. Application 2. is also of crucial importance
as many drugs are potentially cardiotoxic and can cause conditions such as left ventricular failure,
myocardial ischemia, and arrhythmias [2]. Indeed, cardiotoxicity is a major cause of failure during
preclinical­ and clinical development resulting in high rates of post­approval withdrawal of drugs [3].
Regardless of the desired application the ideal EHT should mimic the native heart structure and
function as accurately as possible while being scalable for high­throughput analysis [23]. In the fol­
lowing, some of the cardiac tissue models being employed currently will be described.
2.2.2
Commonly used cardiac tissue models
Several types of in vitro cardiac tissue models exist. A simple such model is the classic two­dimensional
(2D) monolayer culture where cardiac cells are seeded on planar culturing substrates resulting
in the formation of monolayer tissues with establishment of cell­to­cell contacts. The model can
then be combined with various sensors and imaging systems for automatic high­throughput drug
screening. The drawback of such a simple model is that it does not mimic the native heart tissue
well. In particular, the ECM is not included and cardiomyocytes are randomly oriented in the model
whereas they are end­to­end coupled and aligned in the native heart tissue as explained in subsec­
tion 2.1.1. Tissue­level 3D in vitro cardiac models have emerged to overcome these drawbacks.
These models have been created with scaffolds to mechanically support the tissue constructs but
they have also been created without [24].
Spheroids formed of co­cultured hiPSCs and fibroblasts in microwell plates represent an example
of a 3D in vitro cardiac model without the use of a scaffold. This is a simple and scalable model and
is thus used extensively in cardiac toxicity screening. However, the lack of a scaffold means that
the cardiomyocytes exhibit substantial differences in terms of morphology and intracellular struc­
ture when compared to the native tissue. The use of a scaffold allows for the creation of models
that more closely recapitulate the native human heart. There are several examples of such models
but current state­of­the­art are engineered tissue strips. In these models cardiomyocytes, and po­
tentially other types of cells found in native heart tissue, are seeded within a deformable hydrogel
matrix to form the heart tissue. This tissue is then anchored to a set of micropillars contained within
6
==PAGE:14==
a mold. Over time the cells degrade the hydrogel matrix which results in the tissue compacting
around the anchoring points. As such, a dense 3D tissue is formed (see figure 2.4). The anchoring
points provide the tissue with either a passive­ or active mechanical load, depending upon the spe­
cific model, and this has been shown to improve maturation of hiPSCs. Furthermore, an electrical
field can be applied to the heart tissue which will further increase rate of hiPSC maturation [24].
Figure 2.4: Main principle of engineered tissue strips. Cardiomyocytes degrade the deformable hy­
drogel matrix over time such that the tissue contracts and a dense 3D tissue is formed. The anchor­
ing points induce a passive mechanical stretch to the tissue which improves cell maturation [24].
The hydrogel used in engineered tissue strips most commonly consists of collagen combined with
laminin or fibronectin. Matrigel and fibrin are sometimes added as well. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)­
based soft lithography is often the fabrication method of choice for the mold, anchoring pillars, and
wells used for culturing of the cells seeded in hydrogel [24], [25]. This method of fabrication allows
for the construction of small tissues that are suitable for medium­ to high­throughput drug screening
[24].
Engineered tissue strips of this type have demonstrated high accuracy of drug induced responses
and have thus proved highly useful in cardiac toxicity modelling [24]. A different approach is to fab­
ricate EHTs by bioprinting bio­inks consisting of hiPSCs, potentially in combination with other cells
found in the native heart, and cdECM. This is promising as complex human tissue structures can be
recapitulated with high resolution and reproducibility via the use of bioprinting [20]. In addition, the
manufacturing can be fully automatized [4]. cdECM accurately mimics the ECM of the native heart
and thus combining this with bioprinting potentially allows for the production of EHTs that both reca­
pitulate the structure­ and microenvironment of the native heart tissue.
2.3
dECM derived from heart tissue
2.3.1
Definition of dECM
The goal of decellularization is to remove cells and nucleic acids of a tissue while preserving the na­
tive structure and function of the ECM. An exact definition of dECM does not exist although several
criteria that determine if a tissue has successfully been decellularized have been put forward. The
guidelines state that there must be:
• A concentration of double stranded DNA per mg ECM dry weight tissue of <50 ng.
• A DNA fragment length of <200 base pairs.
7
==PAGE:15==
• Absence of visible nuclear material in tissues stained with 4’,6­diamino­2­phenylindole or
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) [4].
In addition to reducing cellular contents of a tissue to such a degree that the above guidelines are
met it is also crucial that ECM loss and damage is minimized [4]. Thus, the decellularization pro­
cess used should be the least harsh possible while still resulting in a tissue that abides by the afore­
mentioned guidelines [9], [4].
2.3.2
Methods of decellularization
Agents used to decellularize tissue can be of chemical­, physical­, or biological nature. Chemical
agents are comprised of acids and bases, hypo­ and hypertonic solutions, detergents, and alcohols.
Acids and bases catalyze the degradation of biomolecules. Thus, they can be effective at remov­
ing nucleic acids from a tissue. However, they can damage ECM components, as is the case with
acetic acid which damages collagens and reduces ECM strength [4]. Peracetic acid (PAA) is com­
monly used as it has minimal effect on ECM composition and structure, although it can denature
proteins so it should still be used with caution [4], [26]. Bases, such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
are useful in removing hair from samples but also eliminate growth factors and disrupt collagen
cross­links in the process which, in turn, reduces strength and chemical fidelity of the ECM. Alter­
nately immersing the tissue in hyper­ and hypotonic solutions causes cell lysis through osmosis
and disintegrates proteins from DNA. Furthermore, it does not alter the ECM molecules or archi­
tecture. Detergents can be both ionic and nonionic with the former being more powerful for decel­
lularization than the latter [26]. They work by solubilizing cellular membranes and dissociating DNA
from proteins. However, they can alter ECM properties by damaging its components. A commonly
used ionic detergent is sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). SDS is effective at decellularizing dense tis­
sues, such as the kidneys, but it should be used for short periods of time as it tends to denature
proteins [27]. Triton X­100 represents an often used nonionic detergent and it is particularly effec­
tive at decellularizing thick tissues where key matrix components are primarily proteins. However,
its use should be minimized in tissues where GAGs are a key component of the ECM [4], [27]. Al­
cohols, such as ethanol or methanol, can be employed to dehydrate and lyse cells. Additionally,
they can dissolve hydrophobic molecules, notably lipids [4]. Physical agents are non­chemical pro­
cedures that provoke cell lysis and disruption of intracellular structure. Examples include: Applying
freeze­thaw cycles to a tissue, abrasion of surface cells, applying hydrostatic pressure to vessels,
and nonthermal irreversible electroporation (the application of electrical pulses across a tissue). Bi­
ological agents react toward certain molecules in a given tissue with greater specificity than chemi­
cal agents. They include enzymes such as nucleases and proteases. Nucleases, such as deoxyri­
bonuclease (DNase), are used to degrade nucleic acids in tissues after cell lysis has been induced.
Proteases, such as pepsin, are often used for bioprinting purposes after decellularization in order to
solubilize the dECM (and create bio­inks) the process of which is detailed in subsection 2.5.3.
2.3.3
dECM sources
Sources of dECM include human­ and animal tissues. dECM derived from human tissues enables
the design of an in vitro tissue model that better recapitulates human physiology than a model cre­
ated using dECM derived from animal tissues. However, it is much more expensive and not as eas­
ily available. Thus, it is more feasible to use dECM derived from animal tissues in tissue models
designed for high­throughput analysis [4]. Specifically for cdECM, porcine LV ECM composition is
quite similar to human LV ECM composition. As the LV is often used in EHTs, primarily due to be­
ing the first target of therapy for a variety of cardiac diseases, porcine cdECM is a good choice for
incorporation in EHTs [28], [19]. Furthermore, Johnson et al. found that successfully decellularizing
human LV tissue required more processing steps and longer treatment with SDS when compared
to decellularizing porcine LV tissue. They observed significantly lower concentrations of sulfated
GAGs in human LV dECM than porcine LV dECM and hypothesized that this was in part due to the
increased processing required to sufficiently decellularize the human LV [29]. As mentioned in sub­
section 2.1.2, sulfated GAGs have several functions including facilitating transport of growth factors
and cytokines making them a potentially important constituent of the dECM. As such, the use of
cdECM derived from porcine LV tissue may be advantageous compared to cdECM from human LV
8
==PAGE:16==
tissue in this regard.
2.3.4
Current protocols for decellularizing porcine heart tissue for use in
bioprinting
The process of decellularization is tissue specific meaning that the optimal selection of methods
depend upon the type of tissue that is to be decellularized. In addition, the optimal decellulariza­
tion protocol varies between species [29]. In the case of porcine heart tissue which is to be used
for bioprinted EHTs the most common approach of decellularization is to isolate the LV, cut it into
small pieces, and treat it with the detergents SDS and Triton X­100 for varying amounts of time de­
pending on the protocol (see figure 2.5 for a simplified illustration of this common decellularization
protocol). In addition, a sterilization step using different types of acids is often conducted after de­
cellularization. The decellularized tissue is then lyophilized as a final step (also seen on figure 2.5).
Figure 2.5: A simplified figure that illustrates a common approach used to decellularize a porcine LV
with the purpose of using it in EHTs [5].
Table 2.1 lists decellularization­ and sterilization protocols used in a selection of articles on bio­
printed EHTs containing porcine cdECM published within the last 10 years.
Decellularization­ and sterilization protocols used in selected articles.
Article:
Decellularization protocol:
Sterilization protocol:
Pati et al.
(2014 and
2017) [9]
[30]
1% SDS for 48 h and 1% Triton
X­100 for 30 min.
0.1% PAA in 4% ethanol for
4 h.
Shin et al.
(2021) [11]
1% SDS for 72 h, while changing
the SDS every day, and 1% Triton
X­100 for 1 h.
Not sterilized.
Das et al.
(2019) [6]
1% SDS for 72 h, 1% Triton X­100
for 1 h, and isopropyl alcohol for 2
h.
0.1% PAA in 4% ethanol for
4 h.
Jang et al.
(2017) [28]
1% SDS for 48 h, 1% Triton X­100
for 1 h.
0.1% acetic acid in 4%
ethanol.
Bejleri et
al. (2018)
[31]
1% SDS for 4­5 d.
Not sterilized.
Kang et al.
(2021) [10]
1% SDS for 60 h, 1% Triton X­100
for 1 h, isopropyl alcohol for 2 h.
0.1% PAA in 4% ethyl alco­
hol for 3 h.
Tsui et al.
(2021) [5]
1% SDS for 36 h, 1% Triton X­100
for 1 h.
0.1% PAA in 4% ethanol
(time not reported).
Table 2.1: Decellularization­ and sterilization protocols used in a selection of seven articles pub­
lished within the last 10 years where bioprinted EHTs containing porcine cdECM were developed.
As evident from table 2.1 the main difference in decellularization protocols is the timescales of SDS
and Triton X­100 treatments. As mentioned in subsections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, exposure time to these
9
==PAGE:17==
detergents should be low enough to preserve ECM constituents well but high enough to sufficiently
decellularize the tissue. Thus, a reasonable approach in selecting a protocol would be to start by
using short exposure times and then adjust as needed. Importantly, all of the protocols from table
2.1 involve a time consuming manual sectioning step. Specifically, the LV is generally cut into small
cubes each with a size of about 1­2 mm3 using a scalpel [30]. If large­scale production of EHTs
containing cdECM is desired this manual step is problematic as it is both time­consuming, cumber­
some, and limits reproducibility. Instead, an automatized sectioning step that yields tissue pieces of
reproducible sizes is warranted. In addition to this challenge, no current protocol specifies how the
chemicals used to decellularize, wash, and sterilize the tissue are removed after each treatment so
that tissue loss is minimized. Thus, a protocol with more detailed descriptions is needed to ensure
reproducible results.
2.3.5
Benefits and challenges associated with using cdECM in EHTs
As mentioned in subsection 2.1.2 the native cardiac ECM is crucial for tissue function and is both
important in providing structural support to the tissue and in regulating many cellular responses.
Thus, incorporating cdECM into EHTs is the best way to ensure that the cardiomyocytes respond
similarly to their in vivo counterparts. In fact, French et al. demonstrated that using a single matrix
component, in this case collagen which is commonly used, in a 2D cardiac tissue model was in­
sufficient in capturing the ECM complexity needed to promote proper cell function. This resulted in
poor survival of cardiomyocytes. Contrarily, cdECM enhanced cardiomyocyte adhesion, prolifera­
tion, maturation, and survival when compared to collagen only [32]. Moreover, Das et al. found that
cardiomyocytes incorporated into 3D bioprinted EHTs with cdECM showed increased expression
of cardiac­specific genes and earlier differentiation when compared to EHTs with collagen only [6].
Collectively this demonstrates the benefit of utilizing cdECM in EHTs.
Besides the already mentioned challenge of establishing a reproducible decellularization protocol
for large­scale production of cdECM which does not excessively degrade ECM constituents an­
other challenge exists, namely, batch­to­batch variation. This is a recognized problem associated
with the use of dECM in tissue models [12]. This problem becomes compounded if donor animal
age varies as ECM composition changes with age [13]. Specifically for cdECM, Tsui et al. quanti­
fied batch­to­batch variation among cdECMs obtained from six different batches of adult pigs using
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC­MS/MS). They found variations in quanti­
ties of fibronectin, laminin, and collagen types­ I, II, III, and IV between batches but concluded that
overall protein composition was relatively well maintained across the batches (see figure A.1 for an
illustration of their results). However, only adult pigs were included in this study. Furthermore, they
performed the quantification using spectral counting (more information on this is given in subsection
2.4.3), in the form of coverage, which is a measure of how much the identified peptides cover the
amino acid sequence of a certain protein (more information on mass spectrometry is given in sec­
tion 2.4). However, spectral counting is generally inferior for protein quantification purposes com­
pared to area under curve (AUC) values (more information on this is given in subsection 2.4.3), po­
tentially making the results of this study somewhat limited [33]. Additionally, they only investigated
batch­to­batch variation among the six most abundant ECM components identified. An analysis
covering a larger portion of the proteome may yield different results. Thus, batch­to­batch variation
may represent a substantial obstacle for the use of cdECM in EHTs.
2.4
Mass spectrometry­based proteomics
2.4.1
Proteomics
The potential batch­to­batch variation in the composition of cdECM derived from different animals is
of interest to investigate as it may limit reproducibility of results from EHTs based on such cdECM.
Furthermore, it is of value to investigate the protein composition of cdECM obtained from using a
specific decellularization protocol in order to determine if important ECM constituents of the tissue
have been preserved while cellular proteins have been eliminated. I.e., a protocol employing sev­
eral treatments with degradatory effects on the ECM may not be viable for decellularization even if
tissue is sufficiently decellularized. On the other hand, a protocol can preserve ECM constituents
10
==PAGE:18==
well but not sufficiently decellularize the tissue if the treatments are not strong enough. Investiga­
tions regarding protein compositions can be conducted by application of proteomic methods.
Proteomics is a field of research that seeks to identify and quantify all proteins of a proteome in­
cluding expression, cellular localization, interactions, post­translational modifications, and turnover
as a function of time, space, and cell type. The field of proteomics encompasses two main meth­
ods, with many submethods for each, of achieving this goal; affinity reagent based methods, such
as enzyme­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or Western blotting, and liquid chromatography­
mass spectrometry (LC­MS) [34]. The latter method is widely used when high­throughput protein
quantification of samples is desired [35], [36]. LC­MS can be performed in many different ways with
most methods having advantages and drawbacks. The choice of method ultimately depends upon
several factors such as study design, availability of resources, and samples to be investigated [37],
[38]. If little is known about sample protein composition prior to the analysis, as is often the case
when a new type of sample is to be investigated, shotgun proteomics is often used [38]. If more is
known, an approach known as targeted proteomics can be employed (more information on this is
given in subsection A.2.1). Shotgun proteomics is highly effective in large­scale protein identifica­
tion and quantitation [39]. It is a ”bottom­up” protein analysis in which characterization of proteins
is achieved by analysis of peptides released from the proteins through proteolysis. In the case of
shotgun proteomics, the bottom­up approach is performed on a mixture of proteins (see figure 2.6).
Conversely, ”top­down” proteomics can be used to characterize intact proteins (more information on
top­down proteomics can be found in subsection A.2.2).
Figure 2.6: The workflow of shotgun proteomics. Proteins are extracted from a sample and di­
gested into peptides. These are then separated by HPLC and ionized (e.g., via ESI) before being
introduced to the mass spectrometer where either DDA or DIA is used to select the peptides of in­
terest. Finally, a database search is conducted with a software (e.g, Skyline, Mascot, MaxQuant,
Spectromine etc). HPLC=high­performance liquid chromatography, ESI=electrospray ionization,
DDA=data­dependant acquisition, DIA=data­independant acquisition [40].
Proteomics can also be subdivided into label­based and label­free quantification. In the former case
samples are labelled with stable isotopes of different masses which allows the mass spectrometer
to discriminate the labelled peptides based on mass [41], [42], [43]. Thus, samples can be pooled
prior to the mass spectrometry (MS) run (see figure A.3). This means that all samples are run si­
multaneously resulting in identical run conditions for the samples as well as short machine time for
the mass spectrometer. However, labelling can be expensive and wet lab preparation of samples
is substantial and potentially prone to error [37]. In contrast, samples are not labelled in label­free
quantification which means that analyses of different samples must be carried out separately (see
figure A.3). This increases machine time and potential variations in conditions between MS runs
when compared to label­based proteomics. However, wet lab preparation is simpler and takes less
time and the method is less expensive than when using labelling. The low cost and simple prepa­
ration make label­free proteomics ideal for analysis of samples of unknown composition as minimal
resources should be spent during initial runs in such cases due to the possibility of compositions
that are not of analytical interest.
11
==PAGE:19==
2.4.2
Workflow of label­free shotgun proteomics
The typical workflow of a label­free shotgun proteomics experiment involves the following steps:
Protein extraction, protein digestion, peptide desalting, peptide separation by high­performance liq­
uid chromatography (HPLC), peptide ionization, MS, and database searching (see figure 2.6 for a
simplified illustration of this (peptide desalting and protein extraction are not included)) [44], [45].
Protein extraction: Proteins must initially be extracted from a sample in a manner that enables ef­
ficient protein digestion (into peptides) prior to the subsequent MS analysis. There are several ways
of achieving this and they generally involve employing detergents (such as SDS) or chaotropic agents
(e.g. Guanidine Hydrochloride (GuHCL) or urea) to denature the proteins [46], [45]. However, these
reagents can inhibit subsequent enzymatic digestion of proteins and hamper peptide detection by
MS and as such their use should be carefully planned. GuHCL has, in contrast to urea, been shown
to be chemically inert and not produce any in vitro artifacts that hamper MS analysis while simul­
taneously enabling rapid digestion of proteins. Thus, it is a suitable choice for digestion in many
cases and is typically combined with other reagents for optimal results [46] [47]. The reagents used
for digestion are often used in conjunction with physical disruption methods such as application of
heat, ultrasonication, grinding, or pressure cycling technology (PCT) which support sample lysis.
Of these, ultrasonication and PCT have been demonstrated to yield rapid, reproducible, and effec­
tive extraction of proteins from both soft­ and harsh tissue even when very little sample is used [46],
[45]. See subsection A.2.4 for information on how each of these two methods work.
Protein digestion: Proteins are digested into peptides using sequence specific­proteases. This
is done for multiple reasons. One important reason is that the mass spectrometer is not as effec­
tive at obtaining sequence information, which is needed for protein identification, from intact pro­
teins as it is when working with peptides [44]. For protein digestion into peptides trypsin is usually
the protease of choice. Trypsin is a very sequence­specific protease which cleaves proteins on the
carboxy­terminal side of arginine (R) and lysine (K) residues (see figure 2.7). The resulting pep­
tides are in a mass range which is preferable for sequencing while ultimately resulting in easily in­
terpretable mass spectra. It is important that the protease is sequence­specific as the protein is
divided into many overlapping species by non­specific proteases and these species are difficult to
interpret.
Figure 2.7: Trypsin cleaves proteins at the carboxyl side of R and K as illustrated by the scissors
located under the green letters. The red letters indicate that trypsin does not cleave the protein in
this position due a P being bound C­terminally to either R or K. P=proline [48].
There are a few problems which can hamper digestion when using trypsin only. For one, trypsin
does not always cleave when either R or K are followed by proline (P) which can result in missed
cleavages (see figure 2.7) [49]. Furthermore, several of the reagents used for protein extraction, in­
cluding GuHCL, hamper trypsin activity which increases occurrence of missed cleavages [50], [47].
As such, Lys­C, an endoprotease, is commonly used prior to trypsin digestion to ensure better di­
gestion of proteins. Lys­C cleaves proteins on the carboxy­terminal side of K residues and does so
regardless of the presence of P [49]. A few additional benefits of Lys­C usage are listed in section
A.2.5. Digestion is done in conjunction with extraction as efficiency of the former is enhanced in this
way [45].
Peptide desalting: Before separation by HPLC and ionization of the peptides it is important that
salts and detergents are separated from the peptides as the former group interferes with peptide
ionization and the latter group inhibits efficient peptide separation by HPLC. The process of re­
moving these substances is known as desalting. A common way of desalting is by using reverse­
phased solid phase extraction (SPE) with octyl (C8) or octadecyl (C18) which are alkyl­bonded sta­
tionary phases [51], [52]. SPE is a technique used to isolate and separate compounds from a liquid
12
==PAGE:20==
matrix based on their properties [53]. In reverse­phased SPE this separation is based on the po­
larity of the compounds. Reverse­phased SPE involves the liquid matrix containing the analytes of
interest, called a mobile phase, and it is typically polar (hydrophilic). In addition, it involves the non­
polar (hydrophobic) material through which the sample is passed, known as the stationary phase,
which retains analytes of interest. The sample itself is typically mid­ to nonpolar [54]. Desalting is
done by washing the nonpolar stationary phase with the polar mobile phase containing the sample
so that the nonpolar analytes of interest, in this case peptides, adsorb to it while the polar mobile
phase elutes through it [51]. Then, multiple washing steps are performed using various buffers de­
signed to remove non­peptide components such as salts and detergents. Finally, the peptides are
eluted by washing with a nonpolar mobile phase, such as acetonitrile or methanol, as this disrupts
the van der Waals forces that bind the peptides to the stationary phase [51]. Desalting is described
in more detail in subsection A.2.6.
Peptide separation by HPLC: Peptides are not introduced to the mass spectrometer all at once,
instead HPLC is used to separate them prior to the introduction. HPLC uses the same principles
as outlined for desalting, that is, it is often conducted as reverse­phase HPLC. It works by inject­
ing the peptide solution, typically containing low μg amounts of peptide, onto a microscale capillary
HPLC column which is directly coupled to the mass spectrometer (see figure 2.9 for an illustration
of the column). The inner surface of the column consists of a reverse­phased material, the station­
ary phase, which is often C18, and this binds the peptides. As mentioned, this type of material re­
tains hydrophobic compounds better than hydrophilic ones. Thus, a solvent gradient of increasing
hydrophobicity is injected into the column containing the peptides so that they are eluted into the
mass spectrometer in order of their polarity. As a result, hydrophilic peptides elute first followed by
hydrophobic peptides (see figure 2.8 for an illustration of the principle behind reverse phase chro­
matography).
Figure 2.8: In reverse phase chromatography a mixture of components is contained within a mo­
bile phase which flows into a column containing a stationary phase. The stationary phase binds the
mixture of components and those that are the most hydrophobic (blue in the illustration) interact the
strongest with the column. By applying a gradient of increasing hydrophobicity it is ensured that the
least hydrophobic components elute first (orange in the illustration) and the most hydrophobic com­
ponents elute last. The product of interest could be all of these components (as in HPLC) or part of
the mixture (green in the illustration) [55].
Peptide ionization: The mass spectrometer measures the mass of peptides by exposing them to
electromagnetic forces. Specifically, it measures the mass­to­charge (m/z) ratio of ionized peptides
13
==PAGE:21==
and then calculates the original mass of the neutral. As such, the peptides must receive an electri­
cal charge, that is, be ionized, before entering the mass spectrometer [56]. There are multiple ways
of achieving this but a common method is electrospray ionization. Here, the peptides flow through
a metal needle as they arrive at the end of the HPLC column. This metal needle is held at a high
electric potential with respect to the entrance of the mass spectrometer which causes the liquid con­
taining the peptides to become electrostatically dispersed so that charged droplets (normally posi­
tively charged) are formed. Afterwards, the solvent of these droplets evaporates and droplet fission
occurs until each droplet contains one analyte ion on average (see figure 2.9) [44].
Figure 2.9: Electrospray ionization works by passing the liquid which contains the peptides through
a needle so that it becomes electrically dispersed, resulting in the creation of positively charged
droplets. These evaporate and fission until each contains approximately one ion [44].
MS: After ionization, the peptides enter the mass spectrometer through an inlet. Inside the mass
spectrometer the m/z ratio of peptide ions and their intensity is determined but the way this is done
differs depending upon the type of mass spectrometer used. One type which achieves very high
resolution and is ideal for peptide­based quantitation from complex mixtures is a hybrid instrument
combining quadrupoles with an Orbitrap Fourier transform­based mass analyzer [56]. The quadrupole
is used to filter peptide ions based on their m/z ratio [57]. The ions that are not filtered out then
travel to the orbitrap mass analyzer where m/z spectral data, that is, the signal intensity of the ion
at each value of the m/z scale, is obtained (see figure 2.10).
Figure 2.10: A mass spectrum where the inlet is focused on the peptide for which the extracted ion
chromatogram in figure 2.12 was plotted [44].
14
==PAGE:22==
Additional information on how the quadrupole and orbitrap work is provided subsection A.2.7. Typi­
cally, the mass spectrum obtained from the initial scan is used as input information to perform sub­
sequent scans (for the same sample) where many peptide ions are isolated and fragmented by col­
lision with inert gases (such as nitrogen molecules or argon atoms) prior to entering the orbitrap
[57], [58]. Ions are called precursor ions prior to being fragmented whereas the fragmented ions are
called product ions. The result of the fragmentation is a tandem mass spectrum (MS/MS or MS2)
which is a mass spectrum of product ions. This yields sequence information about a peptide as ad­
jacent peaks differ by amino acid masses meaning that the differences in masses between peaks
can be used to obtain the amino acid sequence (see figure 2.11) [44].
Figure 2.11: The MS/MS spectrum of the peptide in the inlet on figure 2.10. The amino acid se­
quence is determined by the differences in masses between adjacent peaks. The sequence is writ­
ten from the carboxy­ (HO2C) to amino (NH2) terminus direction which can be deduced based
upon the type of product ion that the MS/MS spectrum represents. M=Methionine, G=Glycine,
E=Glutamic acid, I=Isoleucine, D=Aspartic acid, T=Threonine, P=Proline, S=Serine [44].
Which precursor ions that are chosen for fragmentation depend upon the type of data acquisition
method used. A very common method for global­proteome scale profiling is known as data depen­
dant acquisition (DDA) where the precursor ions with highest intensities, as determined by the orbi­
trap, are chosen for fragmentation. These precursor ions are then selected in the quadrupole by
filtering out those ions that are not to be fragmented [36], [58]. Another approach is called data­
independent acquisition (DIA). Here precursor ions are separated into small consecutive m/z win­
dows and then all the precursors within a window are fragmented. DIA is more reproducible and
accurate for protein quantification than DDA as biased sampling is prevalent in the latter. However,
it is more sophisticated to employ than DDA [36].
Besides mass­ and MS/MS spectra another output of a MS experiment is the total ion intensity from
all the mass spectra that were recorded during a MS run. This is called the total ion chromatogram
and it is obtained as a function of time. The total intensity of a particular peptide can be plotted at
every point on the total ion chromatogram yielding an extracted ion chromatogram. The AUC of this
represents the total signal of said peptide (see figure 2.12) [59], [44].
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.12: A total ion chromatogram is seen as the black curve. The black curve in bold is an ex­
tracted ion chromatogram for a particular peptide. cps on the y­axis refers to counts per second
[44].
Database searching: Most often, the proteins in the sample are not identified by extracting the
peptide sequences directly from the MS/MS spectra in the way described previously [44]. Instead,
a database search tool (software) which compares the obtained MS/MS spectra with theoretical
spectra predicted for each peptide is used. These theoretical spectra are contained within a pro­
tein sequence database and are available in variable degrees according to the organism in ques­
tion. By specifying certain criteria such as mass tolerance and proteolytic enzyme constraints the
list of theoretical spectra that the experimental spectra must be compared with is narrowed down.
The database search tool identifies matches in the form of peptide sequences and then matches
peptides to proteins. Often, the presence of a protein is only confirmed when at least two unique
peptides are identified for said protein [60]. A unique peptide for a protein is a peptide that only
matches with that specific protein in the database [61].
2.4.3
Label­free shotgun proteomics data analysis
Data analysis for label­free shotgun proteomics can be either qualitative, quantitative, or both. In
a qualitative analysis the goal is to investigate which proteins were identified for a sample and the
presence of certain proteins can be compared between different groups of different experimental
conditions or characteristics. The purpose of a quantitative analysis is to determine the amount of
one or more proteins in the sample. Furthermore, it is often of interest to determine whether pro­
tein amounts differ between samples of different characteristics [60]. Using label­free shotgun pro­
teomics, accurate absolute quantification of proteins is not possible as the intensity of the signal of
a peptide does not directly indicate the amount of protein present. There are several reasons for
this, with some of the most important ones being that ionization efficiencies and solubilities differ
between peptides. Relative quantification is possible however, as these factors are reproducible so
that abundance of the same peptide, and thus protein, can be compared between multiple experi­
mental runs and different samples [44]. Commonly, either spectrometric signal intensity or spectral
counting are used as quantification schemes. The basis of these methods is that the amount of pro­
tein correlates well with peak signal intensities of peptides found for the protein as well as the num­
ber of tandem spectra for the protein [33]. Spectrometric signal intensity is calculated as AUC of the
extracted ion chromatogram (see figure 2.12) for the peptides of interest. Spectral counting is the
number of MS/MS spectra identified for each peptide.
Using the spectrometric signal intensity to determine relative protein abundance is generally more
reliable than spectral counting methods although it is more complex [33]. Typically, the spectromet­
ric signal intensity values are normalized, either by the software used for database search or in the
subsequent data analysis, before being used in quantitative analyses. This is done in order to re­
16
==PAGE:24==
duce variation (bias) in the measured abundances (amounts) of proteins which is caused by non­
biological sources such as differences in device calibration, differences in sample preparation and
handling, or temperature changes. Reducing this variation allows for a more accurate comparison
of quantity values between samples [62].
The output of a proteome analysis, that is, the dataset, typically contains the identified proteins and
a quantitative measure such as the spectrometric signal intensity, which may or may not be nor­
malized, as well more information such as the number of identified unique peptides per protein.
Missing values will almost always be present, i.e, data for some proteins will be missing (data as­
sociated with them is equal to not a number (NaN)) between different technical replicates, exper­
imental batches, biological replicates, and research groups [63]. There are many reasons behind
why values are missing including ion competition, ionization efficiency, DDA only selecting the most
abundant ions for analysis in the MS/MS stage, expression level lower than the equipment detec­
tion level, and sample preparation issues. Not all of these are related to the abundance of the pro­
tein [64]. Missing values can be handled in different ways. A simple approach is to not include them
in any of the samples. In more sophisticated approaches the missing data are imputed from avail­
able values of the same­ or related proteins [65].
Identified proteins are typically presented by their identification (ID) codes in the database from
which they were retrieved, the names of the genes encoding for the proteins, and protein descrip­
tions. Expanded database searches also allow for the proteins to be associated with a gene on­
tology (GO) term. This means that they are associated with terms which describe their ”biological
process”, ”molecular function” or ”cellular component” [66]. In essence, the proteins can be grouped
by function in this way. In cases where an expanded database search of this type is not employed
gene annotation can be conducted by using a software tool such as metascape [67]. Metascape
can perform an enrichment­analysis of the proteins which compares the input list of genes with
thousands of gene sets defined by their functions. The output are P­values which rank gene sets,
in the input gene list, that are overly represented by significance. Thus, metascape can be used to
group proteins by function. Metascape employs a set of ontologies, and not just GO terms, to con­
duct the analysis. Examples of these are ”GO processes”, ”KEGG pathway”, and ”Reactome gene
sets” [67].
2.5
3D Bioprinted EHTs
2.5.1
3D Bioprint definition and bioprinting techniques
3D bioprinting involves the printing of cells with­ or without a scaffold into a 3D structure designed
to mimic a specific native tissue type. A 3D structure is obtained by printing a serial addition of 2D
structures in a layer­by­layer approach [4]. The scaffold serves to recapitulate the ECM of the in
vivo counterpart and is also called the ”bioink” in bioprinting applications [68]. Biomolecules that can
influence cell behavior, such as growth factors, are sometimes included in the bioprinted construct
[69].
3D bioprinting techniques can be divided into extrusion­based bioprinting, light­based bioprinting,
and droplet­based bioprinting. Of these, extrusion­based bioprinting is the most common and re­
garded as the most promising due to higher fabrication speed and better ability to create anatomi­
cally shaped constructs than attained with the other two methods [68]. Extrusion­based bioprinting
works by inserting the biomaterial into a disposible plastic syringe and then dispensing said bioma­
terial on a building platform. The dispensed material forms a strand using this method. More details
on dispension methods used in extrusion­based bioprinting are provided in subsection A.3.1.
2.5.2
Rheology requirements for extrusion­based bioprinting
Rheology is the study of deformation and flow and a biomaterial used in extrusion­based 3D bio­
printing must meet requirements for certain rheological parameters in order to be suitable for print­
ing [70], [68]. Specifically, it should ideally have a lower viscosity during printing than after printing.
This allows for printing where cells are not exposed to excessive shear stresses, which will dam­
age them, while making the printed construct able to better maintain its shape after printing [68].
17
==PAGE:25==
This is generally accomplished in one (or both) of two ways; the printing material is shear thinning,
and/or cross­linking of the printing material. Shear thinning behaviour means that the viscosity of a
material decreases as shear rate increases and is caused by molecular rearrangement of polymer
chains to a more stretched conformation during shear (see figure 2.13). In practice, this means that
the material flows under high shear stress conditions (as in during printing) but maintains a high vis­
cosity at low shear stress conditions (as in after printing). This behaviour is exhibited by most poly­
meric materials but to a variable degree. It is particularly prominent among high­molecular weight
polymers.
Figure 2.13: Molecular rearrangement of polymer chains in a shear thinning material during bio­
printing. (i) Entangled conformation of polymer chains (white and red on the figure) prior to applying
printing pressure. (ii) Molecular rearrangement of chains that occurs with exposing the material to a
shear stress as a result of applying printing pressure [68].
Cross­linking of the printed material can be physically induced, chemically induced, or induced by
both types. In any case, it results in the interaction between polymer chains so that their ability to
move is restricted with a stable network structure to follow [71]. The material is said to ”gelate”.
The material must gelate after printing in order for the printed 3D structure to maintain its shape
[68]. Physically induced gelation is primarily based on ionic cross­linking or a thermally induced
property change and results in non­covalent physical interactions between hydrophilic polymer
chains. Thermal gelation is particularly interesting in bioprinting applications as it does not require
additional cross­linking agents which can be potentially harmful to the material. In addition, ther­
mal gelation has excellent biocompatibility [68]. For instance, thermal induced gelation of collagen
bio­inks is common in bioprinting. Here, the bioink is printed at a temperature well below 37 °C and
then heated to 37 °C immediately after printing as collagen gelates at this temperature when the pH
is neutral [72], [73]. The non­covalent interactions between polymer chains in physical cross­linking
are not always strong enough to ensure sufficient mechanical properties and shape fidelity of the
printed construct [68]. In these situations chemical cross­linking may be employed to form strong
covalent interactions between polymer chains so that a stable structure which maintains shape after
printing is attained. One way of achieving this is to add a photoinitiator, such as vitamin B2, to the
bioink followed by exposure of the printed material to ultraviolet (UV) light after dispension which re­
sults in fast cross­linking [74], [68]. Another way to perform chemical cross­linking is to add a cross­
linking agent, e.g. transglutaminase, to the bioink [5]. However, UV light and cross­linking agents
can damage embedded cells so care should be taken when employing these approaches [68].
2.5.3
Porcine cdECM pre­gel formation for EHTs
dECM is a desirable material to use in bio­inks as a result of the potential benefits associated with
using it in tissue models. In order to print the material it must be digested into a liquid which is ca­
pable of gelating first. This liquid is known as the pre­gel. When using porcine cdECM the pre­gel
is generally obtained by pulverizing the lyophilized tissue, such as with a mortar and pestle in liquid
18
==PAGE:26==
N2, followed by treating it in a solution containing pepsin (see table 2.2 for method of pulverization
as well as pepsin treatment used in the same selection of articles as table 2.1).
Method of pre­gel formation used in selected articles.
Article:
Method of pulverization:
Pepsin treatment:
Pati et al.
(2014 and
2017) [9]
[30]
Crushed with mortar and
pestle in combination with
liquid N2.
48 h in 3% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M acetic acid so­
lution with 400 U/mg pepsin in 1:10 (w/w) ratio
with cdECM.
Shin et al.
(2021) [11]
Shredded and chopped with
razor blades.
7 d in 9­10% (w/v) 0.1 M HCl solution with 250
U/mg pepsin in a 1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Das et al.
(2019) [6]
Crushed with mortar and
pestle in combination with
liquid N2.
72 h in 2.5% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M acetic acid
solution with pepsin (specific activity not re­
ported) in 1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Jang et al.
(2017) [28]
Crushed with mortar and
pestle in combination with
liquid N2.
48 h in 3.3% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M acetic acid
solution with pepsin (specific activity not re­
ported) in 1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Bejleri et
al. (2018)
[31]
Milled
48 h in 1% cdECM (w/v) 0.1 M HCL solution
with pepsin (specific activity not reported) in
1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Kang et al.
(2021) [10]
Not reported
5­7 d in 0.5 M acetic acid solution with pepsin
(specific activity and amount not reported) and
cdECM (concentration not reported).
Tsui et al.
(2021) [5]
Not reported
2% cdECM (w/v) and rGO (between 0.1% w/v
and 0.3% w/v depending on group) in 0.1 M
HCL solution with pepsin (specific activity not
reported) in 1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM. Di­
gested until solution was completely homoge­
neous.
Table 2.2: Pre­gel formation protocols, including both method of pulverization­ and pepsin treat­
ment, used in a selection of seven articles published within the last 10 years where bioprinted EHTs
containing porcine cdECM were developed. HCl=hydrochloric acid, rGO=reduced graphine oxide.
Pepsin works by cleaving the telopeptide regions of collagen such that the cdECM can be solubi­
lized. The solution used must be acidic as pepsin is most active in such environments [75]. Adjust­
ing the pH of the solubilized cdECM to neutral by using a base results in the formation of the pre­
gel [9]. Both the amount, time, and strength of the pepsin used should be carefully planned as too
much excessively degrades protein constituents of the ECM and too little results in large amounts
of undigested material which is unsuitable for printing purposes [4].
As seen from table 2.2, time of pepsin digestion varies considerably in the literature with some treat­
ments only lasting 48 hours and others lasting up to a week (and potentially even more as Tsui et
al. did not list the time). The amount of pepsin used is in a 1:10 ratio with cdECM (w/w) in all arti­
cles that report it. However, specific activity of the pepsin used was only listed in two of the articles,
namely, those by Pati et al. and Shin et al. Similarly to when selecting a decellularization protocol a
reasonable approach here is to start by using a pepsin with low enzymatic activity for a short dura­
tion and then adjust as needed.
2.5.4
Challenges associated with 3D bioprinting of dECM bio­inks
dECM, including cdECM derived from porcine heart tissue, is normally hampered by poor mechan­
ical properties, including viscosity, which limits print fidelity. Thermal gelation, induced by incubat­
ing the printed construct at 37 °C for 30­40 minutes, is commonly used to induce cross­linking in
bioinks containing cdECM [9], [76], [6]. Pati et al. were able to create constructs from bioink con­
19
==PAGE:27==
taining 3% porcine LV dECM (w/v) (see table 2.2) that maintained structure for up to two weeks by
employing this approach [9]. However, these constructs were 2D. Indeed, as gelation is not immedi­
ate when using thermal gelation the construct loses shape fidelity in the 30­40 minutes required for
cross­linking. Increasing the concentration of cdECM does yield a more viscous gel which is able to
better maintain shape fidelity. However, higher viscosity hampers cell maturation meaning that in­
creasing cdECM concentration is not a viable strategy to circumvent the problem [6]. To my knowl­
edge, no group has yet managed to print a 3D EHT from bioink with porcine cdECM that was able
to maintain shape after printing without the use of other methods than physical cross­linking only.
Examples of other such methods are described in subsection A.3.2.
20
==PAGE:28==
3
Materials and methods
Multiple decellularization­, label­free shotgun proteomics­, and gelation experiments of LV tissue
derived from adult­ and neonatal pigs were conducted (gelation experiments were not conducted
for neonatal pigs). A simple overview of the study design is provided in figure 3.1. The exact ex­
periments performed and details on the procedures done for each of them are described in the re­
mainder of this section. Further details on the experiments, including the motivation behind each of
them, are given in chapter 4.
Figure 3.1: Simple overview of the study design.
3.1
Cardiac LV tissue acquisition
Porcine hearts were harvested from both adult­ (danish landrace, female, all around 300 kg) and
neonatal pigs (danish landrace, differing genders) after euthanasia at the department of veterinary
animal sciences at University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Adult pigs underwent general anesthesia
and were subjected to caesarean section and neonatal pigs who died­ or were injured at birth were
harvested in the process. The remaining neonatal pigs were used in other studies. Adult­ and in­
jured neonatal pigs were euthanized by intracardiac injection of pentobarbital.
21
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Decellularization­, proteomics­, and gelation experiments
The protocols detailing how decellularization­, label­free shotgun proteomics­, and gelation (includ­
ing pre­gel formation) experiments were performed are listed in the following. Multiple experimental
runs under different conditions were conducted for each of these three experiments types. A sub­
set of these experimental runs are included in this report and hence the three experiments are pre­
ceded by an overview of said experimental runs.
3.2.1
Decellularization
Decellularization experimental overview
Tables 3.1 and 3.2 provide an overview of the most important decellularization experiments (exper­
imental runs) conducted (an overview of the remaining decellularization experiments can be found
in table B.1) by associating them with an experiment identification ID code, listing the samples cre­
ated in each of the experiments, providing each sample with a unique sample ID (sample map), and
summarising how decellularization was performed in the specific experiment. The experiments are
listed in order of completion. All decellularization experiments were based on the established proto­
col by Pati et al. from 2017 (see table 2.1) but most were modified.
22
==PAGE:30==
Overview of the most important decellularization experiments.
Experiment
ID:
Sample map:
Decellularization approach:
PatiDe
• Manually cut adult 2 LV
piece=”PatiDe A2M”.
• Blended adult 2 LV
piece=”PatiDe A2B”.
• Manually cut neonatal 2
LV=”PatiDe N2M”.
• Blended neonatal 3
LV=”PatiDe N3B”.
According to protocol detailed in subsubsec­
tion 3.2.1. Manual cutting done with a scalpel
on glass petri dish. Blending done in 1% SDS
and tissue not frozen prior to initiation of decel­
lularization. 20:1 (v/w) SDS:tissue ratio. SDS
treatment performed for 48 h without solution
change. Triton X­100 treatment performed for
30 min. Liquids switched using centrifugation.
PBS wash following Triton X­100 treatment
done for 3 d. Final washes in sterilized water
were 30 min each.
FineDe
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 48 h
in SDS with SDS:tissue=20:1
(v/w)=”FineDe A3”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 48 h
in SDS with solution change
ED and SDS:tissue=20:1
(v/w)=”FineDe A3C”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 48 h
in SDS with SDS:tissue=80:1
(v/w)=”FineDe A3­80:1”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 96 h
in SDS with solution change
ED and SDS:tissue=20:1
(v/w)=”FineDe A3­96C”.
According to protocol detailed in subsubsec­
tion 3.2.1 using blending only. Blending per­
formed in PBS and tissue frozen prior to ini­
tiation of decellularization. SDS treatment
specifications listed in sample map. Triton X­
100 treatment performed for 30 min. Liquids
switched using centrifugation. PBS wash fol­
lowing Triton X­100 treatment done for 3 d.
Final washes in sterilized water were 30 min
each.
FilterDe
• Adult 3 LV piece treated
48 h in SDS with 1% P/S
and SDS:tissue=40:1
(v/w)=”FilterDe A3­40:1”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated
96 h in SDS with 1% P/S,
SDS:tissue=40:1, and
solution change after 3
d=”FilterDe A3­96C”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 48
h in SDS with SDS:tissue
ratio=20:1 (v/w)=”FilterDe
A3”.
According to protocol detailed in subsubsec­
tion 3.2.1 using manual cutting only. Cutting
performed with sharp knife on silicon wafer
and tissue frozen prior to initiation of decellu­
larization. SDS treatment specifications listed
in sample map. Triton X­100 treatment per­
formed for 30 min. Liquids switched using
decanting and filtering. PBS wash following
Triton X­100 treatment done for 3 d with PBS
containing 1% P/S in samples where this was
used. Final washes in sterilized water were 30
min each.
Table 3.1: Experiment ID, samples included and their sample IDs (sample map), and the approach
used for decellularization (decellularization approach) in the most important decellularization ex­
periments conducted. The number following either ”adult” or ”neonatal” (”A” or ”N” in the sample
IDs) in sample map designates which adult or neonatal heart was used, i.e., the same number in­
dicates that tissue from the same heart was used. ED=every day, PBS=phosphate buffered saline,
P/S=Penicillin Streptomycin.
23
==PAGE:31==
Overview of the most important decellularization experiments (continued).
Experiment
ID:
Sample map:
Decellularization approach:
SDSDe
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 72 h
in SDS=”SDSDe A3­72”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 96 h
in SDS=”SDSDe A3­96”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated 120
h in SDS=”SDSDe A3­120”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated
120 h in SDS with solution
change after 72 h=”SDSDe
A3­120C”.
According to protocol detailed in subsubsec­
tion 3.2.1 using manual cutting only. Cutting
performed with sharp knife on silicon wafer
and tissue frozen prior to initiation of decellu­
larization. SDS treatment times listed in sam­
ple map. SDS:tissue ratio=40:1 (v/w). 1%
P/S was used in all samples. Triton X­100
treatment performed for 30 minutes. Liquids
switched using decanting and filtering. PBS
wash following Triton X­100 treatment done for
3 d with PBS containing P/S. Final washes in
sterilized water were 30 min each.
HarshDe
• Blended adult 3 LV
piece=”HarshDe A3B”.
• Manually cut adult 3 LV
piece=”HarshDe A3M”.
• Blended adult 4 LV
piece=”HarshDe A4B”.
• Manually cut adult 4 LV
piece=”HarshDe A4M”.
• Blended LV from neonatal
7 born of adult 3=”HarshDe
N7B”.
• Blended LV from neonatal
9 born of adult 4=”HarshDe
N9B”.
• Manually cut LV from
neonatal 8 born of adult
3=”HarshDe N8M”.
• Manually cut LV from
neonatal 10 born of adult
4=”HarshDe N10M”.
According to protocol detailed in subsubsec­
tion 3.2.1. Tissue frozen prior to initiation of
decellularization. Manual cutting performed on
glass petri dish. Blending done in PBS. SDS
treatment performed for 5 d while changing so­
lution every day for all samples. SDS:tissue
ratio=40:1 (v/w) on first day and 20:1 (v/w) on
subsequent days for all samples. 1% P/S was
used for all samples. Triton X­100 treatment
performed for 1 h. Liquids switched using de­
canting and filtering. PBS wash following Tri­
ton X­100 treatment performed for 2 d, without
1% P/S, followed by DNase I treatment. Final
washes in sterilized water were 90 min each.
Table 3.2: This table is a continuation of 3.1. Experiment ID, samples included and their sample
IDs (sample map), and the approach used for decellularization (decellularization approach) in the
most important decellularization experiments conducted. The number following either ”adult” or
”neonatal” (”A” or ”N” in the sample IDs) in sample map designates which adult or neonatal heart
was used, i.e., the same number indicates that tissue from the same heart was used. ED=every
day, PBS=phosphate buffered saline, P/S=Penicillin Streptomycin.
General decellularization procedure
LVs were isolated from the hearts of adult­ and neonatal pigs by cutting with a knife. Neonatal LVs
were weighed and adult LVs were cut into smaller batches prior to being weighed. Decellularization
was either initiated immediately or the LVs were frozen at ­80°C prior, depending upon the specific
experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). Tissue was sectioned into small pieces by manually cutting
with a sharp knife and/or scalpel or automatically cut using a blender (Braun minipimer 3, mixing
container) depending upon the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). In the former case, the tissue
was cut into pieces of 1­3 mm3 (in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)) on a glass petri dish or cut
into thin slices with width and thickness below 2cm and 2 mm, respectively, on a silicon wafer, de­
24
==PAGE:32==
pending upon the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). The tissue was transferred to a UV sterilized
(30 min) polyethylene (PE) bottle (250­ or 500 ml) and, in cases of cutting on a glass petri dish, 2%
SDS (Sigma­Aldrich, 71736 or 05030) was added in a 1:1 ratio (v/v) with the added PBS so that a
concentration of 1% SDS was attained. When cutting on a silicon wafer 1% SDS was added after
transference to plastic bottles (as PBS was not added when cutting in this case). When automat­
ically cutting the blender was placed in an ice box and the tissue was blended at the max velocity
setting for 2 min in either measured amounts of 1% SDS or sterilized water depending upon the ex­
periment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). When blending was done in 1% SDS the tissue was transferred
to UV sterilized (30 min) PE bottles (500 ml) after blending and 1% SDS was added. When blend­
ing was done in sterilized water 2% SDS was added to the PE bottles in a 1:1 ratio (v/v) with the
water so that the final concentration was 1% SDS.
In both manually cut­ and blended samples SDS was added to the PE bottles in an amount so that
experiment­dependant total SDS to tissue ratios (v/w) were attained. In some samples 1% peni­
cillin streptomycin (P/E) was added (see tables 3.1 and 3.2 for specifics). Magnetic stirring was
performed (250 RPM) in all subsequent steps. Treatment times in SDS and potential changes of
solution were dependant upon the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). Following SDS treatment
(or during if the SDS was changed) the liquid was removed by utilizing either a centrifugation­ or
decanting and filtering approach depending upon the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2). Liquid
removal was always done in a laminar flow (LAF) bench. The centrifugation approach was per­
formed the same way every time. The mixture of tissue and SDS was transferred to falcon tubes
(50 ml) followed by centrifugation (2000 g, 5 min). If the tissue had not formed a precipitate the set­
tings were adjusted by increasing g with 500 until a proper precipitate formed. After spinning, the
supernatant was removed and new liquid (of type determined by protocol) was added. The mix­
tures were transferred from the falcon tubes and back into a PE bottle for continuation of treatment.
In the other approach, decanting was performed when removing detergents (foam formation inhib­
ited vision if filtering was used here) by letting the tissue sediment for 2­3 min followed by pouring
as much liquid as possible into a waste bottle while losing minimal tissue. Filtering was performed
when removing non­detergent liquids by pouring the liquid into a waste glass beaker through an
ethanol (70%) sprayed and UV sterilized (30 min) disposable nylon filter (pore size=125 μm). Tis­
sue was transferred from the filter and back into a PE bottle using a tweezer and a spatula. Follow­
ing SDS treatment, 1% Triton X­100 (Sigma­Aldrich) in PBS was added to the samples and treat­
ment performed for either 30 min or 1 h depending on the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2).
Then, the liquid was removed and a large amount of PBS with­ or without 1% P/S, depending upon
the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2), was added and the mixtures were transferred to new PE
bottles. Washing in PBS was done for 2­ or 3 d, depending upon the experiment (see tables 3.1
and 3.2), and in the latter case the PBS and the PE bottles were changed every day. In the former
case, neither the PBS nor the PE bottles were changed. Then, in experiments where PBS wash­
ing was performed for 2 d, PBS was removed and PBS containing 75 U/ml DNase I (Sigma­Aldrich,
DN25) was added. The samples were washed in this solution for 20 h followed by removal of the
solution and transference of samples to new bottles where two washes in PBS, containing 1% P/S,
of 90 min each were performed. A third wash in PBS was done overnight. PBS was removed for all
samples (including those washed for 3 d) and samples were treated with 0.1% PAA (Sigma­Aldrich,
1.07222) in 4% ethanol absolute (EtOH) for 4 h. PAA was removed and the samples transferred to
new PE bottles where sterilized water was added. The samples were washed 3 times of 30­90 min­
utes each, depending upon the experiment (see tables 3.1 and 3.2), while changing the sterilized
water between every wash. After the final wash as much liquid as possible was removed from the
samples. The samples were frozen at ­20 °C and stored overnight. Then, samples were frozen in
liquid N2 (2 min) followed by immediate lyophilization. Lyophilization was performed for 20 h. Sam­
ples were weighed after lyophilization and stored at ­20 °C until further use.
3.2.2
Extent of decellularization
Extent of decellularization was determined by DNA quantification by using the DNeasy Blood &
Tissue Kit (Qiagen, 69504) and following the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Specifically,
25
==PAGE:33==
samples of lyophilized cdECM, native lyophilized LV tissue (for control), and native wet LV tissue
(for control) were cut into small pieces with a scalpel, weighed (<25 mg was used), and placed in
1.5 ml eppendorf tubes. Tissue lysis buffer ATL (180 μL) and proteinase K (20 μL) were added, fol­
lowed by pulse vortexing (15 s). The mixtures were incubated in a thermomixer (56°C, 350 RPM)
until they were clear and free of aggregates (at least 3 hours). The mixtures were pulse vortexed
(15 s) and lysis buffer AL (200 μL) was added followed by pulse vortexing (15 s). EtOH (200 μL)
was added and the mixtures were immediately pulse vortexed (15 s). The samples were transferred
into mini spin columns (placed in 2 ml collecting tubes) and centrifuged (8000 RPM, 1 min). Flow­
through was discarded and the mini spin columns were placed in new 2 ml collecting tubes. Wash
buffer AW1 (500 μL) was added and the samples were centrifuged (8000 RPM, 1 min). Then, the
flow­through and collecting tubes were discarded. The spin columns were placed in new 2 ml col­
lecting tubes followed by the addition of wash buffer AW2 (500 μL). The tubes were spun (13400
RPM, 3 min) and the collecting tubes were discarded. The mini spin columns were placed in 2 ml
eppendorf tubes and elution buffer AE (200 μL) was added onto the membrane of the spin columns
(DNeasy membrane). The samples were incubated at room temperature (1 min) followed by being
centrifuged (8000 RPM, 1 minute). The same amount of buffer AE was then added again and the
process repeated. The eluates were stored at ­20 °C until further use. DNA was measured with a
Nanodrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Blanking was done using buffer AE. DNA
per unit tissue weight (in mg) was calculated and illustrated in bar plots using Python.
3.3
Proteomics analysis
Two label­free shotgun proteomics experiments using LC­MS/MS with DDA were performed to as­
sess protein composition of a subset of the cdECMs and the results of both experiments are in­
cluded in this report. The following table provides the experiment ID and sample map of each of
these experiments:
Experiment ID and sample map of proteomics experiments.
Experiment ID:
Sample map:
PatiPro
• PatiDe A2M=”PatiPro A2M”
• PatiDe A2B=”PatiPro A2B”
• PatiDe N2M=”PatiPro N2M”
• PatiDe N3B=”PatiPro N3B”
.
ModPro
• SDSDe A3­72=”ModPro A3­72”
• SDSDe A3­96=”ModPro A3­96”
• SDSDe A3­120=”ModPro A3­120”
• SDSDe A3­120C=”ModPro A3­120C”
• HarshDe A3M=”ModPro A3H”
• HarshDe A4M=”ModPro A4H”
.
Table 3.3: Experiment ID and sample map (with sample IDs) for the proteomics experiments. Sam­
ples included can be interpreted by reading tables 3.1 and 3.2. The number following either ”A” or
”N” in the sample IDs designates which adult­ or neonatal heart was used, i.e., the same number
indicates that tissue from the same heart was used.
3.3.1
Sample preparation for LC­MS/MS
Sample preparation for LC­MS/MS is divided into Protein­ extraction and digestion as well as pep­
tide desalting both of which are explained in the following.
Protein­ extraction and digestion:
2.5­3 mg of lyophilized cdECM was retrieved from each sample by cutting with a scalpel. The re­
trieved tissue was split into two (so that each sample consisted of two subsamples of 1­1.5 mg
26
==PAGE:34==
each) for each sample and transferred to PCT micro­tubes (see subsection A.2.4 for more infor­
mation on PCT). 30 μL 4 M GuHCL (Sigma­Aldrich) in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.8) was added to each
tube. The tubes were covered with micropestles, placed in a cartridge containing two barrels (see
figure B.1 for illustration), transferred to a barocycler, (2320 EXT, Pressure BioSciences, Inc., see
figure B.2 for an illustration of the device) and subjected to PCT (60 cycles, 45 kpsi for 20 s, atmo­
spheric pressure at 33 °C for 10 s). Then, the pestles were removed from the tubes. The micro­
tubes were placed in 1.5 ml eppendorf tubes and HEPES (20 μL, pH 7.8) was added to ensure full
coverage of the tissue with liquid. 200 mM tris(2­carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma­Aldrich)
was added to a final concentration of 10 mM TCEP. The mixtures were incubated (30 min, 37 °C,
350 RPM) followed by addition of 400 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) (Sigma­Aldrich) to a final con­
centration of 40 mM CAA. Samples were incubated (30 min, 37 °C, 350 RPM) followed by brief
spinning. HEPES (pH 7.8) was added so that the total volume of each sample was 100 μL (to di­
lute GuHCL concentration to 1.2 M). Protein concentration was measured with a nanodrop spec­
trophotometer and total amount of protein in each sample was calculated. Lys C (>1:100 (w/w) with
the calculated protein amount) (Fujifilm) was added. Each microtube was covered with a micropes­
tle, placed in the cartridge, transferred to the barocycler, and subjected to PCT (45 cycles, 20 kpsi
for 50 s, atmospheric pressure at 33 °C for 10 s). Pestles were removed from the tubes and 50
mM HEPES (50 μL, pH=7.8) was added to the samples (to dilute GuHCL concentration to 0.8 M).
Trypsin (>1:20 (w/w) with the previously calculated protein amount) (Promega, V5280) was added
and each microtube was covered with a new pestle, transferred to the barocycler, and subjected to
PCT (60 cycles, 20 kpsi for 50 s, atmospheric pressure at 33 °C for 10 s). Subsamples belonging
to the same sample were placed upside­down in 1.5 ml protein low­bind eppendorf tubes and the
tubes were spun for a few seconds. The eppendorf tubes were then centrifuged (10 min, 13000 g).
Supernatant of each sample was transferred to clean protein low­bind eppendorf tubes and protein
digestion was stopped by acidifying with gradual addition of 10% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma­
Aldrich) until the pH was around 2 as determined by pH paper. Samples were stored at ­20 °C.
Peptide desalting:
C18 columns (see figure B.3 for an illustration of the material) were prepared by placing two plugs
of C18 in pipette tips using a syringe. The C18 columns were placed in 2 ml eppendorf tubes with
adaptors. The columns were pre­washed with methanol (40 μL) once, followed by 40 μL of a mix­
ture consisting of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma­Aldrich) and 0.1% TFA in water (buffer B) once,
followed by 40 μL of a mixture consisting of 3% ACN and 1% TFA (buffer A’) twice. After each wash,
centrifugation was performed until minimal liquid was present in the columns, starting at 1000 g for
1 min and increasing both if needed. Air between the fluid and the C18 material after centrifuging
was ensured removed before subsequent washes. This method of centrifuging and investigating for
the presence of air was used in subsequent steps as well. The columns and their associated adap­
tors were placed in new 2 ml eppendorf tubes. The previously obtained nanodrop protein concen­
trations were used to add parts of each sample corresponding to 20 μg of protein (for each sam­
ple) to their corresponding columns (the columns pertaining to the specific samples). The tubes
were then centrifuged and the columns were kept humid after centrifugation by reloading the flow­
through and spinning at the same settings again. 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) was added to
each column and samples were centrifuged. Washing with buffer A was repeated twice. Columns in
adaptors were transferred to new 1.5 ml protein low bind eppendorf tubes and samples were eluted
3 times with buffer B (40 μL each time) by centrifuging. The eluates were dried under vacuum at 45
°C until very little liquid was still present in the eppendorf tubes (about 2 h). The tubes were then
suspended in buffer A’ (12 μL) and peptide concentrations of the samples were measured with the
nanodrop.
3.3.2
LC­MS/MS and data analysis
LC­MS/MS and data analysis encompasses sample loading and liquid chromatography (LC) set­
tings, MS settings, settings used for the database search, and data analysis of the proteomics ex­
periments in python, all of which are explained in the following. Note, that as the specifics of some
of these steps differed between the two experiments multiple tables are included to summarize the
settings used in each experiment.
27
==PAGE:35==
Sample loading and LC settings:
The obtained peptide concentrations were used to calculate the amount of peptide mixture required
to obtain the desired amount (in μg, dependant upon the experiment, see table 3.4 for specifics) of
peptide which was to be loaded onto the LC system for each sample (was the same amount for all
samples belonging to the same experimental run). An excess was added to the calculated amount
for each sample to account for evaporation of the liquid during the analysis in the mass spectrome­
ter. The LC system used­ as well as the amount of peptide loaded and procedure used to separate
the peptides are listed in table 3.4 for each of the two experiments.
LC settings for proteomics experiments.
Experiment:
LC system:
Procedure:
PatiPro
EASY­nLC™1200 liquid chro­
matography system (Thermo Sci­
entific)
Separation of 1 µg of peptide mix­
ture was achieved by running con­
stant flow rate of 250 nL/min in
0.1% formic acid/99.9% water and
a 140 min gradient from 10% to
95% elution buffer (80% ACN,
0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water).
ModPro
EASY­nLC™1200 liquid chro­
matography system (Thermo Sci­
entific)
Separation of 500 ng of peptide
mixture was achieved by running
constant flow rate of 250 nL/min
in 0.1% formic acid/99.9% water
and a 70 min gradient from 10%
to 95% elution buffer (80% ACN,
0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water).
Table 3.4: LC system used­ as well as the corresponding procedure performed to separate the pep­
tides in both of the experiments.
MS instruments and settings:
A PepMap100 C18 precolumn (75 µm x 2 cm , 3 µm, 100 Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and a
PepMap rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) C18 analytical column (75 µm x 15 cm,
2 µm, 100 Å, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) were used in both experiments. DDA operated under
Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 was applied to record the spectra in both experiments. The MS instrument used
for each experiment is summarized in table 3.5 along with the corresponding settings.
28
==PAGE:36==
MS­ instrument type and settings used in each experiment.
Experiment:
MS instrument:
MS settings:
PatiPro
Q Exactive Hybrid Quadropole­
Orbitrap mass spectrometer
(Thermo Scientific)
Full scan:
• Full scan MS spectra: 300­
1750 m/z
• Resolution: 70,000
• Automatic gain control (AGC)
target value of 3 ∗106
• Fixed first mass of 120 m/z
MS2:
• TopN: 10
• Resolution: 17,500
• AGC of 1 ∗106
• Maximum injection time of 60
ms
• Isolation window of 1.6 m/z
• Normalized collision energy
(NCE) of 25%.
• Dynamic exclusion: 60 s.
ModPro
Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spec­
trometer (Thermo Scientific)
Full scan:
• Full scan MS spectra: 300­
1850 m/z
• Resolution: 60,000
• AGC target: Standard
MS2:
• Resolution: 15,000
• AGC: Custom (100%)
• Maximum injection time of 23
ms
• Isolation window of 1.2 m/z
• NCE of 28%
• Charge exclusion: Unas­
signed or single charge state
• Dynamic exclusion: 30 s
Table 3.5: MS instrument and MS settings used for each of the two experiments performed.
Settings used for database search:
The software used for the database search was Spectromine and the database searched was UniProt
for the proteome of Sus Scrofa (U000008227 access: 040422). The enzyme search parameters
used were TrypsinP and LysC and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modi­
fications were specified as carbamidomethyl(C) and dynamic modifications were specified as oxida­
tion(M) and acetyl(N­term). False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Label free quantification was
conducted with the MaxLFQ procedure and the intensities were median normalized. An expanded
database search including GO terms for the proteins (where this was possible) was conducted ex­
clusively in experiment ModPro.
Data analysis of proteomics experiments:
For both experiments data analysis was performed in python using the pandas library. Initially, pro­
teins identified based on only 1 unique peptide were disregarded for analysis by filtering. Then,
both qualitative­ and quantitative analyses were conducted for the comparison of certain samples
from each experiment. For both experiments, the qualitative analysis was initiated by the creation
of Venn diagrams with the website Venny [77]. Protein ID codes (UniProtIDs) of the samples were
29
==PAGE:37==
used as input. The Venn diagrams were then used to retrieve the number of unique­ and common
proteins between the compared samples.
For experiment PatiPro the qualitative analysis was continued by initially removing all proteins with
associated gene names equal to NaN. Then, a custom enrichment analysis in metascape was con­
ducted to investigate unique­ and common proteins between samples. Proteins were analyzed as
belonging to the human species as a custom analysis is not possible for pigs in metascape. Mini­
mum overlap was set to 3, P­value cutoff to 0.01, and minimum enrichment to 1.5. Databases used
for the analysis were ”GO Biological Processes”, ”Reactome Gene sets”, and ”KEGG pathway”. For
the unique proteins, a subset of the most significant function groups were retrieved and it was in­
vestigated if these were related to cellular­ or ECM functions based on the group names. The com­
mon proteins served as input to a quantitative analysis of cellular proteins for the comparison of
samples. For this, a custom enrichment analysis was conducted in metascape, with the aforemen­
tioned parameters, and all proteins within the most significant cellular protein group were retrieved.
Then, these were sorted from highest to lowest quantity (as measured by AUC (termed abundance
in the remainder of the thesis)) for each sample. A common quantity between the compared sam­
ples, representing the 20 most abundant of the proteins, was retrieved for each sample. These pro­
teins were double­checked manually as being of cellular origin in UniProt. The abundances of the
20 proteins were compared between the samples and this was graphically illustrated using a bar
plot with a Log transformed y­axis.
For experiment ModPro the qualitative analysis was continued (after the creation of Venn diagrams)
by searching the GO term columns and the protein description column of the dataset in order to
identify ECM proteins. The search words used were: ”extracellular”, ”basement”, ”collagen”, ”fi­
bronectin”, ”laminin”, ”elastin”, ”proteoglycan”, ”fibrinogen”, ”growth factor”, ”vimentin”, ”inter­alpha­
trypsin inhibitor heavy chain”, ”hemoglobin”, ”myoglobin”, ”transglutaminase”, ”cartilage intermedi­
ate layer protein”, ”glycogen phosphorylase”, and ”nidogen”. Proteins associated with a GO term
or protein description where one of these words were included were grouped as ECM proteins.
Those that were not associated were grouped as cellular+uncharacterized proteins. This was used
to obtain a rough estimate of the amount of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins in each
sample. Then, all proteins associated with gene names equal to NaN were removed. The same
search words were used for all the proteins common between the compared samples and cellu­
lar+uncharacterized proteins were retrieved. These proteins were then used as input to a quanti­
tative analysis. This was done by retrieving the 20 most abundant of the proteins in the same way
as done in the quantitative analysis of cellular proteins conducted in experiment PatiPro. The re­
trieved proteins were double­checked in UniProt as being cellular. In cases where non­cellular pro­
teins were included the search words were expanded to include these so that only cellular proteins
were left (hence some of the very specific search words used). Then, the abundances of the pro­
teins were compared between the samples and the results illustrated using a bar plot with a Log
transformed y­axis.
For both experiments further qualitative­ and quantitative analyses of selected important ECM con­
stituents were conducted. The protein description column of the dataset was searched using spe­
cific search words in order to retrieve the important ECM proteins. Additionally, only proteins where
the protein description column was initiated by one of the search words were retrieved. The search
words used were: ”collagen type I”, ”collagen type III”, ”collagen type IV”, ”collagen type V”, ”colla­
gen type VI”, ”laminin”, and ”fibronectin”. The qualitative analysis was conducted by investigating
which of these important ECM constituents were not identified in all samples (for each set of com­
pared samples) and then determining in which samples they were not identified. The quantitative
analysis was performed by identifying the important ECM proteins common between each set of
compared samples. Then, the abundances of the important collagen­, laminin­, and fibronectin pro­
teins were compared between the samples by creating bar plots, with Log transformed y­axes, for
each of these protein groups.
30
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Gelation experiments
The following table provides an overview of the most important pre­gel formation­ and gelation ex­
periments performed. These experiments were based on protocols from either Pati et al. (see table
2.2) or Noor et al. depending upon the specific experiment (see table 3.6 for specifics on the differ­
ent experimental runs) [78].
Overview of most important pre­gel formation­ and gelation experiments performed.
Experiment
ID:
Sample map:
Pre­gel formation approach:
PatiGel
• PatiDe A2M+PatiDe
A2B=”PatiGel A2”.
According to protocol detailed
in subsection 3.4.1. Protocol in­
spired by Pati et al. Pulverization
done with biopulverizer. HCl was
added in an amount so that a 3%
(w/v) cdECM concentration was
attained. Pepsin with a specific
activity of 400 U/mg protein was
used. Digestion done for 48 h.
ImproveGel
• FilterDe A3=”ImproveGel
A3”.
• FilterDe A3­
96C=”ImproveGel A3­96C”.
According to protocol detailed in
subsection 3.4.1. Protocol inspired
by Noor et al. Pulverization done
with a mortar and pestle. Acetic
acid was added in an amount so
that a 2% (w/v) cdECM concen­
tration was attained. Pepsin with
a specific activity of 2500 U/mg
protein was used. Digestion done
for 4 d. Samples with 0.5%­, 1%­
and 1.5% cdECM (w/v) concentra­
tions were created from the stock
solution of 1.76% cdECM (w/v)
concentration (after addition of 10X
PBS and NaOH)
Table 3.6: Experiment ID, samples included and their sample IDs (sample map), and the approach
used for pre­gel formation (pre­gel formation approach) in the pre­gel formation­ and gelation ex­
periments performed. Samples included can be interpreted by reading table 3.1. The ”+” symbol in
sample map means that samples were pooled. The number following either ”A” or ”N” in the sample
IDs designates which adult or neonatal heart was used, i.e., the same number indicates that tissue
from the same heart was used. HCl=Hydrochloric acid.
3.4.1
General pre­gel formation­ and gelation procedure
Lyophilized cdECM was pulverized into as small particles as possible by using either a BioSpec
BioPulverizer (see figure B.4 for an illustration of this device) or a mortar and pestle depending
upon the experiment (see table 3.6). In the former case the device (including chisels and wells) was
fully immersed in liquid N2 (around 15 min). Meanwhile, the cdECM was weighed and immersed
in liquid N2 (a few min). Then, the cdECM samples were crushed using the device. The crushed
cdECM was grinded further with a spatula followed by being transferred to an eppendorf tube. In
the latter case, the cdECM was placed in a mortar, covered with liquid N2, crushed using the pes­
tle, and transferred to an eppendorf tube. After pulverization either hydrochloric acid (HCl) or acetic
acid, depending upon the specific experiment (see table 3.6), was added to the cdECM so that an
experimental specific cdECM concentration was attained. Pepsin (Sigma­Aldrich, P7125 or P7012)
of an experimental specific activity (see table 3.6) was added in a 1:10 ratio with cdECM (w/w). The
31
==PAGE:39==
resultant mixture was placed in a thermomixer for digestion (room temperature, 300 RPM). Diges­
tion time varied depending upon the experiment (see table 3.6). Following digestion, 10X PBS was
added for ionic balance in a 1:10 ratio (v/v) with the resultant volume. pH was adjusted to 7 by drop­
wise addition of 5 M NaOH while keeping the sample in an ice box to avoid premature gelation. pH
was measured with a pH paper. Depending upon the experiment (see table 3.6) multiple samples
with different concentrations of cdECM were created by pipetting measured amounts of the stock
sample (cdECM concentration (w/v) after addition of 10X and NaOH was recalculated) into different
eppendorf tubes and diluting with PBS. Tubes containing the samples were turned upside down
and the behaviour of the mixtures was observed. In addition, mixtures were attempted pipetted.
Then, samples were incubated (>1 h, 37 °C) to facilitate thermal cross­linking. Finally, extent of
gelation was evaluated by turning the tubes upside down as well as attempting to pipette. Results
were compared to the observations prior to incubation.
32
==PAGE:40==
4
Results
Results of the experiments described in chapter 3 will be presented and described in the follow­
ing. This includes decellularization­, proteomics, and gelation results. In addition, explanations
behind why certain samples were included and specific methods were used are provided. It is im­
portant to mention that no conclusions can be drawn from any of the results as statistical analyses
were not conducted. This is due to the fact that only one replicate of a sample subjected to a set
of specific conditions was performed for any experiment. The original goal was to initially estab­
lish a successful decellularization protocol (see criteria for successful decellularization in section
4.1) and then repeat this protocol multiple times allowing for statistical analyses. However, decel­
lularization was consistently unsuccessful which meant that a successful protocol was attempted
established throughout the entire project. This was done through an approach of varying multiple
parameters regarding treatment conditions for each experimental run in order to best identify the
parameters important in achieving successful decellularization. As running many samples in the
same experimental run was extremely time consuming as a result of having to change liquids of­
ten, (see subsubsection 3.2.1 for the general decellularization protocol) it was not feasible to create
multiple replicates with identical treatment conditions for each of the several protocols attempted
with every run. Hence, the lack of replicates needed to conduct statistical analyses for the decel­
lularization experiments. For the proteomics experiments the original goal was to analyse multiple
replicates of successfully decellularized tissue for each condition and then compare results between
different conditions. As no samples were sufficiently decellularized emphasis was shifted towards
developing a decellularization protocol yielding successfully decellularized tissue and then perform­
ing proteomics analysis once this was achieved (one proteomics experiment, namely PatiPro, was
performed to obtain some data prior to this shift of focus). As a consequence of this, sufficient repli­
cates for statistical analyses were not obtained. Finally, due to the problems with establishing a
sufficient decellularization protocol, and the large time expenditure associated with this, there was
insufficient time to establish a successful pre­gel formation and gelation protocol (see criteria for
success of such a protocol in section 4.3) while simultaneously evaluating this with multiple repli­
cates. Hence, all results in the following are meant to be viewed as preliminary and are used to
identify tendencies rather than drawing conclusions. Note, that samples will not be called by their
sample IDs (those listed in the different tables in chapter 3) in any of the figures or tables for the
decellularization­ and proteomics experiments in this chapter. Instead, sample names that are eas­
ier to interpret will be used and these will all be related to the corresponding sample IDs in the fig­
ure captions. Samples pertaining to a specific experiment will be referred to by their sample IDs
in the text in certain cases such as where a table or figure for that specific experiment has not yet
been presented. The sample IDs are unique to each sample while the sample names in the figures
are not (some samples from different experiments have identical names in the figures). Hence, the
sample IDs can always be used to distinguish different samples although this should not be a nec­
essary as it is always made clear from which experiment a sample is from.
4.1
Decellularization results
A successful and reproducible decellularization protocol of porcine LVs was desired. In addition, it
was a goal to consistently obtain substantial cdECM yields when using the protocol. In this case, a
protocol was deemed successful if, by following it, cdECM with DNA content <50 ng/mg lyophilized
tissue weight was consistently produced (one of the guidelines determining if a tissue has been de­
cellularized, see subsection 2.3.1). Multiple different protocols with varying parameters regarding
treatment conditions were followed in an attempt to achieve this. DNA content was determined for
all protocols and will be presented in the following in order to compare residual DNA for the differ­
ent protocols. In addition, starting weight of each sample and the obtained cdECM yields are pre­
sented. In some of the experiments, the decellularization protocol was attempted to be made more
reproducible by blending instead of manually cutting as the latter carries with it a high likelihood of
33
==PAGE:41==
resulting in tissue pieces of different sizes from one experiment to the next. Furthermore, blending
was attempted as this is a much better alternative than manual cutting if large­scale production of
EHTs based on cdECM is desired due to being much faster. In addition to comparing decellular­
ization protocols with different treatment conditions based on residual DNA content, the blended
approach will be compared to the approach of manually cutting in terms of both residual DNA con­
tent and cdECM yield. In some experiments cdECM was obtained by decellularizing both adult­ and
neonatal pigs. This was done to obtain cdECM derived from pigs of different ages for proteomics
analysis and to compare the residual DNA content in order to investigate if differences in extent of
decellularization when using the same protocol were present between the different pigs. Besides
residual DNA content and cdECM yield, unexpected challenges which occurred during all decellu­
larization experiments will be presented in the last part of this section.
4.1.1
PatiDe ­ replica of protocol by Pati et al.
Samples in experiment PatiDe were decellularized by following the protocol from Pati et al. (2017)
without modifications except that half the samples were blended instead of manually cut and half
the samples were from neonatal­ instead of adult pigs (see table 3.1 for specifications on the ex­
periment and sample map). The final washes preceding lyophilization were conducted in sterilized
water in all decellularization experiments in the present study. This is a slight modification from Pati
et al. (2014) where these were performed in PBS. In Pati et al. (2017) it is stated that the washes
were performed in both PBS and sterilized water and thus the protocols used in the present study
are possibly slightly modified from Pati et al. (2017) in this respect. The protocol from Pati et al.
(2017) was attempted as a start as it is well established and uses short exposure times to deter­
gents.
Centrifugation was used as a means of switching liquids in the decellularization process as no specifics
on how to do this are provided in the protocol and it was believed to be the easiest way to remove
as much liquid as possible while preserving the tissue.
A specified v/w ratio of 20:1 between SDS and tissue respectively, was used as a consequence of
results from experiment IniDe (see subsection C.1.1, figure C.1 for these)) indicating that detergent
should be used in substantial excess with tissue for proper decellularization. This ratio fit such a
criteria by visual inspection. Using a larger ratio made the transference of liquids to falcon tubes
prior to centrifugation incredibly time consuming and was hence avoided when using centrifugation
except in one sample in experiment FineDe (FineDe A3­80:1, see table 3.1 for specifics).
Blending was faster than manually cutting. However, it was of similar reproducibility as excessive
foam formation occurred when blending in SDS. This, in turn, impaired blending and resulted in
tissue pieces of different sizes (tissue pieces were also of different sizes when manually cutting).
Extent of decellularization is dependant upon the size of tissue pieces as smaller pieces have a
smaller surface area:volume ratio than larger pieces. This, in turn, increases rate of diffusion by
agents into the tissue and thus rate of decellularization for smaller pieces when compared to larger
pieces [79]. Thus, tissue pieces of different sizes after cutting limits reproducibility and it can be in­
ferred that both manual cutting and this way of blending may threaten reproducibility. Yields were
generally lower when blending than when manually cutting (see table 4.1).
34
==PAGE:42==
cdECM yield for experiment PatiDe.
Sample
Initial weight
cdECM yield
% yield
Adult 2 manually cut
6.94 g
62.1 ∗10−3 g
0.895%
Adult 2 blended
7.26 g
32.7 ∗10−3 g
0.450%
Neonatal 2 manually
cut
2.18 g
4.31 ∗10−3 g
0.198%
Neonatal 3 blended
3.64 g
2.54 ∗10−3 g
0.0698%
Table 4.1: Initial weights (wet weight) of LV tissue, cdECM yield after lyophilization, and the
cdECM yield relative to the initial weight in % for samples in experiment PatiDe. Adult 2 manually
cut=PatiDe A2M, Adult 2 blended=PatiDe A2B, Neonatal 2 manually cut=PatiDe N2M, Neonatal 3
blended=PatiDe N3B (see table 3.1 for treatment specifications).
Specifically, the relative yields were lower for both the blended adult­ and neonatal samples than
the corresponding manually cut samples (0.450% and 0.0698% vs. 0.895% and 0.198%, respec­
tively). This suggests that the blending approach used here impairs yield when compared to manual
cutting. The very low yield of the blended neonatal pig (2.54 ∗10−3 g) resulted in no tissue being
left for DNA quantification for this sample after proteomics analysis. Thus, no results regarding DNA
content for this sample were obtained.
DNA quantification results for the remaining samples indicated that the protocol from Pati et al. was
insufficient in decellularizing both adult­ and neonatal LVs regardless of the cutting method used.
Specifically, none of the samples were found to have a DNA concentration of under <50 ng/mg dry
weight tissue (see figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1: DNA content per mg lyophilized tissue weight for all samples in experiment PatiDe.
Adult 2 manually cut=PatiDe A2M, Adult 2 blended=PatiDe A2B, Neonatal 2 manually cut=PatiDe
N2M, Neonatal 3 blended=PatiDe N3B (see table 3.1 for treatment specifications).
The lowest DNA concentration was observed for the manually cut adult sample (2746 ng/mg) and
the highest for the manually cut neonatal sample (16655 ng/mg). This suggests that neonatal LVs
are harder to decellularize than adult LVs and is in accordance with results from experiment BlendDe
(only included in the appendix, see figure C.3) and HarshDe (see figure 4.6). DNA content of the
blended adult sample was higher than the manually cut adult sample although they were of the
same order of magnitude (3558 ng/mg vs. 2746 ng/mg, respectively).
35
==PAGE:43==
4.1.2
FineDe ­ Fine blended tissue decellularized under different SDS conditions
Experiment FineDe was designed to investigate the effect of different SDS treatments on extent of
decellularization with the goal of identifying ways of modifying the protocol from Pati et al. so that
sufficient decellularization was attained. Specifically, the effects of SDS amount relative to tissue,
change of SDS solution during treatment, and change of SDS solution+extra treatment time were
investigated. This was done by comparing residual DNA content obtained using such protocols with
that obtained from the SDS protocol used in Pati et al. (2017) (the overall protocol was slightly mod­
ified, i.e., tissue was frozen and blended). These parameters were manipulated as they all might
influence the extent of decellularization theoretically (specifics on sample treatments can be found
in table 3.1).
The effect of extended duration of SDS treatment was not investigated in isolation in this experi­
ment as the goal was for at least one of the samples to be sufficiently decellularized. Then, the pro­
tocol was intended to be modified in future experiments by making it less harsh if possible. Chang­
ing SDS solution in conjunction with extending the treatment time should theoretically provide a
more decellularized tissue than just extending treatment time alone. Thus, this would increase the
chance of obtaining a properly decellularized tissue. Hence, these two parameters were combined
in one sample in this experiment (FineDe A3­96C). Importantly, only adult samples (different adult
than in experiment PatiDe) were used in experiment FineDe as neonatal pigs did not provide enough
tissue. Furthermore, all samples were frozen due to this experiment being run some time after BlendDe
(see table B.1 for specifics on BlendDe) using the same adult heart. All samples were blended in
PBS as this was expected to minimize foam formation, in turn, resulting in better blending with very
small tissue pieces of reproducible sizes that would decellularize more readily. Native wet tissue
was included as a control in order to investigate if the DNA quantification protocol worked as in­
tended. I.e., it was investigated if DNA concentrations of the native tissue were comparable to those
in the literature. Native lyophilized tissue was included as the removal of water provides a more fair
comparison of DNA content with the cdECM than wet tissue does.
Blending in PBS resulted in very fine tissue pieces with a homogeneous size. Thus, in terms of re­
producibility this was an improvement on the blending­ and manual cutting methods used in the pre­
vious experiments conducted. However, yields were generally low and inconsistent when using this
approach (see table 4.2).
cdECM yield for samples in experiment FineDe.
Sample
Initial weight
cdECM yield
% yield
SDS 48h 20:1
10.1 g
17.6 ∗10−3 g
0.174%
SDS 48h 80:1
5.35 g
4.02 ∗10−3 g
0.0751%
SDS 48h change
10.2 g
2.53 ∗10−3 g
0.0248%
SDS 96h change
10.1 g
12.9 ∗10−3 g
0.128%
Table 4.2: Initial weights (wet weight) of LV tissue, cdECM yield after lyophilization, and the cdECM
yield relative to the initial weight in % for experiment FineDe. SDS 48h 20:1=FineDe A3, SDS 48h
80:1=FineDe A3­80:1, SDS 48h change=FineDe A3C, SDS 96h change=FineDe A3­96C (see table
3.1 for treatment specifications).
In particular, direct comparison between the yields of SDS 48h 20:1 in experiment FineDe and the
blended adult in experiment PatiDe (Adult 2 blended in table 4.1) reveals that the relative yield was
noticeable lower in the former than the latter (0.174% vs 0.450%, respectively). Although these
samples were from different adult pigs and the former was frozen while the latter was not these
factors should not impact yield substantially and treatment conditions were otherwise identical ex­
cept the blending method used. Hence, this suggests that blending the tissue into fine pieces in
PBS lowers yield. Furthermore, from table 4.2 it is observed that yields were even lower (than SDS
48h 20:1) and wildly varying for the remaining samples indicating that yields are inconsistent when
blending in this way. However, comparison should be done with care here as the extra changes of
36
==PAGE:44==
SDS conducted for two of the samples (SDS 48h change and SDS 96h change) can impact yield
as a result of tissue loss with each change. Despite this, it is reasonable to compare SDS 48h 20:1
with SDS 48h 80:1 where the only difference was amount of SDS used initially which should not
impact yield. As evident the relative yield was noticeably lower in the latter sample than the former
(0.0751% vs. 0.174%).
DNA quantification results from experiment FineDe indicated that none of samples were properly
decellularized (see figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2: DNA content per mg lyophilized tissue weight for all samples in experiment FineDe as
well as two native tissue control samples. SDS 48h 20:1=FineDe A3, SDS 48h 80:1=FineDe A3­
80:1, SDS 48h change=FineDe A3C, SDS 96h change=FineDe A3­96C (see table 3.1 for treatment
specifications).
The lowest DNA content (272 ng/mg) was observed in the sample treated with SDS in a 20:1 ratio
with tissue (v/w) for 96 h with changes of SDS solution every day (SDS 96h change on figure 4.2)
which was the sample subjected to the harshest protocol. Due to the previously mentioned experi­
mental setup it is unclear if this was a result of changing the SDS every day, using extended treat­
ment time, or both. However, comparison between SDS 48h 20:1 and SDS 48 h change (identical
protocols except the fact that a solution change of SDS was included in the latter sample) suggests
that a solution change of SDS impairs decellularization when compared to no change (1466 ng/mg
vs. 700, respectively). This may indicate that the low DNA content in SDS 96h change was a result
of the extended treatment time used but due to the low sample size no conclusions can be drawn.
Increasing the SDS:tissue ratio from 20:1 (SDS 48h 20:1) to 80:1 (SDS 48h 80:1) resulted in no no­
table difference in terms of residual DNA content (700 ng/mg vs. 693 ng/mg, respectively). DNA
concentration in native wet tissue was 528 ng/mg which is of a similar order of magnitude to val­
ues found in the literature (about 335 ng/mg was reported by Pati et al. [9]) indicating that the DNA
quantification protocol worked as intended.
The DNA concentration in the native wet tissue was lower than in all samples except SDS 96h change.
However, a large portion of the weight of native wet tissue is constituted by water and salt. Thus,
DNA concentration in ng/mg tissue would be far higher if water and salt content was removed mak­
ing a comparison with the samples inaccurate. The lyophilized native tissue control provides a bet­
ter comparison and the DNA concentration was higher than in the native wet tissue here (777 ng/mg
vs. 528 ng/mg, respectively). Surprisingly it was still lower than SDS 48h change (777 ng/mg vs.
1466 ng/mg, respectively). However, exact comparison is still complicated as salt is present in large
37
==PAGE:45==
amounts in the native tissue after lyophilization meaning that material without DNA (salt) constitutes
a large amount of the dry weight. Additionally, the native lyophilized tissue was not digested prop­
erly by proteinase K as part of the DNA quantification protocol (see 3.2.2 for protocol) most likely
impairing DNA yield.
Finally, the DNA concentration in SDS 48h 20:1 was noticeably lower in this experiment than the
corresponding (same SDS treatment) sample in experiment BlendDe (700 ng/mg vs. 2474 ng/mg,
respectively, see figure C.3, sample Adult 3 48h for the latter result). As the only differences be­
tween these two samples were that the former sample was blended in PBS (resulted in fine blend­
ing) and frozen prior to decellularization while the latter was blended in 1% SDS (resulted in rougher
blending) and not frozen, this indicates that one, or both, of these two parameters noticeably low­
ered the DNA content.
4.1.3
FilterDe and SDSDe ­ Decellularization with different SDS conditions and
liquid removal by filtering
The inability to sufficiently decellularize the tissue despite the use of harsher protocols than those
in the literature (see table 2.1, for several used protocols in the literature) prompted the hypothe­
sis that centrifugation was trapping cellular debris in the tissue and was thus a potential cause of
the high DNA contents observed. Furthermore, centrifugation was an incredibly cumbersome and
time consuming method of switching liquids (due to the small falcon tubes used (50 ml)) particularly
when running multiple samples simultaneously. Thus, experiments FilterDe and SDSDe were per­
formed using decanting and filtering instead of centrifugation. In order to ensure large cdECM yields
the tissue was manually cut into thin slices (rather than very small pieces) in these experiments as
blending it in small pieces resulted in large tissue losses through­ and in the filter (this was tested
prior but results are not included). Furthermore, 1% P/S was included in all but one sample in both
experiments to minimize the risk of bacterial infection which could increase DNA content in the
cdECM if not avoided (see tables 3.1 and 3.2 for sample maps and specifics on the conditions used
in these experiments).
One of the samples in experiment FilterDe was subjected to the treatment protocol from Pati et al.
(albeit, tissue was frozen in this sample and not in Pati et al.) meaning that P/S was not included
(sample FilterDe A3). This was due to the fact that a comparison between the DNA content in the
cdECM obtained from using this same protocol in conjunction with centrifugation (FineDe A3 (SDS
48h 20:1) on figure 4.2), where P/S was not added) and that obtained when using decanting and
filtering was desired. However, it is recognized that FineDe A3 was blended and FilterDe A3 man­
ually cut which does make the comparison less accurate. As opposed to when using centrifuga­
tion, more SDS did not complicate the process of changing liquids when decanting and filtering.
Hence, for all samples in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe (except FilterDe A3) an SDS:tissue ratio
of 40:1 (v/w), rather than 20:1 (v/w), was used. Sample FilterDe A3­40:1 (same chemical agent pro­
tocol as Pati et al. plus addition of 1% P/S) was specifically included to investigate if this larger ratio
would be preferable for sufficient decellularization in future experiments. This was done by compar­
ing residual DNA content of this sample with that in sample FilterDe A3 (where a 20:1 SDS:tissue
(v/w) ratio was used). However, it is recognized that the effect of the larger ratio on decellularization
could be confounded by the fact that P/S was used in the former sample but not in the latter. Sam­
ples which were subjected to SDS for 96­ (FilterDe A3­96C) and 120 hours (SDSDe A3­120C) both
with one change of solution were included as it was hypothesized that the combination of many
days in SDS with a change, in addition to not using centrifugation, would result in more than suf­
ficient decellularization. Then the protocol could later be adjusted by making it less harsh. This
hypothesis was based on the fact that protocols used in the literature (see table 2.1) are in gen­
eral less harsh than the one used for these samples and that centrifugation was believed to be the
main cause of high residual DNA content in the previous experiments. Finally, samples subjected to
SDS for 72­ (SDSDe A3­72), 96­ (SDSDe A3­96), and 120 hours (SDSDe A3­120) without solution
changes were included to establish a relationship between duration of SDS treatment and extent
of decellularization. This was desired in order to formulate a protocol using as short a duration of
SDS treatment as possible while still obtaining an acceptable level of decellularization. Note, that
38
==PAGE:46==
the same adult pig (and no neonatal pigs) was used in experiments FineDe, FilterDe, and SDSDe.
Furthermore, all samples were frozen prior to decellularization in these three experiments.
Manually cutting combined with decanting and filtering to switch liquids resulted in high relative
yields, with no relative yield below 0.8%, when compared to previous experiments (see table 4.3
vs. tables 4.1 and 4.2).
cdECM yield for samples in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe.
Sample
Initial weight
dECM yield
% yield
SDS 48h 20:1
13.7 g
118 ∗10−3 g
0.861%
SDS 48h 40:1
9.64 g
90.2 ∗10−3 g
0.936%
SDS 96h change 40:1
12.6 g
117 ∗10−3 g
0.929%
SDS 72h 40:1
4.07 g
39.3 ∗10−3 g
0.966%
SDS 96h 40:1
4.03 g
50.2 ∗10−3 g
1.25%
SDS 120h 40:1
4.05 g
64.5 ∗10−3 g
1.59%
SDS 120h change 40:1
4.05 g
55.9 ∗10−3 g
1.38%
Table 4.3: Initial weights (wet weight) of LV tissue, cdECM yield after lyophilization, and the cdECM
yield relative to the initial weight in % in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe. SDS 48h 20:1=Fil­
terDe A3, SDS 48h 40:1=FilterDe A3­40:1, SDS 96h change 40:1=FilterDe A3­96C, SDS 72h
40:1=SDSDe A3­72, SDS 96h 40:1=SDSDe A3­96, SDS 120h 40:1=SDSDe A3­120, SDS 120h
change 40:1=SDSDe A3­120C (see tables 3.1 and 3.2 for treatment specifications).
Additionally, the yields were quite consistent despite a varying number of total liquid changes, with
the highest relative yield being less than a factor of 2 larger than the smallest relative yield (1.59%
vs. 0.861%, respectively). Thus, these results indicate that this approach is useful in achieving con­
sistently high yields.
None of the samples in either experiments­ FilterDe or SDSDe contained <50 ng DNA per mg dry
tissue weight. (see figures 4.3 and 4.4, respectively).
Figure 4.3: DNA concentration in all samples from experiment FilterDe. SDS 48h 20:1=FilterDe A3,
SDS 48h 40:1=FilterDe A3­40:1, SDS 96h change 40:1=FilterDe A3­96C (see table 3.1 for treat­
ment specifications).
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.4: DNA concentration in all samples from experiment SDSDe. SDS 72h=SDSDe A3­72,
SDS 96h=SDSDe A3­96, SDS 120h=SDSDe A3­120, SDS 120h change=SDSDe A3­120C (see
table 3.2 for treatment specifications).
The lowest DNA concentration was 2205 ng/mg for the sample subjected to SDS for 120 h with no
solution changes in experiment SDSDe (SDS 120h on figure 4.4). Comparison between the sample
subjected to the Pati et al. detergent protocol from experiment FineDe (see SDS 48h 20:1, figure
4.2) and the corresponding sample in experiment FilterDe (see SDS 48h 20:1, figure 4.3) suggests
that the use of centrifugation to facilitate the change of liquids does not result in higher DNA content
than using decanting and filtering. In fact, DNA content was much higher in the latter sample than
the former (3206 ng/mg vs. 700 ng/mg, respectively). The difference in conditions between these
two samples, besides one being centrifuged and another being filtered, is that one was blended
into very fine pieces and another manually cut into slices of much larger size. Filtering should not
result in more residual DNA than centrifugation in itself. Thus, the higher DNA content in the sam­
ple subjected to filtering suggests that the very small pieces obtained when blending are substan­
tially easier to decellularize than manually cut slices. The result also indicates that it is unlikely that
centrifugation was the primary cause of the excessive DNA contents in the previously conducted
experiments. A higher SDS:tissue ratio (SDS 48h 40:1) resulted in lower DNA concentration when
compared to a lower ratio (SDS 48h 20:1), albeit the concentrations were of similar order of magni­
tude (2807 ng/mg vs. 3206 ng/mg, respectively, see figure 4.3). However, it is unknown if the pre­
viously mentioned confounding factor of P/E (used in SDS 48h 40:1) affected the result. The small
difference in residual DNA concentration between these two samples also indicates that the addi­
tion of P/E did not result in substantially lower DNA content. Thus it is unlikely that the high DNA
concentrations in this (and previous) experiments were caused by a bacterial infection. Extending
the duration of SDS treatment to 96 h and including a change in SDS solution on the third day (SDS
96h change 40:1) yielded higher DNA content than only treating in SDS for 48 h with no change to
the solution (SDS 48h 40:1) (3463 vs. 2807 ng/mg, respectively, see figure 4.3). This is similar to
the finding in experiment FineDe where a change in SDS was compared with no change (SDS 48h
change vs. SDS 48h 20:1, see figure 4.2).
Results of other samples in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe also indicate higher DNA contents in
samples where a change of SDS solution was included compared to no change. Specifically, com­
parison between samples where SDS treatment was conducted for 120 h with one change (SDS
120h change), 120 h without change (SDS 120h), and 96 h without change (SDS 96h) reveals that
treating the tissue for 120 h with a change resulted in higher DNA contents than both 120­ and 96
h with no change (3458 ng/mg vs. 2205 ng/mg and 3172 ng/mg, respectively, see figure 4.4). Sim­
40
==PAGE:48==
ilarly, comparing samples where SDS treatment lasted 96 h with a change of solution (SDS 96h
change 40:1, see figure 4.3) and 96 hours with no change (SDS 96 h (a 40:1 ratio was also used
here), see figure 4.4) from experiments FilterDe and SDSDe respectively, suggests that subjecting
the tissue to SDS for 96 hours and including one change of SDS solution yields higher DNA content
than a similar protocol with no change in solution (3463 ng/mg vs. 3172 ng/mg, respectively).
Figure 4.5, where samples with similar conditions from experiments FilterDe and SDSDe are com­
bined, indicates a tendency of decreasing DNA content with increasing duration of treatment in SDS
from 72 h­120 h (4388. ng/mg vs. 3174 ng/mg vs. SDSDe 2205 ng/mg, respectively).
Figure 4.5: DNA concentrations of sample FilterDe A3­40:1 (SDS 48h on figure) from experiment
FilterDe as well as samples SDSDe A3­72 (SDS 72h on figure), SDSDe A3­96 (SDS 96h on figure),
and SDSDe A3­120 (SDS 120h on figure) from experiment SDSDe (see tables 3.1 and 3.2 for treat­
ment specifications).
However, the sample subjected to SDS treatment for 48 h from experiment FilterDe (SDS 48h) dis­
rupts this tendency. Note though, that this sample is from a different experimental run from the rest
and this could impact the results.
4.1.4
HarshDe ­ decellularization using DNAse in addition to harsh protocol
For experiment HarshDe, a protocol designed to adequately decellularize the tissue was attempted
established based upon the findings in the previous experiments. Some results from experiments
FineDe, FilterDe, and SDSDe suggested that changing the SDS solution increased DNA content in
the cdECM compared to not changing it. However, the lowest DNA concentration in all the previous
experiments was still attained for sample FineDe A3­96C (SDS 96h change on figure 4.2) which
was treated for 96 h in SDS while changing the SDS every day. Furthermore, as mentioned, chang­
ing the SDS should theoretically provide better decellularization than not changing it and the prob­
ability of random errors, due to the low sample size, means that the results of the experiments sug­
gesting the opposite may have been faulty. Thus, the protocol used for sample FineDe A3­96C was
made more harsh in experiment HarshDe by treating all samples in SDS for 120 h with a change
of solution every day. In addition, Triton X­100 treatment was extended to 1 h as sufficient decel­
lularization was desired and this treatment time has been employed in the production of cdECM
from porcine LVs previously (see table 2.1 for examples). SDS was used in a 40:1 ratio (v/w) with
tissue when initially adding it based on the slightly lower DNA concentrations found with a higher
SDS:tissue ratio than 20:1 (v/w) in previous experiments. This was only done to be on the safe
side as the previously found differences are very small and uncertain due to the low sample size.
SDS was added in a 20:1 ratio (v/w) with tissue after subsequent changes instead of 40:1 in order
41
==PAGE:49==
to avoid having to use excessively large amounts. Finally, DNase was added to aid in removal of
DNA. This has been done in the decellularization of other tissues previously. For instance, Choi et
al. used a concentration of 50 U DNase per ml of solution in the decellularization of porcine skele­
tal muscle [80]. It was assumed that DNase could also be used for decellularization of porcine car­
diac muscle based on its previous use in skeletal muscle. Thus a solution of 75 U DNAse per ml
solution was used in experiment HarshDe. The concentration used was above 50 U per ml solu­
tion in case of differences between porcine­ skeletal and cardiac muscle. Although previous results
indicated that the high DNA contents were most likely not a result of a bacterial infection, addition
of 1% P/S to all samples was still done to be on the safe side. However, it was only added initially
as the first addition of SDS was performed outside a LAF bench (non­sterile environment) and not
enough P/S was available for its use in later steps. As mentioned, the generally lower DNA con­
tent observed for the samples in experiment FineDe than samples from the other experiments was
likely caused by blending the tissue into very small pieces. Furthermore, the tissue being frozen in
experiment FineDe may also have contributed to the lower DNA levels when compared to experi­
ments PatiDe and BlendDe (see figure C.3 for results of the latter experiment). Thus, the tissue was
frozen prior to decellularization and fine blending in PBS was used as a cutting method in exper­
iment HarshDe. However, as the centrifugation approach of changing liquids used in experiment
FineDe was extremely cumbersome when running many samples it was deemed unfeasible as a
method of facilitating the switching of liquids. Instead, the decanting plus filtering approach was
used. As blending the tissue into small pieces resulted in small and unpredictable yields (which
was hypothesized to be even more profound when filtering instead of centrifuging) it was decided
that half the samples were blended and the other half manually cut into very small pieces (smaller
than in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe, see tables 3.1 and 3.2 for specifics on the experiments)
in experiment HarshDe. Two different adult pig LVs were used (with one being the same as in ex­
periments FineDe, FilterDe, and SDSDe, that is, adult 3) and four different neonatal LVs were used.
The sample map and decellularization approach can be seen in table 3.2.
All tissue was lost during the decellularization process for the two blended neonatal pigs and the
manually cut neonatal pig born of adult 4 (see table 4.4, samples Neonatal 7 blended, Neonatal 9
blended, and Neonatal 10 manually cut).
cdECM yield for samples in experiment HarshDe.
Sample
Initial weight
dECM yield
% yield
Adult 3 manually cut
6.26 g
31.6 ∗10−3 g
0.505%
Adult 4 manually cut
11.2 g
53.9 ∗10−3 g
0.481%
Adult 3 blended
6.17 g
0.718 ∗10−3 g
0.0116%
Adult 4 blended
11.1 g
1.53 ∗10−3 g
0.0138%
Neonatal 7 blended
2.77 g
0 g
0%
Neonatal 9 blended
1.41 g
0 g
0%
Neonatal 8 manually
cut
1.87 g
0.523 ∗10−3 g
0.0280%
Neonatal 10 manually
cut
1.47 g
0 g
0%
Table 4.4: Initial weights (wet weight) of LV tissue, cdECM yield after lyophilization, and the cdECM
yield relative to the initial weight in % for experiment HarshDe. Adult 3 manually cut=HarshDe A3M,
Adult 4 manually cut=HarshDe A4M, Adult 3 blended=HarshDe A3B, Adult 4 blended=HarshDe
A4B, Neonatal 7 blended=HarshDe N7B, Neonatal 8 blended=HarshDe N8B, Neonatal 9 manually
cut=HarshDe N9M, Neonatal 10 manually cut=HarshDe N10M (see table 3.2 for treatment specifi­
cations).
Furthermore, the relative yields from the two adult blended samples were extremely low (0.0116%
and 0.0138%). This suggests that decanting and filtering as it was done here is not compatible with
blending the tissue into very fine pieces if a high cdECM yield is desired. Although no cdECM was
42
==PAGE:50==
obtained from one of the manually cut neonatal pigs, relative cdECM yield was still substantial for
the manually cut adult samples (0.505% and 0.481%). In addition, cdECM was obtained from the
other manually cut neonatal pig (yield=0.0280%) and thus it can be inferred that this method of fil­
tering can be used to obtain substantial yields even when the manually cut tissue pieces are very
small.
The DNA concentrations for the samples in experiment HarshDe where a yield was obtained as
well as that of native wet tissue from adult 4 can be seen on figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: DNA concentration in remaining samples from experiment HarshDe. Adult 3 manually
cut=HarshDe A3M, Adult 4 manually cut=HarshDe A4M, Adult 3 blended=HarshDe A3B, Adult 4
blended=HarshDe A4B, Neonatal 9 manually cut=HarshDe N9M (see table 3.2 for treatment speci­
fications).
None of the samples were decellularized sufficiently with the lowest DNA concentration obtained
being 1847 ng/mg for adult 3 manually cut. In accordance with results from experiments PatiDe
and BlendDe (see figure C.3 for DNA results from the latter) the DNA concentration of the remain­
ing manually cut neonatal sample was much higher than either of the manually cut adult samples
(17920 ng/mg vs. 5016 ng/mg and 6147 ng/mg, respectively). DNA content of the blended samples
were noticeably lower than the manually cut samples of the same adult pigs (1847 ng/mg vs. 5016
ng/mg and 2017 ng/mg vs. 6147 ng/mg, respectively). This indicates that blending the tissue into
very small pieces prior to decellularization increases extent of decellularization when compared to
manually cutting it into small pieces (these are substantially larger than those obtained when blend­
ing).
As the DNA concentrations for the adult samples in this experiment were of a similar order of mag­
nitude (a bit higher in fact) as those in experiments FilterDe and SDSDe it does not seem as if the
harsher protocol used was beneficial in terms of reducing the DNA content based upon these re­
sults.
4.1.5
Unexpected challenges which occurred in all decellularization experiments
An unexpected challenge observed during decellularization treatments in all experiments was that
the tissue formed increasingly large aggregates over the course of the decellularization procedures
(see figure C.4 for an illustration of this). This aggregate formation was exacerbated by changing of
liquids as a result of either spinning when using the centrifuging approach or tissue clustering at the
bottom of the filter when using the filtering approach. Tissue aggregates were particularly prominent
43
==PAGE:51==
around the magnet used for stirring. The aggregates were most prevalent in later phases of the de­
cellularization protocols but also occurred during initial detergent treatment.
Another unexpected challenge was that some tissue got trapped in foam during the detergent treat­
ment which prevented it from becoming fully immersed in the liquid (see figure C.5). The foam for­
mation was a result of shaking the bottles to a variable extent after the initial addition of SDS to the
tissue. It was exacerbated in cases where changes of SDS were performed as bottles were shaken
with every change. Shaking was done to transfer tissue stuck on the side and at the top of a bottle
to the liquid at the bottom. In most samples the foam did not fully disappear until subsequent PBS
washes where residual detergent amount was sufficiently low. However, only a small amount of tis­
sue was trapped in most cases.
Another challenge was that the tissue demonstrated increasing tendency of adhering to the sides
of the plastic bottles during stirring as decellularization protocols progressed (see figure C.6 for an
illustration of this phenomena). This was most prevalent after detergent treatment but it may have
also occurred during detergent treatment.
4.2
Proteomics results
Two Label­free shotgun proteomics experiments using LC­MS/MS with DDA were conducted on a
subset of samples from the decellularization experiments (see table 3.3 for specifics on which sam­
ples). This method of proteomics analysis was chosen as it provides a solid overview of the protein
composition which is useful for an initial analysis of samples with unknown composition (see sub­
section 2.4.1 for background information on the method). The proteomics experiments were per­
formed with two main purposes in mind. First, variations in ECM protein composition between differ­
ent adult pigs (batch­to­batch variation) as well as between adult­ and neonatal pigs were desired
examined as batch­to­batch variations are a known problem with dECM, particularly with donor an­
imals of different ages (as mentioned in subsection 2.3.5). Second, it was of interest to investigate
the difference in ECM protein composition as a result of using different decellularization protocols.
Specifically, differences between manually cut­ and blended samples as well as differences be­
tween samples subjected to protocols of increasing intensities (in terms of exposure time to agents
and agents used) were of interest to compare. Of these, the former investigation is interesting as
blending could potentially be a faster and more reproducible method of cutting in the production of
cdECM. However, heat generation (this was attempted minimized by always blending in an ice box
but may have still occurred) and mechanical stress can denature proteins and blending may expose
the tissue to both. Thus, if important ECM proteins are denatured blending may not be feasible
[81]. The latter is of interest as too harsh treatments may degrade ECM constituents excessively
(as mentioned in 2.3.2). For both main purposes it was also investigated if residual cellular pro­
teins were present in the cdECM. This was done to compare the number and abundance of these
between samples and to investigate if this measure of extent of decellularization was in alignment
with results obtained from DNA quantification. For both main purposes, qualitative and quantitative
analyses were performed (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for specifics on these analyses). The former
involved comparing the number of non­specific­ (not specifically searched for) and specific (specif­
ically searched for) proteins identified in the different samples as well as comparing differences in
the types of proteins (ECM or cellular) present for the samples. The latter involved comparing the
abundance between non­specific­ and specific proteins identified in all the compared samples. The
non­specific proteins included both cellular­ and ECM proteins whereas the specific proteins were
a subset of important ECM proteins in the native human heart (see subsection 2.1.2 for some of
these). Not all results of all the analyses conducted for each experiment will displayed in the follow­
ing. Rather, the most important results will be shown and the rest will be presented in appendix C.2.
However, the results of all analyses will be commented on (with references to appendix C.2 when
needed). Proteins with gene names equal to NaN were excluded for most analyses (see subsub­
section 3.3.2) as many of these genes do not have associated descriptions for their protein prod­
ucts meaning that it would require excessive manual work to find protein descriptions in UniProt by
looking up the UniProtID.
44
==PAGE:52==
4.2.1
PatiPro ­ proteomics analysis of samples from PatiDe
In experiment PatiPro, protein composition of the samples from experiment PatiDe (see table 3.3
for sample map of the proteomics experiments) was investigated and variations in protein com­
position between cdECM derived from an adult­ (PatiPro A2M) and a neonatal pig (PatiPro N2M)
were assessed (same treatment conditions and both manually cut). In addition, potential variations
in ECM protein composition between a sample subjected to manual cutting (PatiPro A2M) and one
subjected to blending (PatiPro A2B) were investigated (same treatment conditions aside from the
cutting method used). In experiment PatiPro, metascape was used for the analyses where grouping
proteins according to function was needed (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for specifics on the data anal­
ysis). Note, that a quantitative analysis of cellular proteins was not conducted for the comparison
between the manually cut­ and blended sample as the primary interest was to assess if blending
denatured ECM constituents here.
PatiPro ­ Variation in protein composition between adult­ and neonatal pig
For the qualitative analysis, a Venn diagram was initially created in order to obtain an overview of
the number of proteins present in each sample, as well as how many were unique to each sample
and common between the samples.
Figure 4.7: Venn diagram of the identified proteins for the adult pig=PatiPro A2M and the neonatal
pig=PatiPro N2M (see table 3.3 for sample map).
As deduced from figure 4.7, the neonatal pig contained noticeably more proteins than the adult pig
(1440 proteins vs. 1003 proteins, respectively). 950 proteins were common between the two sam­
ples whereas 53 proteins were unique for the adult sample and 490 were unique for the neonatal
sample (see figure 4.7).
Analysis of 485 of the unique proteins (five were removed as gene names=NaN) for the neona­
tal pig was conducted in metascape to obtain an overview of the types of proteins in question by
grouping them according to function. The analysis revealed that a large portion of these proteins
were likely cellular proteins (see table 4.5).
45
==PAGE:53==
Unique proteins in neonatal pig grouped by function in order of significance.
Protein function:
Number of proteins:
Log10(P):
Metabolism of RNA
72
­36.68
Signalling by Rho GTPases
52
­18.96
mRNA metabolic process
45
­16.30
Cell cycle
46
­15.13
Positive regulation of or­
ganelle organization
38
­14.31
Table 4.5: The five protein functions that it is most likely that some of the unique proteins from the
neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M belong to (see table 3.3 for sample map). Protein function=the function
in which the subset of proteins are grouped under, Number of proteins=number of proteins associ­
ated with a specific function, Log10(P)=base 10 logarithm of P­value.
Specifically, the logarithm (base 10) of the P­value (Log10(P)) (which indicates lower P­values (in­
creasing significance) with smaller values) was the smallest for the five protein functions: ”Metabolism
of RNA” (­36.68), ”Signalling by Rho GTPases” (­18.96), ”mRNA metabolic process” (­16.30), ”Cell
cycle” (­15.13), and ”positive regulation of organelle organization” (­14.31). Thus, these represent
the functions where a subset of unique proteins (not all as some cannot be grouped within a spe­
cific function with very high likelihood) from the neonatal pig can be identified as belonging to with
the highest likelihood. It is clear that all of these groups concern cellular­ and not ECM function
based on their names (e.g., metabolism of RNA clearly concerns cellular proteins). Note, that the
same protein can be grouped within multiple functions meaning that the counts associated with the
different functions on table 4.5 may contain some of the same proteins. Regardless, at least 72 pro­
teins (from the group ”Metabolism of RNA”) were identified as cellular proteins (likely many more
as some of the proteins present in the other function groups are certainly different) and this is more
than the 53 unique proteins identified in the adult sample. Thus, the neonatal pig contained more
cellular proteins than the adult pig after application of the decellularization protocol.
A quantitative analysis was conducted to compare the abundance of a subset of abundant cellular
proteins identified in both samples (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for specifics on how this was done).
This was done to elucidate if the neonatal pig not only contained more cellular proteins than the
adult pig but also a larger amount of abundant cellular proteins common between the two samples.
20 proteins (sorted by highest abundance for the compared samples) from the most significant cel­
lular protein function group (of the proteins common between the samples) were selected for analy­
sis. No more than 20 were selected as it was desired that all of them were cellular for certain. This
required manually checking the selected proteins in UniProt as some ECM proteins can potentially
be grouped in a cellular function group (and vice versa) if they also exhibit some functions related to
the group.
Analysis in metascape revealed that the most significant cellular protein group identified for the
common proteins between the two samples was ”Reactome Gene Sets; The citric acid (TCA) cycle
and respiratory electron transport” (Log10(P)=­70.56). The 20 most abundant (common between
the two samples) cellular proteins belonging to this group are compared between the two samples
in terms of abundance on figure 4.8.
46
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.8: Bar plot comparing the abundance of a selection of 20 cellular proteins, derived from
metascape analysis, between the adult pig=PatiPro A2M and neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M (see table
3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of
all sets of proteins to be of observable scale.
Note, that the gene names encoding for the different cellular proteins are displayed on the x­axis of
figure 4.8. However, the abundance of the protein products from these genes are reflected on the
figure, not the expression level of the genes. Bar plots will be presented in this way for the remain­
der of the section, although the protein products of the gene names will be included in the captions
of figures illustrating important ECM proteins. As evident from figure 4.8 there was noticeable vari­
ation between the two samples in the abundance of the 20 selected cellular proteins but there was
no clear pattern of the cellular proteins being more abundant in one sample than the other.
Difference in the presence and abundance of important ECM proteins (in the native human heart)
was assessed by both qualitative and quantitative analyses (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for how this
was done). The qualitative analysis was conducted to investigate if some key ECM components
were not present in the neonatal pig cdECM but were present in the adult pig cdECM and vice versa.
Collagen was included in the analysis as it is by far the most abundant ECM protein in the the na­
tive human heart and the specific types of I, III, IV, V, and VI were chosen as they are the most
abundant in the human heart (see subsection 2.1.2). Laminin and fibronectin were included as they
are crucial in cell adhesion (as mentioned in subsection 2.1.2) and this is of utmost importance in
an EHT. Although other ECM constituents than those selected are also important in the native hu­
man heart (such as elastin and proteoglycans, see subsection 2.1.2) these were not included in or­
der to sharpen the analysis. It is recognized that some proteins may be identified in certain sam­
ples and not in others as a result of missing values (see section 2.4.3 for background on missing
values). Thus, results from these qualitative analyses of specific ECM constituents should be inter­
preted with great care.
Results of the qualitative ECM protein analysis indicated that of the selected important ECM con­
stituents one was uniquely identified in one of the two samples, namely, collagen type VI alpha 3
chain (COL6A3). COL6A3 was identified in the adult sample but not in the neonatal sample (see
table 4.6).
47
==PAGE:55==
Important ECM proteins not common between the samples.
Protein:
Adult pig:
Neonatal pig:
COL6A3
x
Table 4.6: Table illustrating the important ECM proteins not common between the adult pig=PatiPro
A2M and the neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M (see table 3.3 for sample map) and which of the samples
these were identified in (marked by an x). COL6A3=collagen type VI alpha 3 chain.
However, three other isoforms of COL6A3 were identified for both samples (see figure 4.9 for the
quantitative analysis where these isoforms are displayed) and the one not identified in the neona­
tal pig could be a result of missing values. Thus, the results of the qualitative analysis may not be
indicative of substantial variance between the samples.
Differences in abundance (between the adult­ and neonatal pig) of the same ECM protein groups
selected for the qualitative analysis was assessed by a quantitative analysis to determine if there
were substantial differences (see subsection 3.3.2 for how the analysis was performed). Thus, only
proteins identified in both samples were analysed. The results of the analysis for collagen can be
seen in the following figure.
Figure 4.9: Differences in abundance for identified collagen proteins of types I, III, IV, V, and VI
common between the adult pig=PatiPro A2M and neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M (see table 3.3 for sam­
ple map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of
proteins to be of observable scale. COL6A3=Collagen type VI alpha 3 chain, COL4A2=Collagen
type IV alpha 2 chain, COL4A5=Collagen type IV alpha 5 chain, COL6A2=Collagen type
VI alpha 2 chain, COL1A1=Collagen type I alpha 1 chain, COL1A2=Collagen type I al­
pha 2 chain, COL6A5=Collagen type VI alpha 5 chain, COL5A1=Collagen type V alpha 1
chain, COL5A3=Collagen type V alpha 3 chain, COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2 chain,
COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain.
As seen from figure 4.9 there were clear differences in abundance of the different collagen proteins
between the two samples. Most prominently, all identified alpha chains of collagen type V were
more abundant in the adult­ than the neonatal sample with collagen type V alpha 3 chain (COL5A3)
being much more abundant (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abundance=40.74). Additionally,
the only identified alpha chain of collagen III, which was collagen type III alpha 1 chain (COL3A1),
was more abundant in the neonatal pig than the adult pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abun­
dance=0.40). Other collagen proteins where a large difference was identified were collagen type I
48
==PAGE:56==
alpha 1 chain (COL1A1), being more abundant in the neonatal pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal
pig abundance=0.15), COL6A3, being more abundant in the neonatal pig for all isoforms (biggest
difference was adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abundance=0.18), and collagen type IV alpha 5
chain (COL4A5), being more abundant in the adult pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abun­
dance=0.14). However, the abundance varied between being higher for the adult­ or neonatal pig
for the rest of the alpha chains identified for these types of collagen. Thus, there was notable vari­
ance in the abundance of the identified alpha chains of these collagen types but there was no clear
pattern of collagen types­ I, IV, and VI being more abundant in one sample than the other based on
these results.
The results of comparing abundances of identified Laminin proteins between the two samples are
seen in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Differences in abundance for identified laminin proteins common between the adult
pig=PatiPro A2M and neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­
axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances for all sets of proteins to be of observ­
able scale. LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta­2, LAMB1=Laminin subunit beta 1, LAMC1=Laminin sub­
unit gamma 1, LAMA3=Laminin subunit alpha 3, LAMA1=Laminin subunit alpha 1.
As evident, there was not much variation in abundance of the beta­ and gamma subunits identi­
fied for the two types of pigs (Laminin subunit beta­2 (LAMB2), Laminin subunit beta 1 (LAMB1),
and Laminin subunit gamma 1 (LAMC1), respectively). However, there was substantial variation
in the alpha subunits identified with Laminin subunit alpha 3 (LAMA3) being much more abundant
in the adult pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abundance=18.69) while Laminin subunit alpha
1 (LAMA1) was much more abundant in the neonatal pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abun­
dance=0.19) (see figure 4.10).
There was not much variation the one isoform of FN1 identified for both pigs with the abundance
being highest for the neonatal pig (adult pig abundance/neonatal pig abundance=0.65) (see figure
4.11).
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.11: Differences in abundance for identified fibronectin proteins common between the adult
pig=PatiPro A2M and neonatal pig=PatiPro N2M (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­
axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances for all sets of proteins to be of observ­
able scale. FN1=Fibronectin 1.
PatiPro ­ manual cutting vs. blending
The manually cut sample contained substantially more proteins than the blended sample (1003 pro­
teins vs. 740 proteins, respectively). 705 proteins were common between the two samples whereas
298 and 35 were unique for the manually cut­ and blended samples, respectively (see figure C.7 for
the Venn diagram).
289 of the unique proteins for the manually cut sample (genes equal to NaN were disregarded)
were investigated in metascape to assess whether they were generally associated with cellular­ or
ECM functions. The analysis revealed that of the 10 most significant protein functions none could
clearly be identified as being associated with ECM functions based on the name of the function
group. However, many (e.g. ”intracellular protein transport” and ”TCA cycle and respiratory electron
transport” etc.) could clearly be identified as cellular protein functions (see table C.1).
Note, that the total number of different proteins associated with these protein functions is not known.
However, the fact that an ECM protein function does not appear as one of the 10 most significant
ones (while many of the functions contain over 30 proteins) still indicates that the unique proteins
are likely almost exclusively cellular and uncharacterized proteins. Thus, based on these results it
does not seem as if blending reduces the number of ECM constituents when compared to manually
cutting.
Similar qualitative­ and quantitative analyses as those performed when comparing the adult­ and
neonatal samples for the assessment of differences in important ECM proteins were conducted for
comparison of the cutting methods.
The results of the qualitative analysis are displayed in table 4.7.
50
==PAGE:58==
Important ECM proteins not common between the samples.
Protein:
Manually cut:
Blended:
FN1
x
LAMA1
x
Table 4.7: Table illustrating the important ECM proteins not common between the manually
cut sample=PatiPro A2M and the blended sample=PatiPro A2B (see table 3.3 for sample
map) and which of the samples these were identified in (marked by an x). FN1=Fibronectin 1,
LAMA1=Laminin subunit alpha 1.
As evident from the above table one isoform of FN1 was identified in the blended sample but not in
the manually cut sample. However, LAMA1 was identified in the manually cut sample and not the
blended sample. Thus, there was not a consistent pattern of several important ECM constituents
not being identified in the blended sample.
The results of the quantitative analysis indicated that the identified alpha chains of collagen types
I (COL1A1, collagen type I alpha 2 chain (COL1A2)), V (collagen type V alpha 1 chain (COL5A1),
collagen type V alpha 2 chain (COL5A2), COL5A3), VI (Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain (COL6A2),
COL6A3, Collagen type VI alpha 5 chain (COL6A5)), and isoforms of these, were not all present
more in one sample than the other (see figure C.8). Both of the identified alpha chains for colla­
gen type IV (collagen type IV alpha 2 chain (COL4A2) and COL4A5) were of higher abundance in
the manually cut sample than the blended one (largest difference for COL4A5 with manually cut
abundance/blended abundance=2.42). However, the single identified alpha chain for collagen type
III (COL3A1) was more abundant in the blended sample than the manually cut one (manually cut
abundance/blended abundance=0.085). Thus, the results do not clearly suggest that blending dam­
ages collagen composition.
Laminin was less abundant in the blended sample than the manually cut sample for all the identified
subunits common between the samples although the difference was only large for LAMA3 (manu­
ally cut abundance/blended abundance=31.83) (see figure 4.12).
Figure 4.12: Differences in abundance for identified laminin proteins common between the manu­
ally cut=PatiPro A2M and blended sample=PatiPro A2B (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that
the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances for all sets of proteins to be of ob­
servable scale. LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta 2, LAMB1=Laminin subunit beta 1, LAMC1=Laminin
subunit gamma 1, LAMA3=Laminin subunit alpha 3.
51
==PAGE:59==
The qualitative analysis demonstrated that LAMA1 was not identified in the blended sample at all
and although this may be a result of the missing value problem (see section 2.4.3 for background
information on this problem) combining it with the much lower abundance of LAMA3 could indicate
that the total amount of laminin alpha subunits was lower for the blended sample than the manually
cut sample.
The isoform of FN1 common between the two samples was less abundant in the blended sample
than the manually cut one but the difference was not large (manually cut abundance/blended abun­
dance=1.66).
Figure 4.13: Differences in abundance for identified fibronectin proteins common between the man­
ually cut=PatiPro A2M and blended sample=PatiPro A2B (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that
the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances for all sets of proteins to be of ob­
servable scale. FN1=Fibronectin 1.
Furthermore, another isoform of FN1 was identified in the blended sample and not the manually cut
one and thus there is no indication that blending damages fibronectin composition based on these
results.
4.2.2
ModPro ­ proteomics analysis of samples from SDSDe and HarshDe
In experiment ModPro, variations in number­ and abundance of proteins present in cdECMs derived
from the same pig by application of different decellularization protocols (modified from the protocol
by Pati et al.) were assessed. Furthermore, batch­to­batch variations in number­ and abundance of
proteins present in cdECMs derived from two different adult pigs were investigated. For the former
assessment both the effect of increasing duration of SDS treatment as well as the effect of introduc­
ing a much harsher protocol were elucidated. The effect of increasing duration of SDS treatment
was analysed by comparing the protein compositions of three samples subjected to SDS for­ 72 h,
96 h, and 120 h with other conditions being identical (ModPro A3­72, ModPro A3­96, and ModPro
A3­120, respectively, see table 3.3 for sample map). The effect of introducing a much harsher pro­
tocol was assessed by comparing the protein composition of the sample subjected to SDS for 120 h
with that of a sample subjected to SDS for 120 h while changing the SDS every day (ModPro A3H,
see table 3.3 for sample map). Furthermore, the latter sample was treated in Triton for 1 h (as op­
posed to 30 min for the former) and it was treated with DNase (also not done for the former). For
the second investigation the compared adult pigs (ModPro A3H and ModPro A4H, see table 3.3 for
sample map) were treated with exactly the same, harsh, decellularization protocols. As opposed to
experiment PatiPro an expanded database search including GO terms was used in this experiment.
Thus, these terms were used for several of the analyses while metascape was not used. Many of
52
==PAGE:60==
the same qualitative­ and quantitative analysis methods used in experiment PatiPro were used in
this experiment as well, albeit the qualitative analysis was expanded to roughly assess the number
of ECM­ and cellular proteins in each sample using the GO terms (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for de­
tails on how this was done).
ModPro ­ effect of different decellularization protocols on protein composition
Venn diagrams for the three samples subjected to different SDS treatment durations, as well as the
sample exposed to SDS for 120 h and the sample where a very harsh decellularization protocol
was used, can be viewed on figures C.9 and C.10, respectively.
859, 804, and 872 proteins were identified for samples SDS 72h, SDS 96h, and SDS 120h, re­
spectively. Thus, it did not seem as if increasing SDS treatment duration reduced the total num­
ber of proteins as it was the highest for the sample subjected to SDS for the longest time. How­
ever, for SDS 120h++ (the sample subjected to a very harsh protocol) only 177 proteins were iden­
tified which, when compared to SDS 120h, suggests that the additional modifications to the pro­
tocol clearly lowered the total number of proteins. A rough estimate of the proportion of ECM pro­
teins and cellular+uncharacterized proteins for each sample was retrieved by using the GO terms in
conjunction with the protein descriptions as described in subsubsection 3.3.2. Some of the specific
words used to search the GO terms and protein descriptions were chosen on the basis of being im­
portant ECM constituents (e.g., collagen, fibronectin etc.). Others were chosen through a process
of removing all ECM components that were still present after the initial filtration using the important
ECM constituents (e.g., hemoglobin, myoglobin etc.) in the subsequent quantitative analysis of 20
cellular proteins. Although proteins such as hemoglobin and myoglobin can be intracellular they can
also be present in the extracellular space and were thus removed to minimize the amount of pro­
teins that were not strictly intracellular. It is recognized that this approach of grouping the proteins
of each sample into ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins does underestimate the amount of
ECM proteins. This is due to the fact that GO terms are not defined for all proteins and the search
words used do not encompass every protein of the ECM. Nevertheless, it does allow for a rough es­
timate. The results of comparing the three samples exposed to SDS for different durations of time
did not reveal any noticeable differences in the numbers­ or fractions (of total number of proteins) of
ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins (see table C.2). However, comparison between SDS
120h and SDS 120h++ indicated that the harsh protocol substantially altered the ratio between cel­
lular+uncharacterized and ECM proteins (see figure 4.8). The result was that the fraction of cel­
lular+uncharacterized proteins was lower (56.5% vs. 75.3%, respectively) whereas the fraction of
ECM proteins was higher (43.5% vs. 24.7%, respectively) for the harsh protocol than the less harsh
one.
Estimate of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins.
Sample
Cellular+ un­
characterized
proteins
ECM proteins
%Cellular+ un­
characterized
proteins
%ECM proteins
SDS 120h
657
215
75.3%
24.7%
SDS 120h++
100
77
56.5%
43.5%
Table 4.8: Estimate of the number of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins as well as the
fractions of the total number of proteins (constituted by these groups) for the sample subjected to
SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and that subjected to a very harsh decellularization
protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map).
This suggest that the harsher protocol destroyed a larger proportion of cellular proteins when com­
pared to ECM proteins than the less harsh protocol. The total number of ECM proteins was far
lower for the harsher protocol when compared to the other protocol though (77 vs. 215, respec­
tively) meaning that a large portion of ECM components, which could potentially be important, were
lost when using it.
53
==PAGE:61==
The amount of the 20 most abundant cellular proteins (it is recognized that some may be more
abundant as comparison in abundance between different proteins is not exact) common between
samples SDS 72h, SDS 96h, and SDS 120h as well as those common between SDS 120h and
SDS 120h++ were investigated with a quantitative analysis in order to gauge the effect of the dif­
ferent decellularization protocols on the abundance of cellular proteins. Details on how this analysis
was conducted are provided in subsubsection 3.3.2. No set pattern of differences in abundance of
the selected cellular proteins between the three samples treated in SDS for different durations of
time were observed (see figure C.11). However, the abundance of all 20 cellular proteins was no­
ticeably lower for SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h (see figure 4.14).
Figure 4.14: Differences in abundance of the 20 most abundant cellular proteins, identified using
GO terms, between a sample subjected to SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and a very
harsh decellularization protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note,
that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of
observable scale.
Combining these results with those from the qualitative analysis indicates that the harsh protocol
not only lowered the number of cellular proteins but also the abundance of remaining cellular pro­
teins when compared to the less harsh protocol.
Qualitative and quantitative analyses of important ECM proteins were conducted similarly in ex­
periment ModPro as in experiment PatiPro (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for details). The qualitative
analyses for samples SDS 72h, SDS 96h, and SDS 120h showed that COL6A5 was not identified
in sample SDS 120h, whereas COL6A3 was not identified in SDS 96h (see table C.3). However,
this does not suggest that increased SDS duration has any deleterious effect on the collagen pro­
teins present for multiple reasons; although COL6A3 was not present in SDS 96h, it was in SDS
120h and it was of higher abundance in the latter than in SDS 72h (SDS 120h abundance/SDS 72h
abundance=1.25). Furthermore, despite its absence in SDS 120h, COL6A5 was more abundant in
SDS 96h than SDS 72h (SDS 96h abundance/SDS 72h abundance=1.99). Thus, the differences in
the qualitative analysis were likely caused by the missing value problem.
Comparison of SDS 120h with SDS 120h++ showed that no proteins were uniquely identified in
the latter sample. However, three collagen alpha chains of two different collagen types (COL5A1,
COL6A5, COL6A3) as well as FN1 were uniquely identified in the former sample (see table 4.9).
54
==PAGE:62==
Important ECM proteins not common between the samples.
Protein:
SDS 120h:
SDS 120h++:
COL5A1
x
COL6A5
x
COL6A3
x
FN1
x
Table 4.9: Table illustrating the important ECM proteins not common between the sample subjected
to SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and that subjected to a very harsh decellulariza­
tion protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map) and which of the samples
these were identified in (marked by an x).
As multiple important ECM components were exclusively identified in SDS 120h when compared
to SDS 120h++, this may indicate that the harsher protocol destroyed some of the important ECM
proteins despite the problem of potential missing values complicating the analysis.
The results of the quantitative analysis indicated no pattern of increasingly reduced abundance with
increased duration of SDS treatment for any of the identified collagen alpha chains except COL4A5
(see figure C.12). Here the abundance ratios between SDS 72h and SDS 96h as well as between
SDS 72h and SDS 120h were 1.23 and 4.05, respectively. However, the abundance for the other
identified alpha chain of collagen IV (COL4A2) was the lowest out of the three samples in SDS
72h (SDS 72h abundance/SDS 96h abundance=0.39 and SDS 72h abundance/SDS 120h abun­
dance=0.52) meaning that there was no pattern of reduced abundance for all collagen IV alpha
chains with increasing duration of SDS treatment.
For FN1, the results did not indicate any damaging effects with increased duration of SDS treat­
ment as abundance did not progressively decrease with duration of SDS treatment for any of the
two identified isoforms (see figure C.13). However, for both LAMC1 (SDS 72h abundance/SDS
96h abundance=1.16 and SDS 72h abundance/SDS 120h abundance=1.54) and LAMB1 (SDS
72h abundance/SDS 96h abundance=1.13, and SDS 72h abundance/SDS 120h abundance=1.36)
abundance decreased progressively with increasing duration of SDS treatment (see figure 4.15).
The differences were not substantial though.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.15: Differences in abundance for identified laminin proteins common between the sam­
ples subjected to SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h (ModPro A3­96), and
120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has been
Log transformed in order for the abundances for all sets of proteins to be of observable scale.
LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta 2, LAMB1=Laminin subunit beta 1, LAMC1=Laminin subunit gamma
1.
Results from the quantitative analysis comparing the important ECM proteins between SDS 120h
and SDS 120h++ showed noticeably reduced abundance for all alpha chains identified for collagen
type VI (biggest difference for COL6A3 at SDS 120h abundance/SDS 120h++ abundance=9.59),
namely, COL6A2 and three isoforms of COL6A3 (see figure 4.16).
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.16: Differences in abundance for identified collagen proteins of types I, III, IV, V, and VI
common between a sample subjected to SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and one sub­
jected to a very harsh decellularization protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sam­
ple map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of
proteins to be of observable scale. COL6A3=Collagen type VI alpha 3 chain, COL4A2=Collagen
type IV alpha 2 chain, COL6A2=Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain, COL1A1=Collagen type I al­
pha 1 chain, COL1A2=Collagen type I alpha 2 chain, COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2 chain,
COL4A5=Collagen type IV alpha 5 chain, COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain.
Combining this with the results of the qualitative analysis which revealed that two collagen type VI
alpha chains (COL6A3 (another isoform) and COL6A5) were identified in SDS 120h but not SDS
120h++, suggests that the more intense decellularization protocol may have had a damaging effect
on collagen type VI.
All identified subtypes of laminin were less abundant in SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h, with LAMB2
being much less abundant (SDS 120h abundance/SDS 120h++ abundance=7.31) (see figure 4.17).
This indicates that the harsh protocol damaged the laminin proteins more than the less harsh proto­
col.
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.17: Differences in abundance for identified laminin proteins common between a sample
subjected to SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and one subjected to a very harsh decel­
lularization protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­
axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observ­
able scale. LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta 2, LAMC1=Laminin subunit gamma 1, LAMB1=Laminin
subunit beta 1.
FN1 was observed to be much less abundant in SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h (SDS 120h abun­
dance/SDS 120h++ abundance=11.63) for the one isoform common between both samples (see
figure 4.18).
Figure 4.18: Differences in abundance for identified fibronectin proteins common between a sam­
ple subjected to SDS for 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) and one subjected to a very harsh de­
cellularization protocol=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the
y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observ­
able scale. FN1=Fibronectin.
Furthermore, as mentioned previously, another isoform of FN1 was identified in SDS 120h but not
58
==PAGE:66==
in SDS 120h++ (see table 4.9). Thus, the results suggest that the harsher protocol may have had a
deleterious effect on FN1.
ModPro ­ Batch­to­batch variation between two adult pigs
The Venn diagram for the two different adult pigs, both subjected to identical harsh treatments, is
shown on figure C.14. 177 proteins were detected in adult 3 whereas only 125 were detected in
adult 4 indicating substantial batch­to­batch variation in the number of proteins identified. Estimates
of the proportion of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins also indicated batch­to­batch vari­
ations as adult 4 contained a noticeably higher amount of ECM proteins relative to total number of
proteins when compared to adult 3 (51.2% vs. 43.5%, respectively) (see table 4.10).
Estimate of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins in the adult samples
Sample
Cellular + un­
characterized
proteins
ECM pro­
teins
%Cellular+ un­
characterized
proteins
%ECM proteins
Adult 3
100
77
56.5%
43.5%
Adult 4
61
64
48.8%
51.2%
Table 4.10: Estimate of the number of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins as well as the
fractions of the total number of proteins (constituted by these groups) for adult 3=ModPro A3H and
adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample map).
However, the absolute number of ECM proteins was lower in adult 4 than adult 3 (64 vs. 77, re­
spectively).
The quantitative analysis of the 20 most abundant cellular proteins (common between the two sam­
ples) indicated no systematic differences in abundance of the cellular proteins (see figure C.15).
Thus there is no indication that abundance of cellular proteins common between the two samples
was higher in one of the adult pigs than the other based on this analysis.
Qualitative analysis of the selected types of important ECM proteins demonstrated that none of
these were uniquely identified in any of the two samples. Thus, no batch­to­batch variation was ob­
served in this regard.
The quantitative analysis of these same important ECM protein types indicated substantial batch­
to­batch variation in the abundances of COL5A2 (adult 3 abundance/adult 4 abundance=14.41) and
COL3A1 (adult 3 abundance/adult 4 abundance=5.84). Both of these were more abundant in adult
3 than adult 4 while being the only alpha chains identified for collagen types V and III, respectively
(see figure 4.19).
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.19: Differences in abundance for identified collagen proteins of types I, III, IV, V, and
VI common between Adult 3=ModPro A3H and Adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample
map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of
proteins to be of observable scale. COL6A3=Collagen type VI alpha 3 chain, COL4A2=Collagen
type IV alpha 2 chain, COL6A2=Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain, COL1A1=Collagen type I al­
pha 1 chain, COL1A2=Collagen type I alpha 2 chain, COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2 chain,
COL4A5=Collagen type IV alpha 5 chain, COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain.
Furthermore, variations between the batches in abundance of COL1A1 and COL1A2 were present,
with these proteins being more abundant for adult 4 than adult 3. The difference was particularly
large for COL1A2 (adult 3 abundance/adult 4 abundance=0.12). Batch­to­batch variation was ob­
served for all the three laminin subtypes identified but it was by far the most prominent for LAMB2
with abundance being much higher in adult 4 than in adult 3 here (adult 3 abundance/adult 4 abun­
dance=0.24) (see figure 4.20).
60
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.20: Differences in abundance for identified laminin proteins common between Adult
3=ModPro A3H and Adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has
been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observable scale.
LAMB2=Laminin subunit beta 2, LAMC1=Laminin subunit gamma 1, LAMB1=Laminin subunit beta
1.
Finally, for the one isoform of FN1 identified in the two samples there was a large difference in the
abundance as it was much higher in adult 3 than adult 4 (adult 3 abundance/adult 4 abundance=5.65)
which may indicate substantial batch­to­batch variation for this protein (see figure 4.21).
Figure 4.21: Differences in abundance for identified fibronectin proteins common between Adult
3=ModPro A3H and Adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has
been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observable scale.
FN1=Fibronectin.
61
==PAGE:69==
4.3
Pre­gel formation­ and gelation results
Pre­gel formation­ and gelation experiments were performed to assess if it was possible to create
a pre­gel, from the produced cdECM, capable of thermally cross­linking by incubation at 37 °C and
thus forming a gel. This is a crucial aspect if the cdECM is to be used for bioprinting. As mentioned
in subsection 2.5.4 thermal gelation is generally not sufficient by itself if the cdECM is to be used
for bioprinting purposes meaning that other modifications to the bioink should be explored (such as
chemical cross­linking and/or addition of viscosity modifiers, see subsection A.3.2 for examples).
However, the pre­gel formation­ and gelation experiments were preliminary in the present study
and intended to provide proof of concept. The degree of success of pre­gel formation for the sol­
ubilized cdECM was evaluated qualitatively by assessing the amount of tissue aggregates in the
mixture by visual inspection, following pepsin digestion (results not shown but will be described). A
large amount of aggregates indicated poor digestion and thus unsuccessful digestion. The degree
of success of gelation was assessed qualitatively by gauging the viscosity of the mixtures following
incubation at 37 °C for at least 1 h and comparing it with that prior to incubation (result of this com­
parison for experiment PatiGel is not shown). Both visual inspection and pipetting of the mixtures
were used to gauge this before­ and after incubation. If the mixtures were not flowing­ (when turned
upside down) and pipetted noticeable less easily after incubation the gelation was deemed unsuc­
cessful.
4.3.1
PatiGel ­ pre­gel formation­ and gelation as inspired by protocol from Pati et
al.
Sample PatiGel A2M in experiment PatiGel was created by pooling of samples PatiDe A2M and
PatiDe A2B (adult pigs manually cut and blended, respectively) from experiment PatiDe and by us­
ing a slightly modified protocol from Pati et al. for the pre­gel formation (see table 3.6 for specifics).
Inspiration was drawn from this protocol as a start due to the short digestion time of two days (which
is a good place to start, see subsection 2.5.3) and as it is one of the few protocols in the literature
where specific activity of the pepsin used is reported (see table 2.2). The modifications consisted
of pulverizing the tissue using a BioPulverizer rather than a mortar and pestle, addition of 10X PBS
following pepsin digestion, and using a solution of HCl rather than acetic acid for the pepsin/cdECM
mixture.
Pepsin digestion in experiment PatiGel was unsuccessful as evidenced by the presence of many
large aggregates following digestion for 48 h. Furthermore, gelation was unsuccessful as there was
no noticeable difference in the viscosity after incubation when compared to before (comparison not
shown). The mixture was easily flowing following incubation and clearly of low viscosity (see sam­
ple furthest to the right on figure 4.22 for an illustration of the mixture following thermal incubation).
Figure 4.22: (From left to right) samples ImproveGel A3 0.5% cdECM, ImproveGel A3 1% cdECM,
ImproveGel A3 1.5% cdECM, ImproveGel A3 stock (1.76% cdECM), and PatiGel A2M (3% cdECM)
after incubation at 37 °C.
62
==PAGE:70==
As evident on figure 4.22 most of the mixture would flow to the bottom of the tube when it was turned
upside­down, and this occurred immediately, indicating that the viscosity was very low. In addi­
tion, the mixture was easily pipetted which supported the observation of low viscosity. Improper
digestion was likely the primary cause of unsuccessful gelation. Another potential cause was that
the cdECM was not completely decellularized (see figure 4.1 for the residual DNA content of the
two used samples (adult 2 manually cut and adult 2 blended on the figure)). However, the effect
that this may have on gelation is unknown. There are multiple potential reasons behind the im­
proper digestion. One potential reason is that the cdECM particles were not completely homoge­
neous in size, with some being noticeably larger than others, following pulverization in the BioP­
ulverizer. Large tissue aggregates are more difficult to digest than small pulverized ones as diffu­
sion of pepsin into the tissue is more effective in the latter situation. Another potential reason is that
the pepsin, in the amount it was used, had too low of a specific activity for proper digestion to take
place. As evident from table 2.2 the specific activity of the pepsin used by Pati et al. was 400 U/mg
protein which was also used here. However, in pepsin digestion of other tissues pepsin with much
higher specific activities have been used. For instance, Noor et al. used pepsin with a specific activ­
ity of 4000 U/mg protein in a 1:10 w/w ratio with porcine­ and human omental dECM (same ratio as
Pati et al.) in the formation of a pre­gel with a dECM concentration of 1% (w/v) after adjustment of
pH [78]. Although omental tissue was used, the total activity of pepsin was much higher here than
in the protocol from Pati et al. Noor et al. digested in pepsin for 96 h which is twice as long as the
48 h used by Pati et al. This may also impact the outcome. Another potential reason behind the un­
successful results of experiment PatiGel is that 0.1 M HCl was used instead of 0.5 M acetic acid
and this may have influenced the pH to a degree where pepsin activity is worse. The measured pH
in experiment PatiGel was between 0 and 1 with pH paper (results not shown). Although the pH for
optimal pepsin activity is dependant upon a variety of factors (such as the substrate used) it is gen­
erally between 1­2 [82]. Hence, it is possible that the pH obtained using HCl was too low for optimal
activity.
4.3.2
ImproveGel ­ pre­gel formation and gelation as inspired by protocol from
Noor et al.
Improper digestion of cdECM was addressed in experiment ImproveGel (see table 3.6 for sample
map and protocol details) by using a different method of pulverizing the tissue, namely, a mortar
and pestle with liquid N2 (which has been used frequently in the literature, see table 2.2), increas­
ing the specific activity of pepsin used, and using 0.5 M acetic acid instead of 0.1 M HCl. In addi­
tion, pepsin digestion time was altered so that digestion was stopped when the appearance of the
mixture no longer changed as determined by visual inspection. For the pepsin used, inspiration
was drawn from Noor et al. by using a pepsin with much higher specific activity than in experiment
PatiGel (>6 times as high) while keeping the w/w ratio between pepsin and cdECM the same (1:10).
The exact pepsin used in Noor et al. was not replicated as the tissue used was different. Samples
FilterDe A3 and FilterDe A3­96C from experiment FilterDe were used to create pre­gels with con­
centrations of 2% cdECM (w/v) (samples were renamed ImproveGel A3 and ImproveGel A3­96C,
respectively, for experiment ImproveGel, see table 3.6 for specifics). This cdECM concentration
was used as a preliminary experiment with the specified higher specific activity of pepsin (in a 1:10
(w/w) ratio with cdECM) was conducted with a 3% cdECM concentration (w/v) and resulted in a
very viscous solution where extent of gelation was difficult to determine due to the high viscosity
both before­ and after incubation. Importantly however, much better digestion was observed in the
preliminary experiment than in PatiGel with the conditions being the same except the specific activ­
ity of the pepsin­ and the samples used (results not shown). For experiment ImproveGel, a series
of diluted samples were created from the stock solution after adjustment of pH with concentrations
ranging from 0.5%­ to 1.5% cdECM (w/v) (the stock solution at 2% (w/v) cdECM concentration was
1.76% (w/v) after adjustment of pH) in order to investigate differences in gelation depending upon
the cdECM concentration.
Pulverization using the mortar and pestle with liquid N2 in experiment ImproveGel resulted in smaller
particles than when using the biopulverizer in experiment PatiGel. However, much more sample
was lost in experiment ImproveGel, including the entirety of sample ImproveGel A3­96C, as it was
63
==PAGE:71==
difficult to collect the tissue after pulverization when using this method. Although the pulverization
was superior in experiment ImproveGel when compared to Patigel, some tissue aggregates which
were not possible to pulverize using this method were still present. Digestion in pepsin was stopped
after 4 d as there was no visible difference between the mixture after 3­ and 4 d of digestion. Some
tissue aggregates were still present after digestion albeit to a much smaller extent than in previ­
ous experiments (results not shown). However, as very little tissue should be visible after pepsin
digestion (mixture was completely solubilized by Pati et al.) the digestion was deemed unsuccessful
[9]. Sample ImproveGel A3 was very viscous after digestion and it was not possible to determine if
gelation occurred via visual inspection by comparing the viscosity before­ and after incubation at 37
°C for the stock solution at 1.76% (w/v) (see the fourth sample to the right on figures 4.23 and 4.22,
respectively).
Figure 4.23: (From left to right) samples ImproveGel A3 0.5% cdECM, ImproveGel A3 1% cdECM,
ImproveGel A3 1.5% cdECM, and ImproveGel A3 stock (1.76% cdECM) before incubation at 37 °C.
Specifically, the solution did not flow in either case. However, by pipetting it was clear that gelation
had occurred as this was only possible before­ but not after incubation. For the diluted samples,
gelation seemed to occur in samples ImproveGel A3 1% cdECM and ImproveGel A3 1.5% cdECM
but not in sample ImproveGel A3 0.5% cdECM as determined by comparing the samples before­
and after incubation at 37 °C (see the three samples to the left on figures 4.23 and 4.22, respec­
tively). In particular, it is evident from the figures that the samples with cdECM concentrations of 1%
(w/v) and 1.5% (w/v) did not flow when the tubes were turned upside­down after incubation but they
flow did before. However, the sample with a cdECM concentration of 0.5% (w/v) clearly did flow
both before­ and after incubation. Pipetting the three samples confirmed these findings with clear
differences in viscosity before­ and after incubation for the 1% (w/v) and 1.5% (w/v) samples but no
clear difference for the 0.5% (w/v) sample. Thus, a cdECM concentration of 0.5% (w/v) was too low
to form a gel by thermal cross­linking whereas cdECM concentrations of 1% (w/v), 1.5% (w/v), and
1.76% (w/v) were all potentially sufficient. However, quantitative rheology measurements would be
needed to confirm these results. Note, that the diluted solutions may be of lower cdECM concen­
trations than those listed while the stock solution may be of higher concentration. This is due to the
fact that tissue aggregates were still present in the stock solution after pepsin digestion and these
may not have been pipetted to a large extent into the diluted solutions. Such inaccuracies in the
cdECM concentrations may have influenced the results.
64
==PAGE:72==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, the finding of insufficient decellularization will initially be discussed and potential
causes behind this finding will be presented. Then, both decellularization­ and proteomics results
comparing effects of different treatment conditions will be interpreted and used to provide sugges­
tions for the design of a sufficient and effective future decellularization protocol. Following this, the
decellularization and proteomics results of comparing the two different adult pigs as well as the
adult­ and neonatal pig will be presented and discussed. Pre­gel formation­ and gelation experi­
ments will then be presented and interpreted. Finally, limitations of all the experiments will be ex­
plained and suggestions for future work will be provided.
5.1
Insufficient decellularization ­ potential causes
As established in section 4.1 none of the protocols used in any of the experiments conducted re­
sulted in sufficiently decellularized tissue as defined by a residual DNA concentration <50 ng/mg
lyophilized cdECM weight. The initial protocol was a replica of an established protocol by Pati et
al. (experiment PatiDe, see table 3.1 for treatment specifications) in which the authors success­
fully decellularized a porcine LV with a resultant residual concentration of 6.7±1.2ng DNA per mg
lyophilized tissue [9]. All of the subsequent experiments performed contained some samples which
were subjected to harsher decellularization protocols (in the form of modifications to the chemical
decellularization agents used, introduction of physical agents such as freezing/thawing, and intro­
duction of biological agents) than the one established by Pati et al. Yet, the lowest DNA concen­
tration attained in the present study was more than 5 times the required amount for sufficient de­
cellularization (272 ng/mg, see figure 4.2). Furthermore, although not part of the criteria defining
a decellularized tissue, in all the samples included for the proteomics experiments where this was
measured, a substantial amount of cellular proteins were identified indicating the presence of cel­
lular impurities (see section 4.2). Thus, both DNA quantification and proteomics analysis indicated
insufficient decellularization. This was unexpected as an established protocol, and harsher modifi­
cations of this, was used. There are multiple potential causes behind the unexpected results. Some
of these are factors which may have impaired decellularization and others are factors which may
have resulted in an overestimation of DNA content. However, due to the large amount of cellular
proteins identified in the proteomics experiments an overestimation of DNA content is likely not the
sole explanation of the high DNA concentrations observed. Instead, this may have contributed to
the magnitude of the problem.
5.1.1
Factors which may have resulted in impaired decellularization
The three unexpected challenges, mentioned in subsection 4.1.5, which occurred during the decel­
lularization protocols in all experiments may have impaired decellularization.
Specifically, the formation of tissue aggregates may impair diffusion of decellularization agents into
the tissue as surface area to volume ratio of the tissue decreases [79]. The concern of aggregate
formation during decellularization has also been addressed in the literature as Oropeza et al., a
group who decellularized porcine LVs and used them for bioprinting, specifically stated that it was
ensured that no agglomerations had formed during SDS treatment [83]. Although aggregate for­
mation was not as prevalent during the initial detergent treatments (where most decellularization
should occur) as later in the protocols for most samples, it was still observed here and thus it may
have impaired decellularization. As the aggregates were particularly prominent around the mag­
net used for stirring its use may have been one factor impairing decellularization through facilitating
their formation.
Trapping of tissue in foam may have impaired decellularization as the trapped tissue was not per­
fused by the detergents to the same extent as the non­trapped tissue. However, as only a small
amount of tissue was trapped in most samples the impact of this potential cause may not have
been large.
65
==PAGE:73==
Adherence of tissue to the plastic bottles inhibited stirring of this tissue which may have reduced dif­
fusion of detergents and other reagents into the tissue. As this may have occurred during detergent
treatment it is a possible cause of impaired decellularization.
5.1.2
Factors which may have contributed to an overestimation of DNA content
One potential cause which could have resulted in overestimation of DNA content (when compared
to the literature) is that the tissue was lyophilized in sterilized water rather than PBS. In the original
protocol from Pati et al. (from 2014) it is stated that the final washes prior to lyophilization were per­
formed in PBS [9]. 1X PBS (which is used in the literature) contains almost 10 g/L of salt [84]. With
the low yields of cdECM (relative to starting weight of the tissue) generally obtained (did not exceed
120 mg in the present study, see table 4.3 for the sample with the highest yield) it is likely that salt
will constitute a substantial portion of the cdECM weight if lyophilization is done in PBS considering
it is not possible to remove all PBS prior to lyophilization. This will underestimate DNA concentra­
tion as a noticeable amount of the cdECM dry weight will be made up of salt.
Another potential cause is that residual chemical­ and biological agents may have still been present
in the tissue after lyophilization. The protocol from Pati et al. does not specifically state details on
the final washing steps so they were performed differently in the present study. Thus, they may not
have been sufficient to completely eliminate residual agents from the tissue particularly when con­
sidering the fact that the tissue generally adhered to the plastic bottles during stirring in the later
phases of the decellularization protocol. Residual agents may have resulted in an overestimation
of DNA content if the absorption of UV light at a wavelength of 260 nm (where the nanodrop mea­
sures at for nucleid acids) was higher for these than that of nucleic acids while the absorptions at
280­ and 230 nm were low enough to result in 260 nm/280 nm and 260 nm/230 nm ratios indicat­
ing pure DNA (1.8­2 and 1.8­2.2, respectively) [85]. Triton X­100 has a low absorption at 260 nm so
this is unlikely to have resulted in an overestimation of DNA [86]. However, I was unable to find suf­
ficient information on the absorption spectra of SDS, PAA, and DNase (the remaining chemical­ and
biological agents used in any one experiment) to determine the feasibility of this cause.
5.1.3
Comparison with the literature
Besides Pati et al. (2014) only one of the other groups listed in table 2.1, namely Kang et al., re­
ported residual DNA concentrations of the cdECM. They reported a concentration of 12.19±0.06ng
DNA per mg lyophilized tissue. However, they performed the washes preceding lyophilization in
PBS which, as mentioned, will underestimate the measured DNA content. Furthermore, they used
isopropyl alcohol for 2 h during the decellularization procedure which was not used in the present
study and this may have facilitated further decellularization. Han et al., who performed decellular­
ization of a porcine LV using the same protocol as Pati et al. (except tissue was sliced into 0.5 mm
slices by the former group and cut into cubes by the latter group) reported residual DNA concentra­
tions of 10.62±1.9ng per mg lyophilized tissue weight but they also performed the washes preceding
lyophilization in PBS. Interestingly, this group also conducted a proteomics analysis of the cdECM
with LC­MS/MS. They found a noticeable amount of residual cellular proteins and thus concluded
that cellular impurities were still present after decellularization. Specifically, they identified 30 ECM
proteins and 54 non­ECM proteins [76]. Thus, it is possible that lyophilizing in PBS underestimated
DNA content so that the tissue appeared decellularized when using the criteria of <50 ng DNA per
mg lyophilized tissue but it was not actually decellularized as evident by the proteomics analysis.
However, it is also possible that a direct correlation between residual DNA content and residual
cellular proteins in the cdECM does not exist so that the criteria of <50 ng DNA per mg lyophilized
tissue will not result in a removal of all cellular proteins. Regardless, Han et al. demonstrated less
DNA content and cellular proteins (see results in subsection 4.2.2 for cellular protein amounts in
some of the samples in the present study) than what was obtained for any of the samples in the
present study, indicating that decellularization was less efficient in the latter. The range of deter­
gent exposure times listed in table 2.1, in addition to several of the groups stating that they based
their protocol on the one established by Pati et al. but introduced modifications, may be an indica­
tion that the protocol from Pati et al. was initially attempted but did not sufficiently decellularize the
tissue. Hence, it may be challenging to replicate results of decellularization procedures in general.
66
==PAGE:74==
This could be a consequence of omission of crucial details in the established protocols which could
impact extent of decellularization.
5.2
Establishment of a future decellularization protocol
Comparison of the cdECM yield­ and DNA quantification results between the many samples sub­
jected to different decellularization protocols may provide insight into the establishment of a fu­
ture protocol which is effective and reproducible (see section 4.1 for results). Furthermore, the pro­
teomics results comparing the protein composition of a subset of the samples where different treat­
ment protocols were used may supplement this insight. In this section, these results will be inter­
preted and discussed and suggestions for a potential future decellularization protocol will be pro­
vided based upon said results as well as by addressing some of the potential causes explained in
the previous section. In addition, findings in the literature will be used to supplement the discussion.
5.2.1
Blending vs. manually cutting
As documented in section 4.1 blending resulted in low yields when compared to manually cutting,
particularly in cases where the tissue was blended in PBS into very small pieces. In fact, the yields
were so low when blending in this way that it is a completely unfeasible method of cutting in a future
protocol if combined with filtering and decanting as barely any tissue was left after decellularization
in this case (see table 4.4). Although yields were generally higher when combining this blending
method with centrifugation (see table 4.2) they were still low and inconsistent. However, it is pos­
sible that using larger centrifuge bottles would increase the yield substantially as the liquid would
not have to be distributed into many bottles when changing it (as opposed to in the present study).
This would, in turn, make it easier to avoid loss related to the tissue adhering to the insides of the
bottles (or tubes in the case of the present study) when transferring it back to the bottle where the
decellularization is performed. If this is possible fine blending carries with it the advantages of being
more reproducible than rougher blending (a result of blending in SDS in some of the experiments
in the present study) and manually cutting as sizes of tissue pieces are much more consistent. In
addition, fine blending resulted in lower residual DNA contents than these two methods which can
be deduced as the latter two resulted in similar concentrations in experiment PatiDe (3558 ng/mg
vs. 2746 ng/mg, see figure 4.1) while fine blending resulted in tissue with noticeably less DNA than
manually cutting in experiment HarshDe (see figure 4.6). If it is not possible rougher blending may
still be a viable alternative when compared to manually cutting. This is due to the fact that neither
of the methods were obviously superior to one another in terms of producing tissue pieces of re­
producible sizes and the lower yield when using blending (was about half the yield of manually cut­
ting, see table 4.1) is more than offset by it being much more effective for large­scale production
of porcine cdECM. The proteomics experiment designed to investigate if blending in this way dam­
aged ECM composition in comparison to manually cutting (experiment PatiPro, see subsubsection
4.2.1) revealed no consistent indications of increased damage to ECM proteins due to blending.
However, the abundance of identified laminin proteins were lower in the blended sample than the
manually cut one, particularly for LAMA3 (see figure 4.12). Furthermore, LAMA1 was only identi­
fied in the latter (this could be a result of the missing value problem and should thus be interpreted
with care). While it is possible that laminin proteins degrade in different ways in response to blend­
ing than do collagen­ and fibronectin proteins, it is also possible that the reduction in laminin was
a consequence of intra­batch variation or random noise associated with protocol and equipment.
Due to these limitations not being accounted for via biological­ and technical replicates, as well as
the fact that ECM constituents did not consistently seem very reduced, there is no reason to believe
that blending damages the ECM constituents based on these findings. Thus, it may be possible that
it can be used as an alternative to manually cutting for large scale production of porcine cdECM and
this is an option that should probably be explored.
5.2.2
Effect of increasing duration of SDS treatment
Results indicated that increasing the duration of SDS treatment from 72h­120h progressively re­
duced residual DNA concentration (see figure 4.4). SDS treatment for 48h resulted in less residual
DNA than did both 72h and 96h (see figure 4.5) but this may have been the result of variation in
67
==PAGE:75==
the two different experimental runs. The observed decrease in DNA content with increasing SDS
duration was not evident on cellular proteins in the proteomics experiment investigating this (exper­
iment ModPro, see subsubsection 4.2.2). Specifically, there was no pattern of decreasing amounts
of cellular+uncharacterized proteins when extending SDS treatment time from 72h­120h (see ta­
ble C.2). Furthermore, such a pattern was not evident for the abundances of compared common
cellular proteins between the samples either (see figure C.11). However, it is important to remem­
ber that the difference in measured residual DNA concentration between the three samples was not
several orders of magnitude (largest difference was 4388 ng/mg vs. 2205 ng/mg, see figure 4.4).
As the methods used in the proteomics analysis of the cellular proteins were not exact (amount of
ECM and cellular+uncharacterized proteins is an estimate and abundances are only compared for a
subset of cellular proteins) it is not surprising that this concentration difference in DNA was not ev­
ident by the analysis of cellular proteins. It should also be noted that the correlation between DNA
and residual cellular proteins may not be completely exact as mentioned previously. An interest­
ing finding from the proteomics analysis was that the increased duration of SDS treatment did not
seem to damage important ECM constituents considerably. Patterns of decreased abundance with
increased duration of treatment were only identified for COL4A5, LAMB1, and LAMC1 (see figures
C.12 and 4.15, respectively) but the differences were small and did not indicate any tendencies,
particularly when considering the low sample size. This finding may seem surprising as increased
SDS has been shown to damage collagens and as the DNA concentration progressively decreased
from 72h­120h it is reasonable to assume that SDS continued to exert its effects after 72 h [87].
Thus, a progressively lower abundance of collagen proteins would be expected. However, it is very
likely that this pattern was not observed due to none of the compared samples being decellularized
anywhere close to sufficiently. Hence, decellularization had not progressed to the point where sub­
stantial destruction of ECM constituents normally occurs. As a consequence of this, the proteomics
analysis does not yield useful information on which duration of SDS treatment would be ideal to use
in a future decellularization protocol in order to preserve ECM constituents well. Similarly, the DNA
quantification does not yield much useful information as the decrease in residual DNA from 72h­
120h SDS treatment may not have been as prevalent (due to potential diminishing returns) if DNA
concentration values closer to the acceptable amount (for sufficiently decellularized tissue) were
attained.
5.2.3
Effect of substantially increasing the intensity of the decellularization
protocol
An unexpected finding was that the protocol used in experiment HarshDe, which was the harshest
of all in the present study, did not result in lower DNA content than the less harsh protocols used in
experiments FilterDe and SDSDe (see figures 4.6, 4.3, and 4.4, respectively). In fact, even when
introducing a change of SDS solution every day, treating in Triton X­100 for 1 hour as opposed to
30 minutes, adding DNase, and manually cutting the tissue for sample HarshDe A3M into smaller
pieces when compared to sample SDSDe A3­120, residual DNA concentration was still substan­
tially higher in the former than the latter (5016 ng/mg vs. 2205 ng/mg, see figures 4.6 and 4.4, re­
spectively). However, comparison of residual cellular proteins between these two samples (done
in experiment ModPro, see subsubsection 4.2.2) indicated that decellularization was noticeably
more pronounced in the sample subjected to the harsher protocol (named SDS 120h++ on pro­
teomics figures) when compared to the less harsh protocol (named SDS 120h on proteomics fig­
ures). Specifically, both the number of cellular+uncharacterized proteins (identified in each sample)
and the abundance of cellular proteins common between the samples were substantially lower in
SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h (see table 4.8 and figure 4.14, respectively). This disparity between
the DNA quantification and proteomics analysis is not likely to be explained by the harsher protocol
destroying ECM components to a larger extent than cellular components (relative to the less harsh
protocol) so that cellular components make up a higher relative amount of the tissue, in turn, yield­
ing higher residual DNA concentration. This is due to the fact that the fraction of the total number
of proteins constituted by ECM proteins was actually higher in SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h (43.5%
vs. 24.7%, respectively, see table 4.8). Furthermore, all the cellular proteins examined which were
common between the samples were less abundant in SDS 120h++ than SDS 120h but this was
68
==PAGE:76==
not the case for all ECM components, specifically collagens (see figure 4.16). Instead, one possi­
ble explanation is that more residual chemical­ and biological agents were left for SDS 120h++ than
SDS 120h as different washing protocols were used (plus DNase, a biological agent, was only used
in the former). Such residual agents may have absorbed strongly at 260 nm so that DNA content
was overestimated for the sample subjected to the harsh protocol. Another possible explanation
is the aforementioned potential loose correlation between residual DNA concentration and resid­
ual amount of cellular proteins. The protein composition of SDS 120h++ also resembled one of
a decellularized tissue far more than SDS 120h. Specifically, both the total number of proteins as
well as the number of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins were much more reminiscent of
what Han et al. found (84, 30, and 54, respectively) for the former (177, 77, and 100, respectively,
see table 4.8) than the latter sample (872, 215, and 657, respectively, see table 4.8) [76]. Although
there may be differences in the results obtained in the present study and those by Han et al., due
to the sample preparation­, instrument­, and analysis methods used, this result, combined with the
proteomics analysis of cellular proteins, still indicates that the sample subjected to the harsh pro­
tocol was more decellularized than that subjected to the less harsh protocol. That is, based upon
analysis of the proteomes. In addition, the total amount of proteins observed in SDS 120h++ was
similar to that observed for a decellularized human heart in a study by Guyette et al. (177 vs. 105,
respectively, although no two isoforms of the same protein were included in the latter so the dis­
crepancy may be even smaller) whereas the total amount of proteins for SDS 120h resembled that
of a cadaveric (non­decellularized) human heart in the same study (872 vs. 967, respectively) [88].
Thus, it is very likely that the high DNA levels in HarshDe (compared to previous experiments in the
present study) were a result of overestimation of DNA levels.
The proteomics results also clearly indicated that more ECM proteins were destroyed in SDS 120h++
than in SDS 120h. This was both evident by a lower total number of ECM proteins (77 vs. 215, re­
spectively, see table 4.8), a lower number of selected important ECM proteins (see table 4.9), and
a lower abundance of all collagen type VI alpha chain­, laminin­, and fibronectin proteins identi­
fied in both samples (see figures 4.16, 4.17, and 4.18, respectively). Thus, it seems that some of
the changes made to the harsh protocol resulted in increased destruction of ECM proteins when
compared to the less harsh protocol. However, it is not possible to assess which factor, or if it was
a combination of the factors, that caused this as they were all changed simultaneously. It is most
likely to have been a combination of the factors as all the changes performed can damage the ECM,
including the use of DNase [89]. It is also complicated to determine if an excessive amount of ECM
proteins were destroyed using this protocol when compared to decellularization protocols where
sufficient decellularization was attained (as defined by residual DNA concentration) in the literature.
For instance, Han et al. reported a noticeably lower amount of ECM proteins in their cdECM than
those found for SDS 120h++ (30 vs. 77, respectively). Hence, it is possible that destruction of a
large number of ECM proteins is inevitable when using a detergent protocol. Thus, though the de­
struction of ECM constituents would indicate the recommendation against a harsh protocol such as
the one used, a high number of ECM proteins in the protocol when compared to the literature indi­
cates that it may not have been excessive destruction. Nevertheless, the results on whether decel­
lularization improved using the harsh protocol were ambiguous (DNA quantification indicated worse
decellularization, proteomics analysis indicated better decellularization) and such a protocol is likely
not necessary to sufficiently decellularize the tissue if some of the potential causes behind the high
DNA concentrations (described in section 5.1) are addressed first.
5.2.4
Effect of including a change of SDS solution
A surprising finding was that including a change of SDS solution seemed to increase residual DNA
content when compared to not including a change. This was observed in all of the experiments
where direct comparisons could be made (i.e., other conditions were identical, see figures, 4.2,
4.3, and 4.4 for the results of these experiments). This may have been the result of random errors
not accounted for due to the low sample size. However, it could also have been caused by addi­
tional foam formation during SDS treatment when including more changes as well as the previously
mentioned increased aggregation of tissue when conducting more changes. Thus, it is possible that
this would not have occurred if the aforementioned factors were addressed. However, as it stands
69
==PAGE:77==
changing SDS solution would be recommended against based on the results. Note, that although
the lowest DNA concentration in the present study was attained in a sample where the SDS was
changed every day (FineDe A3­96C (SDS 96 h change on figure 4.2)), this could also have been
the result of the longer duration of SDS treatment compared to the rest of the samples in experi­
ment FineDe. In addition, residual DNA levels were generally low in experiment FineDe almost cer­
tainly as a result of fine blending. Note, that freezing the tissue prior to decellularization treatment
may have also contributed to lower DNA contents in experiment FineDe than experiments BlendDe
(see figure C.3 for results) and PatiDe (see figure 4.1 for results). However, freezing/thawing was
always confounded by another factor (e.g., fine blending) in the present study so the effect that this
may have had on extent of decellularization is unknown.
5.2.5
Future protocol suggestions
Based on the results addressed thus far it seems that blending the tissue may be a better option
than manually cutting for large­scale production of EHTs. Fine blending should be done if centrifu­
gation allows this otherwise rough blending may be a possibility. This can possibly be achieved
in practice by blending for a shorter duration of time at a lower intensity than used in the present
study (in the present study rough blending was the unintentional result of blending in SDS which
should be avoided in practice due to excessive foam formation). Both centrifugation and filtering ap­
proaches are viable for switching liquids (the latter is not compatible with fine blending though) but
the former must be done in big bottles to minimize time­ and resource expenditure. Decellulariza­
tion should not be conducted in plastic materials, instead using glassware may be a viable option.
Magnetic stirring should be avoided and replaced with a different method such as a shaking plat­
form. It may be advantageous to perform more­ and longer final washes in sterilized water in order
to ensure complete removal of residual unwanted agents. Specific recommendations on the de­
tergent treatment protocol are difficult to provide as all of the previous points should be addressed
first. However, based on the results changes of SDS solution may not be necessary and can per­
haps even impair decellularization. It is important to keep in mind that the impact of the presence
of residual cellular proteins in a decellularized heart (as defined by less than <50 ng DNA per mg
lyophilized tissue) with regards to recellularizing a scaffold is not known [88]. Hence, although Han
et al. were not able to remove all cellular proteins by using SDS for 48 h this SDS duration may still
be a reasonable start. Another option is to increase duration of SDS treatment and investigate the
effect this has on residual cellular proteins. In either case, reduction of important ECM constituents
may be too large if maximal benefit is to be obtained from the use of the cdECM. Other decellu­
larization approaches have been suggested in the literature to address this. For instance, Seo et
al. decellularized a rat LV using a supercritical carbon dioxide­ethanol co­solvent system (scCO2­
EtOH) followed by DNase and avoided the use of any detergents in this way [90]. Although the
resultant cdECM contained very slightly more than 50 ng DNA per mg lyophilized tissue weight
(65±14ng/mg) it is possible that modifications to the protocol could yield sufficiently decellularized
tissue. Furthermore, they demonstrated that important ECM constituents such as GAGs, laminin,
collagen type I, and several growth factors were better preserved when using the scCO2­EtOH pro­
tocol than a detergent protocol combining SDS and Triton X­100. Hence, such a protocol may be a
potential alternative to detergent protocols for the decellularization of heart tissue.
5.3
Variations between pigs of different ages and batches
Differences in extent of decellularization in addition to differences in protein compositions between
different batches of adult pigs as well as adult­ and neonatal pigs were assessed by DNA quantifi­
cation and proteomics analysis, respectively. The results of these analyses will be discussed in the
following.
Results of DNA quantification indicated higher amounts of residual DNA in neonatal pigs than adult
pigs for all experiments where both types of pigs were included (see figures 4.1, C.3, and 4.6). In
the proteomics analysis where such samples were compared (experiment PatiPro, see subsubsec­
tion 4.2.1) more cellular proteins were identified for the neonatal­ than the adult pig. There was no
definitive pattern indicating that the abundance of cellular proteins present in both samples was
70
==PAGE:78==
higher for the neonatal­ than the adult pig. However, the presence of more cellular proteins still
suggests that decellularization was less pronounced in the former than the latter. Thus, it seems
that neonatal pigs are more difficult to sufficiently decellularize than adult pigs both when mea­
sured by residual DNA concentration and residual amount of cellular proteins. Hence, if a porcine
neonatal LV is to be decellularized it may well require a stronger decellularization protocol than
for a porcine adult LV. However, it is unknown if these disparities in residual­ DNA concentrations
and cellular proteins between the neonatal­ and adult pig would be as prevalent, or even exist, if
some of the potential causes leading to poor decellularization in the present study were addressed.
Residual DNA content was similar between the two different adult pigs investigated in experiment
HarshDe (5016 ng/mg vs. 6147 ng/mg, see figure 4.6). Furthermore, the proteomics experiment
where these same two adults were compared (experiment ModPro, see subsubsection 4.2.2) indi­
cated that abundance of residual cellular proteins present in both samples was similar. However,
there was a noticeable difference in the total amount of cellular+uncharacterized proteins present
in the samples (100 vs. 61, see table 4.10). Overall, the differences in decellularization efficiency
between the adult pigs were noticeably smaller than between the adult­ and neonatal pig and there
is no strong indication that the required strength of a protocol to sufficiently decellularize the tissue
differs between different adult pigs.
The proteomics analysis comparing ECM proteins of the adult­ and neonatal pig demonstrated sub­
stantial differences between the two pigs in terms of abundance of several selected important pro­
teins. However, it did not clearly seem as if these differences were generally more pronounced than
those observed between the two adult pigs. For instance, the difference in abundance of COL1A2
was much larger between the two adult pigs than between the adult­ and neonatal pig while the dif­
ference in abundance of COL1A1 was much larger between the neonatal­ and the adult pig than
between the two adult pigs (see figures 4.19 and 4.9, respectively). Similar observations can be
made for the remaining collagen alpha chains for the two comparisons. Furthermore, the difference
in abundance of LAMB2 and FN1 was much larger between the two adult pigs than between the
adult­ and neonatal pig (see figures 4.20, 4.21, 4.10, and 4.11, respectively). Batch­to­batch varia­
tion in ECM composition between the two adult cdECMs was not surprising as Tsui et al. also found
noticeable variation in the most abundant ECM constituents of six cdECMs derived from adult pigs.
This variation was particularly evident when choosing to compare just two batches as was done in
the present study. For instance, comparison of batches 2 and 5 in the study by Tsui et al. reveals
that collagen type III was about 1.8 times more abundant in the latter than the former, collagen type
IV was about 3 times more abundant in the former than the latter, and laminin was about 7 times
more abundant in the latter than the former (see figure A.1). Note, that Tsui et al. grouped colla­
gens and laminins rather than looking at individual alpha chains and subunits, respectively. Thus,
comparison of these results with differences found between the adult pigs for these proteins in the
present study is difficult. Additionally, Tsui et al. used coverage rather than AUC to determine the
amount of each protein which further complicates comparison. Still, the results from Tsui et al. do
indicate that some batch­to­batch variation in protein composition of cdECMs derived from different
adult pigs is expected. However, it was unexpected that this difference was seemingly not smaller
between the two adult pigs than between the adult­ and neonatal pig as substantial age­related
differences in ECM composition of different tissues and species have been demonstrated. For in­
stance, Tottey et al. found distinct differences in biological, mechanical, and structural properties of
dECM from small intestinal submucosa in pigs of different ages [91]. Additionally, substantial dif­
ferences in biochemical composition of cardiac ECM from humans have been noted between fetal,
neonatal, and adult hearts [19]. The most likely cause behind this unexpected finding is that the
tissue was decellularized to various extents across the different samples due to the poor decellu­
larization generally observed in all experiments. This is a potential cause as decellularization af­
fects abundance of ECM constituents due to the damaging effects of some agents used. Hence, it
is possible that the differences in abundance of the ECM proteins between the two adult pigs would
have been smaller than the differences between the adult­ and neonatal pig had the tissue been
sufficiently decellularized in all samples.
71
==PAGE:79==
It is interesting to assess if the differences between the adult­ and neonatal pig in the observed
abundances of the important ECM proteins selected, corresponds to expected age­related differ­
ences in cardiac ECM composition from the literature. All identified collagen type V alpha chains
were more abundant in the adult pig than the neonatal pig (see figure 4.9). Collagen type V has
been found to be more abundant in neonatal­ than adult human heart tissues so this finding is in
agreement with the literature. Furthermore, fibronectin was more abundant in the neonatal­ than
the adult pig (albeit, not by much, see figure 4.11), which is as expected when comparing to human
hearts in the literature. However, all identified alpha chains of collagen type III were more abundant
in the neonatal­ than the adult pig and this is the opposite of what is expected from the literature
[19]. This discrepancy may be a result of differences between porcine cardiac age­related ECM
composition differences and human cardiac age­related ECM composition differences. However,
it could also be caused by the fact that the ECM composition of the same tissue is different when
it is decellularized (in this case, partially decellularized) compared to when it is not. For instance,
Guyette et al. found changes in the most abundant types of collagens and laminins when compar­
ing a non­decellularized human heart with one which was decellularized [88]. This, combined with
the fact that decellularization seemed to have occurred to a different extent between the adult­ and
neonatal pig in the present study, means that observed differences in protein composition between
these two cdECMs are not likely to resemble differences in the native tissue.
5.4
Pre­gel formation and gelation findings
None of the pre­gel formation experiments conducted resulted in sufficient digestion as evidenced
by the presence of noticeable aggregates for all samples (see section 4.3 for results). This was an
unexpected finding as the first experiment, PatiGel (see subsection 4.3.1 for results), closely re­
sembled the protocol from Pati et al. In addition, the other documented experiment, ImproveGel
(see subsection 4.3.2 for results), employed pepsin with a much higher specific activity (>6 times
as high) than that used by Pati et al. (in the same w/w ratio with cdECM) which should theoretically
facilitate digestion to a much larger degree. Yet, Pati et al. were able to completely digest cdECM
with no residual aggregates in their pre­gel [9]. One possible explanation behind this discrepancy
is that none of the samples used in the present study were sufficiently decellularized. It is possi­
ble that the resultant difference in tissue composition (when compared to sufficiently decellularized
cdECM) is more challenging to digest via the use of pepsin. However, this is speculative. Another
potential cause, which is very likely, is that the cdECM was not sufficiently pulverized prior to the
digestion for any of the samples. Although the pulverization method used in ImproveGel (a mortar
and pestle with liquid N2) was the same as that used in Pati et al., results with this method were
observed to vary a lot even for the same sample. Specifically, some parts of the sample pulver­
ized well whereas other parts did not. Better digestion may have been observed if the parts which
did not pulverize well were disregarded. However, a substantial amount of tissue was lost when
using this method of pulverization so only a small amount would be left after removal of larger par­
ticles. Thus, using the mortar and pestle with liquid N2 may be a viable method of pulverization if
large amounts of starting tissue are used and non­pulverized particles are removed. Alternatively,
other methods should be explored such as a mini mill which has been suggested by Pati et al. and
used by Bejleri et al. (see table 2.2) [30] [31]. The digestion was observed to be much better in Im­
proveGel than in PatiGel which was almost certainly partly (the other potential contributing factors
were better pulverization and higher pH of the solution) caused by using a pepsin with much higher
specific activity in the former experiment than the latter. This can be deduced based on the results
from the preliminary experiment (results of this not included in this report) described in subsection
4.3.2. However, the inspiration to increase the pepsin activity was drawn from Noor et al. where
porcine­ and human omental tissue was used [78]. The different characteristics of this tissue when
compared to porcine heart tissue may result in the requirement of a pepsin with much higher activ­
ity for digestion. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that I have not been able to find any group
using pepsin activities of larger magnitude than Pati et al. for the digestion of porcine cdECM (most
groups do not list the activity however, see table 2.2 for a selection of studies). Hence, it is possi­
ble that full solubilization of the tissue could have been achieved in the present study while using
72
==PAGE:80==
the same pepsin protocol as that in Pati et al. if it was properly pulverized and decellularized prior
to initiation of the procedure. This may also be of benefit as too harsh pepsin digestion excessively
degrades the ECM [4]. Thus, addressing the aforementioned probable causes of insufficient diges­
tion should be prioritized prior to using a harsher pepsin digestion protocol.
While no gelation following thermal incubation was observed in experiment PatiGel, some was ob­
served in ImproveGel for most of the investigated cdECM concentrations (compare figures 4.23
and 4.22, respectively, for results before and after incubation at 37 °C). This discrepancy was most
likely caused by the far better digestion in the latter experiment than the former. However, it is not
possible to determine if the observed gelation resulted in rheological properties which would make
any of the samples suitable for bioprinting purposes as quantitative rheology measurements were
not conducted. Regardless, it is unlikely that any of the samples could have been used in the bio­
printing of an EHT without modifications as no group has been able to print a 3D construct where
shape fidelity was maintained using just porcine cdECM with thermal gelation (to my knowledge, as
mentioned in subsection 2.5.4). This is also the case for groups who have created gels of higher
cdECM concentrations than those in the present study (e.g., Pati et al. who used 3% cdECM (w/v)
vs. 1.76% cdECM (w/v) which was the highest concentration used where gelation was observed
in the present study). Thus, modifications, for instance in the form of a viscosity modifier, would al­
most certainly be needed for the solubilized cdECM to be used in an EHT (read more on potential
solutions to this problem in subsection A.3.2). In the present study it was observed that seemingly
no gelation occurred at 0.5% cdECM concentration (w/v) while it did occur at concentrations of 1%,
1.5%, and 1.76% cdECM (w/v). Das et al. demonstrated gelation of pre­gels with concentrations as
low as 0.6% (not reported if w/v or w/w) porcine cdECM after thermal incubation at 37°C via quan­
titative rheology measurements [6]. Although this may seem like an unexpected discrepancy when
compared to the results of the present study there are multiple plausible explanations behind it. Be­
sides the potential causes of incomplete digestion and insufficient decellularization which may affect
gelation, it should be noted that cdECM concentrations in experiment ImproveGel may have been
higher than calculated for the stock solution (1.76%) and lower than calculated for the remaining so­
lutions as explained in subsection 4.3.2. Thus, gelation may have been possible at a cdECM con­
centration of 0.5% (w/v) if these factors were addressed.
5.5
Limitations of the present study
In this section, both limitations common to all the experiments as well as limitations of the individual
experiments will be explained.
5.5.1
Limitations pertaining to all the experiment
The primary limitation of all the experiments conducted in the present study is that the amount of
replicates of a sample subjected to a set of specific conditions never exceeded 1. The reasoning
behind why this was the case is explained in chapter 4. This made it impossible to do statistical
analyses of any results and thus the results have been used to indicate tendencies rather than to
draw conclusions.
5.5.2
Limitations specific to DNA quantification
Using a spectrophotometric method of DNA quantification made it difficult to assess if DNA levels
were overestimated or true values. Supplementing the DNA quantification with H&E staining as well
as investigating the DNA fragment length with gel electrophoresis (see the guidelines for sufficient
decellularization in subsection 2.3.1) could have yielded helpful information to elucidate the likeli­
hood of DNA overestimation by quantification.
5.5.3
Limitations specific to proteomics experiments
Insufficiently decellularized samples were compared rather than sufficiently decellularized, the lat­
ter of which was the intention. This likely greatly influenced the results. The same amount of pep­
tide mass was injected into the mass spectrometer for all the samples pertaining to the same ex­
perimental run despite noticeably different concentrations of peptides between the samples (as
measured during sample preparation, see subsubsection 3.3.1 for procedure). Thus, abundances
73
==PAGE:81==
of investigated proteins may have been higher in samples with higher concentrations of peptides
relative to those with lower concentrations of peptides than what was depicted in the results of the
present study. Injecting the same volume of peptide solution for each sample, rather than the same
peptide mass, could potentially account for this limitation. For all of the quantitative­ as well as the
qualitative analysis of specific ECM proteins only a subset of proteins were selected for analysis. In
addition, the qualitative analyses conducted to assess fractions of ECM and cellular+uncharacterized
proteins (in experiment ModPro) were not of exact accuracy as the search words used did not en­
compass all ECM proteins (see subsubsection 3.3.2 for specifics on the data analysis). Both of
these factors may have influenced the results and the tendencies derived from these.
5.5.4
Limitations specific to pre­gel­ and gelation experiments
Visual inspection and pipetting of the samples does not provide a quantitative measure to assess if
gelation occurred. Both pepsin digestion­ and gelation results may have been influenced by using
insufficiently decellularized tissue which was not the original intention. Calculated concentrations
of diluted samples in experiment ImproveGel may not have been completely accurate which could
have influenced the results.
5.6
Future perspectives
Suggestions for future work within the field of the present study are provided in the following. Note,
that multiple replicates should be included for all the experiments suggested in the following in order
to conduct statistical analyses and confirm findings.
A decellularization protocol for porcine LV tissue which abides by the three guidelines listed in sub­
section 2.3.1, while ensuring that lyophilization is conducted in sterilized water, should be estab­
lished. Some of the suggestions provided in subsection 5.2.5 may be followed in order to establish
such a protocol. Preservation of important ECM constituents, after using the protocol to decellular­
ize the tissue, should be verified by LC­MS/MS. Note, that the important ECM constituents are not
limited to those investigated in the present study as these do not encompass all the crucial ones.
If preservation of ECM constituents is poor, modifications to the protocol or alternative protocols,
such as the one described in subsection 5.2.5, should be explored. Variations in protein compo­
sition between LVs of different adult pigs as well as adult­ and neonatal pigs should be assessed
by performing LC­MS/MS on sufficiently decellularized tissues. Importantly, it should be ensured
that the established protocol sufficiently decellularizes both types of pig LVs prior to conducting any
of the proteomics experiments. Proteomics analyses providing more accurate quantification of the
proteins, such as label­based­ or targeted proteomics (see subsections 2.4.1 and A.2.1, respec­
tively, for explanations of these methods), may be employed after initial assessments using label­
free shotgun proteomics. A protocol for pepsin digestion yielding fully solubilized porcine cdECM
should be established. Specifically, a method of effective tissue pulverization (see section 5.4 for
suggestions) should be established. Furthermore, minimal exposure to pepsin while obtaining the
desired result should be attempted. Modifications to pepsin activity and duration should be em­
ployed as needed. A bioink able to maintain shape­fidelity after printing of a 3D construct should
be attempted formulated. This may include combining the cdECM with viscosity modifiers, such as
fibrillated nanocellulose fibers (see subsection A.3.3), and establishing optimal concentrations of
each constituent through experimental testing of properties. Quantitative rheological measurements
of the formulated bio­inks should be employed in the process.
74
==PAGE:82==
6
Conclusion
In conclusion, a reproducible decellularization protocol for large­scale production of porcine cdECM
yielding sufficient decellularization (as defined by a residual DNA concentration <50 ng/mg dry weight
cdECM) was not successfully established. Both replicates of detergent­based protocols from the lit­
erature and harsher iterations of these (in terms of modifications regarding usage of decellulariza­
tion agents) were attempted to achieve decellularization. However, the lowest DNA concentration
attained was more than 5 times as high as the required amount for sufficient decellularization. In
addition, label­free shotgun proteomics analysis by LC­MS/MS of a subset of samples subjected
to different treatment protocols revealed the presence of many cellular proteins providing a further
indication of insufficient decellularization. Blending was attempted as a method of cutting the LV
tissue in order to increase reproducibility of decellularization results and enable large­scale produc­
tion of cdECM when compared to the traditional method of manually cutting. Blending was found to
result in lower cdECM yields than manually cutting, particularly if the tissue was blended into very
small pieces. However, it might still be suitable for large­scale production of cdECM if the tissue is
not blended into small pieces or if it is combined with centrifugation in large bottles prior to changing
liquids during the decellularization protocol. No substantial degradatory effects of blending on ECM
composition were identified when compared to manually cutting. Hence, blending may be a viable
approach in large­scale production of cdECM.
cdECM obtained from decellularization protocols of differing intensities with respect to chemical­
and biological agent treatments were subjected to LC­MS/MS to elucidate the effect on protein
composition. Increasing SDS treatment duration from 72h­120h resulted in no apparent differences
in cellular­ or ECM composition. However, including a change of SDS solution every day, extending
Triton X­100 treatment time from 30 min to 1 h, and adding 75 U/ml DNase I resulted in noticeably
less cellular+uncharacterized­ and ECM proteins than a protocol where these modifications were
not conducted. This indicates substantial destruction of both protein groups with increasing intensity
of the decellularization protocol used. However, it is unclear how much ECM destruction, as a result
of the decellularization protocol, is acceptable.
Comparison of protein composition between cdECM derived from two different adult pigs­ as well
as an adult­ and neonatal pig was conducted by LC­MS/MS. Results indicated that differences in
number­ and abundance of cellular proteins was not as substantial between the two adult pigs as
between the adult­ and neonatal pig. However, noticeable differences in several important ECM
constituents were found both between the two adult pigs as well as the adult­ and neonatal pig. The
differences were not larger between the adult­ and neonatal pigs than the different adult pigs. This
was likely a result of differing extends of decellularization across the different samples. The poor
decellularization generally observed made assessments regarding the magnitude of cdECM com­
position variation between different pigs unclear.
Successful thermal gelation was observed by qualitative measures for mixtures with cdECM con­
centrations of 1.76%, 1.5%, and 1% (w/v). However, none of the pre­gels were fully solubilized prior
to attempted gelation. The poor digestion may impair their use in bioprinting and was likely a result
of poor pulverization and/or improper decellularization of the cdECM prior to digestion. Thus, differ­
ent methods of pulverization should be explored in conjunction with using sufficiently decellularized
tissue.
Further studies in this field should be conducted with an emphasis on establishing a decellulariza­
tion protocol yielding sufficiently decellularized cdECM. This tissue should then be subjected to
LC­MS/MS experiments both to verify preservation of important ECM constituents and to investi­
gate variations between different batches of pigs. Quantitative rheological measurements should be
employed to investigate extent of gelation and modifications to the bio­inks should be explored to
obtain sufficient rheological properties for 3D bioprinting.
75
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Abdullah Said, Niek Verweij, and Pim Van Der Harst. “Associations of combined genetic
and lifestyle risks with incident cardiovascular disease and diabetes in the UK biobank study”.
In: JAMA Cardiology 3 (8 Aug. 2018), pp. 693–702. issn: 23806591. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.
2018.1717.
[2]
Mina T. Kelleni and Mahrous Abdelbasset. “Drug Induced Cardiotoxicity: Mechanism, Preven­
tion and Management”. In: Cardiotoxicity. Ed. by Wenyong Tan. Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2018.
Chap. 7. doi: 10.5772/intechopen.79611. url: https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.79611.
[3]
Anurag Mathur et al. “In vitro cardiac tissue models: Current status and future prospects”. In:
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 96 (2016). Tissue engineering of the heart: from in vitro
models to regenerative solutions, pp. 203–213. issn: 0169­409X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.addr.2015.09.011. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169409X15002148.
[4]
C.J. Pless et al. BIOPRINTING : from multidisciplinary design to emerging opportunities. EL­
SEVIER ACADEMIC PRESS, 2022. isbn: 9780323854306.
[5]
Jonathan H. Tsui et al. “Tunable electroconductive decellularized extracellular matrix hydro­
gels for engineering human cardiac microphysiological systems”. In: Biomaterials 272 (May
2021). issn: 18785905. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.120764.
[6]
Sanskrita Das et al. “Decellularized extracellular matrix bioinks and the external stimuli to en­
hance cardiac tissue development in vitro”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 95 (Sept. 2019), pp. 188–
200. issn: 18787568. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2019.04.026.
[7]
Gozde Basara et al. “Tunable human myocardium derived decellularized extracellular matrix
for 3d bioprinting and cardiac tissue engineering”. In: Gels 7 (2 June 2021). issn: 23102861.
doi: 10.3390/gels7020070.
[8]
Pilar Montero et al. “Cells, Materials, and Fabrication Processes for Cardiac Tissue Engi­
neering”. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8 (2020). issn: 2296­4185. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2020.00955. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00955.
[9]
Falguni Pati et al. “Printing three­dimensional tissue analogues with decellularized extracel­
lular matrix bioink”. In: Nature Communications 5 (June 2014). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/
ncomms4935.
[10]
Byeongmin Kang et al. “Facile Bioprinting Process for Fabricating Size­Controllable Func­
tional Microtissues Using Light­Activated Decellularized Extracellular Matrix­Based Bioinks”.
In: Advanced Materials Technologies 7 (1 Jan. 2022). issn: 2365709X. doi: 10.1002/admt.
202100947.
[11]
Yu Jung Shin et al. “3D bioprinting of mechanically tuned bioinks derived from cardiac decel­
lularized extracellular matrix”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 119 (Jan. 2021), pp. 75–88. issn: 18787568.
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2020.11.006.
[12]
Esmaiel Jabbari et al. “The matrix reloaded: the evolution of regenerative hydrogels”. In: Ma­
terials Today 19.4 (2016), pp. 190–196. issn: 1369­7021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mattod.2015.10.005. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369702115003144.
[13]
Yeonggwon Jo, Seung Hyeon Hwang, and Jinah Jang. “Employing Extracellular Matrix­Based
Tissue Engineering Strategies for Age­Dependent Tissue Degenerations”. In: International
Journal of Molecular Sciences 22.17 (2021). issn: 1422­0067. doi: 10.3390/ijms22179367. url:
https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/22/17/9367.
[14]
Cinnamon L. VanPutte, Jennifer L. Regan, and Andrew F. Russo. Seeley’s essentials of anatomy
physiology, p. 585. isbn: 9781260092868.
[15]
Daniël A. Pijnappels et al. “Forced alignment of mesenchymal stem cells undergoing car­
diomyogenic differentiation affects functional integration with cardiomyocyte cultures”. In: Cir­
culation Research 103 (2 July 2008), pp. 167–176. issn: 00097330. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.
108.176131.
76
==PAGE:84==
[16]
Sophia Doll et al. “Region and cell­type resolved quantitative proteomic map of the human
heart”. In: Nature Communications 8 (1 Dec. 2017). issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-
01747-2.
[17]
Nikolaos G. Frangogiannis. “The extracellular matrix in ischemic and nonischemic heart fail­
ure”. In: Circulation Research 125 (1 2019), pp. 117–146. issn: 15244571. doi: 10 . 1161 /
CIRCRESAHA.119.311148.
[18]
Ana Catarina Silva et al. “Bearing My Heart: The Role of Extracellular Matrix on Cardiac De­
velopment, Homeostasis, and Injury Response”. In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biol­
ogy 8 (Jan. 2021). issn: 2296634X. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.621644.
[19]
Donald Bejleri and Michael E. Davis. “Decellularized Extracellular Matrix Materials for Car­
diac Repair and Regeneration”. In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 8 (5 Mar. 2019). issn:
21922659. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201801217.
[20]
Byoung Soo Kim et al. “Decellularized Extracellular Matrix­based Bioinks for Engineering
Tissue­ And Organ­specific Microenvironments”. In: Chemical Reviews 120 (19 Oct. 2020),
pp. 10608–10661. issn: 15206890. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00808.
[21]
Sylvie Ricard­Blum. “The Collagen Family”. In: Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 3
(1 Jan. 2011), pp. 1–19. issn: 19430264. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a004978.
[22]
Monique Aumailley. “The laminin family”. In: Cell Adhesion and Migration 7 (1 2013), pp. 48–
55. issn: 19336926. doi: 10.4161/cam.22826.
[23]
Ericka Jayne Knee­Walden et al. Advanced Technologies in Cardiovascular Bioengineering.
Ed. by Jianyi Zhang and Vahid Serpooshan. Springer International Publishing, 2022. isbn:
978­3­030­86139­1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-86140-7. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-030-86140-7.
[24]
Sonia Youhanna et al. “Organotypic and Microphysiological Human Tissue Models for Drug
Discovery and Development—Current State­of­the­Art and Future Perspectives”. In: Pharma­
cological Reviews 74 (1 Jan. 2022), pp. 141–206. issn: 0031­6997. doi: 10.1124/pharmrev.120.
000238.
[25]
Kacey Ronaldson­Bouchard et al. “Advanced maturation of human cardiac tissue grown from
pluripotent stem cells”. In: Nature 556 (7700 Apr. 2018), pp. 239–243. issn: 14764687. doi:
10.1038/s41586-018-0016-3.
[26]
Nana Shirakigawa and Hiroyuki Ijima. “Decellularized tissue engineering”. In: Advanced Struc­
tured Materials 66 (Jan. 2017), pp. 185–226. issn: 18698441. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-3328-
5_5.
[27]
Unai Mendibil et al. “Tissue­specific decellularization methods: Rationale and strategies to
achieve regenerative compounds”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21 (15
Aug. 2020), pp. 1–29. issn: 14220067. doi: 10.3390/ijms21155447.
[28]
Jinah Jang et al. “3D printed complex tissue construct using stem cell­laden decellularized
extracellular matrix bioinks for cardiac repair”. In: Biomaterials 112 (Jan. 2017), pp. 264–274.
issn: 18785905. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.026.
[29]
Todd D. Johnson et al. “Human versus porcine tissue sourcing for an injectable myocardial
matrix hydrogel”. In: Biomaterials Science 2 (5 2014), pp. 735–744. issn: 20474849. doi: 10.
1039/c3bm60283d.
[30]
Falguni Pati and Dong­Woo Cho. “Bioprinting of 3D Tissue Models Using Decellularized Ex­
tracellular Matrix Bioink”. In: 3D Cell Culture: Methods and Protocols. Ed. by Zuzana Kole­
dova. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2017, pp. 381–390. isbn: 978­1­4939­7021­6. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4939-7021-6_27. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7021-6_27.
[31]
Donald Bejleri et al. “A Bioprinted Cardiac Patch Composed of Cardiac­Specific Extracellular
Matrix and Progenitor Cells for Heart Repair”. In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 7 (23 Dec.
2018). issn: 21922659. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201800672.
[32]
Kristin M. French et al. “A naturally derived cardiac extracellular matrix enhances cardiac
progenitor cell behavior in vitro”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 8 (12 2012), pp. 4357–4364. issn:
18787568. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.07.033.
77
==PAGE:85==
[33]
C. Zhang and Y. Liu. “Retrieving Quantitative Information of Histone PTMs by Mass Spec­
trometry”. In: Methods in Enzymology 586 (2017), pp. 165–191. issn: 15577988. doi: 10.1016/
bs.mie.2016.10.017.
[34]
H. Alexander Ebhardt et al. “Applications of targeted proteomics in systems biology and trans­
lational medicine”. In: Proteomics 15 (18 Sept. 2015), pp. 3193–3208. issn: 16159861. doi:
10.1002/pmic.201500004.
[35]
Tsung Heng Tsai, Minkun Wang, and Habtom W. Ressom. “Preprocessing and analysis of
LC­MS­based proteomic data”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 1362 (2016), pp. 63–76.
issn: 10643745. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3106-4_3.
[36]
Jiapeng Li, Logan S. Smith, and Hao Jie Zhu. “Data­independent acquisition (DIA): An emerg­
ing proteomics technology for analysis of drug­metabolizing enzymes and transporters”. In:
Drug Discovery Today: Technologies 39 (Dec. 2021), pp. 49–56. issn: 17406749. doi: 10 .
1016/j.ddtec.2021.06.006.
[37]
Florian Christoph Sigloch and Björn Grüning. Label­free versus Labelled ­ How to Choose
Your Quantitation Method (Galaxy Training Materials). [Online; accessed Sat Apr 09 2022].
May 2021.
[38]
Eva Borràs and Eduard Sabidó. “What is targeted proteomics? A concise revision of targeted
acquisition and targeted data analysis in mass spectrometry”. In: Proteomics 17 (17­18 Sept.
2017). issn: 16159861. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201700180.
[39]
Min Pang et al. “Label­free LC­MS/MS shotgun proteomics to investigate the anti­inflammatory
effect of rCC16”. In: Molecular Medicine Reports 14 (5 Nov. 2016), pp. 4496–4504. issn: 17913004.
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5841.
[40]
Wenbin Zhou and S Dai. “Exploring the diversity of plant proteome”. In: Journal of Integrative
Plant Biology 63 (Jan. 2021), pp. 1197–1210.
[41]
Sushma Anand et al. “Label­Based and Label­Free Strategies for Protein Quantitation”. In:
Proteome Bioinformatics. Ed. by Shivakumar Keerthikumar and Suresh Mathivanan. New
York, NY: Springer New York, 2017, pp. 31–43. isbn: 978­1­4939­6740­7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4939-6740-7_4. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6740-7_4.
[42]
Barbara Deracinois et al. “Comparative and quantitative global proteomics approaches: An
overview”. In: Proteomes 1 (3 Dec. 2013), pp. 180–218. issn: 22277382. doi: 10.3390/proteomes1030180.
[43]
Michaela D. Filiou et al. “To label or not to label: Applications of quantitative proteomics in
neuroscience research”. In: Proteomics 12 (4­5 Feb. 2012), pp. 736–747. issn: 16159853.
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201100350.
[44]
Hanno Steen and Matthias Mann. “The ABC’s (and XYZ’s) of peptide sequencing”. In: Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 5 (9 Sept. 2004), pp. 699–711. issn: 14710072. doi: 10.1038/
nrm1468.
[45]
L. Bundgaard et al. “Effective protein extraction combined with data independent acquisition
analysis reveals a comprehensive and quantifiable insight into the proteomes of articular car­
tilage and subchondral bone”. In: Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 30 (1 Jan. 2022), pp. 137–146.
issn: 15229653. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2021.09.006.
[46]
Joerg Doellinger et al. “Sample preparation by easy extraction and digestion (SPEED) ­ A uni­
versal, rapid, and detergent­free protocol for proteomics based on acid extraction”. In: Molec­
ular and Cellular Proteomics 19 (1 2020), pp. 209–222. issn: 15359484. doi: 10.1074/mcp.
TIR119.001616.
[47]
Jon W. Poulsen et al. “Using guanidine­hydrochloride for fast and efficient protein digestion
and single­step affinity­purification mass spectrometry”. In: Journal of Proteome Research 12
(2 Feb. 2013), pp. 1020–1030. issn: 15353893. doi: 10.1021/pr300883y.
[48]
Unipept. Case study: Taxonomic analysis of a tryptic peptide. url: https://unipept.ugent.be/
clidocs/casestudies/tpa. (accessed: 17.06.2022).
[49]
ThermoFischer Scientific. Pierce™Lys­C Protease, MS Grade. url: https://www.thermofisher.
com/order/catalog/product/90051. (accessed: 17.06.2022).
78
==PAGE:86==
[50]
Ileana R. Leon et al. “Quantitative assessment of in­solution digestion efficiency identifies op­
timal protocols for unbiased protein analysis”. In: Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 12 (10
Oct. 2013), pp. 2992–3005. issn: 15359476. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.025585.
[51]
J. Klatt et al. “Automation of peptide desalting for proteomic liquid chromatography ­ tandem
mass spectrometry by centrifugal microfluidics”. In: Lab on a Chip 21 (11 June 2021), pp. 2255–
2264. issn: 14730189. doi: 10.1039/d1lc00137j.
[52]
Tian Jing. How to choose reversed­phase HPLC Columns? url: https://galaklc.com/reversed-
phase-column-selectivity/. (accessed: 17.06.2022).
[53]
S.J. Lehotay and F.J. Schenck. “MULTIRESIDUE METHODS: EXTRACTION”. In: Encyclo­
pedia of Separation Science. Ed. by Ian D. Wilson. Oxford: Academic Press, 2000, pp. 3409–
3415. isbn: 978­0­12­226770­3. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-226770-2/05621-0. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B0122267702056210.
[54]
Supelco. Guide to Solid Phase Extraction. Sigma Aldrich.
[55]
Creative Biostructure. Custom Reversed­Phase Chromatography Service. url: https://www.
creative-biostructure.com/custom-reversed-phase-chromatography-service-261.htm. (accessed:
17.06.2022).
[56]
John P. Savaryn, Timothy K. Toby, and Neil L. Kelleher. “A researcher’s guide to mass spectrometry­
based proteomics”. In: Proteomics 16 (18 Sept. 2016), pp. 2435–2443. issn: 16159861. doi:
10.1002/pmic.201600113.
[57]
Stefani N. Thomas. “Chapter 10 ­ Mass spectrometry”. In: Contemporary Practice in Clinical
Chemistry (Fourth Edition). Ed. by William Clarke and Mark A. Marzinke. Fourth Edition. Aca­
demic Press, 2019, pp. 171–185. isbn: 978­0­12­815499­1. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978- 0- 12- 815499- 1.00010- 7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128154991000107.
[58]
Anton Kaufmann and Maciej Bromirski. Selecting the best Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spec­
trometer scan mode for your application. 2018.
[59]
Kermit K. Murray et al. “Definitions of terms relating to mass spectrometry (IUPAC Recom­
mendations 2013)”. In: Pure and Applied Chemistry 85 (7 2013), pp. 1515–1609. issn: 00334545.
doi: 10.1351/PAC-REC-06-04-06.
[60]
Jesse G. Meyer. “Qualitative and Quantitative Shotgun Proteomics Data Analysis from Data­
Dependent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 2259 (2021),
pp. 297–308. issn: 19406029. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1178-4_19.
[61]
Tatiana Laremore. Protein ID report. url: https://sites.psu.edu/msproteomics/tag/unique-
peptides/. (accessed: 17.06.2022).
[62]
Tommi Välikangas, Tomi Suomi, and Laura L. Elo. “A systematic evaluation of normaliza­
tion methods in quantitative label­free proteomics”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 19 (1 Jan.
2018), pp. 1–11. issn: 14774054. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbw095.
[63]
Shisheng Wang et al. “NAguideR: Performing and prioritizing missing value imputations for
consistent bottom­up proteomic analyses”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48 (14 Aug. 2020).
issn: 13624962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa498.
[64]
Mingyi Liu and Ashok Dongre. “Proper imputation of missing values in proteomics datasets
for differential expression analysis”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 22 (3 May 2021). issn:
14774054. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa112.
[65]
F. Yu, F. Qiu, and J. Meza. “Design and Statistical Analysis of Mass­Spectrometry­Based
Quantitative Proteomics Data”. In: Proteomic Profiling and Analytical Chemistry: The Cross­
roads: Second Edition (Mar. 2016), pp. 211–237. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63688-1.00012-4.
[66]
Andreas Schmidt, Ignasi Forne, and Axel Imhof. “Bioinformatic analysis of proteomics data”.
In: BMC systems biology 8 (2014), S3. issn: 17520509. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-S2-S3.
[67]
Yingyao Zhou et al. “Metascape provides a biologist­oriented resource for the analysis of
systems­level datasets”. In: Nature Communications 10 (1 Dec. 2019). issn: 20411723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-019-09234-6.
79
==PAGE:87==
[68]
Jos Malda et al. “25th anniversary article: Engineering hydrogels for biofabrication”. In: Ad­
vanced Materials 25 (36 Sept. 2013), pp. 5011–5028. issn: 09359648. doi: 10.1002/adma.
201302042.
[69]
Ippokratis Pountos et al. “3D Bioprinting”. In: Digital Surgery. Ed. by Sam Atallah. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 215–232. isbn: 978­3­030­49100­0. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-030-49100-0_16. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49100-0_16.
[70]
J. Abraham et al. “14 ­ Rheological characteristics of nanomaterials and nanocomposites”. In:
Micro and Nano Fibrillar Composites (MFCs and NFCs) from Polymer Blends. Ed. by Raghven­
dra Kumar Mishra, Sabu Thomas, and Nandakumar Kalarikkal. Woodhead Publishing Series
in Composites Science and Engineering. Woodhead Publishing, 2017, pp. 327–350. isbn:
978­0­08­101991­7. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 101991 - 7 . 00014 - 5. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780081019917000145.
[71]
Jaya Maitra and Vivek Kumar Shukla. “Cross­linking in Hydrogels­A Review”. In: American
Journal of Polymer Science 2014 (2 2014), pp. 25–31. doi: 10.5923/j.ajps.20140402.01. url:
http://journal.sapub.org/ajps.
[72]
Jana Stepanovska et al. “Collagen bioinks for bioprinting: A systematic review of hydrogel
properties, bioprinting parameters, protocols, and bioprinted structure characteristics”. In:
Biomedicines 9 (9 Sept. 2021). issn: 22279059. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9091137.
[73]
Weng Wan Chan et al. “Additive biomanufacturing with collagen inks”. In: Bioengineering 7 (3
2020), pp. 1–23. issn: 23065354. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering7030066.
[74]
Jinah Jang et al. “3D printed complex tissue construct using stem cell­laden decellularized
extracellular matrix bioinks for cardiac repair”. In: Biomaterials 112 (2017), pp. 264–274. issn:
0142­9612. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.026. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961216305695.
[75]
Rajiv Heda, Fadi Toro, and Claudio R. Tombazzi. Physiology, Pepsin. StatPearls Publishing,
Treasure Island (FL), 2021. url: http://europepmc.org/books/NBK537005.
[76]
Wonil Han et al. “Directed differential behaviors of multipotent adult stem cells from decel­
lularized tissue/organ extracellular matrix bioinks”. In: Biomaterials 224 (Dec. 2019). issn:
18785905. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2019.119496.
[77]
Juan Carlos Oliveros. Venny. url: https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html.
(accessed: 18.06.2022).
[78]
Nadav Noor et al. “3D Printing of Personalized Thick and Perfusable Cardiac Patches and
Hearts”. In: Advanced Science 6 (11 June 2019). issn: 21983844. doi: 10.1002/advs.201900344.
[79]
B Alberts, A Johnson, and J Lewis. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th edition; The Diversity of
Genomes and the Tree of Life. New York: Garland Science, 2002.
[80]
Yeong Jin Choi et al. “3D Cell Printing of Functional Skeletal Muscle Constructs Using Skele­
tal Muscle­Derived Bioink”. In: Advanced Healthcare Materials 5 (20 Oct. 2016), pp. 2636–
2645. issn: 21922659. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201600483.
[81]
Juan Jaspe and Stephen J. Hagen. “Do protein molecules unfold in a simple shear flow?” In:
Biophysical Journal 91 (9 2006), pp. 3415–3424. issn: 00063495. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.
089367.
[82]
Léa Salelles, Juliane Floury, and Steven Le Feunteun. “Pepsin activity as a function of pH
and digestion time on caseins and egg white proteins under static: In vitro conditions”. In:
Food and Function 12 (24 Dec. 2021), pp. 12468–12478. issn: 2042650X. doi: 10 . 1039 /
d1fo02453a.
[83]
Beu P. Oropeza et al. “Bioprinting of Decellularized Porcine Cardiac Tissue for Large­Scale
Aortic Models”. In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 10 (2022). issn: 2296­4185.
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.855186. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fbioe.2022.
855186.
[84]
Anne Marie Helmenstine. Phosphate­Buffered Saline or PBS Solution; How to Prepare Phosphate­
Buffered Saline Solution. url: https://www.thoughtco.com/phosphate- buffered- saline- pbs-
solution-4061933. (accessed: 19.06.2022).
80
==PAGE:88==
[85]
Christopher David Viljoen, Chantélle Booysen, and Sandhya Sreenisvasan Tantuan. “The
suitability of using spectrophotometry to determine the concentration and purity of DNA ex­
tracted from processed food matrices”. In: Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 112
(Sept. 2022), p. 104689. issn: 08891575. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . jfca . 2022 . 104689. url: https : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0889157522003076.
[86]
Jozua Laven. “The Partitioning of Octyl Phenol Ethoxylate Surfactant between Water and
Sunflower Oil”. In: The Open Colloid Science Journal 4 (Sept. 2011), pp. 37–41. doi: 10.2174/
1876530001104010037.
[87]
Peter M. Crapo, Thomas W. Gilbert, and Stephen F. Badylak. “An overview of tissue and
whole organ decellularization processes”. In: Biomaterials 32 (12 Apr. 2011), pp. 3233–3243.
issn: 01429612. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.057.
[88]
Jacques P. Guyette et al. “Bioengineering Human Myocardium on Native Extracellular Ma­
trix”. In: Circulation Research 118 (1 Jan. 2016), pp. 56–72. issn: 15244571. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.115.306874.
[89]
Xuewei Zhang et al. “Decellularized extracellular matrix scaffolds: Recent trends and emerg­
ing strategies in tissue engineering”. In: Bioactive Materials 10 (Apr. 2022), pp. 15–31. issn:
2452199X. doi: 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.09.014.
[90]
Yoojin Seo, Youngmee Jung, and Soo Hyun Kim. “Decellularized heart ECM hydrogel us­
ing supercritical carbon dioxide for improved angiogenesis”. In: Acta Biomaterialia 67 (Feb.
2018), pp. 270–281. issn: 18787568. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.11.046.
[91]
Stephen Tottey et al. “The effect of source animal age upon extracellular matrix scaffold prop­
erties”. In: Biomaterials 32 (1 Jan. 2011), pp. 128–136. issn: 01429612. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
biomaterials.2010.09.006.
[92]
Yaoyang Zhang et al. “Protein analysis by shotgun/bottom­up proteomics”. In: Chemical Re­
views 113 (4 Apr. 2013), pp. 2343–2394. issn: 00092665. doi: 10.1021/cr3003533.
[93]
Creative Proteomics. Top­Down Proteomics vs Bottom­Up Proteomics. url: https: / / www .
creative- proteomics.com/resource/top- down- proteomics- vs- bottom- up- proteomics.htm.
(accessed: 17.06.2022).
[94]
Hyun Kyung Kim et al. “Protein Extraction from Porcine Myocardium Using Ultrasonication”.
In: Journal of Food Science 82 (5 May 2017), pp. 1059–1065. issn: 17503841. doi: 10.1111/
1750-3841.13694.
[95]
Shiying Shao et al. “Reproducible tissue homogenization and protein extraction for quan­
titative proteomics using micropestle­assisted pressure­cycling technology”. In: Journal of
Proteome Research 15 (6 June 2016), pp. 1821–1829. issn: 15353907. doi: 10.1021/acs.
jproteome.5b01136.
[96]
Xiaoju Wang, Qingbo Wang, and Chunlin Xu. “Nanocellulose­based inks for 3d bioprinting:
Key aspects in research development and challenging perspectives in applications—a mini
review”. In: Bioengineering 7 (2 June 2020). issn: 23065354. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering7020040.
[97]
Kajsa Markstedt et al. “Biomimetic Inks Based on Cellulose Nanofibrils and Cross­Linkable
Xylans for 3D Printing”. In: ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 9 (46 Nov. 2017), pp. 40878–
40886. issn: 19448252. doi: 10.1021/acsami.7b13400.
[98]
Jisoo Kim, Jinah Jang, and Dong Woo Cho. “Controlling Cancer Cell Behavior by Improving
the Stiffness of Gastric Tissue­Decellularized ECM Bioink With Cellulose Nanoparticles”. In:
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (Mar. 2021). issn: 22964185. doi: 10.3389/
fbioe.2021.605819.
81
==PAGE:89==
A
Background additional information
A.1
cdECM additional information
A.1.1
cdECM batch­to­batch variation
The results of LC­MS/MS analysis of six cdECMs derived from different batches of adult pigs by
Tsui et al. are demonstrated in the following.
Figure A.1: Differences in abundance of the most abundant ECM proteins (as identified by LC­
MS/MS) between six cdECMs derived from different adult pigs [5].
A.2
Proteomics additional background
A.2.1
Targeted proteomics
In contrast to shotgun proteomics, the method known as targeted proteomics can be employed in
cases of prior knowledge concerning the sample composition. Here, the mass spectrometer is set
to filter in a window that only encompasses preselected peptides of interest so that only these are
investigated. This enables high­sensitivity measurements with a more accurate quantification of the
specific proteins of interest than that obtained using shotgun proteomics to quantify the amounts
of the very same proteins [38]. Thus, targeted proteomics is a very useful tool when knowledge on
protein composition of a specific sample has already been attained, for instance after having sub­
jected said sample to shotgun proteomics.
A.2.2
Top­down proteomics
Top­down proteomics can be advantageous in the analysis of post­translational modifications and
isoform analysis of proteins when compared to bottom­up proteomics. However, it is limited by diffi­
culties with protein fractionation, ionization, and fragmentation. Thus, bottom­up proteomics is more
universally adopted for protein analysis [92]. The top­down approach is illustrated along with the
bottom­up approach on figure A.2.
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.2: The workflows of bottom­up­ and top­down proteomics. In bottom­up proteomics, pro­
teins are extracted from a sample, digested into peptides, and then introduced to the mass spec­
trometer. In top­down proteomics, proteins are not digested prior to being introduced to the mass
spectrometer [93].
A.2.3
label­free and label­based quantification
Figure A.3: The workflows of label­free­ (A) and label­based proteomics (B), respectively. In la­
bel free proteomics each sample is prepared and introduced to the mass spectrometer indepen­
dently so that separate runs are being conducted. In label­based proteomics each sample is tagged
with different stable isotopes that have similar physical properties resulting in a mass shift that is
detectable by the mass spectrometer. This enables mixing of the samples before preparation and
introduction into the mass spectrometer [42].
A.2.4
Ultrasonication and PCT
Ultrasonication works by subjecting the sample to ultrasonic waves which cause cavitation in the
sample, that is, the creation and destruction of millions of microbubbles which destroy nearby mat­
ter and thus facilitate protein extraction [94]. In PCT, the sample is placed at the bottom of a de­
formable microtube tube and a pestle is placed in the microtube which forms a tight fit between
the pestle and the tube (see figure A.4 (A)). This construct is then subjected to repeated cycles of
high pressure (up to 45000 psi) by a device known as a barocycler. This cycling pressure causes
the tube to collapse and shorten while the pestle maintains its shape well (see figure A.4 (B)). The
sample is repeatedly forced through the narrow gap between the pestle and the tube walls which
causes compression and facilitates protein extraction [95].
83
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.4: The principle of PCT for protein extraction. (A) the appearance of the pestle/microtube
construct at ambient pressure with the white area representing compressible volume. (B) Applica­
tion of a hydrostatic pressure causes deformation of the microtube so that it is compressed against
the pestle [95].
A.2.5
Lys­C additional benefits
Lys­C has been demonstrated to have high activity in the presence of GuHCL [47]. Thus, Lys­C can
be used to digest the proteins in a solution with higher concentration of GuHCL prior to diluting the
solution to a lower concentration of GuHCL followed by digestion with trypsin [44], [45]. PCT can
also be used after the addition of proteases as this increases efficiency of protein digestion [45].
A.2.6
Desalting
Before separation by HPLC and ionization of the peptides it is important that salts and detergents
are separated from the peptides as the former group interferes with peptide ionization and the latter
group inhibits efficient peptide separation by HPLC. The process of removing these substances is
known as desalting. A common way of desalting is by using reverse­phased SPE with octyl (C8) or
octadecyl (C18) which are alkyl­bonded stationary phases [51], [52]. SPE is a technique used to iso­
late and separate compounds from a liquid matrix based on their properties [53]. In reverse­phased
SPE this separation is based on the polarity of the compounds. Reverse­phased SPE involves the
liquid matrix containing the analytes of interest, called a mobile phase, and it is typically polar (hy­
drophilic), and the nonpolar (hydrophobic) material through which the sample is passed known as
the stationary phase. The sample itself is typically mid­ to nonpolar. C8 or C18 constitutes the sta­
tionary phase and consists of carbons bound to silica and the silianol functional groups have been
chemically modified with nonpolar alkyl or aryl functional groups. The stationary phase is able to
adsorb the analyte of interest as a result of nonpolar­nonpolar attractive van der Waals forces be­
tween the carbon­hydrogen bonds in the analyte and the functional alkyl­ or aryl groups of the sta­
tionary phase [54]. The typical desalting procedure starts with an initial conditioning of the station­
ary phase by washing it with several buffers containing organic solvents designed to remove con­
taminations. Following this, the nonpolar stationary phase is washed with the polar mobile phase
containing the sample so that the nonpolar analytes of interest, in this case peptides, adsorb to it
while the polar mobile phase elutes through it [51]. Analyte adsorption to the stationary phase is
usually enhanced by using aqueous solutions containing ion­pairing agents, such as trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA), as these favor binding [55]. Following analyte binding multiple washing steps are per­
formed using various buffers designed to remove non­peptide components such as salts and deter­
gents. Finally, the peptides are eluted by washing with a nonpolar mobile phase, such as acetoni­
trile or methanol, as this disrupts the van der Waals forces that bind the peptides to the stationary
phase [51], [54], [55].
A.2.7
Quadrupole and orbitrap
A quadrupole is composed of four cylindrical rods to which oscillating electrical fields are applied.
As the peptide ions travel down the quadrupole they will respond differently to the applied electrical
84
==PAGE:92==
fields depending upon their m/z ratio. Specifically, only peptides with a certain m/z ratio maintain a
stable trajectory which prevents them from colliding with the rods, thus enabling them to pass fur­
ther into the mass spectrometer. As such, the quadropole is used to filter peptide ions based upon
their m/z ratio [57]. The ions that are not filtered out then travel to the orbitrap mass analyzer where
an electromagnetic field propels the ions into oscillatory motion. The frequency of this motion is
measured in the time domain and it depends upon the m/z ratio of ions. Then, the measured fre­
quency data is converted to the frequency domain, using the Fourier Transformation, which is then
converted to m/z spectral data.
A.3
Bioprinting additional information
A.3.1
Extrusion­based bioprinting methods
Dispension, in extrusion­based bioprinting, can be pneumatic, piston­, or screwdriven (see figure
A.5). Pneumatic dispensing utilizes airpressure to dispense the biomaterial whereas piston­ and
screwdriven dispensing utilize mechanical forces [69]. Pistondriven dispension provides more direct
control of the biomaterial flow from the nozzle than pneumatic dispension. Screwdriven dispension
can give more spatial control than that obtained with the other two methods. However, using this
method can result in pressure drops at the nozzle which can be harmful for cells [68].
Figure A.5: The three methods used to dispense biomaterial in extrusion­based bioprinting [68].
A.3.2
Other methods than physical cross­linking to maintain shape fidelity of
cdECM bio­inks
One option is to print the construct in a supporting framework, e.g. in a synthetic polymer such as
Poly (ethylene/vinyl acetate) (PEVA) [6]. This was done by Das et al. which enabled them to use
bio­inks with cdECM concentrations as low as 0.6% (see table A.1) and these facilitated greater
cardiomyocyte maturation than higher concentrations (1.2% as seen in table A.1). Another ap­
proach is to chemically cross­link the construct as described in subsection 2.5.2. In the case of
porcine cdECM this has been done frequently as exemplified by the different groups in table A.1
who have employed photoinitiators (lithiumphenyl­2,4,6­trimethylbenzoylphosphinate (LAP), vita­
min B2, Eosin Y, ruthenium/sodium persulfate (Ru/SPS)) and crosslinking agents (Poly(ethylene
glycol) diacrylate (PEG­DA), and transglutaminase). A third approach is to add other materials to
the bioink in order to tune the rheological properties (viscosity modifiers). For instance, Shin et al.
introduced the clay­based ceramic Laponite­XLG into their porcine cdECM bio­inks (see table A.1)
and demonstrated that this enabled printability and improved rheological properties compared to
the formulation without Laponite­XLG [11]. Likewise, Tsui et al. found that the addition of reduced
graphine oxide (rGO) to their porcine cardiac dECM bio­inks (see table A.1) resulted in increased
rheological properties, including viscosity, when compared to cdECM only scaffolds [5].
85
==PAGE:93==
Pre­gel formation and cdECM bioink constituents in selected articles.
Article:
Pepsin treatment:
dECM Bioink constituents:
Pati et al.
(2014 and
2017) [9]
[30].
48 h in 3% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M
acetic acid solution with 400 U/mg
pepsin in 1:10 (w/w) ratio with
cdECM.
3% cdECM (w/v).
Shin et al.
(2021) [11].
7 d in 9­10% (w/v) 0.1 M HCL so­
lution with 250 U/mg pepsin in a
1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Six groups with 4.6% cdECM (w/w), or 4.6%
cdECM (w/w) with 6% PEG­DA (w/w), or 4.6%
cdECM (w/w) with 2.3% Laponite (w/w), or
4.6% cdECM (w/w) with Laponite 2.3 % (w/w),
PEG­DA (6%, 8%, or 10.5% (w/w) depending
on group), and 0.4% LAP.
Das et al.
(2019) [6].
72 h in 2.5% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M
acetic acid solution with pepsin
(specific activity not reported) in
1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Two groups with either 0.6% cdECM or 1.2%
cdECM. respectively. Not reported if concen­
trations were w/w or w/v.
Jang et al.
(2017) [28].
48 h in 3.3% cdECM (w/v) 0.5 M
acetic acid solution with pepsin
(specific activity not reported) in
1:10 (w/w) ratio with cdECM.
Two groups with 2% cdECM (w/v) and 0.02%
vitamin B2 (w/v), or 2% cdECM (w/v) and
0.02% vitamin B2 (w/v) and 0.0001% VEGF
(w/v), respectively.
Bejleri et
al. (2018)
[31].
48 h in 1% cdECM (w/v) 0.1 M
HCL solution with pepsin (specific
activity not reported) in 1:10 (w/w)
ratio with cdECM.
0.8% cdECM (w/v), 5% GelMA (w/v), Eosin Y
(100 ∗10−6M, 0.75% NVP (v/v), and 3% TEOA
(v/v).
Kang et al.
(2021) [10].
5­7 d in 0.5 M acetic acid solution
with pepsin (specific activity and
amount not reported) and cdECM
(concentration not reported).
Two groups with 1% cdECM (w/v) and 0.5
mM Ru/SPS (amount not reported) or 5 mM
Ru/SPS depending on group.
Tsui et al.
(2021) [5].
2% cdECM (w/v) and rGO (be­
tween 0.1% w/v and 0.3% w/v de­
pending on group) in 0.1 M HCL
solution with pepsin (specific ac­
tivity not reported) in 1:10 (w/w)
ratio with cdECM. Digested until
solution was completely homoge­
neous.
Several groups (exact number not reported)
with 2% w/v cdECM only, or 2% w/v cdECM
plus the addition of rGO with concentration
varied between 0.1­0.3% (w/v), or 2% cdECM
w/v and 5% transglutaminase w/v.
Table A.1: Pre­gel formation protocols and constituents of cdECM bioinks (only including
cdECM, crosslinking agents, and viscosity modifiers) in a selection of seven articles published
within the last 10 years where bioprinted EHTs containing porcine cdECM were developed.
HCL=hydrochloric acid, Laponite=Laponite­XLG nanoclay, PEG­DA=poly(ethylene glycol)­
diacrylate, LAP=lithium phenyl­2,4,6­ trimethylbenzoylphosphinate, VEGF=vascular endothelial
growth factor, GelMA=gelatin methacrylate, NVP=1­vinyl­2­pyrrolidione, TEOA=Triethanolamine,
Ru/SPS=ruthenium/sodium persulfate, rGO=reduced graphene oxide.
A.3.3
fibrillated nanocellulose fibers
Ideally, if a material is added to the bioink with the goal of improving rheological properties it should
exhibit a structure similar to that of the native ECM and be biocompatible in order to maximize cell
compatibility. One such material is cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) [96]. Cellulose is the main compo­
nent in trees and the most abundant biopolymer on earth and thus this material is very easily avail­
able. CNFs are useful for bioprinting purposes as they exhibit strong shear­thinning properties so
that they are easily dispensed and quickly regain a high viscosity after the application of force is
stopped. This, combined with the fact that CNFs have a high viscosity at zero shear, means that
86
==PAGE:94==
constructs made from bioinks consisting of CNFs tend to maintain shape very well after printing
[97]. CNFs have been used to improve rheological properties of decellularized ECM. For instance,
Kim et al. decellularized porcine gastric tissue and supplemented this with CNFs in order to mimic
a physiologically relevant microenvironment for cancer cells. They demonstrated that increasing
concentrations of added CNFs increased stiffness of the bioink and found that this allowed for tun­
ing of the bioink stiffness. As such, it was possible to create a bioink with a stiffness mimicking the
native cancer tissue, in turn, increasing the amount of cancer cell aggregates when compared to
not adding CNFs. Although this example concerns cancer cells in gastric tissue and not hiPSCs in
heart tissue it is still of interest within the field of the present study as it demonstrates that CNFs can
be used to improve rheological properties of a bioink [98].
87
==PAGE:95==
B
Materials and methods additional
information
B.1
Overview of decellularization experiments which were not
included
An overview of the decellularization experiments not included in the report is provided in table B.1.
Overview of decellularization experiments not included in report.
Experiment
ID:
Sample map:
Decellularization approach
IniDe.
• Manually cut adult 1 LV
piece treated in SDS for 48
h=”IniDe A1M”.
• Blended adult 1 LV piece
treated in SDS for 72 h with
solution change after 24
h=”IniDe A1B­72C”.
• Manually cut neonatal 1
LV treated in SDS for 48
hours=”IniDe N1M”.
According to protocol detailed in
subsubsection 3.2.1 with a few
differences. Manual cutting done
with a scalpel on petri dish cov­
ered with Sylgard. Blending done
in 1% SDS and tissue not frozen
prior to initiation of decellulariza­
tion. Non­specified SDS:tissue
ratio. SDS treatment performed
for 48 h without switching. Triton
X­100 treatment performed for 30
minutes. Liquids switched using
centrifuging. PBS wash follow­
ing Triton treatment done for 3 d.
Lyophilization done in PBS.
BlendDe.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated with
SDS for 48 h=”BlendDe A3”.
• Adult 3 LV piece treated with
SDS for 120 h with solution
change after 3 d=”BlendDe
A3­120C”.
• Neonatal 4 LV treated with
SDS for 48 h=”BlendDe N4”.
• Neonatal 5 LV treated with
SDS for 120 h with solution
change after 3 d=”BlendDe
N5­120C”.
• Neonatal 6 LV treated with
SDS for 120 h with solution
change after 3 d=”BlendDe
N6­120C”.
According to protocol detailed in
subsubsection 3.2.1 using blend­
ing only. Blending performed in
PBS and tissue not frozen prior
to initiation of decellularization.
SDS duration specifications listed
in sample map. SDS:tissue ratio
was 20:1 (v/w). Triton X­100 treat­
ment performed for 30 min. Liq­
uids switched using centrifuging.
PBS wash following Triton treat­
ment done for 3 d.
Table B.1: Experiment ID, samples included and their sample IDs (sample map), and the approach
used for decellularization (decellularization approach) for the experiments not included in the report.
The number following either ”adult” or ”neonatal” (”A” or ”N” in the sample IDs) in sample map des­
ignates which adult or neonatal heart was used, i.e., the same number indicates that tissue from the
same heart was used.
88
==PAGE:96==
B.2
Proteomics illustrations for the sample preparation
In the following, several illustrations, showing some of the sample preparation steps, will be pre­
sented.
Figure B.1: The cartridge (with two barrels), containing the PCT tubes, which is placed in the baro­
cycler.
Figure B.2: The barocycler used for protein extraction.
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure B.3: An illustration of the C18 material. Holes are removed plugs of the material.
B.3
Pre­gel formation and gelation illustrations
Figure B.4: An illustration of the biopulverizer after having been immersed in liquid N2 for around 15
minutes. Note that the hammer and chisels used to crush the tissue are not included.
90
==PAGE:98==
C
Results not included in report
C.1
Decellularization results
In the following, decellularization results for the experiments not included in the report will be pro­
vided. In addition, illustrations of the three unexpected challenges mentioned in subsection 4.1.5
will be provided.
C.1.1
IniDe ­ First decellularization experiment conducted
Not measuring the amount of SDS used relative to tissue resulted in too little of the former being
added relative to the latter for the blended adult sample (IniDe A1B­72C, see table B.1) as blend­
ing allowed for a large amount of tissue to be cut. This impaired decellularization to an extent where
there was a clear lack of progression in decellularization after 24 hours of SDS treatment (see fig­
ure C.1).
Figure C.1: Adult blended sample (IniDe A1B­72C) after being centrifuged and having the super­
natant removed 24 hours following initiation of SDS treatment.
In contrast to the brown colour of the tissue on figure C.1, the tissue should attain an increasingly
white appearance over the course of decellularization as was seen for the manually cut adult sam­
ple (IniDe A1M) where both a much lower amount of tissue­ and a much larger amount of SDS rela­
tive to tissue were used (see figure C.2).
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure C.2: Manually cut adult sample (IniDe A1M) 24 hours following initiation of SDS treatment.
Note, that the sample name on the falcon tube (A2) was only used during experiments but not in
this thesis.
Thus, a small amount of the manually cut adult sample (IniDe A1M) was kept and a large amount of
SDS added so that treatment continued for two more days (a total of 72 hours) for this sample.
Yield­ and DNA quantification results are not included for this experiment as tissue was not accu­
rately weighed prior to­ and after decellularization.
C.1.2
BlendDe ­ all samples blended and not frozen
Some samples were treated in SDS for 48 hours with no change of solution and others treated for
120 hours with one change of solution in order to investigate the difference in residual DNA content
when one protocol was substantially harsher than the other. Yield results are not included as only
approximate weights of the tissue were obtained prior to decellularization. Residual DNA content of
all samples can be seen on figure C.3.
92
==PAGE:100==
Figure C.3: DNA content per mg lyophilized tissue weight for all samples in experiment BlendDe.
Adult 3 48h=BlendDe A3, Adult 3 120h change=BlendDe A3­120C, Neonatal 4 48h=BlendDe N4,
Neonatal 5 120h change=BlendDe N5­120C, Neonatal 6 120h change=BlendDe N6 120­C (see
table B.1 for treatment specifications).
C.1.3
Illustrations of unexpected challenges
Figure C.4: Illustration of the formation of tissue aggregates during the decellularization process.
Although not super clear, it is observed that the tissue has aggregated into larger pieces which is
particularly prominent around the magnet.
93
==PAGE:101==
Figure C.5: Foam formation as a result of shaking a bottle containing porcine LV tissue in SDS. As
evident, some of the tissue is trapped in the foam and is not immersed in the liquid as a result.
Figure C.6: Tissue adhering to the side of the plastic bottle during the decellularization procedure
while continuous stirring was performed.
94
==PAGE:102==
C.2
Proteomics results
Figure C.7: Venn diagram of the identified proteins for the manually cut sample=PatiPro A2M and
the blended sample=PatiPro A2B (see table 3.3 for sample map).
Unique proteins of the manually cut sample grouped by function in order of significance.
Protein function:
Number of proteins:
Log10(P):
Signalling by Rho GT­
Pases, Miro GTPases and
RHOBTB3
39
­17.54
Intracellular protein transport
37
­16.97
Vesicle­mediated transport
32
­12.91
Actin cytoskeleton organiza­
tion
28
­12.28
Golgi vesicle transport
20
­11.24
Regulation of protein
catabolic process
23
­11.10
TCA cycle and respiratory
electron transport
16
­10.68
Protein stabilization
17
­10.52
Cellular responses to stress
31
­10.47
Regulation of proteolysis
30
­10.33
Table C.1: The 10 protein functions that it is most likely that some of the unique proteins from the
manually cut adult pig=PatiPro A2M belong to (see table 3.3 for sample map). Protein function=the
function in which the subset of proteins are grouped, Number of proteins=number of proteins asso­
ciated with a specific function, Log10(P)=base 10 logarithm of P­value.
95
==PAGE:103==
Figure C.8: Differences in abundance for identified collagen proteins of types I, III, IV, V, and
VI common between the manually cut sample=PatiPro A2M and blended sample=PatiPro
A2B (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in or­
der for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observable scale. COL6A3=Collagen
type VI alpha 3 chain, COL4A2=Collagen type IV alpha 2 chain, COL4A5=Collagen type
IV alpha 5 chain, COL6A2=Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain, COL1A1=Collagen type I al­
pha 1 chain, COL1A2=Collagen type I alpha 2 chain, COL6A5=Collagen type VI alpha 5
chain, COL5A1=Collagen type V alpha 1 chain, COL5A3=Collagen type V alpha 3 chain,
COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2 chain, COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain.
Figure C.9: Venn diagram illustrating the identified proteins for samples subjected to SDS for 72
h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h (ModPro A3­96), and 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­
120) (see table 3.3 for sample map).
96
==PAGE:104==
Figure C.10: Venn diagram illustrating the identified proteins for the sample subjected to SDS for
120 h=SDS 120 h (ModPro A3­120) and that subjected to a very harsh decellularization proto­
col=SDS 120h++ (ModPro A3H) (see table 3.3 for sample map).
Estimate of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins for different SDS treatments.
Sample
Cellular+ un­
characterized
proteins
ECM proteins
%Cellular+ un­
characterized
proteins
%ECM proteins
SDS 72h
647
212
75.3%
24.7%
SDS 96h
605
199
75.2%
24.8%
SDS 120h
657
215
75.3%
24.7%
Table C.2: Estimate of the number of ECM­ and cellular+uncharacterized proteins as well as the
fractions of the total number of proteins (constituted by these groups) for the samples subjected to
SDS for different durations of time. SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h (Mod­
Pro A3­96), and 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample map).
97
==PAGE:105==
Figure C.11: Differences in abundance of the 20 most abundant cellular proteins, identified using
GO terms, between samples subjected to SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h
(ModPro A3­96), and 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that
the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of ob­
servable scale.
Important ECM proteins not common between the samples with differing SDS treatments.
Protein:
SDS 72h:
SDS 96h:
SDS 120h:
Collagen type VI alpha 5
chain
x
x
Collagen type VI alpha 3
chain
x
x
Table C.3: Table illustrating important ECM proteins not common between the samples subjected
to SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h (ModPro A3­96), and 120 h=SDS 120h
(ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample map) and which of the samples these were present in
(marked by an x).
98
==PAGE:106==
Figure C.12: Differences in abundance for identified collagen proteins of types I, III, IV, V, and VI
common between the three samples subjected to SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96
h=SDS 96h (ModPro A3­96), and 120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample
map). Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of
proteins to be of observable scale. COL6A3=Collagen type VI alpha 3 chain, COL4A2=Collagen
type IV alpha 2 chain, COL6A2=Collagen type VI alpha 2 chain, COL1A1=Collagen type I
alpha 1 chain, COL1A2=Collagen type I alpha 2 chain, COL5A2=Collagen type V alpha 2
chain, COL5A1=Collagen type V alpha 1 chain, COL4A5=Collagen type IV alpha 5 chain,
COL3A1=Collagen type III alpha 1 chain.
Figure C.13: Differences in abundance for identified fibronectin proteins common between the three
samples subjected to SDS for 72 h=SDS 72h (ModPro A3­72), 96 h=SDS 96h (ModPro A3­96), and
120 h=SDS 120h (ModPro A3­120) (see table 3.3 for sample map). Note, that the y­axis has been
Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to be of observable scale.
99
==PAGE:107==
Figure C.14: Venn diagram illustrating the identified proteins for the two different adult pigs. Adult
3=ModPro A3H, Adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample map).
Figure C.15: Differences in abundance of the 20 most abundant cellular proteins, identified using
GO terms, between Adult 3=ModPro A3H and Adult 4=ModPro A4H (see table 3.3 for sample map).
Note, that the y­axis has been Log transformed in order for the abundances of all sets of proteins to
be of observable scale.
100
