==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master in Computer Science and Engineering
Designing hybrid investment packages of
cryptocurrencies with rewards and index
funds
Carlos Daniel Pinho Ventura s202450
Supervisor: Jesper Larsen
Co-supervisor: Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cryptocurrencies have become powerful tools for investors looking to diversify their
portfolios. An important feature resides in generating additional passive income
with cryptocurrency passive investment methods. In sum, these techniques allow
the user to constantly receive a specific rate (e.g lending) in addition to the
cryptocurrency returns. For an easier understanding, the above-stated rates are
converted to a compound annual form and are thus designated Annual Percentage
Yields (APYs). In this thesis, the previous techniques are first introduced and
explained. Secondly, with the help of a simple mean-variance optimization model,
packages composed of Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) and/or small baskets of
cryptocurrencies, with and without APYs added, are generated. The results
demonstrate two findings: the inclusion of the mentioned APYs vastly improves the
performance of investments over time, and lastly, including a small basket of
cryptocurrencies in a diversified portfolio can significantly increase the portfolio
performance for a relatively close level of downside risk.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a MSc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 21, 2022
Carlos Daniel Pinho Ventura
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Jørgen Villadsen, Jesper Larsen and
Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen for setting up a possibility for me to work on a project
in which I chose the topic and the co-supervisor. In addition, I would like to thank
Kourosh for providing valuable critical feedback throughout the thesis.
I would also like to show my gratitude to my friends and family, that were always by
my side and helped me push forward with the project.
A special thank you goes to Jorge Bertomeu Genís, who motivated the idea of this
master thesis with his thesis and assisted with understanding essential concepts, and
lastly to Brynjar Örn Grétarsson for his advice and guidance on a more general
aspect throughout not only the project period but also the whole master’s.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Cryptocurrency
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
DeFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Technical Terms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Cryptocurrency passive investments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Step-by-step guide to cryptocurrencies and yield generator products
.
17
3
Index Funds
20
3.1
Index funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
ETFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Funnel Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Models and Methods
23
4.1
Rates terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Funnel approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Performance Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Data
30
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.1
Cryptocurrencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
ETFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Investment hybrid packages
34
6.1
ETFs, cryptocurrencies and APYs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Training optimization model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Generated packages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusion
46
7.1
Limitations and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Bibliography
49
Performance of chosen packages with 2.5%, 5% and 10% cryptocurrency weight on all APYs 55
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
Loss percentages according to price variation from a Medium article [64] .
16
2.2
Simplified steps to invest in cryptocurrencies and yield generator products
18
3.1
Thesis implemented Robo-Advisor algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.1
Optimal ETFs+Cryptocurrencies correlation matrix from 06.11.2017 to 11.03.2019
(training data)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Eﬀicient frontiers comparison with 5% crypto allocation from 06.11.2017 to
11.03.2019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Zoomed out version of eﬀicient frontiers comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
BTC comparison of investing vs investing with interest generator from
15.09.2014 to 01.06.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.5
Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and optimal cryptocurrencies(mst
filter applied) from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.6
Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and stablecoin from 11.03.2019
to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and optimal cryptocurrencies
from the top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.8
Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and all, separate, cryptocurren-
cies from the top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.9
Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and weighted cryptocurrencies
top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.10 Final generated portfolios generated with average(mean) APY from 11.03.2019
to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Loss percentages according to price variation (in depth) from a Medium
article [64] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1
Cryptocurrency due diligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Availability of passive investment methods in the considered platforms . .
31
5.3
APY rates statistics on the top 10 cryptocurrencies by Market Cap . . . .
32
5.4
ETF due diligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.1
Bitcoin portfolio with APYs from 15.09.2014 to 01.06.2022 - Gp annual
geometric average return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Performance of World benchmark ETFs from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . .
37
6.3
Optimal ETFs performance according to multiple rebalance periods from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Optimal ETFs performance on different input/parameters from 11.03.2019
to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Portfolios performance analysis over multiple parameters/inputs from 11.03.2019
to 01.05.2022 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
Cryptocurrency market cap due diligence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.7
Performance comparison of the resulted portfolios from the packages from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 - annual basis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.8
Performance comparison for ETF+Crypto C(mst) according to different
APYs from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 - annual basis results . . . . . . . . .
45
6.9
Performance comparison for ETF+stable C according to different APYs
from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 - annual basis results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
1
Performance comparison of ETF+Opt C(mst) with multiple crypto weights
and APYs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
2
Performance comparison of ETF+Opt C(top) with multiple crypto weights
and APYs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3
Performance comparison of ETF+ stable C with multiple crypto weights
and APYs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4
Performance comparison of ETF+ BTC with multiple crypto weights and
APYs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Performance comparison of ETF+top 10 C(w) with multiple crypto weights
and APYs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
New technology advances have introduced new opportunities for investors to
diversify and expand the type of assets in portfolios. After the introduction of
bitcoin, the cryptocurrency market grew to a point where the number of
cryptocurrencies has reached the thousands. The technology itself presents
attractive characteristics, and for the investor, one key feature is the ability to
generate passive income with multiple methods. In this thesis, with the help of an
optimization model, packages composed of Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs),
cryptocurrencies and APYs(rates obtained from the passive income generator
techniques) are generated and analyzed.
This master’s thesis is structured in a way that in chapter 2 an introduction to
cryptocurrencies is given, followed by an enumeration and description of
cryptocurrency passive investments and finished with the risks associated and a
guide on how to invest in cryptocurrencies and yield generator products. Chapter 3
defines index funds and ETFs, concluding with the introduction of a funnel
investment approach. The chapter 4 starts with an explanation of rates in the
project context and a deeper description of the previously mentioned funnel
approach; the focus is then shifted to modern portfolio theory essential concepts. At
the end of the chapter, performance measurements are introduced and explained. In
chapter 5 the data utilized for the project is presented, demonstrating the three
datasets: ETFs, cryptocurrencies and passive rates (APYs). The chapter 6 is the
culmination of findings and results. This chapter is split into three parts. In the
first part, the advantages of including cryptocurrencies in a portfolio are
enumerated, highlighting the impact of APYs in cryptocurrency investments. The
second part is characterized by analyzing the optimization model (including input
parameters) and comparing it to benchmarks. The chapter is finalized with the
exhibition of the generated packages and the corresponding performance measures.
The last chapter 7 concludes the thesis work with the relevant limitations and
suggestions for future work.
1.1
Problem description
The main goal and motivation behind this thesis is to provide complete or partial
answers to the following questions:
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Problem description
2
• What are the different methods of utilizing cryptocurrency and generating
passive income?
• Can an ETF investment funnel approach with a simple mean-variance
optimizer outperform a world ETF?
• What is the impact of including APYs in cryptocurrency investments?
• How does a portfolio’s performance shift with the addition of small
percentages of cryptocurrencies?
• Does an ordinary investor with no extensive knowledge have the ability to
replicate a high-performance strategy that includes ETFs and
cryptocurrencies?
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Cryptocurrency
This chapter gives an overview of cryptocurrencies, including a summary of all the
relevant concepts and provides knowledge to explain the cryptocurrency-related
products. That is, enumerating the products, explaining how they work and
detailing risks and benefits.
2.1
Introduction
The following section outlines the history and base concepts of cryptocurrency.
2.1.1
History
Cryptocurrency is a concept that has been around long before the introduction of
Bitcoin by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008. The first cryptocurrency dates back to 1990,
eCash, a centralized system owned by DigiCash that was available via banks and
smart cards in numerous countries. Problems such as double-spending and user
privacy were already being addressed. To avoid double-spending, payments were
sent online and offline using cryptographic methods. The cryptographic systems
utilized blind signatures to preserve the anonymity of their users. Soon after
discovering cryptographic primitives, the digital gold currency became widespread,
with e-Gold being the most widely employed. Due to its success in the first online
micro payment system, it originated advances and methods that made transactions
more convenient and safe. Both of these systems ceased to exist; eCash in 1999 after
being acquired by InfoSpace and e-Gold in 2008 due to compliance problems [62].
2.1.2
Nature
Cryptocurrency is a subgroup of what is called digital currency, which is majorly
known, and a few examples are tokens for online casinos and computer games or any
other tokens that can be used/exchanged for different types of objects [62].
Cryptocurrency is a P2P version of electronic cash. It enables internet payments to
be transmitted directly from one party to another without the need for an
institution or ”middle man” to process them, posing a threat to the former [62]. For
most cryptocurrencies, the technology to enable secure transactions is a distributed
ledger or a blockchain. Blockchain works like a database that keeps a record of all
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Introduction
4
the transactions ever made, allowing the users to freely access all the data on the
history of transactions and appending transactions safely. A blockchain is composed
of blocks, and in each block, a cryptographic function generates a hash value of the
content that is then repeated in the next block of the chain. Supposing that there is
a modification to a block, the hash value will change, and it will not match the next
block’s hash, making it exceedingly improbable to re-write history without the
network detecting an inconsistency and removing/replacing the corrupted block. A
set of participants confirms additions to the distributed ledger by running
verification mechanisms [38].
2.1.3
Bitcoin
In 2008 Satoshi Nakamoto published a paper describing Bitcoin, a peer-to-peer
electronic system [59], and as a result, new cryptocurrencies known as altcoins were
created [23]. Bitcoin uses the previously mentioned blockchain and introduced
mining or proof-of-work(PoW). This consensus mechanism validates a block before
adding it to the chain [37]. In simple terms, PoW is a competition to solve a
cryptography puzzle; the first to crack it is rewarded with newly created coins. The
degree of diﬀiculty is automatically adjusted to take approximately 10 minutes to
solve the problem. The Bitcoin protocol is set up so that new bitcoins are generated
at a steady but decreasing rate. The reward for solving a block is automatically
halved every four years to ensure a steady increase of new bitcoins, and the diﬀiculty
of solving the puzzle grows over time [62]. Previously in 2.1.2, it was mentioned that
it is very improbable to re-write history on the blockchain. According to Nakamoto,
this method is achievable if a single entity has 51% of the computing power [38].
While a detailed description of Bitcoin is beyond the scope of this project, it is
necessary to identify and enumerate some of its benefits/features and risks:
Benefits/Features
• Decentralization
• Transparency
• Immutability history
• Flexibility
• Fast transactions
• Low transaction fees
[23] [47].
Risks
• Private key loss
• Software volatility
• Price volatility
• Criminal activity
• Regulatory attitudes
• Economic risks
[62].
==PAGE:14==
2.2 DeFi
5
2.1.4
Altcoins
Altcoins are a category of cryptocurrencies that include all cryptocurrencies other
than Bitcoin. The majority of altcoins use cryptographic technology that is
comparable to Bitcoin, except for the use of distinct algorithmic designs. Altcoins
are being created for a variety of reasons, including addressing bitcoin flaws (such as
the high energy demand on PoW), as well as various applications, i.e., increasing
the number of transactions per second, increasing block size, better support for
smart contracts, and so forth [23]. A few examples of altcoins are Ethereum (ETH),
Tether (USDT), Binance Coin (BNB), USDC Coin (USDC), Ripple (XRP), Solana
(SOL), Cardano (ADA), Polkadot (DOT).
2.1.5
Future
Currently, technology is playing an increasingly important role in finance, and it is
expected that banks will be digital with blockchain as one of the solutions in the
future. Cryptocurrencies, like any inventions, come with many setbacks, and
regulators are no exception since there is a lot of confusion and unease about how to
deal with this financial innovation. One undeniable fact is that cryptocurrency will
evolve and continue to persist. While some coins will cease to exist, different coins
will arise with innovative technology and employment. The benefits of
cryptocurrency have the potential to revolutionize the finance world, and its
exponential growth can be compared to that of the Internet [62]. A large number of
potential research areas (e.g. the network design, trading dynamics, monetary
systems, portfolio diversification and so on) reflects the rapid rise of
cryptocurrencies [38].
2.2
DeFi
Decentralized Finance (DeFi) is briefly explained in this section, with the definition
of the concept, the technology underlying it, benefits and current issues/challenges.
2.2.1
Definition
Before moving into the concept of DeFi, it is necessary to understand the structure
of traditional finance to provide better contrast between the systems.
Traditional finance is described by the existence of a leading middle-man who
centralizes functions and financial resources. This gives rise to financial
centers/hubs that rely on trust and confidence, supported by laws, rules, and
regulations. Although this system began as private/self-regulated, it has evolved to
involve the state with a larger role, and financial crises have arisen as a result of
many failures in rules and regulations [80].
==PAGE:15==
2.2 DeFi
6
DeFi, in contrast, presents the idea of allowing technology to eliminate the
traditional centralized financial centers, not depending on either institutions or
intermediaries. [80]. At its core, DeFi is a set of decentralized applications (DApps:
composed of smart contracts and a front-end) running on a blockchain that performs
financial transactions and provides the base to create new transactions that are not
possible in traditional finance. Presently Ethereum is the cryptocurrency on which
most of DeFi is based, thanks to its programmable capabilities (smart contracts).
DeFi systems are open source, and the main features revolve around being
permissionless, censorship-resistant, programmable(i.e. if the transaction is possible
to code) and immutable in relation to transactions. The censorship resistant feature
stems from the lack of authority and regulation in the DeFi space [37].
2.2.2
Advantages
DeFi is bringing markets closer, eliminating the need for a middle man and
self-identification, decreasing costs (due to smart contract usage) and providing
access to everyone [37].
The permissionless feature is improving the inclusivity (69% of all adults have a
banking account, according to a World Bank report [28]) and lowering traditional
barriers by simply requiring a device and access to the Internet to engage in DeFi.
Subsequently, developing countries might considerably benefit from DeFi, as issues
such as data access, manipulation, and security could be mitigated [37].
To conclude this short advantages summary, it is important to say that DeFi not
only carries the opportunity of creating an alternative financial system with low fees,
without counterparty risk, decentralized, censorship-free and automated [37] but
also inspires the traditional finance to improve the current structure by assimilating
notions and concepts from DeFi [80].
2.2.3
Challenges and Issues
The major problem and challenge that DeFi is currently facing is related to
regulation, accountability and oversight. It is still uncertain which or if courts and
laws should be applied [80] and at the time, DeFi is violating two important aspects
of financial regulation: Anti-money laundering (AML) and Know Your Customer
(KYC) requirements [22]. While ideas are being researched and proposed, such as
”RegTech and embedded regulation” [80], it still presents an important and urgent
matter to solve.
Transaction speed establishes a problem for DeFi to expand its adoption. Varied
blockchain networks have different transaction speeds, i.e. the number of
transactions per second, and these statistics are currently much lower than those of
the Visa network [37].
Another diﬀiculty is DeFi’s low liquidity, which, while constantly increasing, is still
insuﬀicient to match that of central finances [37].
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Investing
7
Furthermore, there are issues in having low user-friendly platforms, high fees on
specific networks, and low performance due to lack of scalability and smart contract
risks [37].
2.3
Investing
Cryptocurrencies pose an excellent opportunity for investors who believe in the
technology’s potential. Due to its recent creation and development, there is still a lot
of speculation on the market, and specific cryptocurrencies are highly volatile. To
address the volatility issue, stablecoins were created (more on stablecoins in 2.4.4).
The investment attitude required to invest in this new technology is similar to that
needed in stocks, ETFs, or any other asset; one must conduct suﬀicient research and
determine the appropriate value. A few features of cryptocurrencies are the
possibility to invest 24/7 and the existence of whitepapers that explain the
technology and the purpose of each project.
Apart from the technology, a crucial reason to invest in cryptocurrency is the low
correlation to traditional assets based on historical data, which presents excellent
news for investors looking to diversify their portfolio [47][23].
Investing in cryptocurrencies is a relatively new concept nonetheless, there is
already research on strategies that can be applied to maximize returns and lift the
eﬀicient frontier of portfolios [23].
This project focuses on one of the most intriguing aspects of investing in
cryptocurrencies: the ability to generate more cryptocurrency after purchasing the
former compared to earning interest by storing the cryptocurrency passively,
allowing a compounding effect to occur. This topic is discussed in greater detail in
2.5.
2.4
Technical Terms
The following section introduces further concepts that have not been covered
previously but are important to comprehend the technology behind one of the
project’s fundamental components: products relating to cryptocurrency 2.5.
2.4.1
Decentralized Exchange (DEX)
With the increasing adoption of cryptocurrencies, many exchanges have been
developed specifically to target this asset. These exchanges are usually divided into
two types: centralized exchange (CEX) and decentralized exchange (DEX) [17].
Centralized cryptocurrency exchanges are trusted third parties that facilitate
trading while securely storing tokens and currencies. These exchanges are generally
in the form of limit order books, similar to the stock market. However, the critical
distinction is that most CEX are not regulated and lack suﬀicient insurance for the
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Technical Terms
8
assets they hold [17]. Due to the limitations mentioned above, DEXes are becoming
an alternative for cryptocurrency trading. Decentralized exchanges are smart
contracts running on the blockchain [39]. Instead of using an order book, the
majority of DEXes employ an automated market maker (AMM) to determine the
price of an asset [60] [17]. The prices on DEXes are closely tied to the prices on
CEXes due to arbitrageurs trading in the presence of price fluctuations to profit and
subsequently re-balance the weights, bringing the prices closer [31]. Two examples
of AMMs are Constant Function Market Makers (CFMM) and Token Swap Market
Makers (TSSMM), both of which provide a deterministic pricing rule between two
or more pools of tokenized assets [40].
DEXes employ an AMM rather than an order book because replicating an order
book on the blockchain would not be feasible nor practical. The transactions would
be exceedingly slow and costly, whereas an AMM could be readily programmed into
smart contracts [4].
Another important point to mention is that AMM on DEX allows any user to be a
market maker by providing liquidity to liquidity pools 2.4.3.2 [17]. The bigger the
liquidity pool compared to the trade, the less slippage would occur, improving the
experience for the user [34].
2.4.2
Proof-of-Stake (PoS)
Proof-of-stake is one of the consensus algorithms1 that, unlike proof-of-work, is
based on the amount of cryptocurrency staked rather than computer power. To
participate in this mechanism, one stakes/locks his coins and creates a network
validator node. Nodes are chosen to validate a block of transactions, and in case of
success, this block is added to the blockchain, and the node is rewarded with
cryptocurrency. After a successful validation function, benefits are granted to nodes
to deter them from acting maliciously. The probability of choosing nodes is
proportional to the number of cryptocurrency staked. Therefore someone who
stakes 20% of the tokens/coins has a higher chance of getting selected as a validator
than someone who stakes 1%. These percentages are not perfectly proportional in
all PoS applications to not only address the problem of ”the rich get richer” but also
to give an opportunity to small investors to earn their share [32].
In the 2.5 section, a more detailed discussion of the incentives, benefits and
drawbacks of staking cryptocurrencies is given.
1There is a variety of PoS mechanisms that are not explained in this subsection as it is not in
the project scope to explore this area further.
==PAGE:18==
2.4 Technical Terms
9
2.4.3
Pools
2.4.3.1
Staking and Mining pools
Staking and mining pools are a technique of pooling resources into a larger
entity/third party to enhance the likelihood of obtaining rewards [61] [69].
Staking pools in PoS only impose a cost on the pool leader to keep a node
connected to the network to execute the protocol, whereas mining pools in PoW
impose expenses on all pool members due to the necessity of mining [15]. The
operational cost of staking pools is frequently split among the remaining delegators
as a pool admission fee [61].
To this extent, this type of pool allows small investors to earn ”constant” returns
that have a higher likelihood even though they are lower than those who would solo
stake.
The threat of these pools resides in the fact that they represent a single node on the
network, and therefore, there is the risk of centralization [61].
2.4.3.2
Liquidity pools
Liquidity pools in its core are pools of tokens locked in smart contracts used by
decentralized exchanges (DEXes) [34]. The fundamental purpose of these pools is to
offer liquidity and make token swapping easier without the need of a trusted third
party [60] [34]. A single liquidity pool is usually composed of 2 tokens, creating then
a market for this particular pair of tokens [34].
The individuals who provide liquidity to these pools are called liquidity providers,
and they do so by locking their cryptocurrencies into the pool [39]. The percentage
of each token that must be contributed to the pool varies by protocol and platform
[34]; it can range from 50/50 to 80/20, and it can even employ different mechanisms,
as in Uniswap v3 [60]. The incentive for this action relies on the public fixed fee
percentage that is charged on every trade made on the platform and redistributed
by all liquidity providers depending on their contribution to the pool, represented
by Liquidity Provider (LP) tokens [39] [4].
With the emergence of liquidity pools, a new investment opportunity 2.5.3, that
allows investors to offer their assets to DEXes pools to provide liquidity in return of
transaction fees, arose [39].
2.4.4
Stablecoins
Cryptocurrencies’ high volatility makes it diﬀicult for investors to earn consistent
returns or sustain value. As a result, effective investment tools are urgently needed
to protect against traditional cryptocurrencies. It was in this context that
stablecoins were introduced [76].
Tether was one of the first and most used stablecoins to exist, presenting a key
factor in the further development of stablecoins. The assertions made by the issuing
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Technical Terms
10
business, Tether Limited, that the tokens (1 Tether = 1 Dollar) were backed 100%
by liquid reserves were put to the test by many parties, resulting in auditing process
flaws. The price variations that Tether has seen, reaching 0.91$ in 2017, are an
illustration of a probable shortage of reserves; nevertheless, Tether is still the
pioneer of stablecoins and has a vast trading volume [48].
Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies built to reduce price volatility by incorporating a
stability mechanism [33][76][48][16]. These mechanisms are the most crucial aspect
of stablecoins since it is proven if the pegged price to fiat, commodities or any other
asset/basket of assets can remain stable. Due to different mechanisms, stablecoins
are divided into Tokenised funds (also known as fiat-backed stablecoins),
Collateralised stablecoins and Algorithmic stable coins. Fiat-backed stablecoins are
backed by fiat currencies, which the issuer needs to hold to allow users to convert
from fiat and stablecoin at the pegged rate. Collateralized stablecoins are backed by
other types of assets whose price is volatile and are divided into on-chain and
off-chain. On-chain refers to stablecoins that use cryptocurrencies to act as
collateral, not depending on third parties and being subjected to high volatility.
Due to this reason, usually, these stablecoins are over-collateralized. On the other
hand, off-chain collateralized stablecoins are backed by traditional assets other than
fiat and require the issuer to possess such assets. Algorithmic stablecoins are
characterized by not having collateral. While this mechanism hasn’t had success in
implementation, the goal is to regulate the supply of stablecoin units in order to
preserve price stability [16].
The development of stablecoins has provided the ability to create a cryptocurrency
that allows day-to-day payments and hedges against portfolios or market volatility.
[76][45]. Howbeit, it comes with shortcomings: inability to maintain the peg rate
and lack of transparency from some stablecoin issuers [21].
A few examples of stablecoins are Tether (USDT), Tether Gold (XAUT), DAI, USD
Coin (USDC), TerraUSD (UST), Gemini Dollar (GUSD) and Binance USD (BUSD).
2.4.5
DeFi Protocols
This subsection provides a brief yet concise explanation of several DeFi Protocols.
Aave: Aave is a decentralized non-custodial liquidity market protocol, i.e. a lending
and borrowing protocol. Depositors receive a passive income by providing liquidity
to the market, while borrowers can borrow with over-collateralization (perpetually)
or under-collateralization (one-block liquidity). Aave protocol has gone through
audits and has been secured. The protocol is open-source, allowing interactions with
an API, user interface, and smart contracts. The Aave token (AAVE) is the
protocol’s native governance token, which is used to vote on proposals and can be
staked to offer security and insurance as well as incentives and fees [1].
Maker Protocol: Maker Protocol is an open-source protocol that permits the
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Technical Terms
11
creation of DAI (stablecoin) by leveraging collateral assets that have been approved
by Maker Governance, the community of MKR (governance token of the protocol)
holders who have voting power over the protocol’s future. DAI is a soft-pegged
cryptocurrency that is decentralized, unbiased, and collateral-backed. Due to its
minimal volatility, DAI is resistant to hyperinflation and provides economic freedom
and opportunity to anybody, anywhere [51].
Uniswap Protocol: Uniswap protocol is an open-source automated market maker
(AMM) protocol that provides liquidity and allows tokens trading. The need for
intermediaries is eliminated while still providing safe, accessible and eﬀicient
exchanges. The protocol is composed of smart contracts that create liquidity pools,
provide liquidity, and swap assets. It is designed to withstand censorship and is
non-upgradable [72].
Compound: Compound is a lending and borrowing protocol built on the
Ethereum blockchain that creates money markets, which are pools of assets with
algorithmically calculated interest rates based on the asset’s supply and demand.
Without negotiating terms like maturity, interest rate, or collateral with a peer or
counterparty, asset suppliers and borrowers engage directly with the protocol,
earning/paying a fluctuating interest rate. COMP is the protocol’s governance
token, and it represents voting rights not only for its holders but also for any other
address delegated by COMP owners (without the need to own COMP) [67].
Curve: Curve is an Ethereum-based exchange liquidity pool designed for eﬀicient
stablecoin trading and low-risk, supplemental fee income for liquidity providers.
Curve allows customers to trade between correlated cryptocurrencies with a low fee
and slippage algorithm. In addition, as the liquidity pools are supplied to different
lending protocols, liquidity providers have the opportunity to earn additional
income. This protocol is open source and has been audited by Trail of Bits [27].
Synthetix: Synthetix is a derivatives liquidity protocol that enables the
development/creation of synthetic assets while also providing unique derivatives and
real-world asset exposure. An off-chain oracle tracks the prices of assets. The
traders trade against a community’s pooled collateral rather than a single
counterparty due to the collateralization of the assets (in this case, the synthetic
assets are over-collateralized). The SNX token serves as the model’s basis and
backbone, and its investors must stake their tokens to mint liquidity to the network
before participation [71].
Yearn Finance: Yearn Finance is a group of protocols that provide yield
generation opportunities for users (Vaults). These vaults present a passive-investing
strategy that automates the yield production and strategy re-balancing while
socializing gas costs between the users. Yearn Finance ecosystem is governed by
YFI (governance) token holders who submit and vote on off-chain ideas [70].
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Cryptocurrency passive investments
12
2.4.6
Wallets
As a result of the rise of cryptocurrencies, a new type of digital wallet emerged:
”crypto” wallet [42]. It presents a secure environment for accessing and executing
transactions on the blockchain. Its primary usage relates to private
keys/cryptocurrencies management and allowing secure interactions from the user
e.g. transfer of funds between individuals, information on the balance and
transaction history [42] [43]. Managing and securing private keys is one of the most
challenging and important aspects of cryptocurrencies, given that access to the
private key corresponds to access to a user’s assets [66].
Crypto wallets can be split into ”hot” wallets and ”cold” wallets. Hot wallets are
defined as online, either on an exchange like Binance (cloud wallet) or a device
through a software (software wallet). The private keys in the preceding examples
are not handled directly by the user, posing a danger of hacking, whether on the
exchange servers or the online device managed by the user. On the other hand, cold
wallets operate entirely offline, providing the highest security. Hardware wallets, a
type of cold wallet, are dedicated physical cryptographic devices that produce and
store private keys and sign transactions. USB sticks, Bluetooth gadgets, and smart
cards with proper software are examples of these devices [66].
The backup and recovery processes in hardware and software wallets rely on a word
list that the user obtains upon creating the account and is urged to maintain as
secure as possible (a piece of paper). This fact causes two potential issues: one,
leaking the word list gives the opportunity for hackers to perform brute force
attacks and second, forgetting the word list results in the impossibility of recovering
the keys and loss of funds [66].
2.4.7
Gas/Network/Transaction Fees
In a transaction, there is a transfer of a cryptocurrency from a sender to a receiver.
Transactions fees are included in transactions to prevent network spamming and
primarily act as a prioritization mechanism. These fees are rewarded to the miner
for providing resources to the blockchain. Since transaction fees vary, miners are
encouraged to prioritize transactions with higher fees to enhance their rewards [6].
While discussing transaction fee mechanisms and how they function [49] is outside
the scope of this project, it is vital to be aware that participating in yield techniques
2.5 can result in various transaction fees along the process.
2.5
Cryptocurrency passive investments
This section introduces the most frequent passive investing products in
cryptocurrency. Each mechanism is briefly described, followed by a list of risks,
which are further detailed in the Risks section 2.6.
==PAGE:22==
2.5 Cryptocurrency passive investments
13
2.5.1
Yield farming
Yield farming is a mechanism in which investors receive passive income by moving
tokens to a variety of yield-generating smart contracts. This concept aims to seek
opportunities in the DeFi ecosystem to extract as much return as possible across a
wide range of products of all shapes and sizes, made possible by tokenizing holdings
on essential assets. The notion of yield farming gained traction with the liquidity
mining 2.5.3 program on Compound; a DeFi lending protocol [26].
Yield farming can be done manually by choosing different protocols or automatically
through yield aggregators: smart contract-based fund managers with
pre-programmed and automatically executed investment strategies. The returns on
this technique are typically based on short-term incentives, requiring the user to
uncover new protocols with high incentives in order to keep the high yields, which
renders the strategy unsustainable in certain ways [26].
Due to the complexity of each strategy, which sometimes is composed of multiple
strategies, and the high usage of smart contracts, DeFi platforms and protocols,
yield farming presents a lot of risks such as liquidity risks, liquidation risks,
composability risks, APY instability and impermanent/divergence loss [26].
Examples of yield aggregators are: Idle Finance, Pickle Finance, Harvest Finance,
Autofarm, Yearn Finance, Vesper Finance and Rari Capital.
2.5.2
Staking
Staking is a passive income generator that is available for cryptocurrencies that
employ the proof-of-stake 2.4.2 consensus mechanism. It can be done both in a
centralized and decentralized manner. In CEX (centralized), it is relatively simple
to activate it as it only requires the user to start staking by having the correct
funds, browsing the staking tab, and clicking on a ”button.” This approach,
although simpler, removes the possibility of choosing which DeFi protocol or wallet
to stake. The decentralized approach presents more complexity in the way that a
user needs to transfer cryptocurrencies using a cryptocurrency wallet in order to
allocate funds on the chosen decentralized exchange and/or staking pool.
Overall, staking allows the user to generate rewards while contributing to the
blockchain’s financial eﬀiciency, security and integrity [46].
Some of the risks involved in staking are: lock-up period, price volatility, loss or
theft of funds, validator risks, and liquidity risks 2.6 [46].
2.5.3
Providing liquidity and liquidity mining
Liquidity mining and providing liquidity are terms used to describe passive income
sources that rely on providing liquidity to liquidity pools 2.4.3.2, primarily through
DEXes but also CEXes.
While providing liquidity offers, as a reward, the transaction fees that users pay
when swapping tokens, liquidity mining programs takes it a step further by
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Risks
14
supplying native tokens denoting protocol ownership to early participants. This
encourages people to invest in the protocol and increases decentralization by
dividing protocol ownership among the users. Native tokens can sometimes feature
governance functionalities, which means that token holders have voting power over
the project and its future [26].
Apart from smart contract issues, this interest generating technique introduces a
new risk labeled impermanent loss or divergence loss 2.6.
It’s important to note that calculating an APY using this method is diﬀicult
because of the following dependencies: number of transactions, amount of each
transaction, percentage of each transaction paid to liquid providers, user’s
contribution to the pool and whether or not it is a liquidity mining program that
offers additional native tokens.
2.5.4
Lending
Cryptocurrency can be employed for lending in a CeFi (centralized finance) or DeFi
manner. Lending on a CEX can be done in two ways: indirectly through savings
accounts 2.5.5 or directly by providing cryptocurrency and allowing the user to set
the interest rate. DeFi lending is done via lending protocols that manage
cryptocurrencies through smart contracts and possess a collateral evaluation coded.
The interest rates on this mechanism are computed and updated from protocol
models in response to supply-borrow fluctuations [78]. Lending presents risks such
as possible lock-up periods, APY instability, smart contract risks, liquidity risks and
liquidation risks.
2.5.5
Savings/Earn programs
This mechanism relates to that of traditional banks’ savings accounts, and thus it is
only available on CEXes. Like conventional savings accounts, users provide funds
(different cryptocurrencies) to the bank, in this case to the CEX, and interest is
provided in return. Usually, the provided funds are loaned to borrowers. To
mitigate the risk of losing the deposited funds, users are advised to search for
exchanges that have insurance policies. Other risks presented in this ”strategy” are
the lock-up period and price volatility.
2.6
Risks
The purpose of this section is to elaborate on a few risks caused by investing in
cryptocurrency and in its related products.
==PAGE:24==
2.6 Risks
15
2.6.1
Project risk
With the surge in cryptocurrency adoption came a spike in scam tokens and projects.
On Uniswap, around 11,000 scam tokens (covers around 50% of all tokens) and scam
liquidity pools (45% approximated of all pools) have been identified. Schemes in the
cryptocurrency world include ”Rug Pull” scams and smart contracts with traps [77].
Rug pull is a type of scam described by developers abandoning a project while
keeping the investor’s money. On DEXes, the goal is to make investors add liquidity
to the scam token pools and then drain the funds from the former [77].
Smart contracts with traps are designed to delude the investor further and can be
split into backdoors in scam token contracts and advance fee tokens. Backdoor in
scam token contracts is short for mechanisms implemented to gain investors’ trust
and prevent victims from getting back their money (e.g removing the ability to sell
from most of the users). Advance fee tokens are designed to charge an extra fee
when operations (mint, swap or born) on the token are performed. These fees are
then forward to a wallet that is claimed to be a reward pool for users involved [77].
2.6.2
Smart contract risk
Smart contracts are pieces of code written by groups/individuals. Thus, it is always
possible to contain bugs that could promote unwanted behavior while interacting
with different applications (e.g. loss/theft of funds). To mitigate such risks,
protocols are subjected to external audits, or bug bounty programs are established
[26].
2.6.3
Composability risk
The composability aspect of DeFi protocols, i.e. the ability to connect different
protocols (”money legos”), enables yield farming 2.5.1. However, because all
protocols are vulnerable to smart contract risk, the more interconnected they are,
the higher the composability risk. Another thing to keep in mind is that even if all
of the individual smart contracts are secure and bug-free, the combination of the
former could result in vulnerabilities. Furthermore, a failure on a high-value smart
contract might have a cascading impact, affecting the entire system [26].
2.6.4
APY instability
The cryptocurrency market causes ”promised” returns to fluctuate dramatically,
rendering claimed APY’s on different yield generator mechanisms untrustworthy
[26].
Providing liquidity and lending suffer an uncertainty on the APY as both depend on
the utilization ratio of the protocol/exchange.
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Risks
16
2.6.5
Impermanent Loss
Impermanent/divergence loss refers to the loss that liquidity providers face when
the asset prices on the liquidity pool change. It describes the likelihood of the
liquidity provider reserved tokens to lose value in comparison with a buy and hold
strategy. The ”impermanent” name stems from the fact that this loss is only
realized when a liquidity provider decides to remove his position [4] [39]. As shown
in the comparison of several types of asset pools in the [39] paper, there is a clear
relationship between asset volatility and impermanent loss.
A side note is that the impermanent loss is unconditional of the price change
direction. Price doubling or halving will have the same impact.
The image and table below demonstrate the loss on liquidity providers according to
asset price changes compared to a simple hold strategy.
Figure 2.1: Loss percentages according to price variation from a Medium article
[64]
Price Change
1.25x
1.5x
1.75x
2x
3x
4x
5x
Loss
0.6%
2.0%
3.8%
5.7%
13.4%
20.0%
25.5%
Table 2.1: Loss percentages according to price variation (in depth) from a Medium
article [64]
2.6.6
Lock-up period
The application of cryptocurrencies in yield-generating mechanisms is frequently
accompanied by a pre-determined lock-up period during which investors cannot
access/retrieve their funds. It often varies from 1 to 3 months. Due to the high
==PAGE:26==
2.7 Step-by-step guide to cryptocurrencies and yield generator products
17
volatility of cryptocurrencies, this risk becomes increasingly noticeable. Therefore, it
may be preferable to sell an asset rather than keep it on a mechanism that generates
a yield, as the yield could potentially not offset a price drop in an asset.
2.6.7
Validator risk
The staking mechanism implies that an investor either delegates their stake to a
staking pool or it creates its own pool and validates transactions. The node (staking
pool) must constantly be active to validate the transactions, denoting some costs
and knowledge from the stake pool owner. The risk stems from possible disruptions
in the staking process and potentiality affecting the rewards [36].
2.6.8
Liquidity risk
Lending protocols present liquidity risk when the utilization ratio is high, i.e. the
percentage of borrowed assets divided by the total liquidity is close to 1. Under
these conditions, if multiple lenders decide to withdraw their funds at the same
time, this action may not be possible, and lenders will have to wait for borrowers to
settle the loan principal [26].
Staking introduces this risk in a slightly different way. If the stacked assets present
limited liquidity on different exchanges, it may be diﬀicult to sell/swap the asset or
convert the staking returns to other cryptocurrencies.
2.6.9
Liquidation risk
Yield farm strategies often employ borrowing assets, and as such, usually, there is
the need to provide collateral, which, if fallen below a pre-determined threshold, will
cause liquidation. When the collateral is not deemed valuable enough to cover the
loan, the borrower loses part of it, and the protocol automatically sells it on the
market at a discount. If used for collateral, cryptocurrencies with high volatility will
increase the liquidation risk. As a result, one way to mitigate this risk is to use
stablecoins as collateral, which is yet another reason why stablecoins are so
important [26].
2.7
Step-by-step guide to cryptocurrencies and yield
generator products
This section covers the entire process (including ramifications and implications)
required to invest in cryptocurrencies while employing the previously outlined
yield-generating techniques 2.5.
==PAGE:27==
2.7 Step-by-step guide to cryptocurrencies and yield generator products
18
USER
 CRYPTO WALLET
Centralized Exchanges (CEXes)
Deposit fiat currency
(Possibility of deposit fees)
Deposit cryptocurrency if owned
(Transaction fees)
1. Apply interest generator mechanisms
e.g staking, providing liquidity, lending and savings
2. Redo step 1 if there is the need to re-apply the mechanism
CeFi Route
Send cryptocurrency to crypto wallet
(Transactions fees)
DeFi Route
DeFi Protocols
1. Apply interest generator mechanisms
e.g. yield farming, staking, provinding liquidity,
liquidity mining and lending
2. Redo step 1 if there is the need to re-apply
the mechanism
(Transaction fees)
Swap cryptocurrencies
(Liquidity Provider fees)
Buy and swap cryptocurrency throught Limit Order Book
Step 1
Step 2
Swap currencies
(Transaction fees)
Figure 2.2: Simplified steps to invest in cryptocurrencies and yield generator prod-
ucts
==PAGE:28==
2.7 Step-by-step guide to cryptocurrencies and yield generator products
19
A user’s initial step in investing, whether in a decentralized or centralized manner,
is to deposit fiat currency in a centralized exchange (CEX), which generally entails
fees. After depositing fiat money on the CEX, the user can buy cryptocurrencies
through the limit order book method. Another option for the former steps is to
have previously acquired cryptocurrency, i.e. in any other platforms and send it
from the platform to the CEX; transaction fees are applied. In this instance, the
user is presented with two options: one, to invest in the interest generator
mechanisms through a CEX, i.e. centralized manner (CeFi Route) or two, to do the
same operation but in a decentralized manner making use of DeFi protocols (DeFi
Route). By choosing the former, the following steps are simple: the user navigates
on the CEX and executes the interest generator mechanism of choice. Typically
these mechanisms include a lock-up time, i.e., the cryptocurrency will be ”applied”
and not retrievable for an amount of time. After that period, the user should
re-apply the cryptocurrency in the desired mechanism. The DeFi route requires the
user to be in possession of a crypto wallet. The second step is to send the purchased
or formerly owned cryptocurrency to the crypto wallet address, which incurs
transaction fees. When the user has cryptocurrency on the wallet, there are
multiple options on how to apply it and multiple protocols to choose from.
Furthermore, specific crypto wallets allow the user to have more actions than just
holding cryptocurrencies: MetaMask Swaps [58] enables the user to the swap
currencies with the best rates of multiple market makers; Yoroi wallet [79] provides
staking mechanisms for Cardano (ADA); Atomic Wallet [75], and Trust Wallet [79]
allow staking on a specific set of cryptocurrencies; etc. It is essential to understand
that interactions with DeFi protocols (transactions) will always imply transaction
fees for the user. The previous fact is important when considering manual yield
farming strategies versus yield aggregators due to the high number of connected
protocols. The fees paid on each transaction can be seen before the execution of the
former, giving the user a better understanding of the actual cost of yield strategies.
As in the CeFi route, DeFi protocols might require the re-application of the interest
generator mechanism.
Swapping cryptocurrencies, while possible on both routes, presents significant
differences: on the centralized route, swapping tokens is done through the limit
order book; on the other hand, swapping tokens in a decentralized manner is done
through a DEX (liquidity pools) and typically involves both transaction and
liquidity provider fees.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Index Funds
This chapter explains index funds by providing history, examples and context on the
matter. Furthermore, an approach to investing in index funds is presented.
3.1
Index funds
Index funds date back to 1972, and by the end of 2008, they featured more than 1
trillion dollars in assets [3]. Index funds are characterized as a unique type of
investment fund that pools multiple individual and company assets into a diversified
portfolio. Unlike actively managed funds, which buy and sell securities according to
personal views, this type of fund attempts to track the performance of market
indexes [8]. A few market indexes that index funds may seek to track are: S&P 500,
The Russel 1000, Dow Jones Industrial Average and FTSE 100. The majority of the
index fund industry is constituted by the ”Big Three” index fund managers:
Vanguard, BlackRock and State Street Global Advisors. It is vital to note that
index funds incorporate all investment types that track an index, including
exchange traded funds (ETFs) 3.2 and mutual funds [8].
The returns of index funds generally outperform those achieved through actively
managed funds, presenting a core reason for the importance of indexing. 68% of US
mutual funds (from 1970 to 2008) performed worse compared to the SP500 returns.
68% of European mutual funds performed worse compared to the MSCI Europe
returns. 56% of the Global mutual funds performed worse compared to the MSCI
World returns. The MSCI Emerging Market returns outperformed 68% of Emerging
mutual funds. According to the preceding statistics, indexes outperform mutual
funds by a minimum of 50%. Moreover, it proves that the high indexing benefits are
global and not only restricted to the US market. Outside of raw performance
comparisons, in index funds, the fees and expense ratios are relatively low compared
to mutual funds, where fees range from administration to management of the fund
[52].
To summarize, index funds offer a low-fee investment with significant diversification
and without the risk of underperforming in comparison to market benchmarks [52].
==PAGE:30==
3.2 ETFs
21
3.2
ETFs
ETFs were introduced in the market in 1993 and since then have become a
progressively popular replacement to index funds [3]. From 2001 to 2010, the ETF
sector experienced a 40% annual increase rate [20], and between 2008 and 2018, the
ETF global market grew from 772 billion dollars to 5000 billion dollars. In the
United States, stock ETFs cover one third (approximated value) of the trading
volume [50].
Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are index funds with the peculiarity of trading like
stocks (possibility of acquiring a short or a long position). Unlike index mutual
funds that can only be bought once per day and the investor is only allowed to open
long positions, ETFs can be traded every time during the day and allow investors to
open long and short positions [50] [52]. ETFs follow the strategy of tracking indexes,
and their rise in popularity is due to a combination of high diversification, low-cost
investment, availability to different investors [20] and shift from active to passive
investing mindset in recent years [50].
Index funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) have been proven to be
replacements, but not exact. The fact that ETFs are not a perfect alternative
doesn’t change the reality that this sort of investment has introduced new features,
services, and boosted market competitiveness [3].
3.3
Funnel Approach
Robo-advisors were first developed following the 2008 global financial crisis. The
objective of these ”robots” was to build and manage client portfolios in an
automated and passive manner [63] [2]. Robo-advisors have been gaining traction in
recent years. What started as a start-up business evolved to a recent adoption by
traditional financial institutions to create their services. The general workflow of a
robo-advisor revolves around determining a strategy according to specific goals and
a risk profile. These steps are typically achieved by making a questionnaire to the
investor through an online platform, generally without human interaction and fully
automated. With this information in place, robo-advisor uses pre-defined algorithms
to construct an optimized portfolio. Besides composing portfolios, robo-advisors
monitor and rebalance when deviations from the strategy are identified. In order to
achieve diversification and reduce risk while keeping a low-cost service,
robo-advisors mainly present ETF and index fund options in the strategies. Due to
its open and easy accessibility, robo-advisors encompass the potential to minimize
financial advice costs and account minimum requirements [2].
As an example of possible robo-advisor algorithms, the picture 3.1 demonstrates a
funnel approach in ETF/cryptocurrency investing that will be used in this thesis.
The algorithm is split into various steps/stages that will decrease the number of
assets and will attribute the optimized weights to the final set of assets
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Funnel Approach
22
Figure 3.1: Thesis implemented Robo-Advisor algorithm
Due diligence screening: In this step, the asset universe is reduced and filtered
according to pre-determined criteria. Minimum average daily volume, minimum
number of years with data available, a specific start date with available data,
maximum expense ratios and minimum percentage on annual average returns are
possible constraints.
Machine Learning: The goal of this step is to further decrease the number of
assets before applying optimization models in order to reduce the parameter
uncertainty and provide results with higher performance. The reduction of assets is
achieved by performing advanced feature selection while ensuring a high
diversification ratio. Two examples of such methods are the minimal spanning tree
method, and hierarchical clustering [41].
Optimization: In the last step of the investment funnel technique, the weights on
the filtered assets are calculated to maximize/minimize a strategy. Robo-advisors
generally allocate asset weights with mean-variance optimization [44]. Other
techniques such as CVaR and scenario generation methods are explored and
implemented in J. B. Genís, and P. Vanek master thesis [35] [73].
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Models and Methods
In this chapter, the models and methods implemented in this thesis will be explained
and complemented with additional background and justification for their selection.
4.1
Rates terminology
The search for ”passive rates” within cryptocurrency platforms originated the type
of rates discovered to be questioned. The platforms often employ either Annual
Percentage Rate (APR) or Annual Percentage Yield (APY) to describe the gains an
investor will be entitled to in a specific period. In order to create a consistent list of
rates for all cryptocurrencies, these two concepts would have to be understood with
explicit conversion formulas. Before moving on to the explanation of these two
notions, it is important to realize that throughout history, there has been confusion
in the exact definitions and formulas to the extent that some textbooks define them
as ”mathematical equivalents”. This thesis will move away from an equal
description. Instead, it will define APR as an annualized periodic rate [18] and APY
as a ”rate” or ”yield” that takes into account the effects of compounding interest
[56]. The following formulas describe how converting from APR to APY and vice
versa can be achieved [56] [18].
APY = (1 + Periodic Rate)n −1
Periodic Rate = (1 + APY )1/n −1
APR = Periodic Rate × n
n
Number of Periods in a Year
APY
Annual Percentage Yield
APR
Annual Percentage Rate
To avoid reader confusion, it is necessary to mention that the word ”rate” and
”yield” is freely used in this thesis in the context of either APR or APY, as these
two notions are the most commonly observed in cryptocurrency platforms.
Furthermore, in this project, APY was chosen for the standard rate type across all
cryptocurrency rates for a one-month period. The main reason behind these
decisions resides in the fact that when employing passive rate mechanisms 2.5 the
period that the mechanism is applied is relatively short (1 week to 3/4 months
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Funnel approach
24
frequently or flexible), allowing the investor to compound its gains with high
frequency.
4.2
Funnel approach
In order to decrease the asset universe of each category of assets, a funnel technique,
as previously discussed 3.3, will be adopted, with some modifications, in both
cryptocurrencies and index funds.
Due diligence screening: In this stage, individual and shared filters are applied
to each category. This step will be explained in more detail in chapter 5.
Machine Learning: The method chosen for this step is the Minimum Spanning
Tree. The MST method can be described as a subset of the edges of a connected,
undirected edge-weighted graph that connects all the nodes, with no cycles present
and with the least feasible total sum of weights of the edges. The purpose of this
method is to construct subsets of assets that present the highest diversification
based on asset correlation. The approach selects the MST’s dangling nodes or nodes
with degree one (only one edge connecting them). Furthermore, the Spearman
Correlation Distance defines the distance calculated between the edges. The
following master thesis delves deeper into this algorithm [41] [73].
Optimization: This step will be implemented by using PyPortfolioOpt, a python
library with features to achieve mean-variance optimization and more [57].
4.3
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)
Modern Portfolio Theory encompasses Markowitz’s Portfolio Selection, which
originated in 1952 and the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), contributed by
William Sharpe in 1964. In summary, both the models act as frameworks to
construct portfolios to maximize returns and minimize risk [53]. The scope of this
thesis in terms of asset selection will be shifted towards Markowitz’s model, and as
such, MPT references point to the former.
MPT states that portfolio selection depends on expected return and risk/variance.
One of the significant components of this theory is diversification, relating to the
well-known saying of not putting all the eggs in the same basket. Due to this, the
risk of the portfolio depends not only on return variance but also on the covariance
(a measurement of ”interrelationship”) between pairs of asset returns. In other
words, risk reduction in a portfolio is majorly impacted by the number of
uncorrelated assets. Another core concept on the MPT is the risk/return tradeoff
stating that the riskier a portfolio is, the higher the potential, not guaranteed,
returns must be for an investor to consider constructing a portfolio [53].
Before diving deeper into Markowitz’s, it is meaningful to state that his theory was
built based on several assumptions (including human and market behavior) that are
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)
25
argued not to be entirely true under real-world circumstances (more on this matter
on [53] paper).
4.3.1
Risk
Succinctly, in a portfolio context, risk or volatility can be described as the deviation
from the expected returns in a defined period of time. Markowitz adds that the
portfolio risk is not established from single assets but according to the composition
of the same assets. Moreover, it is assumed that all portfolios are subjected to two
types of risk: systematic/market/common risk and unsystematic/diversifiable risk
[53].
Systematic risk: In short, this type of risk affect assets on a large scale due to
economic issues (e.g. inflation, exchange rates, unemployment rates), i.e. a macro
risk. It is not possible to remove systematic risk from a portfolio; COVID-19 and
the war between Ukraine and Russia(2022) represent recent proofs [53].
Unsystematic risk: Opposing systematic risk, unsystematic risk is a micro-level
risk that generally affects single or small groups of assets. It can include negative
media, management changes, new competitors etc. Earlier, this risk was also named
”diversifiable”, demonstrating that it is possible to mitigate it by diversifying a
portfolio with multiple and different asset classes. However, the mitigation process
is limited to an extent, as returns always present some form of correlation,
preventing the risk from being entirely eliminated [53].
4.3.2
Return
The return of a certain asset over a period of time can be defined as [55]:
Rt =
Pt
Pt−1
−1
(4.1)
The Markowitz approach focuses on the mean/average of the returns of assets in a
portfolio. Given wi as the weight of the asset in the portfolio and µi as the mean of
an asset, the return of a portfolio for n assets is calculated as follows [55]:
µp =
n
X
i=1
µiwi
(4.2)
4.3.3
Variance
The volatility of an asset or group of assets is measured by variance [53].
Introducing σij as the covariance between Ri and Rj, the variance of a portfolio can
be calculated as [55]:
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT)
26
σ2
p =
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
σijwiwj
(4.3)
4.3.4
Eﬀicient frontier
The eﬀicient frontier in MPT presents the best combinations of assets to achieve the
highest return for a given risk level, creating a set of optimal portfolios. It is
generally shown as a curve on a graph, relating returns with risk.
4.3.5
Optimization
In the Markowitz model, optimisation can be interpreted in different ways.
• Minimize risk given a return E [7]:
min (1
2σ2
p)
subject to
µp ≥E
and
n
X
i=1
wi = 1
(4.4)
• Maximize return given a level of risk V [7]:
max (µp)
subject to
V ≤σ2
p
and
n
X
i=1
wi = 1
(4.5)
• Maximize utility function given the risk aversion coeﬀicient as λ [9]:
max {µp −(λ)1
2σ2
p}
subject to
n
X
i=1
wi = 1
(4.6)
The risk aversion coeﬀicient signifies the level of risk that each investor is
willing to accept. This value is different from investors and has the possibility
to change over time. It is noticeable from the 4.6 equation that a higher
number on the λ parameter attributes more weight to the variance. In other
words, a high λ is equivalent to a higher risk averse strategy [29].
From the above-given equations, it is observed that the sum of the weights of the
assets is constrained to being equal to 1. However, there is no constraint on each
individual asset weight, permitting the possibility of short selling as the weights can
range from -1 to 1. In order to eliminate short selling from a portfolio, the following
constraint needs to be applied [55]:
wi ≥0,
i = 1, 2, .., n
(4.7)
==PAGE:36==
4.4 Performance Measures
27
4.4
Performance Measures
This section describes the measures utilized to compare and evaluate portfolios
along with the relevant limitations.
4.4.1
Average Return
A common practice to evaluate an asset or portfolio is calculating the historical
return. Often, to describe average returns, two types of ”means” are indicated:
arithmetic mean and geometric mean.
Given N as the number of periods and r(k) as the portfolio returns for period k, the
arithmetic mean is given by [10]:
R = 1
N
N
X
k=1
r(k)
(4.8)
The previous formula is the simple average of returns over some time. On the other
hand, geometric mean outputs the annualized return over the same time period,
implicitly presenting the reason to be chosen for this thesis. An important fact to
know is that the arithmetic mean of returns is always greater than geometric mean.
The following formula describes the geometric mean [10]:
G =
" N
Y
k=1
(1 + r(k))
#1/N
−1
(4.9)
The paper [10] studies and observes that the arithmetic mean overestimates the
portfolio’s real return, while the geometric mean contrasts this fact by
underestimating it. The conclusion is that neither of the means is the actual
accurate measure of a portfolio return, presenting a limitation on the work
developed in this thesis. Within the study, there are improved formulas to
approximate the mean of a return series to its real value.
4.4.2
Standard Deviation
Standard deviation is a measure of variability on a series of data. The validity of
standard deviation does not rely on the normality of the data, the opposite of a
common notion; in fact, around 95% of data in any distribution falls within two
standard deviation limits [5]. In an MPT approach, the standard deviation (or risk)
is given by [10]:
std p =
q
σ2p = σp
(4.10)
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Performance Measures
28
4.4.3
Sharpe Ratio
Given Rp as the portfolio return, Rf as the risk-free return and σp as the standard
deviation of a portfolio, the following equation represents Sharpe ratio [54]:
Sp = Rp −Rf
σp
(4.11)
Sharpe ratio, which stems mainly from MPT, is interpreted as the excess return
over a risk-free asset. It is often employed to evaluate the performance of portfolios
that are expected to represent the total investment of an individual. The ratio is
based on the assumption that the portfolio returns follow a normal distribution [54].
4.4.4
Downside Deviation
Downside deviation, unlike standard deviation, and as the name suggest, is a
measure that only considers data below a certain threshold. The premise for this
type of deviation is that investors are only afraid of the downside risk [54]. In the
context of this thesis, the semivariance concept introduced by Markowitz will be
employed as the square of downside deviation. Given N or n as the total number of
returns, TH as the target/threshold return, the previous hypothesis is explained by
the following equations ([54] [68] [19] papers present different
nomenclature/structure for the same equation). First, the downside deviation is
given by:
dd =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
min(0, Rp −TH)2
from [68]
(4.12)
Second the semivariance defined by Markowitz is given by:
sv =
Pn
t=1 min2 
0, Rp −TH

n
from [14]
(4.13)
Third, the semivariance of a portfolio defined by Markowitz is defined by:
svp =
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
wiwjsvij
from [30]
(4.14)
where svij corresponds to the semicovariance between asset i and j:
svij = 1
N
N
X
t=1
min(Rit −TH, 0) min(Rjt −TH, 0)
from [30]
(4.15)
==PAGE:38==
4.4 Performance Measures
29
4.4.5
Sortino Ratio
Sortino ratio only considers returns that are below a pre-defined threshold and is
defined by [54]:
SR =
Rp −T
q
1
N
PN
i=1 min(0, Rp −T)2
(4.16)
From the previous equations, it can be observed that the Sortino ratio employs the
downside deviation (or the square root of semivariance) instead of standard
deviation, as seen in Sharpe ratio 4.4.3.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Data
This chapter explains the required data fetched to construct packages/portfolios. In
addition, cryptocurrencies, ETFs and passive rates are included with further
elucidation on the source of the data and the filters applied to it. All data was
fetched on a weekly basis unless required otherwise by filters.
5.1
Cryptocurrencies
The cryptocurrency data was obtained from Yahoo! Finance, with a total count of
9935 tickers. The data from Yahoo! Finance is powered by CoinMarketCap [24],
and it was obtained by making use of yfinance, a python library [65].
As introduced in 3.3 and 4.2, cryptocurrencies are subjected to the funnel approach
where the first step is due diligence screening. As a result, the data from
cryptocurrencies went through the filters in the table below.
Table 5.1: Cryptocurrency due diligence
Filters
Assets
Existence of passive rates
546
Available data from 06.11.2017
82
Minimum daily average trading volume of $2000000
62
Maximum annual volatility (standard deviation) of 200%
42
The volume filters solves the problem of iliquid markets by only allowing
cryptocurrencies with a relatively high trading value. The existence of passive rates
for cryptocurrencies is of high importance since the motivation of the thesis is to
present the reader with the impact of this mechanism on investing strategies. The
maximum volatility removes cryptocurrencies that have an unpredictability very
high.
It is worth mentioning that other cryptocurrency ”baskets” are presented in the
next chapter.
==PAGE:40==
5.1 Cryptocurrencies
31
5.1.1
Passive Rates
Passive rates refers to the different rates available on the methods talked on 2.5. It
is important to know that the provided rates don’t stem from all the methods due
to two reasons: lack of availability/recurrence of the method in different platforms
and high complexity in calculating an exact ”passive” rate that could be translated
in APY for each cryptocurrency
Table 5.2: Availability of passive investment methods in the considered platforms
Platform
Staking
Lending
Savings/Earn
Binance
X
X
Crypto.com
X
DeFi Rate
X
OKX
X
X
X
KuCoin
X
X
X
Kraken
X
Gemini
X
gate.io
X
X
Huobi
X
X
The previous table 5.2 displays the platforms where the data for the passive rates
were obtained and the types of the available method. The platforms were chosen
according to the presence of passive interest methods, and relatively high ranking
on CoinGecko [25]. DeFi Rate is an exception to these rules. Nevertheless, it is very
valuable to include it, considering the data aggregation of different platforms on
different cryptocurrencies.
The high number of platforms to collect data (passive rates) ensures that the
generated packages on section 6.3 will be able to have realistic values for the
minimum, average and maximum rate. It also ensures a high number of
cryptocurrencies with available rates.
The data is downloaded to ensure that all rates are expressed in APY by converting
APR to APY assuming a one-month compounding period and by annualizing rates
if needed.
The table 5.3 demonstrates that each cryptocurrency of the top 10 (filtered by
market capitalization) list presents a relatively high number of rates, although only
nine platforms were fetched. While the APYs for each cryptocurrency manifest an
extensive range, i.e. a low minimum and a high maximum, an important measure is
what an investor is able to obtain on average. According to the previous fact, it
==PAGE:41==
5.2 ETFs
32
Table 5.3: APY rates statistics on the top 10 cryptocurrencies by Market Cap
BTC
ETH
USDT
USDC
BNB
XRP
BUSD
ADA
SOL
DOGE
Available rates
29
37
35
27
15
15
9
29
30
17
Min
0.02%
0.04%
0.38%
0.15%
1.47%
0.02%
0.8%
0.5%
0.78%
0.04%
Mean
2.34%
2.61%
4.76%
4.49%
6.07%
1.94%
6.33%
3.7%
5.07%
1.45%
Max
8.19%
10.12%
10.00%
10.00%
12.99%
6.0%
13.33%
11.25%
13.47%
4.47%
should be noticeable that investing in cryptocurrencies holds an additional ”high”
advantage (presence of APYs) that has the potential to boost portfolios.
5.2
ETFs
The ETF data was also retrieved from Yahoo! Finance, with the same python
library [65] totaling 31566 ETFs. Filtering the data is made with the same principle
of cryptocurrencies by making use of the funneling approach. In the first step (due
diligence screening), the following filters were applied:
Table 5.4: ETF due diligence
Filters
Assets
Maximum expense ratio of 0.5%
8378
Available data from 06.11.2017
5121
Minimum daily average trading volume of $2000000
1121
The low maximum on the ETF expense ratio narrows the asset universe to a list of
low-cost ETFs. In addition, the volume filter ensures that the market for the ETF
has a relatively high liquidity.
5.2.1
World ETFs
The world ETFs chosen to be considered as benchmarks are the following:
• IUSQ.DE
• IWDA.AS
• VWCE.DE
IUSQ.DE: The iShares MSCI ACWI ETF tracks an index composed of
international large and mid-cap companies from developed and emerging markets.
The expense ratio is 0.33% [13].
IWDA.AS: The iShares Core MSCI World UCITS ETF tracks an index composed
of companies from developed countries. The expense ratio is 0.20% [11].
==PAGE:42==
5.2 ETFs
33
VWCE.DE The FTSE All-World UCITS ETF, from Vanguard, tracks an index
(FTSE All-World Index) compromised of companies, large and mid-cap, in
developed and emerging markets. The expense ratio is 0.22% [74].
The above-listed world ETFs present high diversification with a low expense ratio,
key desirable facts for investors. Another key factor common to all the benchmark
ETFs is that gross income is reinvested (e.g. dividends) at no extra cost; their type
is accumulating, and it can be seen at the end of the name as (Acc) on platforms
like Yahoo Finance. The ACWI and VWCE.DE ETFs track a broader range of
companies since emerging markets are included. The differences between the former
ETFs are seen in the weight allocation and number of positions of each index.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Investment hybrid packages
This chapter generates and discusses different packages combining ETFs,
cryptocurrencies and APYs. The chapter can be described as follow: at first, the
advantages of introducing cryptocurrency into investments compromised on ETFs
are shown and proofed, then the results of training the optimization model with
different parameters are demonstrated, and finally, the generated packages are
displayed and analyzed.
The experiments in this thesis were done in a way that 30% of the dataset is used
for training (1.3 years) and 70% (3.15 years) is utilized for testing purposes.
6.1
ETFs, cryptocurrencies and APYs
6.1.1
Correlation
Chapter 2 (2.3) mentions that cryptocurrencies are a good portfolio diversifier due
to their low correlation to any other traditional assets.
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ETFs
Cryptocurrencies
Figure 6.1: Optimal ETFs+Cryptocurrencies correlation matrix from 06.11.2017 to
11.03.2019 (training data)
==PAGE:44==
6.1 ETFs, cryptocurrencies and APYs
35
Figure 6.1 demonstrates the correlation between the returns of a combined basket of
ETFs and cryptocurrencies that were previously and separately filtered with the
Minimum Spanning Tree method 4.2 (training period). One can attain the
conclusion that the previous statement is verified as the correlation between ETFs
and cryptocurrencies is low. Another intriguing aspect is that cryptocurrencies
significantly correlate with one another, implying that there could be shared cycles
in terms of performance.
6.1.2
Eﬀicient frontier
The goal of combining ETFs with cryptocurrencies is for one to be able to lift the
eﬀicient frontier, i.e. obtain higher returns for an equal level of risk/volatility.
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Efficient Frontier Crypto
Efficient Frontier ETF
Efficient Frontier Crypto + ETF
Cryptos
ETFs
Volatility
Return
Figure 6.2: Eﬀicient frontiers comparison with 5%
crypto allocation from 06.11.2017 to 11.03.2019
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Volatility
Return
Figure 6.3: Zoomed out
version of eﬀicient fron-
tiers comparison
Figure 6.2 displays the impact of including a small portion of cryptocurrencies into
a portfolio (training period). While the cryptocurrency eﬀicient frontier extends
until higher returns, as seen in 6.3, the eﬀicient frontier with ETFs and
cryptocurrencies is constrained by the 5% allocation in cryptocurrencies, preventing
the reach to higher returns. Figure 6.3 exhibits the presence of cryptocurrencies in
zones of high volatility, ranging from 100% to 200%.
6.1.3
APYs
Part of the thesis goal is to demonstrate the power of passive rates in the
cryptocurrency investing sphere. In order to achieve this objective, an overtime
graph, from 15.09.2014 until 01.06.2022, with the evolution of a possible investment
in Bitcoin, is shown in figure 6.4. The figure is based on the ”debatable” assumption
that the passive rates that exist today have existed throughout the life of, in this
case, Bitcoin. The initial value of the investment is 100, and the comparison results
are presented in the table 6.1. Disregarding the growth of Bitcoin, which is extreme,
the presence of APYs in this specific investment strategy can increase the value of a
==PAGE:45==
6.1 ETFs, cryptocurrencies and APYs
36
portfolio, on average almost 20% and at a maximum of 82%. It is important to keep
in mind that these values stem from two factors: time and APY value. The higher
the time the investment is exposed to the APY, the higher the difference in the
portfolio value will be when compared to investing without employing APYs. With
this fact in mind, a question of whether to choose a cryptocurrency based on
performance, the highest APY or a combination of both can arise (more on this
matter in 7.1). In summary, both figure 6.4 and table 6.1 serve as proof that APYs
are of extreme importance when investing in cryptocurrency.
2016
2018
2020
2022
0
5k
10k
15k
20k
25k
30k
Mode
NORMAL
MIN
MEAN
MAX
Date
Value
Figure 6.4: BTC comparison of investing vs investing with interest generator from
15.09.2014 to 01.06.2022
Table 6.1: Bitcoin portfolio with APYs from 15.09.2014 to 01.06.2022 - Gp annual
geometric average return
Mode
APY
Gp
Final Portfolio Value
Value increase
Normal
N/A
81.46%
9456.59
N/A
Min
0.02%
81.50%
9470.95
0.15%
Mean
2.34%
85.68%
11271.42
19.19%
Max
8.19%
96.23%
17186.50
81.74%
==PAGE:46==
6.2 Training optimization model
37
6.2
Training optimization model
There are two points to clarify beforehand: first, the optimization model does not
support asset reallocation between time periods; instead, it only facilitates
rebalancing to return the portfolio to its original weights, and second, rebalancing
expenses are not included in the return calculations. More on this matter on 7.1.
In order to execute an optimization, there is the need to input parameters to the
model. A small study is made on this parameter to find the best possible
combinations and understand why the test data performance fluctuates. The
parameters to be tested are as follows:
• Filter ETFs/cryptocurrencies according to Sharpe ratio before running the
Minimum Spanning Tree method. The options are: not filtering, filtering with
a Sharpe ratio ≥0 or filtering with a Sharpe ratio ≥1.
• Variance optimization versus Semi-Variance optimization.
• The best time frame to rebalance in the sense of making the portfolio follow
the initial weights decided; every 1, 3, 6 or 12 months.
• Apply constraints to the number of assets and weights of each asset decided
for the optimal ETFs. Options are ∅(no constraints applied), max w (all
weights have a maximum threshold), p (a penalty is applied to assets with low
weights), and max w ∧p (all weights have a maximum threshold, and a
penalty is applied to assets with low weights).
As a benchmark of performance and volatility, given Gp as the geometric annual
average return of the portfolio and std p as the annual volatility of the portfolio, the
following table indicates the performance of the chosen world ETFs 5.2.1 on the test
dataset:
Table 6.2: Performance of World benchmark ETFs from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
World benchmark ETFs
Gp
std p
VWCE.DE
11.95%
16.62%
IUSQ.DE
13.97%
17.42%
IWDA.AS
15.24%
17.63%
VWCE.DE and IUSQ.DE take precedence from the three benchmarks due to their
higher diversification. With this fact in mind, IUSQ.DE is chosen as the
benchmark, considering that VWCE.DE started on a date later than the start date
of the test dataset, and overall the performance is better.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Training optimization model
38
6.2.1
Optimal ETFs
The training model’s first target is to find optimal ETF weights that will perform
higher than 14%, returns wise, while maintaining the risk within a [0%, 25%] range.
The optimization is performed according to the 4.3.5 equation, maximizing return
for a certain level of risk, V = 20%; volatility given from the chosen benchmark with
an added margin. The optimal ETF basket is obtained by applying the first two
steps of the robo-advisor 3.1: due diligence and machine learning (Minimum
Spanning Tree method).
Table 6.3: Optimal ETFs performance according to multiple rebalance periods from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Rebalance
Average Gp
Average std p
1 month
7.18%
20.30%
3 months
7.28%
20.23%
6 months
7.06%
20.10%
12 months
7.12%
20.26%
The first metric tested on optimal ETFs is the rebalance period. Table 6.3
demonstrates that the best performance in terms of returns stems from a
rebalancing done every three months. Risk is disregarded due to the high
concentration around the same average. This chosen parameter will be used for
consecutive comparisons.
Given assets_p and assets_sp as the number of assets on the respective optimizer
mode, the table 6.4 indicates that only 2 out of 24 portfolios manage to outperform
the benchmark return with volatility within the range defined. It can then be
deduced that a simpler mean-variance optimizer does not hold the power to
transform a basket of ETFs into a portfolio that surpasses the benchmark provided.
Both the portfolios with a higher return possess only one asset: IVV.AX. This asset
corresponds to the iShares S&P 500 ETF (U.S.) [12] and fails to comply with one of
the goals of optimal ETFs: to bear high diversification.
While there could be statistics across parameters to be explored according to the
previous table 6.4 results, this step and analysis will be skipped due to performance
reasons. Instead, the optimal ETFs basket will be replaced by the chosen
benchmark (IUSQ.DE).
6.2.2
Optimal ETFs + cryptocurrencies
It is known that cryptocurrencies are volatile assets, and as a result, one should
expect the rise of volatility in a portfolio with the inclusion of the former. What can
also be expected in this setting (portfolio compromised of ETFs and
==PAGE:48==
6.2 Training optimization model
39
Table
6.4:
Optimal ETFs performance on different input/parameters from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Variance Optimisation
Semi-Variance Optimisation
No sr filter
Gp
std p
assets p
Gp
std sp
assets sp
∅
7.08%
17.00%
1
7.08%
17.00%
1
max w
10.08%
17.72%
3
10.08%
17.72%
3
p
5.64%
14.51%
8
5.76%
15.13%
8
max w ∧p
5.64%
14.51%
8
5.76%
15.13%
8
Sr ≥0
∅
5.55%
22.42%
1
5.55%
22.42%
1
max w
10.36%
22.39%
4
2.26%
29.42%
5
p
7.72%
17.97%
9
2.66%
27.35%
7
max w ∧p
7.79%
17.82%
9
2.66%
27.35%
7
Sr ≥1
∅
15.00%
15.87%
1
15.00%
15.87%
1
max w
7.84%
22.23%
3
7.83%
22.23%
3
p
6.87%
23.37%
6
6.81%
23.37%
6
max w ∧p
6.84%
23.37%
6
6.84%
23.37%
6
cryptocurrencies) is the manifestation of the importance of rebalancing; due to their
high volatility, cryptocurrencies have the ability to quickly shift portfolios weights
over a short period if rebalancing fails to take place. With this in mind, the training
model still targets a risk of V = 20%. On the other hand, generated portfolios are
now accepted within a [0%, 35%] range of risk, a 10% increase. The model supports
three different cryptocurrency weights for the portfolio: 2.5%, 5% and 10%. Given
sr p, as the Sharpe ratio (risk-free asset, in this case, is 0%, due to lack of relevancy)
metric over the geometric mean and standard deviation averages, the following table
6.5 illustrates the portfolio performance conforming multiple parameters.
Starting with the bottom of the table 6.5, the presence of a line over Sr ≥1 is due
to the fact that after the application of the respective minimum spanning tree filter,
only one asset remains, therefore, the optimization model is ”forced” to pick this
cryptocurrency. The previous behavior is not what is intended for inputs to the
training model and hence the exclusion. Looking at the table 6.5 from a global
perspective, it is clear that including cryptocurrencies in one’s portfolio vastly
improves the performance while maintaining an adequate level of risk. Each
parameter type presents bold values for the highest return and Sharpe ratio. While
it is vital to consider the Sharpe ratio, a measure that gives the investor an essential
ratio of return conform risk, in this thesis, the highest return will be prioritized for
parameter selection. The rationale is simple for the choice; all levels of risk are
adequate, and as such, an investor is keen on maximizing the expected return.
Consequently, the chosen optimization model parameters are semi-variance
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Generated packages
40
Table 6.5: Portfolios performance analysis over multiple parameters/inputs from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Average Gp
Average std p
sr p metric
Variance optimisation
26.90%
23.72%
1.13
Semi-variance optimisation
28.84%
24.78%
1.16
Rebalance 1 month
24.35%
20.68%
1.18
Rebalance 3 months
27.33%
23.97%
1.14
Rebalance 6 months
28.35%
25.03%
1.13
Rebalance 12 months
31.45%
27.33%
1.15
∅
29.20%
25.49%
1.15
max w
26.53%
23.01%
1.15
p
29.22%
25.50%
1.15
max w ∧p
26.53%
23.01%
1.15
No filter
27.77%
23.55%
1.18
Sr ≥0
25.24%
22.85%
1.11
Sr ≥1
30.60%
26.35%
1.16
optimization, rebalancing annually (which in a real-world scenario dramatically
reduces the cost of rebalancing), applying a penalty to low weights and applying no
filter before executing the MST method.
6.3
Generated packages
This section introduces and explains the generated packages, provides the obtained
results and finishes with a small discussion on the performance measures of all
packages. The packages are presented so the reader can visualize and understand
the impact of APYs on hybrid portfolios. It has been said before; however, it will be
reminded that the optimal ETFs are considered to be the benchmark IUSQ.DE
since performing optimization on an ETF basket did not perform as expected. To
simplify the results, the weights of cryptocurrencies in the portfolio are reduced to
the 5% value. It is then expected that increasing the weight of cryptocurrency
allocation in a portfolio will increase both volatility and return (the opposite is also
true). More information in the appendix 7.1.
Optimal ETFs + optimal cryptocurrencies(mst filter applied): According
to the optimization model, IUSQ.DE (ETF) and BNB(cryptocurrency) are the
obtained assets. The figure 6.5 demonstrates the basket with different APY inputs
and the high performance in terms of returns.
==PAGE:50==
6.3 Generated packages
41
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
100
150
200
250
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+Opt-MstCrypto
ETF+Opt-MstCrypto+Apy(min)
ETF+Opt-MstCrypto+Apy(mean)
ETF+Opt-MstCrypto+Apy(max)
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.5: Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and optimal cryptocurren-
cies(mst filter applied) from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Optimal ETFs + stablecoin: In this package, one of the limitations of the
project is shown present since only one stablecoin has existed since 06.11.2017. The
assets of this package are IUSQ.DE (ETF) and USDT(cryptocurrency). The figure
6.6 demonstrates that including a stablecoin in an ETF portfolio can reduce the
performance in terms of returns. This reduction is dependent on two factors, the
average return of the ETF and the APY acquired for the stable coin. If an investor
finds an APY higher than the average return of the portfolio ETF/ETFs, the
performance (returns) increases.
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+Opt-StableCrypto
ETF+Opt-StableCrypto+Apy(min)
ETF+Opt-StableCrypto+Apy(mean)
ETF+Opt-StableCrypto+Apy(max)
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.6: Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and stablecoin from 11.03.2019
to 01.05.2022
The next packages are built on the assumption that the recent highest ranked
cryptocurrencies according to market capitalization are the same as the initial date
of the dataset: 06.11.2017.
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Generated packages
42
Table 6.6: Cryptocurrency market cap due diligence
Filters
Assets
Recent top 30 crypto by market cap
30
Available data from 06.11.2017
14
Optimal ETFs + optimal cryptocurrencies from the top 30 14 by market
cap list: The resulted assets from the optimization model are IUSQ.DE (ETF) and
TRX(cryptocurrency). It is yet again proved that including optimal
cryptocurrencies in an ETF portfolio increases the performance, figure 6.7.
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
100
120
140
160
180
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+Opt-TopCrypto
ETF+Opt-TopCrypto+Apy(min)
ETF+Opt-TopCrypto+Apy(mean)
ETF+Opt-TopCrypto+Apy(max)
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.7: Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and optimal cryptocurrencies
from the top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Optimal ETFs + individual cryptocurrencies from top 14 by market
capitalisation: Within this package, there are 14 sub-packages generated. The
assets list is composed of: IUSQ.DE (ETF) and [BTC, ETH, USDT, BNB, XRP,
ADA, DOGE, TRX, LTC, XMR, BCH, XLM, ETC, LINK] (cryptocurrencies).
When comparing the inclusion of cryptocurrencies, separately, into an ETF portfolio
6.8, it is observed that 93% of the portfolios outperforms(returns) a simple ETF
strategy. 7% of corresponds to the portfolio that includes a stablecoin. The figure
6.8 does not include APYs for better visualisation. With this limited data, it is
possible to state that investing in high market capitalization cryptocurrencies deems
positive results.
Optimal ETFs + weighted cryptocurrencies top 2/3/5/10/all by market
capitalization: This package follows the behavior of the previous one in the sense
that more than one package is generated, in this case, five sub-packages. In each
sub-package, all the cryptocurrencies are weighted accordingly. Figure 6.9
determines that making baskets of cryptocurrency, with a simple strategy such as
==PAGE:52==
6.3 Generated packages
43
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+ADA
ETF+BCH
ETF+BNB
ETF+BTC
ETF+DOGE
ETF+ETC
ETF+ETH
ETF+LINK
ETF+LTC
ETF+TRX
ETF+USDT
ETF+XLM
ETF+XMR
ETF+XRP
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.8: Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and all, separate, cryptocur-
rencies from the top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
1/n for 5%, results in an overall better strategy when compared to just picking one
cryptocurrency. The highest result stems from weighting the top 10
cryptocurrencies.
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+Top2Crypto
ETF+Top3Crypto
ETF+Top5Crypto
ETF+Top10Crypto
ETF+TopAllCrypto
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.9: Portfolio performance with optimal ETFs and weighted cryptocurrencies
top 14 from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
6.3.1
Comparisons
Now that the packages have been enumerated and shortly described, a deeper
analysis of the performance measures takes place. In order to compare the
strategies, one portfolio from each package is chosen. For the packages that only
present one portfolio it is simple. From the package with multiple cryptocurrencies
separately integrated into an ETF portfolio, the cryptocurrency chosen is BTC due
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Generated packages
44
to its popularity and for being the pioneer in cryptocurrencies. The package with
weighted cryptocurrencies, the best performer, returns wise, is selected. The list of
portfolios is:
• Optimal ETF + optimal cryptocurrenies (mst) as ETF+Opt C(mst)
• Optimal ETF + stablecoin as ETF+stable C
• Optimal ETF + optimal cryptocurrencies from top 14 as ETF+Opt C(top)
• Optimal ETF + BTC as ETF + BTC
• Optimal ETF + weighted cryptocurrency top 10 as ETF+top 10 C(w)
Table 6.7: Performance comparison of the resulted portfolios from the packages
from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 - annual basis results
ETF
ETF+
Opt C(mst)
ETF+
Opt C(top)
ETF+
stable C
ETF+
BTC
ETF+
top 10 C(w)
Geometric Return
13.97%
31.39%
16.55%
13.26%
22.09%
24.98%
Volatility
17.48%
28.01%
19.81%
16.67%
19.18%
20.85%
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
1.05
0.73
0.68
1.05
1.10
Downside Deviation
13.00%
16.01%
14.29%
12.42%
13.61%
13.91%
Sortino Ratio
0.92
1.84
1.02
0.91
1.48
1.65
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
236.56
162.09
148.10
187.67
202.06
The following table 6.7 shows the portfolio’s statistic performance without
considering the inclusion of APYs. A comparison of portfolios with APYs is made
on the tables 6.8 and 6.9. One of the first conclusions drawn from table 6.7 is that
higher returns for a same/close level of volatility is not possible; however, what is
interesting is that despite the previous fact, the Sharpe ratio rises, implicating that
the inclusion of a low percent of cryptocurrencies increases the return/risk ratio. In
terms of volatility, overall, all strategies are within the specified range [0%, 35%],
proving that the risk can be contained to a certain degree. The most powerful
observation stems from the downside deviation and, in consequence, the Sortino
ratio. For the specified cryptocurrency weight, the maximum increase in downside
deviation is by 3%, verifying that ETF strategies and ETFs with cryptocurrency
strategies hold the trait of a relatively proximate level of downside deviation.
Consequently, the Sortino ratio suffers high variations on the positive side. The
portfolios with the highest Sortino and Sharpe ratios (ETF+OPT C(mst) and
ETF+top 10 C(w)) validate two arguments: first, that a training model can
significantly increase returns for a similar level of downside risk and second, that
diversifying, even in cryptocurrency, produces portfolios with the same level of
downside risk and higher returns. The portfolio with the stablecoin (ETF+stable C)
cryptocurrency decreases volatility and downside risk at the cost of lower returns.
In summary, the previous portfolio strategies hold for an investor seeking to
minimize downside risk. In contrast, for an investor that values low volatility, higher
returns come at the expense of higher risk.
==PAGE:54==
6.3 Generated packages
45
Jul 2019
Jan 2020
Jul 2020
Jan 2021
Jul 2021
Jan 2022
100
150
200
250
Portfolio style
ETF
ETF+OptCrypto-MST+Apy(mean)
ETF+OptCrypto-Top+Apy(mean)
ETF+Crypto-stable+Apy(mean)
ETF+BTC+Apy(mean)
ETF+Crypto-Top10-weighted+Apy(mean)
Date
Portfolio evolution
Figure 6.10: Final generated portfolios generated with average(mean) APY from
11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022
Table 6.8:
Performance comparison for
ETF+Crypto C(mst) according to differ-
ent APYs from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 -
annual basis results
ETF+Opt C(mst)
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return
31.39%
31.70%
32.64%
34.06%
Volatility
28.01%
28.16%
28.64%
29.34%
Sharpe Ratio
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.09
Downside Deviation
16.01%
16.03%
16.10%
16.19%
Sortino Ratio
1.84
1.85
1.90
1.98
Final Portfolio Value
236.56
238.30
243.74
252.02
Table 6.9:
Performance comparison for
ETF+stable C according to different APYs
from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 - annual ba-
sis results
ETF+stable C
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return
13.26%
13.28%
13.5%
13.76%
Volatility
16.67%
16.67%
16.66%
16.65%
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
0.68
0.69
0.71
Downside Deviation
12.42%
12.42%
12.4%
12.38%
Sortino Ratio
0.91
0.91
0.93
0.95
Final Portfolio Value
148.10
148.18
149.10
150.18
The above tables, 6.8 and 6.9, act as a study point on the influence of including
APYs in the tested portfolios. Only two strategies are being analyzed because, in
sum, there are two types of portfolio results: one that increases returns and both
types of risk and one that decreases the previously mentioned measures. More
tables with the performance over different cryptocurrency weights and all APY
measures are presented in the appendix 7.1.
To summarize, the results shown in this chapter prove the influence of including
cryptocurrency in a portfolio. It acts as a diversifier and increases returns with
adequate volatility and approximate downside risk. Furthermore, cryptocurrencies
carry the advantage of generating higher returns with APYs, rates obtained from
the methods explained in 2.5. From the five generated packages, an ordinary
investor can copy and execute strategies that don’t evolve the optimization model,
corresponding to 60%. From the previous three packages (60%), while the
stablecoin package slightly under-performs when compared to not including
cryptocurrencies, the remaining two packages highly increase the returns.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis covers the subject of diversifying investments with cryptocurrency
packages. The cryptocurrency topic is relatively recent and brings different nuances
to the investment sphere. From the technology to the financial impact, one of the
pinnacle cryptocurrency features for investors is the ability to utilize it in different
ways, apart from just holding. Methods such as staking, lending, and earning
programs demonstrate that it is possible to take cryptocurrency and put it to work -
generating more cryptocurrency - generally in a passive way. Such methods act as
incentives to draw an increased number of people to the highly volatile
cryptocurrency market.
The generated investment packages are composed of ETFs (baskets of securities)
and cryptocurrencies. Markowitz, one of the creators of the modern portfolio theory,
advises that the key to a sound investment is diversification; the so known ”Don’t
put all your eggs in the same basket” phrase. One possible strategy to diversify
ETFs is to perform a robo-advisor algorithm on an ETF list. In essence, the
robo-advisor filters ETFs and then optimizes the weights to achieve the highest
return for a certain level of risk.
In this project, the previous steps are followed to create optimal ETFs and optimal
cryptocurrencies. Due to the high importance given to diversifying, the benchmark
for the results is a world ETF that includes both developed and emerging markets.
The first conclusion drawn is that the inclusion of cryptocurrencies in an ETF
portfolio acts as a diversifier (low correlation) and bears the potential to increase
returns for the same level of risk. Secondly, the power of including APYs within
cryptocurrencies investment is displayed with possible increases in value, reaching
80% in the long run. Thirdly, it is shown that a simple mean-variance optimizer is
not fit to optimize a list of filtered and diversified ETFs with the ability to
overperform the chosen benchmark. Following this discovery, the generated
packages include the benchmark ETF and different baskets of cryptocurrencies for a
small percentage of the portfolio. This thesis proves that including small baskets of
cryptocurrencies on a simple but diversified portfolio significantly increases the
returns for closely equivalent downside risk. Their performances are then surpassed
by the simple fact of including APYs, which in reality can be as simple as a monthly
click on an online platform. A vital end note is that three out of the five generated
packages are ready to be made for an investor with no experience in optimization
models.
==PAGE:56==
7.1 Limitations and future work
47
To summarize, this thesis serves as a foundation for the prospect of portfolio
innovation by discovering and including APYs within cryptocurrencies.
7.1
Limitations and future work
In chapter 2, methods to generate income are introduced and explained. On the
other hand, in chapter 5, data introduction, it is seen that only part of these
methods is included in the fetched data. The not inclusion of all methods presents a
limitation on the results applied. Elaborating further on the mentioned limitation,
this thesis, data-wise, explores ”centralized” approaches to a greater extent than
”decentralized” techniques. A possible study could be made in investigating the
remaining methods (with higher complexity) and calculating a real-world scenario
APY.
An assumption related to passive income rates is made in this project, stating that
APYs have existed throughout all the cryptocurrency market time and that the
values fetched are equivalent from the past and have remained stable. Since this fact
is not proven and most likely not trustworthy, it not only acts as a limitation on the
final results but also introduces a possible study on the evolution of cryptocurrencies
APYs and possible dependencies with market cycles, time or prices.
Continuing with the aspect of data, a significant limitation of this project is shown
in the cryptocurrency data downloaded from Yahoo Finance. Cryptocurrencies are
relatively recent, and due to this fact, there is a lack of data on a high time frame,
limiting testing results. Additionally, Yahoo Finance limits the cryptocurrency data
to a greater extent by setting a fixed incorrect ”start” date on the majority of
cryptocurrencies.
The results presented in the project are built on the assumption that transaction
costs when buying and rebalancing the portfolio are considered to be 0. One of the
reasons for such an assumption resides in the fact that transaction costs in
cryptocurrencies are not as linear as a simple fee on an online brokerage. The
inclusion of APYs causes high variations on what may be the actual final
transaction cost. It should also be considered that to benefit from APYs the
investor must create an account on online platforms that don’t present ETFs, i.e.
the total investment will be split on different platforms. It is proposed that an
analysis of the real costs of holding and rebalancing a portfolio with ETFs,
cryptocurrencies and APYs is investigated.
Looking into the performance measures, the paper [10] points out that the
geometric average always underestimates the actual returns of a rebalanced
portfolio. Sharpe ratio assumes that the returns are normally distributed, and
negative excess returns raises diﬀiculties in interpretation.
==PAGE:57==
7.1 Limitations and future work
48
Finally, one substantial limitation of the thesis is exposed on the optimization
problem. It is observed that a simple mean-variance optimization, as introduced by
Markowitz, without reallocation, does not hold the best results out of sample. J. B.
Genís master thesis [35] confirms that a better optimization model combined with
scenario generation methods can output better results. Due to this reason, there is
an open opportunity to extend the project with better and more complex
optimization models within asset allocation to increase performance. There is also
the possibility of performing studies on parameter tuning for the model’s inputs.
To conclude, as possible future work, the topic of how to choose cryptocurrencies
can be addressed. In this matter, important issues to tackle reside in how to pick
and weight cryptocurrencies in combination with the existence of APYs.
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
Aave. Introduction to Aave. 2022. url: https://docs.aave.com/faq/
(visited on March 30, 2022).
[2]
Facundo Abraham, Sergio L Schmukler, and Jose Tessada. “Robo-advisors:
Investing through machines.” In: World Bank Research and Policy Briefs
134881 (2019).
[3]
Anna Agapova. “Conventional mutual index funds versus exchange-traded
funds.” In: Journal of Financial Markets 14.2 (2011), pages 323–343.
[4]
Andreas A Aigner and Gurvinder Dhaliwal. “Uniswap: Impermanent loss and
risk profile of a liquidity provider.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14404 (2021).
[5]
Douglas G Altman and J Martin Bland. “Standard deviations and standard
errors.” In: Bmj 331.7521 (2005), page 903.
[6]
Damiano Azzolini, Fabrizio Riguzzi, and Evelina Lamma. “Studying
transaction fees in the Bitcoin blockchain with probabilistic logic
programming.” In: Information 10.11 (2019), page 335.
[7]
Zhidong Bai, Huixia Liu, and Wing-Keung Wong. “Enhancement of the
applicability of Markowitz’s portfolio optimization by utilizing random matrix
theory.” In: Mathematical Finance: An International Journal of Mathematics,
Statistics and Financial Economics 19.4 (2009), pages 639–667.
[8]
Lucian A Bebchuk and Scott Hirst. Index funds and the future of corporate
governance: Theory, evidence, and policy. Technical report. National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2019.
[9]
Franziska Becker, Marc Gürtler, and Martin Hibbeln. “Markowitz versus
Michaud: Portfolio optimization strategies reconsidered.” In: The European
Journal of Finance 21.4 (2015), pages 269–291.
[10]
William J Bernstein and David J Wilkinson. “Diversification, rebalancing, and
the geometric mean frontier.” In: Available at SSRN 53503 (1997).
[11]
BlackRock. iShares Core MSCI World UCITS ETF. url:
https://www.ishares.com/nl/particuliere-
belegger/nl/producten/251882/ishares-msci-world-ucits-etf-acc-
fund (visited on May 31, 2022).
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
50
[12]
BlackRock. iShares Core SP 500 ETF. url: https:
//www.ishares.com/us/products/239726/ishares-core-sp-500-etf
(visited on June 1, 2022).
[13]
BlackRock. iShares MSCI ACWI ETF. url: https:
//www.ishares.com/nl/particuliere-belegger/nl/producten/251850/
(visited on May 31, 2022).
[14]
Shaun Bond. “An econometric model of downside riskŁ.” In: Forecasting
Volatility in the Financial Markets (2002), page 251.
[15]
Lars Brünjes et al. “Reward sharing schemes for stake pools.” In: 2020 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE. 2020,
pages 256–275.
[16]
Dirk Bullmann, Jonas Klemm, and Andrea Pinna. “In search for stability in
crypto-assets: are stablecoins the solution?” In: ECB Occasional Paper 230
(2019).
[17]
Agostino Capponi and Ruizhe Jia. “The adoption of blockchain-based
decentralized exchanges.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08842 (2021).
[18]
PR Chandrasekaran, C Steven Cole, and Foster Roden. “Resolving confusion
in terminology: annual percentage rate and effective rate of interest.” In:
Journal of Financial Education (1996), pages 60–64.
[19]
Jianguo Chen and Dar-Hsin Chen. “The downside risk and equity evaluation:
Emerging market evidence.” In: Journal of Emerging Market Finance 3.1
(2004), pages 77–93.
[20]
Si Cheng, Massimo Massa, and Hong Zhang. “The Dark side of ETF investing:
a world-wide analysis.” In: SSRN Electronic Journal (2013).
[21]
Usman W Chohan. “Are stable coins stable?” In: Notes on the 21st Century
(CBRi) (2019).
[22]
Usman W Chohan. “Decentralized finance (DeFi): an emergent alternative
financial architecture.” In: Critical Blockchain Research Initiative (CBRI)
Working Papers (2021).
[23]
David LEE Kuo Chuen, Li Guo, and Yu Wang. “Cryptocurrency: A new
investment opportunity?” In: The journal of alternative investments 20.3
(2017), pages 16–40.
[24]
GUEN CMC. Powering Yahoo Finance’s Cryptocurrency Data and More!
2019. url: https://blog.coinmarketcap.com/2019/11/21/powering-
yahoo-finances-cryptocurrency-data-section-and-more/ (visited on
April 28, 2022).
[25]
CoinGecko. Top Cryptocurrency Exchanges Ranking by Trust Score - Spot.
2022. url: https://www.coingecko.com/en/exchanges (visited on April 28,
2022).
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
51
[26]
Simon Cousaert, Jiahua Xu, and Toshiko Matsui. “Sok: Yield aggregators in
defi.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.13891 (2021).
[27]
Curve. Curve FAQ. url: https://curve.fi/rootfaq (visited on March 30,
2022).
[28]
Asli Demirguc-Kunt et al. The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring
financial inclusion and the fintech revolution. World Bank Publications, 2018.
[29]
Marnix Engels. “Portfolio Optimization: Beyond Markowitz.” In: A master
thesis in University of Leiden (2004).
[30]
Javier Estrada. “Mean-semivariance optimization: A heuristic approach.” In:
Journal of Applied Finance (Formerly Financial Practice and Education) 18.1
(2008).
[31]
Alex Evans. “Liquidity provider returns in geometric mean markets.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.08806 (2020).
[32]
Giulia Fanti et al. “Compounding of wealth in proof-of-stake
cryptocurrencies.” In: International conference on financial cryptography and
data security. Springer. 2019, pages 42–61.
[33]
Antonio Fatás. The Economics of fintech and digital currencies. CEPR Press
London, 2019.
[34]
Finematics. How Do Liquidity Pools Work? DeFi Explained. 2020. url:
https://finematics.com/liquidity-pools-explained/ (visited on
March 15, 2022).
[35]
Jorge Bertomeu Genís. “Portfolio Optimization using Index Funds and a
Basket of Cryptocurrencies.” Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2021.
[36]
Hans Gersbach, Akaki Mamageishvili, and Manvir Schneider. “Staking Pools
on Blockchains.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05838 (2022).
[37]
Umit Hacioglu and Tamer Aksoy. “Financial Ecosystem and Strategy in the
Digital Era.” In: ().
[38]
Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Campbell R Harvey, and Raphael CG Reule.
Understanding cryptocurrencies. 2020.
[39]
Lioba Heimbach, Ye Wang, and Roger Wattenhofer. “Behavior of liquidity
providers in decentralized exchanges.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.13822
(2021).
[40]
Johannes Rude Jensen et al. “The Homogenous Properties of Automated
Market Makers.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02782 (2021).
[41]
Auður Anna Jónsdóttir. “Feature Selection in Asset Allocation.” Master’s
thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[42]
Kim Peiter Jørgensen and Roman Beck. “Universal Wallets.” In: Business &
Information Systems Engineering (2022), pages 1–11.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
52
[43]
Kostis Karantias. “SoK: A taxonomy of cryptocurrency wallets.” In:
Cryptology ePrint Archive (2020).
[44]
Orçun Kaya et al. “Robo-advice–a true innovation in asset management.” In:
Deutsche Bank Research (2017), pages 1–16.
[45]
Sungil Kim. “New crypto-secured lending system with a two-way collateral
function.” In: Ledger 6 (2021).
[46]
Hakwan Lau and Stephen Tse. “Decentralized Basic Income: Creating Wealth
with On-Chain Staking and Fixed-Rate Protocols.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.14312 (2021).
[47]
Jim Liew et al. “Cryptocurrency investing examined.” In: The Journal of The
British Blockchain Association (2019), page 8720.
[48]
Alexander Lipton et al. “11. Stablecoins, Digital Currency, and the Future of
Money.” In: Building the New Economy. PubPub, 2020.
[49]
Yulin Liu et al. “Empirical Analysis of EIP-1559: Transaction Fees, Waiting
Time, and Consensus Security.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05574 (2022).
[50]
Russell J Lundholm. “FSA in an ETF world.” In: Review of Accounting
Studies 26.4 (2021), pages 1428–1455.
[51]
MakerDAO. The Maker Protocol: MakerDAO’s Multi-Collateral Dai (MCD)
System. 2017. url: https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper/ (visited on
March 30, 2022).
[52]
Burton G Malkiel. “Eﬀicient markets and mutual fund investing: The
advantages of index funds.” In: Mutual Funds: Portfolio Structures, Analysis,
Management, and Stewardship (2009), pages 117–137.
[53]
Myles E Mangram. “A simplified perspective of the Markowitz portfolio
theory.” In: Global journal of business research 7.1 (2013), pages 59–70.
[54]
Ahmed Marhfor. “Portfolio performance measurement: Review of literature
and avenues of future research.” In: American Journal of Industrial and
Business Management 6.4 (2016), pages 432–438.
[55]
Hannes Marling and Sara Emanuelsson. “The Markowitz Portfolio Theory.” In:
November 25 (2012), page 2012.
[56]
John D Martin and Arthur J Keown. “A Tutorial on the Economics of Payday
Lending: Loan Sharking or Risky Lending.” In: Available at SSRN 2946399
(2017).
[57]
Robert Andrew Martin. “PyPortfolioOpt: portfolio optimization in Python.”
In: Journal of Open Source Software 6.61 (2021), page 3066. doi:
10.21105/joss.03066. url: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.03066.
[58]
MetaMask. The most trusted way to access, store and swap Ethereum tokens.
url: https://metamask.io/swaps/ (visited on April 13, 2022).
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
53
[59]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.” In:
Decentralized Business Review (2008), page 21260.
[60]
Michael Neuder et al. “Strategic Liquidity Provision in Uniswap v3.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.12033 (2021).
[61]
Cong T Nguyen et al. “Proof-of-stake consensus mechanisms for future
blockchain networks: fundamentals, applications and opportunities.” In: IEEE
Access 7 (2019), pages 85727–85745.
[62]
Lam Pak Nian and David Lee Kuo Chuen. “Introduction to bitcoin.” In:
Handbook of digital currency. Elsevier, 2015, pages 5–30.
[63]
Kokfai Phoon and Francis Koh. “Robo-advisors and wealth management.” In:
The Journal of Alternative Investments 20.3 (2017), pages 79–94.
[64]
Pintail. Uniswap: A Good Deal for Liquidity Providers? 2019. url:
https://pintail.medium.com/uniswap-a-good-deal-for-liquidity-
providers-104c0b6816f2 (visited on March 31, 2022).
[65]
Aroussi R. Download market data from Yahoo! Finance’s API.
https://github.com/ranaroussi/yfinance. 2022.
[66]
Hossein Rezaeighaleh and Cliff C Zou. “New secure approach to backup
cryptocurrency wallets.” In: 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM). IEEE. 2019, pages 1–6.
[67]
Geoffrey Hayes Robert Leshner. Compound: The Money Market Protocol. 2019.
url: https://compound.finance/documents/Compound.Whitepaper.pdf
(visited on March 30, 2022).
[68]
Thomas N Rollinger and Scott T Hoffman. “Sortino: a ‘sharper’ratio.” In:
Chicago, Illinois: Red Rock Capital (2013).
[69]
Fahad Saleh. “Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake.” In: The Review of
financial studies 34.3 (2021), pages 1156–1190.
[70]
Benjamin Samuels. Introduction. 2022. url:
https://docs.yearn.finance/getting-started/intro (visited on
March 30, 2022).
[71]
Synthetix. System Synopsis. url: https://docs.synthetix.io/synopsis
(visited on March 30, 2022).
[72]
Uniswap. Frequently Asked Questions. url: https://uniswap.org/faq
(visited on March 30, 2022).
[73]
Petr Vanek. “Performance Analysis of the most traded Mutual Funds versus
Optimal Portfolios of Exchange Traded Funds.” Master’s thesis. University of
Copenhagen, Faculty of Science, 2020.
[74]
Vanguard. FTSE All-World UCITS ETF - (USD) Accumulating. url: https:
//www.vanguard.co.uk/professional/product/etf/equity/9679/ftse-
all-world-ucits-etf-usd-accumulating (visited on May 31, 2022).
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
54
[75]
Atomic Wallet. How Staking Works. url:
https://atomicwallet.io/staking (visited on April 13, 2022).
[76]
Gang-Jin Wang, Xin-yu Ma, and Hao-yu Wu. “Are stablecoins truly
diversifiers, hedges, or safe havens against traditional cryptocurrencies as their
name suggests?” In: Research in International Business and Finance 54
(2020), page 101225.
[77]
Pengcheng Xia et al. “Trade or Trick? Detecting and Characterizing Scam
Tokens on Uniswap Decentralized Exchange.” In: Proceedings of the ACM on
Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems 5.3 (2021), pages 1–26.
[78]
Jiahua Xu and Nikhil Vadgama. “From banks to DeFi: the evolution of the
lending market.” In: Enabling the Internet of Value. Springer, 2022,
pages 53–66.
[79]
Yoroi. Yoroi Wallet. 2019. url: https://yoroi-wallet.com/#/ (visited on
April 13, 2022).
[80]
Dirk A Zetzsche, Douglas W Arner, and Ross P Buckley. “Decentralized
finance.” In: Journal of Financial Regulation 6.2 (2020), pages 172–203.
==PAGE:64==
Performance of chosen packages with
2.5%, 5% and 10% cryptocurrency weight
on all APYs
The following results are obtained from 11.03.2019 to 01.05.2022 and are expressed on an annual basis.
Table 1: Performance comparison of ETF+Opt C(mst) with multiple crypto weights and APYs
ETF
ETF+Opt C(mst) [2.5%, 5% 10%]
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return %
13.97
[23.25, 31.39, 45.43]
[23.41, 31.7, 45.97]
[23.93, 32.64, 47.66]
[24.7, 34.06, 50.18]
Volatility %
17.48
[21.58, 28.01, 40.24]
[21.65, 28.16, 40.48]
[21.88, 28.64, 41.21]
[22.22, 29.34, 42.28]
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
[0.98, 1.05, 1.08]
[0.99, 1.05, 1.09]
[1.0, 1.07, 1.11]
[1.02, 1.09, 1.14]
Downside Deviation %
13.00
[14.34, 16.01, 19.23]
[14.35, 16.03, 19.26]
[14.39, 16.1, 19.35]
[14.45, 16.19, 19.47]
Sortino Ratio
0.92
[1.48, 1.84, 2.26]
[1.49, 1.85, 2.28]
[1.52, 1.9, 2.36]
[1.57, 1.98, 2.47]
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
[193.34, 236.546, 325.79 ]
[194.15, 238.3, 329.65]
[196.72, 243,74, 341.84]
[200.59, 252.02, 360.55]
==PAGE:65==
Performance of chosen packages with 2.5%, 5% and 10% cryptocurrency weight on all APYs
56
Table 2: Performance comparison of ETF+Opt C(top) with multiple crypto weights and APYs
ETF
ETF+Opt C(top) [2.5%, 5% 10%]
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return %
13.97
[15.29, 16.55, 18.9]
[15.29, 16.55, 18.91]
[15.49, 16.94, 19.67]
[15.79, 17.55, 20.85]
Volatility %
17.48
[18.32, 19.81, 24.0]
[18.32, 19.81, 24.0]
[18.34, 19.87, 24.15]
[18.38, 19.97, 24.39]
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
[0.73, 0.73, 0.7]
[0.73, 0.73, 0.7]
[0.74, 0.75, 0.73]
[0.75, 0.78, 0.77]
Downside Deviation %
13.00
[13.47, 14.29, 16.63]
[13.47, 14.29, 16.63]
[13.47, 14.31, 16.68]
[13.48, 14.34, 16.76]
Sortino Ratio
0.92
[0.99, 1.02, 1.02]
[0.99, 1.02, 1.02]
[1.0, 1.04, 1.06]
[1.02, 1.08, 1.12]
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
[156.63, 162.09, 172.64]
[156.63, 162.11, 172.67]
[157.48, 163.83, 176.18]
[158.8, 166.51, 181.7]
Table 3: Performance comparison of ETF+ stable C with multiple crypto weights and APYs
ETF
ETF+stable C [2.5%, 5% 10%]
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return %
13.97
[13.61, 13.26, 12.55]
[13.62, 13.28, 12.59]
[13.73, 13.5, 13.03]
[13.86, 13.76, 13.56]
Volatility %
17.48
[17.08, 16.67, 15.87]
[17.08, 16.67, 15.87]
[17.07, 16.66, 15.84]
[17.06, 16.65, 15.81]
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
[0.68, 0.68, 0.66]
[0.68, 0.68, 0.67]
[0.69, 0.69, 0.7]
[0.7, 0.71, 0.73]
Downside Deviation %
13.00
[12.71, 12.42, 11.84]
[12.71, 12.42, 11.83]
[12.7, 12.4, 11.79]
[12.69, 12.38, 11.74]
Sortino Ratio
0.92
[0.91, 0.91, 0.89]
[0.91, 0.91, 0.9]
[0.92, 0.93, 0.94]
[0.93, 0.95, 0.98]
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
[149.56, 148.1, 145.21]
[149.6, 148.18, 145.36]
[150.06, 149.09, 147.17]
[150.61, 150.18, 149.33]
Table 4: Performance comparison of ETF+ BTC with multiple crypto weights and APYs
ETF
ETF+BTC [2.5%, 5% 10%]
No APY
min
mean
max
Geometric Return %
13.97
[18.14, 22.09, 29.44]
[18.14, 22.1, 29.45]
[18.3, 22.4, 30.03]
[18.7, 23.17, 31.5]
Volatility %
17.48
[18.1, 19.18, 22.03]
[18.1, 19.18, 22.03]
[18.12, 19.22, 22.12]
[18.15, 19.32, 22.32]
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
[0.89, 1.05, 1.25]
[0.89, 1.05, 1.25]
[0.9, 1.06, 1.27]
[0.92, 1.1, 1.32]
Downside Deviation %
13.00
[13.18, 13.61, 14.94]
[13.18, 13.61, 14.94]
[13.18, 13.61, 14.95]
[13.18, 13.62, 15.0]
Sortino Ratio
0.92
[1.22, 1.48, 1.84]
[1.22, 1.48, 1.84]
[1.24, 1.5, 1.87]
[1.27, 1.55, 1.97]
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
[169.17, 187.67, 225.66]
[169.18, 187.69, 225.69]
[169.89, 189.18, 228.93]
[171.7, 192.96, 237.18]
==PAGE:66==
Performance of chosen packages with 2.5%, 5% and 10% cryptocurrency weight on all APYs
57
Table 5: Performance comparison of ETF+top 10 C(w) with multiple crypto weights and APYs
ETF
ETF+top 10 C(w) [2.5%, 5% 10%]
No Apy
min
mean
max
Geometric Return %
13.97
[19.74, 24.98, 34.3]
[19.77, 25.05, 34.41]
[20.0, 25.49, 35.22]
[20.46, 26.36, 36.82]
Volatility %
17.48
[18.78, 20.85, 25.82]
[18.79, 20.86, 25.84]
[18.82, 20.94, 25.98]
[18.88, 21.08, 26.26]
Sharpe Ratio
0.68
[0.94, 1.1, 1.25]
[0.95, 1.1, 1.25]
[0.96, 1.12, 1.28]
[0.98, 1.16, 1.33]
Downside Deviation %
13.00
[13.29, 13.91, 15.61]
[13.29, 13.91, 15.62]
[13.29, 13.92, 15.63]
[13.29, 13.92, 15.65]
Sortino Ratio
0.92
[1.33, 1.65, 2.07]
[1.34, 1.66, 2.07]
[1.35, 1.69, 2.13]
[1.39, 1.75, 2.22]
Final Portfolio Value
151.03
[176.5, 202.06, 253.45]
[176.65, 202.37, 254.13]
[177.73, 204.63, 259.0]
[179.89, 209.13, 268.76]
==PAGE:67==
==PAGE:68==
