==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master Thesis in Management Engineering
Solving a Hierarchical Facility
Location & Vehicle Routing
Problem
Jens Ettrich - S203029
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Richard Martin Lusby
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademievej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem is a problem where goods are
moved through a network, using vehicle fleets, to fulfill delivery requests.
All goods originate from a depot and must pass through an intermediate
facility, called satellite, before being delivered at their final destination. The
problem is separated into two echelons. The first echelon consists of depots
and satellites, while the second consists of satellites and customers. It is
our job to choose, from a set of predetermined locations, the combination of
depots and satellites. The goal is to minimize the total cost, including the
cost of vehicle routes in both echelons and the cost of opening facilities. In
this work the impact of allowing split deliveries, meaning multiple vehicles
may be used to visit the same customer, is examined.
Two mathematical models that describe this problem are presented. We
propose using Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search to solve the problem.
This algorithm has already been used to solve the Two-Echelon Location
Routing Problem with single deliveries and is considered a state of the art
method. Moreover, the algorithm is proven to perform well on the Vehicle
Routing Problem and its relaxation with split deliveries.
The heuristic is tested in two sets of benchmark instances, 54 problems
in total. The instances feature up to 200 customers, 10 satellites, and a
single depot. For single deliveries, the algorithm is able to produce optimal
results for 22 out of 54 instances and 17 more solution that are within 1%
of the optimal solution. However, it is outperformed by state of the art
algorithms, indicating that the implementation could have been improved.
By introducing split deliveries our algorithm is able improve 39 out of
54 instances.
Additionally, the results of the computational experiment
indicate that the primary savings, when introducing split deliveries, are
related to changes in the primary routing decisions.
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
ALNS
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
BKS
Best Known Solutions
CG
Column Generation
CWSA
Clarke and Wright Savings Algorithm
GRASP
Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedure
ILS
Iterated Local Search
LNS
Large Neighbourhood Search
LRP
Location Routing Problem
LRP2E
Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem
LS
Local Search
MIP
Mixed-Integer Programming
SA
Simulated Annealing
SDVRP
Vehicle Routing Problem with Split Delivery
VNS
Variable Neighbourhood Search
VRP
Vehicle Routing Problem
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary
i
Abbreviations
ii
Contents
iii
Introduction
1
1
Related Works
3
1.1
LRP2E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Split Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Mathematical Formulation
8
3
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
12
3.1
ALNS for LRP2E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Initial Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Heuristic Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Destroy Operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Repair Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Neighbourhood Configuration Moves . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Split Delivery Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.1
First Echelon Routing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.2
Second Echelon Operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Parameter Tuning
31
4.1
Tuning Instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Predetermined Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
4.3
Tested Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Number of Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Satellite Reconfiguration Frequency . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.3
Starting Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.4
Local Search Parameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Operator Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.1
Destroy Operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.2
Repair Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.3
Neighbourhood Configuration Moves . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Computational Study
49
5.1
Test Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Single Deliveries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Numerical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.2
Result Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Split Deliveries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.1
Test: Quick Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.2
Numerical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3.3
Results Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Problem Variation
60
6.1
Mathematical Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
ALNS Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
63
Appendices
65
Appendix A
Appendix
66
A.1 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2 Alternative LRP2E Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
72
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
In this work, we explore the hierarchical facility location problem with in-
tegrated routing decisions in the context of an optimization problem. In
the literature, problems that combine location and routing decisions are
referred to as Location Routing Problems (LRPs). Previous studies inves-
tigate hierarchical structures for LRPs under the umbrella of multi-echelon
distribution systems, i.e. networks where a product moves from its origin
to a customer through a number of intermediate facilities (Jesus Gonzalez-
Feliu 2009).
Here, we consider a two-echelon distribution system, commonly referred
to as Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem (LRP2E). The goal of solving
LRP2E is to determine a combination of depots and intermediate facilities,
called satellites, that minimizes both the cost of opening these facilities and
routing. These problems consider each echelon in isolation, thus referring
to them as first (or primary) and second (or secondary) echelon. The first
echelon connects depots and satellites whereas the second echelon connects
the satellites to the customers. One real world application of this problem
arises within city logistics where its goal is reducing traﬀic in the city cen-
ter. A core concept for achieving this goal is to reduce the number of large
vehicles driving in city centers. One solution is for logistics providers to
design routes where large vehicles go transfer platforms where their load is
redistributed to smaller vehicles (Yang and Zeng 2018). A different appli-
cation for LRP2E arises in the dairy industry where whey, a byproduct of
making cheese, is transferred to a collection center to be processed, before
being moved to a refinery (Esmaeilbeigi et al. 2021).
By definition, every LRP2E has at least one depot, a number of satellites
to choose from, and a number of customers with a known demand.
It
features two vehicle fleets.
One delivers goods from depots to satellites
and the other delivers goods from satellites to customers. LRP2E assumes
both fleets are assigned separate fixed cost and capacity. Additionally, all
vehicles must start and end their route at the same facility. Furthermore,
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
LRP2E assumes that a vehicle can only visit a node when it is able to
deliver its full demand, however, this requirement is relaxed, ergo, allowing
split deliveries.
The Vehicle Routing Problem with Split Delivery (SDVRP) was first in-
troduced by Dror and Trudeau (1989) as a relaxation to the Vehicle Routing
Problem (VRP). Since its introduction, multiple studies investigated the
effects of split deliveries on VRP. However, as of our knowledge, this is the
first time that a LRP2E with split deliveries (on all echelons) is considered.
LRP2E combines two computationally diﬀicult problems. Consequen-
tially, this makes it computationally taxing because it inherits their NP-
hard status (Crainic et al. 2011). Therefore, the time for solving problems
optimally using exact methods scales exponentially with the number of vari-
ables and even medium sized problems can require an unfeasible amount of
time. Consequentially, a meta-heuristic approach is proposed in this work.
In this study, we examine the effect of introducing split deliveries to
the LRP2E. For this purpose a meta-heuristic, in the shape of Adaptive
Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS), is implemented and used to generate
solutions.
First, we compare its results, using only single deliveries, to
solutions generated by state of the art algorithms. Consequently, we repeat
the experiment with split deliveries enabled. By comparing the two sets of
results, we seek to establish proof that allowing multiple visits per customer
(or satellite) reduces the cost of solutions. If there are improvements, we
will analyse root causes of the cost reductions. Moreover, this work seeks
to explain possible changes in the interaction of first and second echelon.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows: Chapter 1 reviews
relevant literature; Chapter 2 formally defines LRP2E; Chapter 3 describes
the general ALNS as well as the specific version implemented to solve
LRP2E; Chapter 4 shows the process of parameter tuning. Moreover, it
contains an initial analysis of the performance of singular components of
the algorithm; Chapter 5 contains results of computational tests and dis-
cusses them. It contains a comparison with state of the art algorithms for
LRP2E and a comparison of results when LRP2E is solved with and with-
out split deliveries; Chapter 6 formally defines a second, generalized LRP2E
and introduces any changes from the initial model; Chapter 7 summarizes
our findings and concludes this work.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Related Works
The introduction briefly addressed the basics of LRP2E and SDVRP. This
section offers an in depth review of the related literature. Comprehensive
surveys have been assembled by Cuda, Guastaroba, and M. G. Speranza
(2015) and Drexl and Schneider (2015) regarding LRP2E as well as Claudia
Archetti and Maria Grazia Speranza (2008) for the SDVRP. The remainder
of this chapter are split into two sections: section 1.1 reviews literature in
LRP2E and section 1.2 reviews relevant works in SDVRP
1.1
LRP2E
In order to classify different instances of LRP2E Crainic et al. (2011) pro-
pose the following notation to summarize its basic details: (λ/M1/.../Mλ−1)
where λ is the number of echelons and Mi is the distribution type used to
connect stages i and i + 1. The distinction that is made is either return
trips only, notated with Ri, or routes, noted with Ti. Moreover, stages that
are subject to location decisions have their distribution type over-lined.
One of the earliest works classified as LRP2E is the case study by Jacob-
sen and Madsen (1980), which analyzes the distribution of newspapers in
Denmark. They describe the problem as (3/T/T), where the primary facil-
ities (printing oﬀices) are already known and only the optimal combination
of secondary facilities must be determined. This falls within the category
of shared node problems where facilities, in their case transfer points that
require no physical set-up, may be located at customer nodes. Instead of for-
mulating a mathematical model to express the problem they use heuristics
to find a solution.
A case study on whey relocation for the dairy industry by Esmaeilbeigi
et al. (2021) also considers a shared node LRP2E. The key difference to
Jacobsen and Madsen is that they must make both primary and secondary
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Related Works
facility decisions. Moreover, primary facilities must be placed on top of a
secondary facility. Based on their mathematical model, they formulate the
problem as (3/R/R), which they solve using Benders Decomposition.
Xu et al. (2021) formulate a mathematical model that describe a (3/T/T)
problem for a case study on waste management in France. A key difference
to other models, there are both first and second echelon locations already ex-
isting. They research a reverse logistic network, meaning that commodities
are picked up from several locations, collected and processed at treatment
centers, and delivered to a refinement plant. Their model allows different
nodes to have multiple purposes. However, they specify that there exist
rules for combinations of facilities that are not allowed to share a node.
To the best of our knowledge, Crainic et al. (2011) are the first to formu-
late LRP2E mathematically. They propose three Mixed-Integer Program-
ming (MIP) models using one, two or three indices for the routing variables.
They solve the problem using exact methods for small to medium-sized in-
stances. However, their results indicate that more elaborate methods are re-
quired to solve the problem well. The authors determine that the NP-hard
nature of the problem favours heuristics solution approaches, as instances
become more realistic in size.
Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon (2012b) consider a special case with only
one available location for the primary facility, which falls into the (3/T/T)
classification. They propose heuristics based on Greedy Randomised Adap-
tive Search Procedure (GRASP) as a means of generating quality solutions
quickly.
They describe four construction heuristics used in the GRASP
procedure, two variable neighbourhood descent methods for improving the
solutions and an intensification strategy named path re-linking. They test
their algorithm on two sets of instances that have been used as benchmark
instances for LRP2E ever since. In another study, they solve these instances
using iterative local search complemented with path re-linking. Both stud-
ies support the idea that path re-linking is a reliable intensification strategy
(Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon 2012a).
Boccia et al. (2010) describe a LRP2E problem which is categorized by
(3/T/T), however, they do not provide a mathematical formulation in their
work. They solve it by using Tabu-Search and describe in great detail the
different moves they implemented to generate their solutions.
Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic (2012) propose an exact method in
Branch-and-Cut to generate good lower bounds as well as a meta-heuristic
in ALNS to find good upper bounds. To eﬀiciently implement their branch-
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Split Delivery
5
ing strategy, they formulate a two index vehicle flow model similar to
Crainic et al. (2011). Both their exact and heuristic methods utilize de-
composition of LRP2E into two isolated LRPs.
Their strategy revolves
around solving the problems iteratively, starting with the second echelon
and then moving to the first. Their computational study is performed on
benchmark instances and shows that ALNS outperforms numerous other
algorithms, including the Iterative Local search and GRASP presented by
Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon.
Schwengerer, Pirkwieser, and Raidl (2012) extend a Variable Neighbour-
hood Search (VNS) to solve a (3/T/T) problem. They conduct an experi-
mental study, including tests on the aforementioned benchmark instances,
and compare their results with Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon’s algorithms
and Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic’s ALNS. Their results show that
VNS outperforms ALNS.
H. Li and S. Li (2020) describe a two-echelon network that fits a (3/T/T)
classification. However, they do not provide a mathematical model. They
design a simulated annealing heuristic with a Tabu-Search component for an
LRP2E with fuzzy demands and time windows. They test their algorithm
on instances with 50 customers or fewer, using one of the aforementioned
bench-marking sets. While their algorithm outperforms the solution strat-
egy initially proposed by Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon, the approach itself
is outperformed by Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainics ALNS.
Recently, Gandra et al. (2021) considered LRP2E with loading restric-
tions and split deliveries on the first echelon. Two MIP models are presented,
a one index formulation similar to Crainic et al. and one LRP formulation
with split deliveries on the first echelon. Like Nguyen, Prins, and Prod-
hon, they propose an Iterated Local Search (ILS) for solving the problem
although they include several adaptations related to the loading of vehicles.
The computational study performed on benchmark instances shows that
their ILS outperforms the ALNS.
1.2
Split Delivery
Claudia Archetti, Savelsbergh, and Grazia Speranza (2006; 2008) studies
are dedicated to analysing the problem itself. They establish that a tight
bound for savings, 50% of the optimal VRP objective value, exists.
In
==PAGE:12==
6
1 Related Works
the case of small vehicle capacities, they show that savings are at most 25
percent of the VRP solution. In addition to that, there is evidence that
savings are primarily related to reducing the number of routes. Therefore,
this gain is dependant on the characteristics of the problem and, especially,
on the relation between average customer demand and the vehicle capacity.
They state that optimal conditions for splitting deliveries are an average
customer demand between half and three quarters of the vehicle capacity.
Dror and Trudeau (1989) laid the groundwork for SDVRP as they were
the first to formulate it as a relaxation for VRP. They provide a formulation
for both a regular VRP and a SDVRP. Moreover, they provide theoretical
proof that the optimal solution to SDVRP is at least as good or better than
the optimal solution of a VRP. Additionally, the authors provide theoretical
foundations regarding the structure of an optimal solution for the problem.
The authors propose a heuristic method to solve the problem and perform
a computational experiment that shows that introducing split deliveries
generates cheaper solutions. They observe consistent improvements as long
as the average demand of all customers is above ten percent of a vehicle’s
capacity. Moreover, their experiment indicates that cost savings increase
when the average demand of customers increase.
Different heuristic methods have been proposed in the literature to solve
the SDVRP. For example, Wilck IV and Cavalier (2012a) describe a mod-
ular construction heuristic with three steps. For each step, they propose
multiple components, leading to a total of 72 possible combinations. Their
computational study shows that there is a set of nine combinations that
generates especially promising results. A number of authors propose varia-
tions of Local Search (LS) algorithms. Dror and Trudeau (1990) algorithm
fall into this category. Dror and Trudeaus method is based on generating
a single solution and performing a LS that adds properties of an optimal
SDVRP solution to the route. Another LS approach has been formulated
in Tabu-Search. Customers are inserted in their cheapest position before
being removed from all other routes. Then, removing customers inserted
by this method is forbidden by the Tabu-List (Archetti, M G Speranza,
and Hertz 2006). A LS variation is formulated by Silva, Subramanian, and
Ochi (2015) in ILS. ALNS has been also been used to effectively solve the
SDVRP and variations thereof (Gu et al. 2019; F. Guo, Z. Huang, and W.
Huang 2021; Palomo-Martínez, Salazar-Aguilar, and Gilbert Laporte 2017).
Some authors have formulated swarm intelligence algorithms for solving
the SDVRP, specifically, Particle Swarm Optimization Chen and J. Guo
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Split Delivery
7
(2018) and Ant Colony Optimization Ochelska-Mierzejewska (2020). An-
other approach is presented in genetic algorithms where many solutions
are generated and individual elements combined in an attempt to create
better ones (Wilck IV and Cavalier 2012b; Rattanamanee 2021; Gao, Sun,
and Yuan 2019). A special case is the memetic algorithm developed by
Boudia, Prins, and Reghioui (2007) which combines a genetic algorithm
with a local search that features special neighbourhood moves to introduce
split deliveries.
Claudia Archetti, M Grazia Speranza, and Savelsbergh (2008) present a
methodology that combines heuristic and exact methods. They formulate
a path-based SDVRP using a set of heuristically assembled routes as input.
Only high quality routes are supposed to be used. The quality of routes is
determined by evaluating the attractiveness of the used paths. Another at-
tempt at combining exact and heuristic methods is proposed by Gulczynski,
Golden, and Wasil (2010), where solutions are generated heuristically and
then entered into a MIP solver. The model maximizes the potential savings
that can be achieved through reallocation of customers to other routes.
Column Generation (CG) and branching schemes are examples of ex-
act solution methods found in the literature. Jin, Liu, and Eksioglu (2008)
formulate a path-based model and a corresponding pricing problem that ob-
tains lower bounds. Additionally, they describe an iterative CG process that
can generate upper bounds. Another approach that uses CG is Branch-and-
Price-and-Cut, where a sub-problem (called pricing problem) is solved to
generate new columns. The SDVRP has been solved using this strategy (C.
Archetti, N. Bianchessi, and M. G. Speranza 2011). This method has also
been used to solve an extended SDVRP with commodity constraints (Clau-
dia Archetti, Nicola Bianchessi, and M. Grazia Speranza 2015; Gschwind,
Nicola Bianchessi, and Irnich 2019). Branch-and-Cut (without CG) is a
simpler method and used to solve various instances of SDVRP. Among oth-
ers, there are formulations for the traditional problem (Claudia Archetti,
Nicola Bianchessi, and M Grazia Speranza 2014) and an extension with
loading constraints (Ferreira, Queiroz, and Toledo 2021).
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Mathematical
Formulation
LRP2E is a network design problem, therefore, it can be described on a
complete symmetric digraph G = (V, E). There are three types of facil-
ities on the graph: Depots, Satellites, and Customers. Consequently, we
can partition the graph into three different sets. The potential depot set
R = {1, 2, ..., l}, the potential satellite set S = {l + 1, l + 2, ..., l + m}, and
the customer locations T = {l + m + 1, l + m + 2, ..., l + m + n}. Every arc
that connects a node-pair (i,j) is associated with travel cost cij. Only arcs
connecting nodes on the same echelon are traversed, thus, costs are sepa-
rated into cDS
i,j and cSC
i,j . Parameter cDS
i,j denotes the cost of arcs connecting
depots and satellites, while cSC
i,j denotes the cost of using arcs connecting
satellites and customers. We assume the following properties to be true: All
customers have a known demand Dt that must be met; Satellites have lim-
ited throughput capacities Cs; while depots are assumed to have unlimited
capacity. Moreover, opening depots or satellites induces costs Or and Os.
A homogeneous vehicle fleet of KDS units connects depots and satellites,
with a cost per vehicle of F DS and capacity QDS. A second homogeneous
fleet with KSC units connects satellites to customers. The associated cost
and capacity are F SC and QSC, respectively.
A LRP2E model that integrates split deliveries can be formulated by
combining the model forumlated by Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon (2012b)
with properties of the SDVRP developed by Dror and Trudeau (1989). A
three index formulation is used where xi,j,k = 1 when a secondary vehicle
k traverses an arc (i, j), ys,t,k ∈Z+ is the amount delivered to a customer
t through a secondary vehicle k from satellite s, ws,k = 1 if vehicle k is
assigned to (and starts its tour from) satellite s, and zs = 1 if satellite s
is opened. A set of variables with equivalent function and structure are
used to model the first echelon. These are ηi,j,k for traversing arcs, µr,s,k
==PAGE:15==
2 Mathematical Formulation
9
as delivered quantities for satellites, ζr,k as vehicle assignment variables
and, finally, ψr for indicating opened depots. Using this information the
following mathematical model can be formulated:
==PAGE:16==
10
2 Mathematical Formulation
min
∑
i∈R∪S
∑
j∈R∪S
∑
k∈KDS
ηi,j,kcDS
i,j +
∑
r∈R

ψrOr +
∑
k∈KDS
ζr,kF DS


+
∑
i∈S∪T
∑
j∈S∪T
∑
k∈KSC
xi,j,kcSC
i,j +
∑
s∈S

zsOs +
∑
k∈KSC
ws,kF SC


(2.1)
s.t
∑
j∈S∪T
xi,j,k =
∑
j∈S∪T
xj,i,k
∀i ∈S ∪T, k ∈KSC
(2.2)
∑
i∈S′
∑
j∈S′
xi,j,k ≤|S| −1
∀S′ ∈T, |S′| ≥2, k ∈KSC
(2.3)
∑
s∈S
ws,k ≤1
∀k ∈KSC
(2.4)
∑
k∈KSC
ws,k ≤|KSC| · zs
∀s ∈S
(2.5)
ws,k ≥zs +
∑
t∈T
xs,t,k −1
∀s ∈S, k ∈KSC
(2.6)
ws,k ≤
∑
t∈T
xs,t,k
∀s ∈S, k ∈KSC
(2.7)
∑
i∈S∪T
xi,s,k ≤ws,k
∀s ∈S, k ∈KSC
(2.8)
∑
t∈T
ys,t,k ≤QSC · ws,k
∀s ∈S, k ∈KSC
(2.9)
∑
s∈S
∑
k∈KSC
ys,t,k = Dt
∀t ∈T
(2.10)
ys,t,k ≤Dt ·
∑
i∈S∪T,i̸=t
xi,t,k
∀s ∈S, t ∈T, k ∈KSC
(2.11)
∑
j∈T
∑
k∈KSC
ys,t,k ≤Ci
∀i ∈S
(2.12)
∑
r∈R
∑
κ∈KDS
µr,s,κ =
∑
t∈T
∑
k∈KSC
ys,t,k
∀s ∈S
(2.13)
∑
j∈R∪S
ηi,j,k =
∑
j∈R∪S
ηj,i,k
∀i ∈R ∪S, k ∈KDS
(2.14)
∑
i∈S′
∑
j∈S′
ηi,j,k ≤|S′| −1
∀S′ ∈S, |S′| ≥2, k ∈KDS
(2.15)
∑
i∈R∪S,i̸=s
ηi,s,k ≤zs
∀s ∈S, k ∈KDS
(2.16)
∑
r∈R
ζr,k ≤1
∀k ∈KDS
(2.17)
∑
k∈KDS
ζr,k ≤|KDS| · ψr
∀r ∈R
(2.18)
ζr,k ≥ψr +
∑
s∈S
ηr,s,k −1
∀r ∈R, k ∈KDS
(2.19)
ζr,k ≤
∑
s∈S
ηr,s,k
∀r ∈R, k ∈KDS
(2.20)
∑
i∈R∪S
ηi,r,k ≤ζr,k
∀r ∈R, k ∈KDS
(2.21)
∑
s∈S
µr,s,k ≤QDS · ζr,k
∀r ∈R, k ∈KDS
(2.22)
µr,s,k ≤Ci ·
∑
i∈R∪S,i̸=s
ηi,s,k
∀s ∈S, k ∈KDS, r ∈R
(2.23)
==PAGE:17==
2 Mathematical Formulation
11
The objective function (2.1) minimizes the sum of all costs related to the
problem.
These include the cost of routing, opening facilities and fixed
vehicle cost. The costs are applied to both echelons.
The constraints related to routing and vehicle assignment follow the
same structure for both echelons. The defining differences are the variable
names and indexing.
We use common flow conservation (2.2 and 2.13) and sub-tour elimina-
tion constraints (2.3 and 2.15). Moreover, each vehicle is assigned at most
once (2.4 and 2.17) and only to an open facility (2.5 and 2.18). The con-
straints defined in 2.5 and 2.6 or 2.19 and 2.20 enforce that a vehicle is
only assigned to a facility when leaving it and that it cannot be assigned
without leaving. Finally, any vehicle can only enter the facility to which it
is assigned (2.7 and 2.21).
No vehicle can deliver more goods in their tour than its capacity allows
(2.9 and 2.22) and the combined quantity leaving a satellite cannot exceed
its capacity (2.12). Additionally, equations 2.9 and 2.22 enforce that goods
delivered by a vehicle are taken from the satellite from which the vehicle
starts its tour. A customer or satellite can only receive goods from a vehicle
that uses an arc going into their node (2.11 and 2.23). In the second echelon,
all customer demands must be fulfilled (2.10), whereas on the first echelon,
the satellites must be supplied with a large enough quantity to load all vehi-
cles with the required quantities (2.13). On the first echelon, an additional
routing constraint prohibits vehicles from entering closed satellites (2.16).
We verify the model methodologically by creating different scenarios to
confirm specific constraints and inserting solutions into a MIP solver. We
inspect the MIP solver’s feasibility status for correctness. We verify con-
straints by changing inputs on a very small instance, thus, making certain
actions too attractive for the model to not use them, unless, the constraints
are formulated correctly. For example, vehicle assignment constraints are
tested by allocating negative fixed costs to vehicles, making it attractive to
use as many as possible. Concurrently, they are constrained to a single visit,
ensuring that the optimal solution will default to one route per customer.
Thus, minimizing costs infinitely, unless, the vehicle assignment constraints
are correct.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3
Adaptive Large
Neighbourhood Search
Ropke and Pisinger (2006) first proposed ALNS as an extension to Large
Neighbourhood Search (LNS) which was introduced by Shaw (1997). More-
over, they formulate a general framework and prove its effectiveness for
VRP and variations thereof (Pisinger and Ropke 2007). As mentioned in
section 1.2, ALNS has also been used to generate results for routing with
split deliveries (Gu et al. 2019; F. Guo, Z. Huang, and W. Huang 2021;
Palomo-Martínez, Salazar-Aguilar, and Gilbert Laporte 2017) and LRP2E
(Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic 2012).
It is based on LNS and the ruin and recreate method formulated by
Schrimpf et al. (2000), therefore ,one of the core principles of ALNS is to
first destroy and then repair a starting solution. This repeats until it reaches
a stopping criterion. Changes to the solution are made through heuristics,
which can be separated into two sets HD and HR which are known as destroy
and repair operators, respectively. Because operators are called repeatedly
all heuristics used in ALNS should be quick to execute. Every iteration,
two heuristics, one from HD and from HR, are independently chosen via
roulette wheel selection. This process of selecting an operator takes place
in the adaptive layer and it considers each operators past performance to
control their respective likelihood of being selected. Past success of any
operator i is measured by a score πi, where large values indicate that a
heuristic has performed well (Pisinger and Ropke 2007). Assuming that
HX is a generic set of heuristics then operator i from this set is selected
with probability
p(x ←−i) =
πi
∑
j∈HX πj
(3.1)
At the end of each iteration, when it is known whether the selected heuristics
==PAGE:19==
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
13
were successful, the scores πi are updated for all heuristics. Following the
method used by Pisinger and Ropke (2007), scores are based on a collection
of data that is assembled over a number of iterations and calculated as
follows:
πi,j+1 = ρπi,j
ai
+ (1 −ρ)πi,j,
where πi,j+1 is an operators score for the next iteration, πi,j its cumulative
score during the observed segment j and ai the number of times it has been
used during the segment. ρ is the reaction parameter and controls the im-
pact of current observations compared to the last segments score. Values
close to one for ρ indicate that scores are based more on recent observa-
tions whereas values close to zero mean that the recent observations are
factored in slowly. It is mentioned that adjustments made to scores de-
Table 3.1. Pseudo-Code for the general ALNS
1.
Initial Solution: x, x∗←−ConstructionHeuristic(I)
2.
Repeat
3.
Select Destroy Method: N −←−Roulette(HD, πD)
4.
Select Repair Method: N + ←−Roulette(HR, πR)
5.
Destroy Solution: x′ ←−N −(x)
6.
Repair Solution: x′ ←−N +(x′)
7.
IF accept solution
8.
Update Solution: x ←x′
9.
IF f(x′) < f(x∗)
10.
Update Best: x∗←x′
11.
END IF
12.
END IF
13.
Update Scores: πD, πR ←Update(π,x,x′)
14.
Until Stop criterion is reached
15.
return x∗
pend on whether operators are successful or not, as such, success must be
defined within the scope of ALNS. This definition and subsequent score ad-
justment is provided by a master local search framework, which determines
which solutions are accepted or rejected. An accepted solution is used as
the starting solution in the next iteration (Pisinger and Ropke 2007). An
example of pseudo-code for ALNS is shown in Table 3.1
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
3.1
ALNS for LRP2E
Simulated Annealing (SA) is implemented as the master local search frame-
work.
Therefore, every iteration, one solution is sampled by destroying
and repairing the starting solution x. This candidate solution, denoted as
x′, is now either accepted or rejected based on its objective value, thereby,
providing an intuitive measure of success. Logically, rejecting a solution is
considered a failure whilst accepting a solution is considered a success. The
SA criterion always accepts improving solutions. If a solution is worse it
can still be randomly accepted, however, the this likelihood depends on the
decline in solution quality. This concept is used to measure different levels
of success. A distinction is made between solutions with a better objective
value than their predecessor and accepted solutions with worse objective
values than their predecessor. The probability of accepting worse solution
is given by
p(x ←−x′) = e−f(x′)−f(x)
T
,
where T > 0 is the current temperature. Temperature T controls the like-
lihood of acceptance with higher values making it more likely. A starting
temperature Tstart is determined when ALNS is initialized and adjusted
throughout its execution. Following the approach laid out by Ropke and
Pisinger (2006), the starting value is set by inspecting an initial solution,
thereby, making it specific not only to the problem but also to individual
instances. The starting temperature, given a feasible solution, is defined
so that a solution that is w% worse than the current solution is accepted
with a probability of 50%. The temperature is continually adjusted using a
cooling rate c. In this work, a standard exponential cooling rate is chosen.
Therefore, the temperature at any given time can be defined as
T = Tstart · cτ,
(3.2)
where the cooling rate is given by 0 ≤c < 1. τ is a parameter that counts
iterations. When τ increases, the temperature decreases. The concept of
reheating can be introduced by reducing τ when certain conditions are met
as, otherwise, τ increases steadily. Reheating is used to aid the algorithm
in escaping local minima by increasing the temperature and, thereby, in-
creasing the likelihood of accepting a solution with a worse objective value
(Dowsland and Thompson 2012).
==PAGE:21==
3.1 ALNS for LRP2E
15
Using ALNS to solve LRP2E requires a number of changes compared to
solving a VRP. The concept presented here takes inspiration from Contardo,
Hemmelmayr, and Crainic (2012) who address the same problem. One of
the key differences is the limitation of the search space to feasible solutions
only. The significance of this change lies in the added limitation of repair
operators that are now required to perform additional checks to prevent the
violation of constraints. Additionally, the ALNS presented here is designed
for single depot instances which simplifies the solution procedure on the
first echelon.
LRP2E with a single depot is solved using ALNS by making the assump-
tion that a combination of open satellites cannot be changed. Because only
routing decisions are considered, it is comparable to treating the first eche-
lon as a regular VRP and the second echelon as a VRP with multiple depots.
In a normal iteration, ALNS operators from sets HD and HR are called to
destroy and repair vehicle routes on the second echelon. If the changes lead
to the first echelon routes being infeasible, the first echelon is solved again.
In order to generate good solutions, a multitude of satellite configu-
rations will have to be explored. Therefore, we introduce a third set of
heuristics HN. This concept is similar to large destroy operators as pro-
posed by Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic. All operators featured in
this set are used to change the combination of opened satellites. Solutions
generated by these operators cannot be rejected to ensure the exploration
of a suﬀicient number of satellite configurations. Because every satellite
combination should be explored thoroughly, operators from this set are
only called after ω iterations have passed. τ counts the number of passed
iterations by increasing after each iteration. Exceptions are made whenever
a solution with either a new local, meaning for the current combination of
satellites, or global best objective value are found. In the former scenario,
τ does not increase whereas the latter scenario changes τ by doing
τ = ⌈(1 −γ)τ⌉,
(3.3)
where 0 < γ < 1 is a parameter that determines the additional amount
of exploration allowed within a satellite configuration. Reducing τ by γ%
results in the SA acceptance criterion being reheated. The intended con-
sequence of using a percentage based reduction for the additional number
iterations is that this number becomes larger when few iteration are re-
maining before ALNS changes the satellite configuration, thus, allowing
additional exploration of promising neighbourhoods.
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
After a change in satellite configuration τ is set to zero and ALNS uses
the current solution as its starting solution. In principle, this procedure
starts a new ALNS, as such, a new starting temperature Tstart is calcu-
lated based on the initial solution. The operator scores πi to let collected
information carry over into the next execution of ALNS.
Using the aforementioned distinction between local and global best so-
lutions the measure of success is differentiated further. Rejection of a gen-
erated solution remains a failure. Generating a solution that is accepted is
the lowest tier of success. Generating a solution that replaces the local best
is the medium tier of success while generating a solution that replaces the
global best falls into the highest tier. Parameters σi are assigned to each
tier of success i where the values are increasing from one tier to the next.
It follows that:
σfailure < σlow < σmedium < σhigh
These Parameters σi are used to increment the observed scores π of opera-
tors from sets HD and HR.
Operators from set HN are used less frequently and only the best solu-
tion that is found in a generated satellite configuration is of interest, there-
fore, an different scoring system is used. The success of a configuration
change is measured after the final iteration within a satellite combination
and before the next move is selected. Success is measured by inspecting the
best objective value found for this satellite configuration and comparing it
to current best solution. We introduce four tiers of success. In order of
descending success the tiers are: (1) a new best global solution has been
found, (2) the local objective value is within 2.5% of the best objective
value, (3) the local objective value is within the interval of (2.5%;5%] of
the best objective value and (4) the objective value is higher by more than
5%. Additionally, scores are kept continually instead of being counted for
a certain number of iterations. An operators score is given by
πi = α · β + (1 −α)πi,
where α is a new reaction parameter and β is the score corresponding to the
tier of the local solution. Once scores are updated, the algorithm continues
by selecting an operator from set HN via roulette wheel selection with the
new scores as input when using the procedure described in Equation 3.1.
LS is added to enhance promising solutions. Following Contardo, Hem-
melmayr, and Crainics approach, LS is used to improve routing decisions on
==PAGE:23==
3.1 ALNS for LRP2E
17
the second echelon, when the overall objective value of a solution is within
η% of the global best solution. A simple version of LS using only 2-opt and
swap moves are used. 2-opt moves attempt to exchange the position of two
nodes within a route whereas swap exchanges two nodes from two separate
routes. Both moves use a first improvement strategy, consequently, the first
change that improves the solution is performed.
This version of ALNS is described by the pseudo-code in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2. Pseudo-Code for ALNS that is used to solve LRP2E
1.
Initial Solution: x, xL, x∗←−ConstructionHeuristic(I)
2.
Repeat
3.
Select Destroy Method: N −←−Roulette(HD, πD)
4.
Select Repair Method: N + ←−Roulette(HR, πR)
5.
Destroy Solution: x′ ←−N −(x)
6.
Repair Solution: x′ ←−N +(x′)
7.
IF Accept Solution
8.
IF f(x′) ≤(1 + η) ∗f(x∗)
9.
Improve with LS: x′ ←LS(x′)
10.
END IF
11.
IF f(x′) < f(xL)
12.
Update Local Best: xL ←x′
13.
IF f(x′) < f(x∗)
14.
Update Best: x∗←x′
15.
END IF
16.
END IF
17.
Update Solution: x ←x′
18.
END IF
19.
Update D&R Scores: πD, πR ←Update(π,x,x′, σ)
20.
Update τ
21.
IF τ = ω
22.
Update NM Scores: πN ←Update(π,x,x′)
20.
Select NM Method: N ∗←−Roulette(HN, πN)
21.
Perform NM: x, xL ←N ∗(xL)
22.
END IF
23.
Until Stop criterion is reached
24.
return x∗
==PAGE:24==
18
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
3.2
Initial Solution
An initial solution is constructed by opening the minimum number of satel-
lites with a total capacity higher than the total demand of all customers.
The satellite with the largest capacity is the first to open. Two tiebreakers
are applied to determine which facility opens if there are multiple candi-
dates.
The primary tie-breaker is lowest cost and the secondary lowest
index. A second satellite with maximum distance to the first is opened. In
a tie-breaker scenario, the same rules apply. The selection criterion for any
additional satellites is the maximum distance to all opened facilities.
Once a configuration of satellites has been determined all customers are
assigned to the facility closest to them. Should the total demand of its
assigned customers exceed a satellite’s capacity, a reallocation of customers
is performed. This reallocation removes and re-assigns one customer at a
time until no facility has any excess demand. The customer that can be
reassigned to another facility with the lowest increase in distance is selected.
If the selected customer cannot feasibly be reinserted, another is removed.
In order to prevent cycling of removals, a Tabu-List forbids a number of
recent allocations to be removed.
Once customer allocation is complete, routes are generated using Clarke
and Wright Savings Algorithm (CWSA). The algorithm is performed for
each satellite individually, thus, viewing them and their assigned customers
in isolation, treating them as a VRP. The first step of the algorithm is to
generate a set of initial routes. A route is created for all assigned customers,
with the vehicle coming and immediately going back to the satellite. The
next step is to calculate savings for merging two routes by establishing
a path between customers i and j. Savings are defined as the impact of
removing the edges from the satellite to customers i and j and adding the
edge that connects them (Clarke and Wright 1964). This yields:
Si,j = ci,0 + cj,0 −ci,j + F
(3.4)
where ci,0 is the cost of using an arc connecting customer i to its satellite.
Equation 3.4 features an additional parameter F, which denotes the fixed
cost per vehicle, because merging two routes means that only one vehicle is
used. A savings list, that contains the values Si,j for all customer pairs (i,j),
is defined. In the literature, there are two common approaches for combin-
ing routes (G. Laporte et al. 2000). They find that the so-called parallel
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Heuristic Methods
19
version consistently generates better solutions, therefore, it is implemented
here. The parallel strategy build multiple routes at once and always com-
bines the two routes that contain the customer pair (i, j) with the largest
remaining savings value. A customer pair is only eligible if both candidates
are the first or last node in a route. It should be noted that parameter F
mentioned in Equation 3.4 is fixed so that it does not change the order of
customer pairs in the savings list. However, it may enable a merge that that
would not be performed based solely on distance. Because the search space
is limited to feasible solutions only, a merge must only be executed when
the combined load of both routes does not exceed the vehicle capacity.
Once the algorithm has generated second echelon routes, it constructs
first echelon routes as well. It replaces customers with open satellites and
customer demand with outbound satellite flow. Because there is only one
depot with unlimited capacity, satellite allocation is not necessary. Routes
are constructed following the procedure described above.
Whenever ALNS constructs new first echelon solutions it uses CWSA
to do so. Because the number of satellites is limited, and because only a
selection of them will be open at any given time, it is deemed an appropriate
effort to minimize cost while also being time eﬀicient.
3.3
Heuristic Methods
3.3.1
Destroy Operators
Pisinger and Ropkes initial framework features three of the destroy moves
that we use here. Random Removal selects q customers at random and
removes them all from their routes. Similarly, Worst Removal finds and
removes q customers whose removal improves the objective value the most.
In order to compensate for each location’s position relative to other nodes,
Worst Removal normalizes the impact of removing the customer by dividing
by the distance to some of their closest nodes. Finally, Cluster Removal
selects a seed customer and removes the q −1 nearest customers. Seed cus-
tomer selection is based on the same criterion as Worst Removal, however,
instead of selecting the worst customer, it applies roulette wheel selection.
Probability calculations follow Equation 3.1, where a customer is’ score
equals their benefit of removal (Pisinger and Ropke 2007).
==PAGE:26==
20
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
The final three operators remove entire routes. When selecting initial
routes they follow the same principle. It is based on the total cost of a route.
Some customers are located further away from a satellite, therefore, it is
likely that their routes are more expensive. Therefore, when selecting routes
to remove, the cost of a route is put into relation with its customers potential
cost. The potential cost refers to a customers distance to a number of their
closest available nodes, i.e. all other customers and all opened intermediate
facilities. Finally, the probability of selecting a route is calculated by using
Equation 3.1. Then a roulette wheel selection is performed.
The first operator is Remove n-Routes, which removes a number of routes
from the solution with the number of routes being dependent on a parameter
n.
The second route related operator is called Explosive Route removal,
where only one route is selected per iteration. Then, Cluster Removal is
performed with each customer in the route being used as a seed node. This
operator assumes that customers in a chosen route are located far apart,
thereby, creating multiple small clusters. It may occur that there are two
customers in the selected route whose clusters would remove the same cus-
tomers. No replacements are used if any overlapping customers have already
been removed.
Finally, Proximity Route Destroy selects one route per iteration and
destroys a second route, which originates from a different satellite. The
second route is determined by finding the customer closest to the seed route
which is not assigned to the satellite. This operator is inspired by the Route
Redistribution (Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic 2012) and is motivated
by the same idea that some nodes may benefit from being assigned to a
different satellite.
3.3.2
Repair Operators
The repair methods included in the ALNS are Cheapest Repair, Parallel
Repair and variations of Regret Repair. All three methods fall into the cat-
egory of parallel insertion heuristics which are focused on building multiple
routes at once. Like Ropke and Pisinger’s repair operators, these heuristics
are mainly used to repair partial solutions, i.e. most customers are inserted
into existing routes. However, it is possible to create new routes at any of
the satellites. All three operators use only cost when deciding which routes
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Heuristic Methods
21
to insert customers into. Following Ropke and Pisinger’s notation, let ∆fi,r
be the change in objective value caused by inserting customer i into route r.
Any infeasible insertion of customer i into a given route r is removed from
consideration by letting ∆fi,r = ∞. For every customer i, a minimum cost
ci and corresponding position can be determined as
ci = min
r∈R{∆fi,r},
(3.5)
where R is the set of existing routes, including some empty ones used to
establish new routes to any of the satellites. For new routes, the cost of
using an additional vehicle is included (Ropke and Pisinger 2006).
Cheapest Repair is a randomised greedy heuristic that inserts one cus-
tomer into their best position. First, a customer i is randomly sampled
from the candidate pool and their minimum cost ci is determined using
Equation 3.5. Finally, the customer is inserted into the solution at its best
position. This process repeats until the candidate pool is empty.
Parallel Repair is another basic greedy heuristic. It tests the insertion of
all customers i from the candidate pool into all existing routes r. Therefore,
every customers minimum cost ci and minimum cost position are known.
The customer i with the lowest insertion cost ci is inserted into their mini-
mum cost position. This process repeats until the candidate pool is empty.
Regret Repair is a heuristic that reduces the amount of greed when
inserting customers by including look-ahead information. This is done to
assess the loss that comes from inserting customers into sub-optimal routes.
In other words, it assess the cost of insertion into the q best routes and
selects the customer where the difference from best to worst are largest.
Let ∆f q
i be the cost of inserting customer i into their qth. cheapest route,
thus, the customer that satisfies
i := arg max
i∈U
( q
∑
h=2
(∆f h
i −∆f 1
i )
)
,
(3.6)
is selected for insertion.
Ties are broken by cheapest insertion into the
customer’s best routes. Here, U is set of remaining customers and q the
regret-factor. The regret-factor is the worst insertion included in the look-
ahead, which is why this heuristic is also referred to as regret-q heuristic.
As with the other repair operators, after a customer is inserted the process
is repeated for the remaining candidate pool (Pisinger and Ropke 2007).
==PAGE:28==
22
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
Three variations of Regret Repair are included as repair operators which
are Regret-2, Regret-3 and Regret-X. The first two are performed as de-
scribed while Regret-X includes one extra step to the process: After every
insertion, a new regret-factor q is drawn from the interval of [1;4]. Follow-
ing Pisinger and Ropke, q = 1 is treated as parallel insertion Pisinger and
Ropke 2007.
It should be noted that Regret-3 and Regret-4 heuristics are imple-
mented incorrectly.
The mistake in the aforementioned regret heuristics regard Equation 3.6
which is erroneously implemented as
i := arg max
i∈U
( q
∑
h=2
(∆f h
i ) −∆f 1
i
)
(3.7)
which results in more weight being given to customers which are expensive
to insert in sub-optimal positions. Customers with more expensive second
and third best insertion costs are more likely to be inserted now as the
impact of the best insertion is lessened for higher regret factors, as seen
when transforming Equation 3.7 into
i := arg max
i∈U
( q
∑
h=2
(
∆f h
i −∆f 1
i
q −1
))
(3.8)
Setting q = 2 in Equation 3.8 shows that, despite the erroneous implemen-
tation, Regret-2 functions correctly while larger values for q diminish the
importance of the cheapest insertion.
Because the search space is limited to feasible solutions, it may occur that
a customer cannot be inserted. This would occur when no satellite has
enough capacity remaining to supply a customers demand. This scenario
can only occur after the majority of customers are already inserted, there-
fore, rejecting the solution on grounds of infeasibility would mean that the
time spent on inserting customers was wasted. There may also be instances
where there is no excess capacity, in other words, the satellites combined
capacities match the total demand exactly. When this is the case, most
solutions will be rejected due to infeasibility. Instead of having to reject
solutions, all repair heuristics remove a customer from the solution when
there are no feasible insertions.
We introduce a procedure that removes customers when repair heuristics
are unable to insert a customer. Cheapest Repair only inserts one customer
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Heuristic Methods
23
at a time, therefore, without a feasible insertion it immediately prompts the
removal of another a customer. Both Parallel-Repair and Regret-Repair test
the insertion of all remaining customers. Yet, we only perform customer
removal when the first one cannot be inserted. After the first customer’s in-
sertion has been tested, we know of at least one feasible insertion. Therefore,
we do not need to remove any customers in order to insert another.
Deciding which customer to remove follows a set of rules that is meant to
minimize both solution degradation and the number of removals. Assume
that customer i causes the removal then removing customer j from satellite
s must always fulfill
Cs −
∑
k∈As
(ys,k) + ys,j ≥Di,
(3.9)
where Cs is the capacity of the inspected satellite, ys,j the quantity delivered
to customer j from satellite s and Di the remaining demand of customer i.
The equation guarantees that customer is total demand can be assigned to
satellite s after customer j is removed. Let Bs be the subset of customers
assigned to satellite s, defined for all open satellites in set O, that fulfill
Equation 3.9. Then, ˜Bs is its subset and defined as
˜Bs := {i ∈Bs|
∑
k∈Aj
(yj,k) + ys,i ≤Cj, ∀j ∈O \ {s}}
(3.10)
and is the set of all customers that, without further removals, can be re-
allocated to another satellite. As such, one can formulate a set ˜B, which
unifies every open satellites customer list
˜B =
∪
s∈O
˜Bs
In the event that ˜B is empty, i.e. there exists no customer that can be
inserted into another satellite without requiring a removal, different rules
are applied. Let ¯Bs be a subset of customers j whose removal from satellite
s leaves it with a remaining capacity large enough to insert customer i
while not exceeding the excess capacity of the current satellite configuration
afterwards. ¯Bs is defined by
¯Bs := {j ∈Bs|Cs −
∑
k∈As
(ys,k) + ys,j −Di ≤ϵ}
==PAGE:30==
24
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
where ϵ is the excess capacity given the current combination of open satel-
lites. A final set ˆBs is defined for all satellites. ˆBs is defined as a subset of
¯Bs which includes all customers with lower demand than customer i, thus,
its definition:
ˆBs = {j ∈¯Bs|ys,j < Di}
Because customers from ˆBs are bound to reduce the excess capacity tied up
by the satellite that they are removed from, priority of removal is established
for ˆBs over ¯Bs. Using this, the customer selected for removal should always
be from the highest priority list, thus, the succession is: ˜B −→ˆB −→¯B −→B.
The criterion used for removal is minimization of distance. The distances
that are factored into the criterion are regard the customer whose insertion
needs to be enabled and the customer who is removed from the solution.
The customers distances to their two closest nodes that are assigned to
their candidate satellite are used. In other words, if customer i is assigned
to satellite s the distance to the two nearest customers assigned to s are
used. Similarly, if customer l is reassigned to satellite t their distance to
the two nearest customers assigned to t are used. We get the following
argument:
l := arg min
l∈B
(
min
j,k∈As,j̸=k {di,j + di,k} +
min
m,n∈At,m̸=n {dl,m + dl,n}
)
,
(3.11)
where As and At are all customers assigned to satellites s and t, is selected.
3.3.3
Neighbourhood Configuration Moves
Neighbourhood configuration moves HN, while similar, are treated differ-
ently than large destroy operators used by Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and
Crainic. As mentioned in section 3.1, configuration moves are performed at
the end of ALNS iterations instead of being selected in place of a destroy
operator from set HD, as seen in Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic’s
ALNS. This change causes the most significant difference as all configura-
tion moves used here always follow the same pattern. First, they adjust
the satellite configuration. Then, they perform a predetermined action to
reconstruct all affected routes. On a final note, while Contardo, Hemmel-
mayr, and Crainic large destroy operators after a number iterations where
the solution is not improved, we use neighbourhood configuration moves
after a set number of iterations.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Heuristic Methods
25
The first and simplest of the neighbourhood configuration moves is Open
Satellite. The operator chooses one satellite via roulette wheel selection
and opens it. The probability of selection is based on its distance to the
currently open facilities, where the further away it is from all others the
more likely its selection is. This is motivated by the idea that a satellite
with maximum the distance to other satellites will identify an area where
customers have low coverage and, therefore, are more likely to be part of
more expensive routes. Once a satellite is opened, a number of customers
with minimum distance are removed from their current routes and assigned
to the new facility. Customers are reassigned to satellite s until its share of
the total demand is at least proportional to its share of the total capacity
of all open satellites. As such, a threshold t is determined
t =
Cs
∑
i∈O Ci
·
∑
j∈N
Dj,
where Cs is the capacity of the new satellite, O is the set of open satellites
and N the set of all customers. Once the assigned demand of satellite s
crosses the threshold CWSA, as described in section 3.2, is performed for
the new facility. It should be noted that this operators main purpose is
the diversification of explored neighbourhoods and that it is not expected
to generate high quality solutions. The low expectation for the quality of
solutions stems from an assumption that excess capacities offer diminish-
ing returns. Therefore, the algorithm is forbidden from picking it in two
consecutive neighbourhood re-configurations.
The second neighbourhood configuration move is the Satellite Swap op-
erator. The operator closes one satellite randomly before opening other
satellites until all demand can be met. The probability of being selected
for closing depend on the utilization of the satellites capacities where low
utilization increases their likelihood of selection. The utilization rate is ex-
pressed as a fraction between the demand assigned to satellite s and its
capacity. Defining the score πs as the inverse of the utilization reflects the
desired property of low values having higher selection probability. With
only feasible solutions being explored, it follows that
1 ≤πs =
Cs
∑
j∈As Dj
≤Cs,
where As is the set of customers that are assigned to satellite s. Lower and
upper bound for πs are found by inserting the highest and lowest values
==PAGE:32==
26
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
for the demand assigned to satellite s which are its complete capacity or at
least a single unit. By inserting these terms into Equation 3.1, probabili-
ties are determined and roulette wheel selection can be performed. After a
satellite is closed, new satellites are opened until the total capacity in the
network meets or exceeds total customer demand. Again, roulette wheel
selection is used to determine which facilities to open. The probability is
inversely correlated to the distance of all customers that were assigned to
the closed facility. Customers are allocated to the newly opened facilities
using a shortest distance criterion, while maintaining feasibility regarding
capacities. Once customer allocation is feasible, CWSA is used to generate
routes for the new facilities. There may be instances where only one new fa-
cility with lower capacity than the previous is opened and not all customers
can be assigned. In such cases, customers that are not assigned are inserted
only once CWSA is finished. Once completed, any customers not in the
solution are inserted using regret repair with q = 2. A similar situation
occurs when a satellite is closed and the total capacity of the remaining
facilities still exceeds the total demand of all customers. In that case no
facility is opened and all customers are inserted via regret repair.
The final neighbourhood configuration move is called Satellite Reconfigu-
ration. This operator relies on closing all satellites at once, however, routes
are transformed into cycles instead of being destroyed. The first step is to
calculate the cheapest cost of insertion for every cycle onto every satellite.
Then, satellites are opened, one at a time, until customer demand can be
fully satisfied. The selection takes into account both a satellites opening
cost as well as its cheapest cost of inserting cycles that will fill at least 70
percent of its capacity. Once the total cost has been determined for all
candidate locations, roulette wheel selection is used to pick one satellite.
Selection probabilities are based on cost and, since it is a minimization
problem, low cost satellites are favoured. Consequently, costs are inserted
into Equation 3.1 as
1
cost. When a satellite is opened, all cycles associated
with it are removed from all remaining calculations. Once a combination
of satellites has been determined, all routes are re-inserted using parallel
insertion principle. There may be situations, most likely while attempting
reinsertion of the final few cycles, where a route cannot be reinserted. In
this situation, the cycle is completely destroyed and the customers returned
to the candidate pool. Once there are no cycles left, customers in the can-
didate pool are reinserted via regret insertion with q = 2. The search space
is diversified by introducing a condition that the first selected satellite must
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Split Delivery Adjustments
27
be new, meaning that it was not included in the previous satellite configu-
ration.
3.4
Split Delivery Adjustments
Using ALNS to introduce split deliveries requires adjustments to the algo-
rithms heuristics while the overall framework and order of execution stays
the same.
3.4.1
First Echelon Routing
The concept for including splits on the first echelon starts by constructing
feasible routes without splits via CWSA. If there are more than two routes,
including at least one return route, then the feasibility of split delivery is
tested. Let x be the initial solution and x′
s a solution where the route visit-
ing a single satellite s is removed. Then ∆fs,r is the cost of inserting that
satellite into an existing primary route. As feasibility is a concern, satellite
s’ entire outgoing quantity must be lower than the vehicles combined re-
maining capacity. Thus, setting ∆fs,q +∆fs,r = ∞removes infeasible route
combinations. For every candidate satellite s, a minimum split insertion
cost ci can be determined as
cs =
min
q,r∈R,q̸=r{∆fs,q + ∆fs,r}
where R is the set of first echelon routes existing in x′
s. Using a greedy
criterion the satellite that satisfies
s := arg min
s∈¯R cs
is selected as a candidate for splitting delivery, however, it must satisfy
f(x′
s) + cs < f(x)
Consequently, a split is only introduced when it reduces the objective value
of the previous solution. Like LS, described in section 3.1, this is an iterative
process that is repeated until no improvement is made.
==PAGE:34==
28
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
3.4.2
Second Echelon Operations
As customers can be included in multiple routes, removals are separated
into complete and partial removal. In a partial removal, a customer is only
removed from a selected route whereas complete removal deletes them from
the all routes in the current solution. Of the heuristics discussed within this
study, Remove-n-Routes and Proximity-Route-Destroy use partial removal
while the remaining operator applies complete removal.
All repair heuristics are changed to allow split insertions. In an optimal
solution for a problem with split deliveries two routes cannot have more
than one customer in common (Claudia Archetti and Maria Grazia Sper-
anza 2008). All insertion methods are changed to respect this requirement.
Additionally, the number of visits is limited to two visits per customer.
When evaluating the insertion of a customer, the algorithm is restricted to
insertions with either full delivery or partial delivery with quantities be-
tween 30 to 70 percent of the demand. All repair methods consider only
one insertion at time. Therefore, when a customer’s full demand cannot
be delivered in a single visit, they require an additional iteration to insert.
It can make sense to reflect this in the insertion cost during the decision
making process. Silva, Subramanian, and Ochi (Silva, Subramanian, and
Ochi 2015) propose adjusting the cost by dividing with the residual capac-
ity of a route, which penalizes moves that insert only low quantities. This
adjustment punishes insertions that are more likely to require additional
insertions Silva, Subramanian, and Ochi 2015. Leaning on this principle, if
inserting customer i into route r induces a cost cr while delivering quantity
yi,r of the remaining demand Di then the adjusted cost c∗
r is
c∗
r = cr · Di
yi,r
(3.12)
making the penalization dependent on every customers own demand.
Cheapest Repair and Parallel Repair are intended to be greedy repair
heuristics. Consequentially, the price adjustment in Equation 3.12 is fore-
gone during their execution. As look-ahead information is a core concept of
Regret-Heuristics they are changed to follow Equation 3.12, thus, adding an
additional layer of look-ahead information compared to the other heuristics.
We propose a new method called Quick Resolution, as a strategy to
enhance the quality of splits in the solution. It relies on immediately re-
solving the remaining capacity of a customer that is partially inserted. All
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Split Delivery Adjustments
29
customers j visited by route r that meet
yj,r ≥Di −yi,r
are considered candidates to replace customer i for a split. They are can-
didates because their quantities delivered by route r are large enough to
reallocate a suﬀiciently large amount for customer i to be inserted com-
pletely. For each candidate, the best alternative route t and insertion cost
cj is identified using the principle described in section 3.2. A customers
is fully reallocated to route t when the capacities of the new satellite and
route allow it, thus, the customer j that minimizes
j := arg min
j∈R

cj −



∆fj,r,
if full reallocation
0,
otherwise


is split.
This strategy for splitting is motivated by the idea that most
customer insertions with partial demand are performed due to the vehicle
capacity restrictions. Therefore, the last customer inserted into a route will
always be the one whose demand is split. When a Regret-Heuristic inserts
customer i with partial demand yi,r into route r with their maximum partial
delivery being yi,r = 0.7 · Di, it follows that
c∗
r = cr ·
Di
0.7Di
= cr · 10
7 ≈1.428 · Cr
Consequently, their best full insertion costs at least 42.8% more than the
best split. As regret is maximised, the second best insertion must be more
expensive. Thus, it makes sense to check if route r visits a customer j whose
insertion into a different route is cheaper. Similarly, Parallel Repair leaves
expensive to insert customers for last and it would make sense that these
customers were also split more often due to increasing scarcity of routes
with cheap insertion cost and suﬀicient demand.
LS is changed out of necessity, since split deliveries introduce two sce-
narios which should be considered to improve solutions. Both scenarios rely
on an exchange of customers from two different routes with a customer i
being part of both routes r and t.
In the first scenario, the algorithm attempts to exchange customer i
with themselves. In this case LS now tests the possibility of removing one
of the visits in favour of supplying all demand through one vehicle. The
==PAGE:36==
30
3 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
possible outcomes are (1) an exchange is not possible due to infeasibility
either in the vehicle or satellite capacities, (2) customer i can feasibly be
fully inserted into one of the two routes in which the move is performed,
and (3) customer i can feasibly be inserted in either route, then they are
removed from the route that will lead to the bigger decrease in objective
value.
In scenario two the algorithm attempts the exchange of customer i with
another customer j.
Because customer i is part of both routes, when
swapped with another customer, it is not inserted into the route a sec-
ond time, instead, the cost of insertion for customer i is set to zero and the
delivered quantity updated to the full amount.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Parameter Tuning
4.1
Tuning Instances
Prodhons LRP2E Instances is one of two sets used to benchmark algorithms
when solving LRP2E. It contains 30 instances and considers capacitated
satellites and routes.
The number of customers ranges from 20 to 200,
number of satellites is either 5 or 10, and a single depot is used. The depot
is located at coordinates (0,0) in all instances. Vehicle capacities on the
second echelon are QSC ∈{70, 140}, whereas the capacities on the first
echelon are defined to be 1.5 times the satellite capacity. Customers are
located in clusters with c denoting the number of clusters and 3 being the
largest number. The cost ci,j of using an arc connecting customers i and
j is given by the euclidean distance multiplied with 100, costs are doubled
on the first echelon. All costs are rounded to the next highest integer value.
The naming convention for this set is n−m−c−[b], where [b] is an optional
parameter to indicate increased vehicle capacities.
From this set, three instances 50 −5 −1, 100 −10 −1 and 200 −10 −2,
moving forward referred to as the small, medium and large sets, are used
to perform parameter tuning tests.
4.2
Predetermined Parameters
A number of ALNS parameters are described in section 3.1. Tuning all
parameters individually would require numerous tests. Therefore, a selec-
tion of them are fixed at values that perform well in either LRP2E (Con-
tardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic 2012) or VRP (Ropke and Pisinger 2006;
Pisinger and Ropke 2007). Presumably, parameter settings are problem
dependent and should be carefully considered.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 Parameter Tuning
Figure 4.1. Temperature cooling parameter in relation to the ALNS closeness
to reaching its termination criterion. Percentage of iterations are on the x-Axis,
cooling factor on the y-Axis. The dotted line shows the setting used by Ropke
and Pisinger in Ropke and Pisinger 2006. The solid line displays the setting used
here.
The first parameter is the cooling rate of the temperature for the SA
acceptance criterion. The rate is defined as an exponential cooling rate in
Equation 3.2 and is defined with a dependency to the number of iterations
ω between neighbourhood moves.
Using the following definition for the
cooling parameter c
c = ω −x
ω
the variable x is determined so that temperature decay follows a curve sim-
ilar to the one that can be constructed using Ropke and Pisinger’s setting.
Figure 4.1 shows the cooling factor in relation to the percentage of itera-
tions performed before neighbourhood reconfiguration. The dotted curve
displays Ropke and Pisinger’s setting with x = 6.25 whereas the solid curve
with x = 5 is used for the ALNS here. Noticeably, the solid curve decays at
a slower rate. This is a conscious decision as the original line is used for an
ALNS that iterates over 25,000 different solutions, whereas the number of
iterations within a neighbourhood is going to be lower. Thus, having higher
rate of acceptance may help explore neighbourhoods more thoroughly in less
time.
The reheating of the temperature and simultaneously the decreasing of
iterations τ for a neighbourhood move are controlled by the parameter γ,
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Predetermined Parameters
33
as defined in Equation 3.3. Reheating is a known concept, however, the
chosen implementation is not based on other works. Because, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no precedent for this concept it is intuitively set
as γ = 0.9.
The final set of predetermined parameters that are part the ALNS frame-
work are all related to the scoring system for the different heuristic operators.
The first set of parameters regards the frequent operators from sets HD and
HR. The values of parameters σi for the different tiers of success are directly
taken from Ropke and Pisingers implementation. They also consider three
tiers of success, albeit with a different interpretation (Ropke and Pisinger
2006). As mentioned in section 3.1 success is only measured by acceptance
of solutions and their relation to the local and global best solutions, thus,
the reward for the different tier are defined as
σfailure = 1
σlow = 9
σmedium = 13
σhigh = 33
Neighbourhood configuration move scores are the second set of parameters
that need to be defined. The new reaction parameter is set as α = 0.6
which means that the configuration moves react strongly to recent results.
If x∗is the best solution then the iteration score β is
β =













1,
if f(x) = f(x∗)
0.7,
if f(x∗) < f(x) ≤1.025 · f(x∗)
0.4,
if 1.025 · f(x∗) < f(x) ≤1.05 · f(x∗)
0.2,
otherwise
Finally, there are the destroy operator parameters which control the de-
gree of destruction. For Random Removal the number of customers to be
removed is set as suggested by Pisinger and Ropke, meaning that an in-
terval is defined from which a number is drawn every time the operator is
used. Bounds are set, following their recommendation, to min{0.1 · C; 30}
and max{0.4 · C; 60} Pisinger and Ropke 2007. Worst Removal applies the
same logic and interval as Random Removal to determine how many cus-
tomers to remove. Cluster Removal randomises the number of removals by
randomly drawing a number from an interval, however, the interval bounds
==PAGE:40==
34
4 Parameter Tuning
are defined differently. Instead of scaling linearly with the number of cus-
tomers the bounds are set as {⌈0.5
√
C⌉; ⌈
√
C⌉}. Taking inspiration from
Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic the number of routes to destroy by
Random Route Destroy is variable, however, it is tied to the instance. The
lower bound it fixed at LB = 2 regardless of instance size whereas the up-
per bound is defined in relation to the total demand and vehicle capacity
as UB = max{2; ⌈0.2
∑
i∈C Di
QSC
⌉}. The expression ⌈
∑
i∈C Di
QSC
⌉is an estimate
for the number of route that will be in a solution, of which at most 20%
are destroyed. Explosive Route Destroy identifies a single route and uses its
customers as a seed nodes for cluster removal, thus, parameter q is required
for this operator. Following the principal established for Cluster Removal
an interval is established from which a new value for q is drawn every
time the operator is used. The bounds are defined as {⌈0.5
√
C⌉; ⌈0.8
√
C⌉}.
Proximity Route Destroy does not use any additional parameters.
4.3
Tested Parameters
In this section any parameters whose settings are not mentioned in sec-
tion 4.2 are presented and explained. The setting of these parameters are
based on generating and comparing solutions with variations of the same
parameter.
As ALNS relies on randomness during problem exploration,
each parameter variation is used to solve the problem ten times, thus al-
lowing for a comparison by average solution quality. This method helps
mitigate randomness and over-performance, which leads to a better frame
of reference for the decision making process.
Due to the number of parameters that require tuning changes are tested
one at time. It may be better methodologically to test combinations of
different parameter settings, like Pisinger and Ropke who test a variation of
five values for both the cooling rate and the temperature control parameter.
However, this leads to 25 tests in total for just two parameters Pisinger and
Ropke 2007.
Because the different tuning instances have different ranges of objective
values the following methodology is used in order to aggregate all results into
a single measurement. The following steps are conducted for the individual
instances before aggregation is possible. First, the average objective value,
its standard deviation, and the average execution time are calculated for
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Tested Parameters
35
all parameter settings. For all categories, the values are put into relation
with the best average found. Taking the objective value as an example, let
zp be the average objective value obtained when using parameter variation
p, then
Gapp =
¯zp
min
i∈P (¯zi) −1
Gapp shows how a setting performs when compared to the best setting. Ag-
gregation is performed by calculating the average of each parameter setting
for all instances.
Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainics ALNS is used as a frame of ref-
erence for all initial parameter settings. Therefore, the initial number of
iterations between satellite configuration is ω = 1000, the initial local search
parameter η% = 20% and the temperature control parameter w% = 1%.
The total number of iterations in an ALNS is the first test, therefore, no
initial value is needed.
4.3.1
Number of Iterations
The core trade-off to be considered when in- or decreasing the number of
iterations is execution-time versus quality of solutions generated by the al-
gorithm. Initial testing has shown that the average iteration takes longer to
execute than that of Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic, therefore, val-
ues are tested in ranges lower than the 500,000 iterations that they perform.
Tested parameter settings range from 10,000 to 100,000 iterations, with in-
tervals of 10,000 being considered.
Figure 4.2. Results for parameter variation of the number of iterations. LEFT:
Gap of the average objective value. RIGHT: Relative standard deviation.
==PAGE:42==
36
4 Parameter Tuning
In Figure 4.2 a clear downward trend is visible both for the average objec-
tive value (left) and standard deviation (right) with an increasing number
of iterations, consequently, one can draw the conclusion that the algorithm
becomes more reliable with more iterations being performed. The average
aggregated objective value hits a point of diminishing returns at 40,000
iterations where the average solution quality is consistently within least
within one percent of the best value. The standard deviation is observed to
steadily decline with increasing number of iterations, however, it is likely to
offer diminishing returns as well, when increasing the number of iterations
further.
All in all, when not considering execution time, the number of iterations
should be increased as much as possible. More tests with an even higher
number of iterations would likely reveal a point where ALNS stops improv-
ing. Moreover, all values are reported in relation to the best solutions found
by the algorithm, not the Best Known Solutions (BKS). Therefore, increas-
ing the number iterations further may allow it to find better solutions, which
would change how the data is Figure 4.2 constructed. As mentioned before,
consideration must be given towards the execution time of the algorithm
and, therefore, the number of iterations.
Figure 4.3 shows that both the initial execution time and its growth de-
pend on problem size. The largest instance with 200 customers requires
30 minutes to execute fully with the lowest configuration tested. For each
Figure 4.3. Average execution time on the three tuning instances plotted over
the number of iterations.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Tested Parameters
37
10,000 iterations time increases by approximately 20 minutes. Thus, run-
ning the simulation on the highest setting, i.e. 100,000 iterations, takes
approximately three hours. Despite this setting being the most consistent,
it is not used due to its excessive run-time. Ideally, execution times would
not exceed one hour which, following Figure 4.2, indicates 30,000 iterations
as the highest viable setting. On the other hand, Figure 4.2 shows that the
average solution quality improves by approximately 1.5% when increasing
the number of iterations to 40,000. As previously mentioned the average
objective values point of diminishing returns also lies at 40,000 iterations.
Consequentially, this study adopts 40.000 iterations for the ALNS.
4.3.2
Satellite Reconfiguration Frequency
The number of iterations ω that the ALNS performs before performing a
neighbourhood configuration move should have a significant impact on the
quality and consistency of solutions generated. The implied trade-off of in-
creasing or decreasing this parameter is the depth of exploration for a given
configuration versus diversification of satellite configurations explored. Five
parameter variations are tested, three are lower and two are higher than
the standard setting. From one setting to the next values are doubled. Fig-
ure 4.4 indicates that ω = 125 is the ideal setting because it shares the
best average solution quality with ω = 500 while having the lowest stan-
dard deviation. One would assume that ω = 250 would produce similar
results as either one of the other settings, being the value that compromises
between their degrees of exploration regarding diversity of satellite configu-
Figure 4.4. Results for the variation of the reconfiguration parameter ω. LEFT:
Gap of the average objective value. RIGHT: Relative Standard deviation.
==PAGE:44==
38
4 Parameter Tuning
rations and second echelon routing. It is possible that 250 iterations lacks
the ability to produce high quality solutions from which a neighbourhood
reconfiguration finds good combinations of satellites while also reducing the
quantity of re-configurations. In short, it is possible that ω = 250 reduces
both quality and quantity of the moves, thus, getting the worst of both
worlds. Another, albeit unlikely, possibility is there is an unusually high
number of bad solutions found during these 30 solutions. Theoretically, re-
peating the experiment could provide more insights, however, here 125 and
500 iterations are used as candidates moving forward.
Figure 4.5 provides an in-depth look for the results from which the data in
Figure 4.4 is made up. Notably, there is no clear setting for all three in-
stances. For example, the smallest tuning instance with 50 customers (top
left) performs best with a more thorough exploration of individual neigh-
bourhoods. This would suggests that with a lower number of intermediate
facilities less configuration moves are needed before the ideal one is found.
The change from 2,000 to 4,000 iterations shows that too large a reduction
in the number of changes has a very negative impact on solution quality.
All variations of the parameter, except ω = 500, find no solution with a
better objective value than 131,000. Looking at the lines for the median
value indicates that an exploration of 500 iterations would be enough to
consistently find solutions close to the best. The medium instance (top
right) shows that increasing the time in a neighbourhood increases the
number of bad solutions, indicated by the location of the median, while
finding better best solutions, suggesting that ALNS benefits from increased
exploration of good configurations. The box-plots for the large instance
(bottom) show that larger values for ω are not viable options. They also
highlight the trade-off between exploration of different configurations and
routing decisions very clearly. Seeing that ω = 125 finds the best neigh-
bourhoods consistently while not having enough time to explore them, as
seen by its best solutions being worse than all other settings. The median
line of ω = 500 is lower than even the antenna of setting ω = 125 shows
that at least half the solutions found when exploring with 500 iterations are
better than the best solution when exploring for only 125 iterations.
In conclusion, either 125 or 500 iterations should be used for ω as indi-
cated by Figure 4.4 while the in depth view provided by Figure 4.5 suggests
that 500 iterations has more potential for generating good solution. Moving
forward ω = 500.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Tested Parameters
39
Figure 4.5. Box plots of the objective value for all parameter settings of the
number of iterations between satellite re-configurations ω.
TOP LEFT: In-
stance 1 with 50 customers and 5 satellites. TOP RIGHT: Instance 2 with 100
customers and 10 satellites. BOTTOM: Instance 3 with 200 customers and 10
satellites.
4.3.3
Starting Temperature
In section 3.1 the temperature control parameter w% is introduced.
It
controls how much worse a new solution can be, when compared to the
current one, and still be accepted with a probability of 50%. Therefore, its
importance lies its effect on the degree of exploration versus intensification.
When the starting temperature is too low, there is a risk of the algorithm
rejecting all worse solutions immediately, effectively removing diversifica-
tion. Consequently, there is an increased risk of getting stuck in a local
optimum when w% is too low. When the temperature is too high, however,
the opposite becomes true and the algorithm is likely to accept solutions re-
gardless of quality. The result is a directionless algorithm that spends a lot
of iterations generating results that are of no use in the long-term. While
the cooling effect eventually mitigates the lack of guidance, at that point,
the current solution may already be too bad to reach a point of usefulness
before the next neighbourhood change.
==PAGE:46==
40
4 Parameter Tuning
The parameter variation uses an interval between 1% and 5% with 1%
steps.
The first value is the one used by Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and
Crainic while the latter is used by Ropke and Pisinger (2006) to solve a
VRP. In addition to that, w% = 0.5% and w% = 1.5% are tested as to
provide extra data points around the initial parameter setting.
Figure 4.6.
Results for the variation of the temperature control parameter
w%. LEFT: Gap of the average objective value. RIGHT: Relative Standard
deviation.
Of the tested temperatures control parameters the initial setting of w% =
1% produces the best results. As seen in Figure 4.6 tests with parameter
settings that are lower or higher decrease the average quality. At the same
time the standard deviation peaks when using this setting, being approxi-
mately 40% higher than the higher settings. Considering this information,
w% = 1% is still the most likely candidate. A closer look at parameter per-
formances of individual instances, as shown in Figure 4.7, confirms what
Figure 4.6 suggested. For small and medium instances, the median lines are
among the lowest out of all settings. Thereby, we see that better solutions
are found more frequently using this setting. On top of that, w% = 1%
produces the best best results as indicated by the longer lower antennas.
At the same time, bad solutions become worse making the setting a double
edged sword. Taking into account the large instances data, w% = 1% has a
median line lower than the first quartile of all settings apart from w = 0.5%.
Therefore, it can be concluded that on the large instance a more restrictive
search consistently guides ALNS to better solutions.
In conclusion,Figure 4.6 suggests that based on the higher average qual-
ity of solutions w% = 1% should be used. Inspecting Figure 4.7 confirms
this as it emphasizes its higher potential while also pointing out the de-
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Tested Parameters
41
Figure 4.7.
Box plots of the objective value for all settings of the tempera-
ture control parameter w%. TOP LEFT: Instance 1 with 50 customers and
5 satellites. TOP RIGHT: Instance 2 with 100 customers and 10 satellites.
BOTTOM: Instance 3 with 200 customers and 10 satellites.
crease in consistency. In summary, there is insuﬀicient evidence to suggest
using a setting other than w% = 1%.
4.3.4
Local Search Parameter
Local Search (LS) is a time-consuming process. Therefore, the LS param-
eter likely relates to a trade-off between the execution time and solution
quality. With lower percentages η% the becomes more specific and only
improves solutions that are close to being the best solution. Lower settings
likely lead to fewer executions of LS and, therefore, reduced total execution
time. However, larger settings of η, while most likely increasing execution
time, may help the algorithm converge on locally optimal solutions quicker.
At the same time, there is no guarantee that more frequent uses of LS also
mean more consistent or better solutions as it may dilute the search process.
The curve in Figure 4.8 confirms that larger values of η% increase the execu-
==PAGE:48==
42
4 Parameter Tuning
Figure 4.8. The ALNS’ aggregated execution time for different settings of the
local search parameter η%.
tion time of ALNS. However, it also suggests that increasing this parameter
beyond η = 20% decreases execution time. One possible explanation may
be that the simple implementation chosen for the LS causes the algorithm
to revert back to a local optimum within a few moves, thereby, exhausting
the process quicker.
It is noted that the exact cause for this behaviour could likely be identified
with more testing, however, it is out of scope for the remainder of this study.
Figure 4.9. Results for the variation of the Local Search parameter η%. LEFT:
Gap of the average objective value. RIGHT: Relative standard deviation.
Figure 4.9 shows that η% = 5% is the ideal setting in terms of objective
value and standard deviation. It both generates the best average objective
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Operator Analysis
43
values and does so more consistently than any other setting. Coupled with
the fact that it reduces the time per ALNS execution by approximately
15%, there are no augments that suggest any of the other tested settings
should be used.
4.4
Operator Analysis
Three sets of heuristics are described in section 3.3. While most heuristics
featured in these sets are well known in literature, it is sensible evaluate their
usefulness. Performance of individual operators are judged by comparing
results with solutions generated while that operator is disabled.
As with the parameter testing conducted in the previous section, there is
a level of complexity to the interactions between different operators. Thus,
it is possible that testing different combinations of deactivated operators
may be beneficial. Doing so is foregone to keep the number of tests within a
manageable level. The methodology for aggregating results across instances,
as described in section 4.2, is also used in this section.
4.4.1
Destroy Operators
The different destroy operators are useful in different situations. For ex-
ample, Worst Removal and Random Removal have the largest potential
for customers removed, thus, their potential to cause large scale changes is
more potent than other operators’. Another example is Cluster Removal,
which removes a small number of customers in a localized fashion. This
mechanism may be favourable for intensification by allowing changes to a
number of routes in close proximity.
Figure 4.10 shows that disabling any one destroy heuristic will have a
negative impact on the average solution quality. The figure on the right
shows that different operators cause different changes in execution time. In-
formation on the operators success throughout the execution of ALNS can
be inferred from Figure 4.10. Consider the changes to the execution times:
Random Removal and Worst Removal should, on average, remove the same
number of customers, since they use the same parameters. However, dis-
abling the latter decreases time per execution by 2 −3% more than the
former. The differences in time only makes sense when the success rate of
==PAGE:50==
44
4 Parameter Tuning
Figure 4.10. Results when disabling a single destroy operator. LEFT: Relative
change in objective values. RIGHT: Average change in execution time.
Worst Removal is higher and, therefore, is used more often. Because its iter-
ations are re-distributed among the active operators, most of which remove
less customers, execution time decreases as fewer customers are reinserted
on average. The same argument can be made for Remove-n-Routes and
Proximity-Route-Destroy. The former has larger destructive potential yet
disabling it causes similar changes in execution times indicating the latter
to be more successful throughout ALNS executions.
Figure 4.11 provides a closer look at the objective values for the gen-
erated solutions. It suggests that removing single operators has different
implications for the differently sized problems. For example, removing any
operator but Proximity Route Destroy results in an increase in the frequency
of bad solutions on the large instance. At the same time, disabling Cluster
Removal and Random Removal for the medium instance changes almost
nothing. On the small tuning instance, the box-plot indicates that most of
the operators could be disabled with minimal effect on the range of solu-
tions found. However, the frequency of good solutions, as indicated by the
median line, decreases for all.
In conclusion, permanently disabling Random Removal could be consid-
ered to trade an increase in average objective value for a lower execution
time. However, in this study the operator’s absence when solving a large
instance is too significant to be worth it.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Operator Analysis
45
Figure 4.11.
Box plots over the objective value with one destroy operator
disabled. TOP LEFT: Instance 1 with 50 customers and 5 satellites. TOP
RIGHT: Instance 2 with 100 customers and 10 satellites. BOTTOM: Instance
3 with 200 customers and 10 satellites.
4.4.2
Repair Operators
Unlike the destroy operators, heuristics from set HR all follow the same pur-
pose of constructing the cheapest possible routes. However, the approaches
are different: Cheapest Repair and Parallel Repair assemble routes quickly
and greedily, which makes it likely for their first insertions to create high
quality routes whereas later insertions are likely to be in a bad position.
Regret-Heuristics, on the other hand, are more likely to assemble good
routes all around, albeit at the cost of potentially reducing the quality of
its best routes.
In theory, frequent variation of these operators seems ideal because good
routes from the greedier heuristics are maintained while worse ones are
replaced with better routes from the more restrained regret heuristics.
Figure 4.12 shows that disabling any repair operators other than Regret-
2 decreases the average solution quality. The right graph, displaying the
relative changes in execution time, shows that disabling any Regret Heuristic
==PAGE:52==
46
4 Parameter Tuning
Figure 4.12. Results when disabling a single repair operator. LEFT: Relative
change in objective values. RIGHT: Average change in execution time.
reduces execution times.
An inference of success is diﬀicult for the repair methods because no
two heuristics exercise the same depth of detail. One could argue that both
Parallel Repair and Regret-Repair attempt insertion of all customers into
all routes, thus, the average iteration for both methods should be similar.
On the other hand, Regret-Repair stores additional information for the q
best routes and must continually update this information, likely increasing
execution time. This would explain the notable increase in consumed time
from parallel to regret-2 and from regret-2 to regret-3 repair. The execution
time suggests that Regret-X is less successful, since its impact on execution
times is lower than Regret-2 repair. Given that it samples the level of regret
from an interval between [1,4] it should lie between Regret-2 and Regret-3
as that is where the average level of regret would be.However, disabling
Regret-X causes the largest decrease in average objective value. therefore,
it seems to add a valuable component to the ALNS.
Seeing that disabling Regret-2 decreases execution time while improving
average objective values permanent removal is considered. Summarized in
Figure 4.13 the results of disabling single operators show that removing
Regret-2 is not strictly as good as Figure 4.12 suggests. It does narrow
down the range of solutions being found on the small and large instances
while also reducing the median on the medium instance. However, on the
large instance instance its removal limits the ALNS’ ability to produce
better results.
Both decisions, removing or keeping Regret-2, can objectively be correct
depending on the intention of the decision maker. Here it is kept in HR as
ALNS is used more than once to solve all problems with the intention of
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Operator Analysis
47
Figure 4.13. Box plots over the objective value with one repair operator dis-
abled.
TOP LEFT: Instance 1 with 50 customers and 5 satellites.
TOP
RIGHT: Instance 2 with 100 customers and 10 satellites. BOTTOM: Instance
3 with 200 customers and 10 satellites.
finding the best possible solutions in at least one of the repetitions. If it
were a real life application it would make more sense to remove the heuristic
to increase the likelihood of finding good solutions reliably.
4.4.3
Neighbourhood Configuration Moves
Heuristics included in set HN are not necessarily used to find good solutions
themselves but to enable the ALNS to move between different configurations
with the intention of discovering one that will produce good objective values.
While it is important to be able to move to good configurations it may
also be useful in the long term to move to worse ones, once in a while.
For example, moving to a configuration that induces larger costs from first
echelon routes and opening cost of satellites may be helpful by generating
a lot of cheap second echelon routes which impact the next configuration
move, thereby, potentially promoting a satellite combination that would
==PAGE:54==
48
4 Parameter Tuning
otherwise not be considered.
Figure 4.14 shows that disabling Satellite Swap and Satellite Reconfigu-
ration decreases solution quality. As no relevant time savings are achieved
by doing this it not considered any further.
Disabling Open Satellite would allow an objective value improvement
of circa 0.1% at not cost to execution time, however, the improvement is
negligible and it may be more beneficial to include when solving instances
other than those selected for tuning.
Figure 4.14. Aggregated changes to the objective value and time when disabling
operators from set HN relative to the values found when including all operators.
Shaded bars are objective values, solid bars are time
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Computational Study
5.1
Test Instances
The performance of the presented ALNS, both with and without splits. It is
used to solve two sets of LRP2E instances. The first set, Prodhon’s LRP2E
Instances, is already described in section 4.1.
The second set is Nguyen’s LRP2E Instances which is commonly used for
bench-marking. It contains 24 instances. Customer numbers range from 25
to 200, the number of satellites are either 5 or 10, and one depot is randomly
located. First echelon vehicles have capacities QDS ∈{750, 850} and second
echelon vehicle capacities is QSC ∈{100, 150}. Customer demand follows
a normal distribution with mean µ = 15 and variance σ2 = 25. Customer
locations follow either a normal distribution or a multi-normal distribution.
The cost of travelling from customer i to j is given by the euclidean distance
times ten, which is then rounded to the next highest integer. On the first
echelon, costs are generated by doubling the euclidean distance between two
nodes. This distance is multiplied by ten and rounded to the next highest
integer. The naming convention for the files in this set is n −m −[N/MN]
with N and MN indicating the distribution used for customer location
(Nguyen, Prins, and Prodhon 2012b).
5.2
Single Deliveries
Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainics ALNS and Schwengerer, Pirkwieser,
and Raidls VNS are state of the art algorithms for solving LRP2E. Both
publications include results and BKS for all instances. In this study, we
compare the performance of the proposed ALNS with their algorithms. The
objective values of all BKS reported in both publications are combined into
==PAGE:56==
50
5 Computational Study
one master list. Consequently, all values they report are re-calculated with
BKS’s from the master list.
Algorithmic performances are compared using an aggregated view of
results. Three key performance indicators are used: (1) Gap of the best
solution in all repetitions GAPm, (2) Gap of the average objective value
Gap and (3) the average execution time. Gap values are calculated as
Gap =
(
z
zBKS
−1
)
· 100,
(5.1)
where z and zBKS are an obtained objective values and the best known
objective value.
5.2.1
Numerical Results
5.1 shows that both algorithms perform better than the ALNS presented
here while also having shorter execution times. On Prodhon’s instances,
the best solution gap is higher than both algorithms average gap. This
indicates that, even our ALNS’ best solutions cannot compete with state of
the art algorithms average solutions. On Nguyen’s instances, the difference
is not quite as harsh as. At its best, it outperforms the average solution
quality of VNS. Comparing just the average solution qualities, it performs
worse than both Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainics ALNS and Schwen-
gerer, Pirkwieser, and Raidls VNS as Gap values are 1.5 to 3 times larger.
Consequentially, ALNS also finds fewer BKS as well as objective values
within 1% of the BKS.
Table 5.1. Aggregated results of the proposed ALNS.
Set
ALNS - Contardo
VNS
ALNS
Gapm%
Gap%
t
Gapm%
Gap%
t
Gapm%
Gap%
t
Prodhon
0.32
0.83
465.82
0.30
0.50
313.13
0.85
1.56
1,144.49
Nguyen
0.16
0.49
191.98
0.16
0.90
274.70
0.56
1.42
997.83
#BKS
36/54
36/54
22/54
#Gap<1%
49/54
50/54
39/54
Table 5.2 shows the results obtained by the ALNS on all of Prodhon’s
LRP2E Instances.
The key result is that the proposed ALNS performs
better with fewer potential satellite locations. On average, the gap is about
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Single Deliveries
51
Table 5.2.
Complete List of results for textitProdhon’s LRP2E Instances generated
using the proposed ALNS.
BKS
zm
∆Gapm%
z
∆Gap%
t
tm
20-5-1
89,075.0
89,075.0
0.00
89,075.0
0.00
76.13
28.00
20-5-1b
61,863.0
61,863.0
0.00
61,869.3
0.01
79.44
23.08
20-5-2
84,478.0
84,478.0
0.00
84,508.2
0.04
69.20
19.04
20-5-2b
60,838.0
60,838.0
0.00
60,838.0
0.00
73.32
10.53
50-5-1
130,843.0
131,085.0
0.18
132,105.1
0.96
236.75
127.34
50-5-1b
101,530.0
101,530.0
0.00
101,747.0
0.21
220.82
107.64
50-5-2
131,825.0
131,825.0
0.00
132,004.3
0.14
229.70
96.16
50-5-2b
110,332.0
110,332.0
0.00
110,353.5
0.02
230.78
102.36
50-5-2BIS
122,599.0
122,599.0
0.00
122,681.9
0.07
233.50
162.94
50-5-2bBIS
105,696.0
105,763.0
0.06
105,888.2
0.18
231.57
110.67
50-5-3
128,379.0
128,379.0
0.00
128,574.0
0.15
261.54
96.93
50-5-3b
104,006.0
104,006.0
0.00
104,038.2
0.03
243.06
96.02
100-5-1
318,761.0
320,891.0
0.87
322,297.9
1.31
977.97
554.91
100-5-1b
256,878.0
258,646.0
0.69
259,277.2
0.93
903.22
362.64
100-5-2
231,305.0
232,116.0
0.35
233,405.8
0.91
938.17
194.13
100-5-2b
194,729.0
194,934.0
0.11
195,137.9
0.21
812.41
217.48
100-5-3
244,194.0
245,636.0
0.64
246,812.3
1.12
903.89
297.55
100-5-3b
194,110.0
194,285.0
0.09
195,841.8
0.89
770.19
406.37
100-10-1
353,133.0
355,421.0
1.19
364,423.8
3.75
974.76
585.55
100-10-1b
297,167.0
300,947.0
1.27
303,298.8
2.06
841.76
467.95
100-10-2
305,154.0
306,416.0
0.65
310,427.8
1.97
929.76
464.80
100-10-2b
263,876.0
264,696.0
0.31
267,051.8
1.20
790.27
452.50
100-10-3
310,200.0
316,983.0
2.19
322,598.0
4.00
935.64
577.51
100-10-3b
261,796.0
264,749.0
1.70
268,029.0
2.96
805.69
393.98
200-10-1
549,718.0
560,725.0
2.19
566,225.7
3.19
4,182.70
636.79
200-10-1b
445,802.0
453,333.0
1.80
454,346.6
2.03
3,126.59
0.32
200-10-2
498,199.0
507,873.0
2.10
519,235.0
4.38
4,049.31
1271.96
200-10-2b
423,031.0
427,356.0
1.11
431,666.5
2.13
2,721.97
1967.59
200-10-3
531,548.0
540,310.0
2.49
549,926.1
4.32
4,279.21
2325.09
200-10-3b
402,130.0
424,364.0
5.65
431,868.1
7.52
3,205.47
1787.76
AvgM=5
0.17
0.40
416.20
167.43
AvgM=10
1.89
3.29
2,236.93
910.98
==PAGE:58==
52
5 Computational Study
2.9% worse when there are 10 satellites instead of 5. For the best solutions,
this difference is less severe at a 1.7% difference. The computation time
is larger for instances with ten satellites because the average number of
customers is larger. The interesting thing about the computation times is
that, on average,the best solutions are found before the ALNS is halfway
complete. This phenomenon is observed both for instances with 5 or 10
satellites. The most severe case is observed on instance with 200 −10 −1b,
where the algorithms initial solution improves for only the very few of the
first iterations as seen with the average time of the best solution being 0.32
seconds. The same table with results for Nguyen’s instances are included
in the appendix as Table A.1, and confirm these findings.
5.2.2
Result Discussion
While unable to compete with state of the art algorithms, the proposed
ALNS generates decent solutions. We acknowledge that it struggles with
instances where the number of satellites is larger. Moreover, the results show
that the algorithm has a tends to find its best solutions after approximately
40% of its total execution time.
Therefore, it is assumed that it lacks
direction when generating results. It is likely that some parameter settings,
especially those not subjected to testing, conflict with a search space limited
to feasible solutions. Moreover, some design decisions may have limited the
ALNS’ ability when solving LRP2E.
Rethinking lower and upper bounds for the parameters of destroy oper-
ators might improve solution quality and execute times. This hypothesis is
grounded in the belief that repair operators removing additional customers
increases the number of removals even further. It is likely that these extra re-
movals contribute to changing solutions too much at once, therefore, leading
to solutions that are rarely accepted because of weaknesses within the inser-
tion methods. Pisinger and Ropke (2007) mention a similar behaviour when
removing too many customers per iteration when solving VRP’s, which is
why they limited the number of removals to 60 customers. Another possibil-
ity is that any removals by repair operators introduce unfavourable moves
by removing customers in good positions, due to the prioritization rules
defined in subsection 3.3.2.
In subsection 4.3.1, disabling Random Removal was discussed but ulti-
mately not performed. It could have been interesting to conduct an ad-
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Single Deliveries
53
ditional experiment where Random Removal was disabled while increasing
the number of total iterations to 50,000. It is possible that increasing the
number of iterations would be more useful for generating good solution on
the remaining instances due to an increased number of satellite changes.
Another idea for improving solution quality is exchanging or altering
destroy operators to more specifically target LRP2E. For example, an oper-
ator could be allowed to remove customers from only a single satellite. This
would result in no removals from repair operators, speeding up the repair
process, and creating focus on improving routes rather than allocating cus-
tomers. Another example, a repair operator could be designed to allocate
all removed customers before inserting them into routes. In this case, cus-
tomer allocation would have to follow related criteria such as minimization
of distance to the satellites.
Another parameter to reconsider is the reheating parameter γ. In sec-
tion 4.2, γ is set intuitively. However, this parameters potential to impact
the solution quality was likely underestimated because the parameter af-
fects both the SA acceptance criterion and the exploration of satellite con-
figurations. In hindsight, the ALNS might have benefit from performing
parameter variation to find a setting that is better for the algorithm.
We have pointed out a lack of guidance towards better solutions in the
ALNS. One mistake in the implementation has been the calculation of a
new starting temperature for every satellite configuration. Had the tem-
perature only depended on the best solution, ALNS would have had to
accept higher quality solutions throughout its execution. Moreover, there
may be more potential for improvement related to satellite configurations.
It concerns the selection of satellite configurations, specifically, the cycling
between the same few combinations of satellites. We consider the possibility
that the presented neighbourhood configuration moves are not good enough
to effectively explore diverse enough configurations. This impression is cre-
ated by observing that results of problems with more satellites are worse.
The introduction of a Tabu-List may be beneficial to guarantee diversity of
exploration. For example, the five last satellite combinations could be for-
bidden from being used, thereby, forcing the algorithm into neighbourhoods
it would not use otherwise. As a final remark on satellite configuration, we
consider that implementing Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic’s satellite
reconfiguration criterion could be a step into the right direction. Figure 4.5
shows that each instance has an individual ideal setting for the number
of iterations spent within a neighbourhood. In subsection 4.3.2 ω = 500
==PAGE:60==
54
5 Computational Study
is selected as a compromise for all three tuning instances. Therefore, the
implementation of a different criterion may be beneficial for the ALNS’ per-
formance. Alternatively, ω could be the defined as a function ω = f(I, C, S).
This function would take into account the number of customers, satellites
and total ALNS iterations. However, we assume that additional tests with
more instances would be necessary to generate enough data to fit a curve.
Other possible improvements to the algorithm are based on including
more features such as periodically resetting the operator selections adaptive
weights, as proposed by Pisinger and Ropke (2007). The algorithm could
also be allowed to use its current global best solution when performing a
neighbourhood configuration as proposed by Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and
Crainic.
5.3
Split Deliveries
5.3.1
Test: Quick Resolution
Quick Resolution has been proposed as a method to resolve remaining ca-
pacities of split customers. It relies on the immediate insertion of the split
customers remaining demand. Because its impact is unknown, results are
compared to an ALNS execution where customers are simply not removed
from the candidate pool if their demand is not yet fully met. Therefore,
they are inserted using the same repair heuristic as all other customers in
this iteration. Table 5.3 provides comprehensive details on the difference
between using Quick Resolution or a standard procedure of split insertions.
i
Gap¯z%
∆¯zS
∆¯zE=1
∆¯zE=2
Gap˜s%
∆nS
∆n|R|
Gap¯t%
S
0.97
-61.2
-135.0
1,459.9
-27.81
-0.9
0.0
-8.31
M
-0.24
-8,174.0
1,741.6
5,600.0
-29.40
-5.3
1.0
-9.08
L
1.60
-2,405.5
331.3
10,371.7
-9.98
-8.9
0.8
-10.97
Table 5.3.
Comparison of results obtained using Quick Resolution for splits
with standard split insertion procedure. Gap values refer to relative calculated
as q−s
s . Delta values are generated as q −s. Values q and s are placeholders for
quick and standard resolution results.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Split Deliveries
55
Because Quick Resolution is a new method, its results are compared against
results from standard insertion. Calculations use standard insertion as the
initial value, therefore, positive values indicate Quick Resolution having
larger values.
The gap values reported in Table 5.3 show that for two out of three tun-
ing instances, standard resolution performs better than Quick Resolution.
The columns named ∆¯zs, ∆¯zE=1 and ∆¯zE=2 show the differences in objec-
tive value in the three cost components: Cost of open satellites, first echelon
routing cost, and second echelon routing cost. Only the second echelon is di-
rectly affected by the type of split resolution applied, thus, it is telling that
its routing costs are higher on all instances. Columns ∆nS and ∆n|R| show
differences in number of split customer deliveries and number of routes. It
seems that, on average, Quick Resolution both reduces the number of splits
and, consequently, increases the number of vehicles used. Noticeably, the
cost of opened satellites is lower in all instances when using Quick Resolu-
tion, however, this effect is only able to offset the increased cost of second
echelon routing on the medium instance. The column GapBart shows that
the average time consumed by executing ALNS with Quick Resolution is
lower than a standard insertion. This is a consequence of two factors. First,
using parallel insertion instead the more time consuming regret heuristics
(see Figure 4.13) and, secondly, it means that insertion is only tested for a
few customers in a route compared to the entire customer pool.
A decision is made to drop the Quick Resolution method as it decreases
solution quality.
5.3.2
Numerical Results
The literature provides no numerical results for LRP2E with split deliveries.
Therefore, we compare our results only to single delivery execution of ALNS.
We compare the following list of key performance indicators: (1) change
in best objective value, (2) change in average objective value, (3) change in
execution time, (4) number of instances with improved best results and (5)
number of instances with improved average results.
Indicators (1)-(3) are referred to as (1) ∆Gapm%, (2) ∆Gap% and (3)
∆t% and expressed as percentage changes. Calculations use Equation 5.1
where zBKS are the objective values from the single delivery ALNS execu-
==PAGE:62==
56
5 Computational Study
tion. For indicator (1) the best values from all ten repetitions are used and
for (2) the average of ten repetitions.
Table 5.4 shows that introducing split deliveries to LRP2E reduces ob-
jective values in 39 out of 54 instances. On Prodhon’s instance set, 24 out
of 30 problems have improved best solutions while 22 out 30 also improve
on average. For Nguyen’s set, splits generate new best solutions for 14 out
of 24 problems while 17 out of 24 produce better results on average. The
table shows that for Prodhon’s instances the savings from split deliveries
are higher. For both instances, time spent per ALNS execution increases
significantly.
There is a noticeable difference both in number of improved solutions
and magnitude of improvement when comparing the impact of allowing split
deliveries between the instance sets.
Table 5.5 provides an in depth view on how split deliveries affect costs
on both instance sets with an additional divide into instances with five and
ten candidate satellites as well as regular and increased vehicle capacities.
Table 5.5 shows that the percentage of customers with multiple visits
∆nc% is reduced from 6.9% to just over 1.1%, when vehicle capacities are
increased. Similarly, Nguyen’s instances compare at 2.4% and 1.5%. The re-
sults for Prodhon’s instances show an average reduction by 0.69 routes with
regular capacity. This reduction is diminished to just 0.04 with increased
vehicle capacity. Results for Nguyen’s show a minor increase from 0.03 to
0.05 fewer routes on average. Both instances show a reduced percentage of
customers receiving deliveries from multiple vehicles ∆nc%.
The different satellite aggregations show that the benefit of splitting
deliveries increases with instance size. The combined savings of satellite
opening and first echelon routing costs are reduced when more potential
locations are available.
This difference is especially steep for Prodhon’s
instances where average primary routing costs go from roughly -400 to -9600
Set
∆Gapm%
∆Gap%
∆t%
#Gapm% < 0
#Gap% < 0
Prodhon
-1.75
-1.61
13.28
24/30
22/30
Ngyuen
-0.22
-0.33
7.24
14/24
17/24
Total
-1.04
-1.07
10.60
38/54
39/54
Table 5.4. Aggregated results when allowing split deliveries. Results shown on
separate instance sets and combined.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Split Deliveries
57
Set
M
Q
∆GapO
∆GapP
∆GapS
∆ns
∆R1
∆nc%
∆R2
*
*
-88.50
-4066.90
-750.64
0.38
-0.32
4.23
-0.38
5
*
-345.39
-391.64
-71.42
0.06
0.00
3.28
-0.21
PDN
10
*
296.85
-9579.78
-1769.48
0.86
-0.81
5.65
-0.64
*
70
-748.47
-3582.60
-1198.59
0.39
-0.29
6.93
-0.69
*
140
665.76
-4620.38
-238.71
0.36
-0.36
1.15
-0.04
*
*
-647.35
-253.31
294.60
0.14
-0.03
1.84
-0.04
5
*
-263.52
-163.83
150.84
0.06
0.00
1.48
0.00
NGN
10
*
-1031.18
-342.80
438.36
0.22
-0.07
2.20
-0.08
*
100
-775.69
-110.88
28.35
0.15
-0.03
2.42
-0.03
*
150
-519.00
-395.75
560.85
0.13
-0.04
1.26
-0.05
Table 5.5. In depth view of the changes caused by the introduction of split deliv-
eries. Set names abbreviated to PDN (Prodhon) and NGN (Nguyen). Complete
aggregation as well as aggregation of instances with 5 or 10 satellites. Complete
aggreagtion for instances with different vehicle capacities. ”*”-values indicate
where all instances in a given category are aggregated
when more locations are available. Moreover, instances with five satellites
show that on average there is no reduction in primary routes, although
there are instances with split satellites. Additionally, when ten satellites
are available the number of split satellites increases, while the number of
routes decreases. Appendices Table A.2 and A.3 are the complete results
for individual instances. They confirm our findings that an increase in the
number of satellites leads to an increase in savings.
When comparing the impact of split deliveries across the two sets there
is an interesting difference where second echelon routing costs are reduced
for Prodhon’s instances regardless of data aggregation whereas they become
more expensive for Nguyen’s.
Across both instance sets, there is a consistent behaviour of primary
routing costs decreasing. The decrease is more significant for Prodhon’s set,
however, it is likely caused by the depot being located at the edge of the
graph whereas it is rather centrally located in Nguyen’s set.
==PAGE:64==
58
5 Computational Study
5.3.3
Results Discussion
As pointed out, there is a reduction in benefit from split delivery being
allowed when comparing instances with regular vehicle capacities to in-
creased ones. This is evident in both instance sets. Furthermore, comparing
these results for regular vehicle capacity instances across Prodhons’s and
Nguyen’s sets confirm this phenomenon. Our observations are in line with
Claudia Archetti, Savelsbergh, and M Grazia Speranza’s (2006) findings
that the average demand being closer 50% of a vehicles capacity increase
potential savings when allowing split delivery.
We make an interesting observation in Table 5.5, where the aggregated
results with five satellites show routes with split satellites but no reduction
in primary routes. Coupled with the fact that the satellite opening costs
are different, we conclude that the number of open satellites is likely higher
when split deliveries are allowed. When more satellites are open but no
additional routes are used, it follows, that at least one of them is visited
by two primary vehicles. A similar observation is made for the aggregation
of results of instances with ten satellites.
Allowing split deliveries still
appears to change the combination of open satellites. However, it seems that
mostly an existing route is split. This theory is grounded in the fact that
satellites being split and, simultaneously, there is a reduction of the number
of routes. Because the average number of split satellites ∆ns decreases and
the reduction in primary routes ∆R1 do not match there are likely also
instances where satellite combinations with an additional facility are used.
For a complete analysis, second echelon routing costs must also be ac-
counted for. In Prodhon’s set routing cost are decreased in all aggregations,
whereas they are increased for all aggregations on Nguyen’s set. On a sur-
face level, it appears as though there is no pattern across the two instance
sets. However, both sets have lower second echelon routing cost when vehi-
cle capacities are lower, mirroring the behaviour on the first echelon. All in
all, allowing split deliveries likely reduces second echelon routing cost. How-
ever, it would be diﬀicult to establish in how far this is the case because
the changes in satellite configuration lead to different routing decisions and
imcomparable costs. In order to find out how much the cost is reduced one
would have to solve the problem with a fixed satellite combination, once
with single and once with split deliveries.
An comparison of all costs, for the two sets, gives an indication that
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Split Deliveries
59
the origins of the savings are problem dependent. In both cases allowing
split deliveries on the first echelon are the primary reason for the cost re-
duction.
However, the primary savings for Prodhon’s set come directly
from the reduction of first echelon routing costs, whereas for Nguyen’s set
the primary savings are generated by using different satellite configurations.
The key difference between the two sets is the location of the depot. Prod-
hon’s instances place it in a corner of the graph, thereby, creating large
distances between itself and the satellites. Nguyen’s set places the depot
randomly and, therefore, more centrally (in most cases). The depot being
located centrally reduces its distance to the satellites, therefore, it likely
reduces potential reductions of the distance saved by using split delivery.
Consequentially, we can infer that the layout of the network impacts the po-
tential savings and how they are generated when introducing split deliveries
in LRP2E
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 6
Problem Variation
6.1
Mathematical Formulation
The introduction mentions a variation of LRP2E, based on the problem
described in Esmaeilbeigi et al. 2021. This variation of LRP2E uses only
one type of node, which is able to full-fill all three purposes (customer,
satellite and depot) at once. Staying as close as possible to their problem
description all nodes are customers and it is possible to open a satellite
at any customer location. There is no fixed depot location, therefore, its
location must also be determined. All nodes can host a depot, however,
the problem demands that depots can only be opened on nodes where a
satellite has already been established.
This problem is still described by a complete symmetric digraph G =
(V, E) where all nodes i are part of the same set N. Consequently, every
node is associated with costs OD
i
and OS
i which are the costs for opening
a Depot or Satellite respectively, additionally, each node is associated with
satellite capacity CS
i and a depot capacity CD
i . Notations for fixed vehicle
cost and capacities are QDS and F DS for fist echelon and QSC and F SC for
the second.
Variables included in this version of LRP2E do not differ from those
introduced in chapter 2, however, indexing is changed to include all nodes.
Apart from that, there are some changes related to the assignment of facil-
ities to nodes that impact some constraints. The complete model can be
found in the appendix.
The first change is made to Equation 2.3 and Equation 2.16 which pre-
vent cycles in routes. They are changed so that when the subset of nodes
includes an opened facility cycles are allowed, thus, Equation 2.3 becomes
∑
i∈S′
∑
j∈S′
xi,j,k ≤|S| −1 + M ·
∑
i∈S′
Zi ∀S′ ∈S′, |S′| ≥2, k ∈KSC
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Mathematical Formulation
61
The same Big-M formulation is used to alter Equation 2.16. It purpose is
to, whenever a satellite is included, make the number of edges in set S′
arbitrarily large.
Equation 2.7 does not need to be included in the formulation of the
problem variation. The indexing changes makes it so that a combination
of different equations disallow vehicles from entering another node where a
satellite is open. Because Equation 2.2 would require the vehicle to leave the
satellite node again whilst Equation 2.6 would require it to be assigned to
that node it causes a conflict with Equation 2.4 which allows each vehicle
to be assigned to at most one satellite.
The same reasoning applies to
Equation 2.20 which is also removed.
Equation 2.9 is changed to fulfill represent the fact that a customer
whose node is also used to open a satellite is automatically met, therefore,
it becomes
∑
i∈V
∑
k∈KSC
yi,j,k = Dj · (1 −zj) ∀j ∈V
reducing it to zero, thereby, ensuring the node will neither be included in any
route nor will a return route be opened for it. Because the problem makes
the same assumption about depots and satellites, Equation 2.13 becomes
∑
h∈V
∑
κ∈KDS
µh,i,κ ≥
∑
j∈V
∑
k∈KSC
yi,j,k + zi · Di −ψi · Ci ∀i ∈V,
where the term zi·Di is added to include the demand of the customer whose
demand is automatically met and ψi·Ci subtracted to disable the constraint
when that node is both a satellite and depot at once.
A new equation is needed in order to have primary vehicles enter open
satellites only which takes the form
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
ηi,j,k ≤zj ∀j ∈V, k ∈KDS
which fulfills its purpose by providing a upper bound of zero unless a satellite
is opened at a node.
Model verification uses the same methods and procedures that are de-
scribed in chapter 2.
==PAGE:68==
62
6 Problem Variation
6.2
ALNS Changes
ALNS requires few changes in order to solve this variation of the problem.
Most of these changes affect the solution procedure on the first echelon.
Most importantly, depot location decision must be included.
Unlike
Contardo, Hemmelmayr, and Crainic who used ALNS to solve both the
first and second echelon, the strategy for including this decision and solv-
ing for the first echelon relies on CWSA as presented in section 3.2. During
the construction of an initial solution a selection of depots must be included.
Because depots must be located at a node with an open satellite, nothing
about the order of operations is changed. Moreover, nodes are already re-
duced to a candidate set due to this requirement. We suggest that this
should be considered when opening satellites initially. Therefore, the cri-
terion for tie-breaking is replaced with the combined cost of opening the
satellite and depot. If there is more than one open depot the procedure
follows the second echelon strategy: The satellites are assigned to the de-
pots, then depots are treated as isolated VRPs, and finally CWSA is used
to construct routes.
The idea for selecting an ideal combination of depots, both for an initial
solution and when satellite reconfiguration is performed, is to test all feasible
combinations. Feasibility refers to its ability to satisfy all demand. While
testing all combinations is more expensive than selecting depots using a
set of criteria, we assume that the value of finding the best possible depot
combination for a given satellite configuration outweighs the value of time
lost. Testing all combinations should, in theory, not consume too much
time, given the low number of active nodes in the first echelon and the
speed of CWSA.
Configuration moves in HN, like the initial solutions construction method,
should also consider a nodes cost of opening the depot.
Finally, ALNS must be changed to consider customers that share a loca-
tion with a satellite as automatically supplied and immovable. Immovable
meaning that they cannot be removed from a solution by any means but a
satellite reconfiguration.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this study a model for the Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem with
split deliveries is introduced. We propose and design a heuristic approach,
in the shape of Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search, to solve this prob-
lem. The performance of our ALNS is compared with results from state
of the art algorithms for two sets of LRP2E bench-marking instances. The
comparison of results is performed without split deliveries because LRP2E
with split delivery has not yet been explored in the literature. Based on
this comparison, we point out perceived weaknesses. Moreover, we present
theories for their origins as well as ideas that might mitigate them. The
experiment was repeated with split deliveries being allowed. These results
were compared with our previous findings for single deliveries. Based on
this comparison, we have discussed how split deliveries manifest themselves
in LRP2Es and what their benefit might be. Finally, an alternative model,
based on a different class of problem, for Two-Echelon Location Routing
Problem is presented. We have laid out potential changes to out ALNS
that would allow us to solve this problem.
All in all, we contribute to the literature by defining two distinct LRP2E
models which, to the best of our knowledge, are the first to include split
deliveries. Moreover, we generate results for one of the models, using two
well known bench-marking instance sets.
This study is the first to con-
sider LRP2E with split deliveries, therefore, our results can be serve as
comparative values for future research. However, we do note that future
works are likely to outperform our results because of the weaknesses in the
implemented approach.
The analysis of the generated results has shown that our ALNS could
not compete with state of the art algorithms. One of these algorithms is
another ALNS that uses similar ideas. The key distinction of the algorithms
is the search space, which we limited to feasible solutions. We acknowledge
that there are parameters and design decisions that would have had to be
considered more closely due to this limitation. In the discussion, we arrived
==PAGE:70==
64
7 Conclusion
at the conclusion that the parameters that decide the number of removals for
destroy operators are likely to be one of the key contributors to the ALNS’
limitations. Moreover, we find that the results suggest weaknesses regarding
operators responsible for satellite configurations, especially regarding when
they are performed and the possibility of cycling between the same few
configurations.
In the results of the experiment with split deliveries, we observe re-
duced costs in approximately 70% of all instances. Analysing the results,
we find that the relation of customer demand to vehicle capacity affects
the benefit of allowing split deliveries. These findings are consistent with
observations made by Dror and Trudeau and Claudia Archetti, Savelsbergh,
and M Grazia Speranza. Moreover, we have come to the conclusion that
the layout of LRP2E instances have a direct impact on how savings are
generated when using split deliveries. We differentiate between instances
where savings are primarily driven by reducing first echelon routing cost and
instances where reduced first echelon routing costs lead to cheaper satellite
configurations being used. In both cases, a change in satellite configura-
tions has been observed, as a result of introducing split deliveries. The
second echelon routing costs are assumed to be reduced as well because
instances with lower vehicle capacities and more splits show higher savings.
However, we cannot provide definitive proof because the change in satellite
configuration also changes the second echelon routing decisions.
The main limitation of this work has been the quality of the presented
ALNS. Presumably, its weaknesses also affect the solution quality when
splits are introduced. Moreover, the instances considered in this work are
special cases of LRP2E which do not require depot location decisions. Addi-
tionally, we have only presented theories for a generalized LRP2E without
generating solutions or testing the ALNS on it.
We believe that there are multiple ways to continue the work presented
in this study. For example, it would be interesting to see the impact of
introducing split deliveries in LRP2E when an algorithm is used that pro-
duces results closer to the level of state of the art algorithms. Moreover,
we believe that a study that focuses on changes in interactions between the
two echelons, as a result of split deliveries being introduced, would provide
interesting insights. Finally, we find that research into the effects of split
deliveries, when different network layouts are used, could be another avenue
for research.
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
The only appendices included here are those reference throughout the The-
sis. A digital appendix is part of the files handed in on DTU-inside. There
are two excel files included: (1) a file that contains the complete results for
the process of parameter tuning, and (2) a file that contains all data used
for the computational study. Additionally, any code that has been used to
generate data for this thesis has been included.
A.1
Results
Appendices Table A.1 to A.3 are detailed results for the individual instances.
Table A.1 is the complementary table to the one shown in Chapter 5. Ta-
ble A.2 and A.3 are tables for the results with split deliveries. From left
to right the columns contain the following information: The name of the
instance, best objective value obtained by the presented ALNS with single
deliver; the best objective value obtained using the ALNS when solving with
split delivery; the improvement of the best solution when split delivery is
introduced; average objective value obtained by ALNS with single delivery;
average objective value with split deliveries; the average time per execution;
and the average time when finding the best solution.
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A.1 Results
67
Table A.1. Complete List of results for textitNguyen’s LRP2E Instances gener-
ated using the proposed ALNS.
BKS
zm
∆Gapm%
z
∆Gap%
t
tm
25-5N
80,370
80,370
0.00
80,370.0
0.00
75.7
15.7
25-5Nb
64,562
64,562
0.00
64,562.0
0.00
69.4
14.5
25-5MN
78,947
78,947
0.00
78,957.1
0.01
73.3
24.4
25-5MNb
64,438
64,438
0.00
64,438.0
0.00
67.1
15.3
50-5N
137,815
137,815
0.00
137,904.1
0.06
242.6
63.7
50-5Nb
110,094
110,603
0.46
111,358.9
1.15
251.1
115.0
50-5MN
123,484
123,484
0.00
124,122.4
0.52
244.6
96.9
50-5MNb
105,401
105,401
0.00
105,401.0
0.00
251.3
59.0
50-10N
115,725
115,725
0.00
116,714.5
0.86
247.0
168.9
50-10Nb
87,315
87,315
0.00
87,554.0
0.27
236.4
128.1
50-10MN
135,519
135,519
0.00
136,499.1
0.72
221.8
111.5
50-10MNb
110,613
110,613
0.00
111,523.9
0.82
235.4
87.5
100-5N
193,228
194,684
0.75
195,946.6
1.41
932.8
525.9
100-5Nb
158,927
159,040
0.07
159,249.1
0.20
846.3
485.7
100-5MN
204,682
204,938
0.13
205,319.6
0.31
914.6
384.7
100-5MNb
165,744
166,100
0.21
166,383.7
0.39
885.4
413.5
100-10N
210,449
216,533
3.13
219,187.4
4.40
946.3
389.4
100-10Nb
155,489
157,361
1.20
163,383.0
5.08
820.0
448.9
100-10MN
201,275
204,507
1.61
207,662.6
3.17
916.7
587.6
100-10MNb
170,625
170,625
0.00
173,262.9
1.55
914.3
641.8
200-10N
347,395
351,550
1.82
354,557.7
2.69
3,914.4
1,719.0
200-10Nb
256,171
257,879
0.67
263,354.9
2.80
3,564.5
1,611.9
200-10MN
324,006
326,476
0.83
335,499.3
3.61
3,982.5
1,567.6
200-10MNb
287,076
294,463
2.57
299,037.4
4.17
3,094.2
1,330.6
AvgM=5
0.14
0.34
404.5
184.5
AvgM=10
0.99
2.51
1,591.1
732.7
==PAGE:74==
68
Appendix A Appendix
Table A.2. Complete List of results for textitProdhon’s LRP2E Instances when
solving using ALNS after introducing split deliveries. Superscript SD denotes
objective values when using split deliveries.
zm
zSD
m
Gapm
z
zSD
Gap
t
tm
20-5-1
89,075
89,075
0.00
89,075.0
89,075.0
0.00
76.6
26.9
20-5-1b
61,863
61,863
0.00
61,869.3
61,871.4
0.00
77.6
30.4
20-5-2
84,478
84,275
-0.24
84,508.2
84,441.8
-0.08
72.6
26.4
20-5-2b
60,838
59,838
-1.64
60,838.0
60,738.0
-0.16
78.6
5.5
50-5-1
131,085
128,882
-1.68
132,105.1
130,031.0
-1.57
268.1
114.3
50-5-1b
101,530
101,530
0.00
101,747.0
101,658.8
-0.09
231.3
113.8
50-5-2
131,825
131,673
-0.12
132,004.3
132,215.3
0.16
287.3
122.9
50-5-2b
110,332
110,332
0.00
110,353.5
110,353.5
0.00
245.4
91.7
50-5-2BIS
122,599
122,269
-0.27
122,681.9
122,489.3
-0.16
272.9
98.0
50-5-2bBIS
105,763
97,248
-8.05
105,888.2
97,363.6
-8.05
244.4
103.9
50-5-3
128,379
126,959
-1.11
128,574.0
127,578.9
-0.77
287.7
145.2
50-5-3b
104,006
104,006
0.00
104,038.2
104,182.3
0.14
252.9
54.3
100-5-1
320,891
318,420
-0.77
322,297.9
322,091.5
-0.06
1,099.6
608.8
100-5-1b
258,646
258,406
-0.09
259,277.2
259,406.7
0.05
994.6
559.5
100-5-2
232,116
231,166
-0.41
233,405.8
231,898.3
-0.65
1,136.4
350.2
100-5-2b
194,934
194,814
-0.06
195,137.9
195,004.5
-0.07
846.7
408.8
100-5-3
245,636
244,493
-0.47
246,812.3
245,457.5
-0.55
1,085.5
352.4
100-5-3b
194,285
195,422
0.59
195,841.8
196,045.9
0.10
835.3
498.6
100-10-1
355,421
344,056
-3.20
364,423.8
352,433.4
-3.29
1,201.4
742.7
100-10-1b
300,947
285,333
-5.19
303,298.8
295,549.1
-2.56
885.1
508.9
100-10-2
306,416
293,008
-4.38
310,427.8
295,268.5
-4.88
1,126.8
659.1
100-10-2b
264,696
251,919
-4.83
267,051.8
254,626.6
-4.65
854.9
335.7
100-10-3
316,983
300,264
-5.27
322,598.0
305,867.5
-5.19
1,184.4
654.8
100-10-3b
264,749
253,328
-4.31
268,029.0
255,198.7
-4.79
872.4
610.9
200-10-1
560,725
552,406
-1.48
566,225.7
557,432.8
-1.55
5,471.4
1,305.2
200-10-1b
453,333
443,023
-2.27
454,346.6
445,680.6
-1.91
3,411.4
259.5
200-10-2
507,873
507,075
-0.16
519,235.0
514,795.1
-0.86
5,310.9
2,413.6
200-10-2b
427,356
424,677
-0.63
431,666.5
432,252.3
0.14
3,305.9
1,578.7
200-10-3
540,310
524,649
-2.90
549,926.1
533,275.1
-3.03
5,676.9
3,368.1
200-10-3b
424,364
409,456
-3.51
431,868.1
414,088.7
-4.12
3,460.9
1,895.5
AvgM=5
-0.80
-0.65
466.30
206.20
AvgM=10
-3.18
-3.06
2,730.20
1,194.40
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A.1 Results
69
Table A.3. Complete List of results for textitNguyen’s LRP2E Instances when
solving using ALNS after introducing split deliveries. Superscript SD denotes
objective values when using split deliveries.
zm
zSD
m
Gapm
z
zSD
Gap
t
tm
25-5N
80,370
80,370
0.00
80,370.0
80,370.0
0.00
81.2
0.4
25-5Nb
64,562
64,562
0.00
64,562.0
64,562.0
0.00
72.9
5.3
25-5MN
78,947
77,416
-1.94
78,957.1
77,416.0
-1.95
74.6
1.4
25-5MNb
64,438
64,438
0.00
64,438.0
64,438.0
0.00
65.0
3.2
50-5N
137,815
137,685
-0.09
137,904.1
137,861.1
-0.03
272.4
12.2
50-5Nb
110,603
109,883
-0.65
111,358.9
111,027.0
-0.30
263.9
22.6
50-5MN
123,484
123,484
0.00
124,122.4
124,367.2
0.20
270.4
6.6
50-5MNb
105,401
104,908
-0.47
105,401.0
104,908.0
-0.47
269.1
26.0
50-10N
115,725
115,701
-0.02
116,714.5
116,488.1
-0.19
274.6
13.2
50-10Nb
87,315
86,836
-0.55
87,554.0
87,162.0
-0.45
248.8
4.6
50-10MN
135,519
134,279
-0.92
136,499.1
135,457.0
-0.76
252.1
21.9
50-10MNb
110,613
110,506
-0.10
111,523.9
111,327.1
-0.18
253.7
66.6
100-5N
194,684
194,067
-0.32
195,946.6
194,919.3
-0.52
1,000.7
76.4
100-5Nb
159,040
158,947
-0.06
159,249.1
159,127.6
-0.08
898.9
66.8
100-5MN
204,938
203,807
-0.55
205,319.6
204,693.9
-0.30
1,014.5
68.9
100-5MNb
166,100
166,281
0.11
166,383.7
167,004.4
0.37
930.2
27.2
100-10N
216,533
215,372
-0.54
219,187.4
217,200.6
-0.91
1,042.3
449.7
100-10Nb
157,361
157,375
0.01
163,383.0
162,916.3
-0.29
866.7
77.2
100-10MN
204,507
205,412
0.44
207,662.6
208,614.1
0.46
990.8
321.9
100-10MNb
170,625
172,060
0.84
173,262.9
173,246.3
-0.01
923.8
92.3
200-10N
351,550
349,826
-0.49
354,557.7
353,777.2
-0.22
4,309.2
419.9
200-10Nb
257,879
259,545
0.65
263,354.9
263,444.1
0.03
3,810.5
516.7
200-10MN
326,476
327,233
0.23
335,499.3
331,277.3
-1.26
4,424.7
437.6
200-10MNb
294,463
292,086
-0.81
299,037.4
296,099.2
-0.98
3,331.2
505.6
AvgM=5
-0.33
-0.26
434.5
26.4
AvgM=10
-0.10
-0.40
1727.4
243.9
==PAGE:76==
70
Appendix A Appendix
A.2
Alternative LRP2E Model
min
∑
i∈V
∑
j∈V
ci,j ·

∑
k∈KDS
ηi,j,k +
∑
κ∈KSC
xi,j,κ


+
∑
i∈V

ψiOD
i + ziOS
i +

∑
k∈KDS
ζi,kF DS +
∑
κ∈KSC
wi,κF SC




(A.1)
s.t
∑
j∈V
xi,j,k =
∑
j∈V
xj,i,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KSC
(A.2)
∑
i∈S′
∑
j∈S′
xi,j,k ≤|S| −1 + M ·
∑
i∈S′
Zi
∀S′ ∈S′, |S′| ≥2, k ∈KSC (A.3)
∑
i∈N
wi,k ≤1
∀k ∈KSC
(A.4)
∑
k∈KSC
wi,k ≤|KSC| · zi
∀i ∈V
(A.5)
wi,k ≥zi +
∑
j∈V
xi,j,k −1
∀i ∈V, k ∈KSC
(A.6)
wi,k ≤
∑
j∈V
xi,j,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KSC
(A.7)
∑
j∈V
yi,j,k ≤QSC · wi,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KSC
(A.8)
∑
i∈V
∑
k∈KSC
yi,j,k = Dj
∀j ∈V
(A.9)
yh,j,k ≤Dj ·
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
xi,j,k
∀h ∈V, j ∈V, k ∈KSC
(A.10)
∑
j∈V
∑
k∈KSC
yi,j,k ≤Ci
∀i ∈V
(A.11)
∑
h∈V
∑
κ∈KDS
µh,i,κ ≥
∑
j∈V
∑
k∈KSC
yi,j,k + zi · Di
−ψi · Ci ∀i ∈V
(A.12)
∑
h∈V
∑
κ∈KDS
µh,i,κ ≤(1 −ψi)Ci
∀i ∈V
(A.13)
ψi ≤zi
∀i ∈V
(A.14)
∑
j∈V
ηi,j,k =
∑
j∈V
ηj,i,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.15)
∑
i∈S′
∑
j∈S′
ηi,j,k ≤|S′| −1 + M ·
∑
i∈S′
ψi
∀S′ ∈S, |S′| ≥2, k ∈KDS (A.16)
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
ηi,j,k ≤zj
∀j ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.17)
∑
i∈V
ζi,k ≤1
∀k ∈KDS
(A.18)
∑
k∈KDS
ζi,k ≤|KDS| · ψi
∀i ∈V
(A.19)
ζi,k ≥ψi +
∑
j∈V
ηi,j,k −1
∀i ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.20)
ζi,k ≤
∑
j∈V
ηi,j,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.21)
∑
j∈V
µi,j,k ≤QDS · ζi,k
∀i ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.22)
µh,j,k ≤Cj ·
∑
i∈V,i̸=j
ηi,j,k
∀h ∈V, j ∈V, k ∈KDS
(A.23)
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A.2 Alternative LRP2E Model
71
The objective function (A.1) minimizes the sum of all costs related to
the problem. These include the cost of routing, opening facilities and fixed
vehicle cost. The costs are applied to both echelons.
Constraint that handle routing and vehicle assignment follow the same
structure both echelons, the only difference being variable names and in-
dexing.
We use common flow conservation (A.2 and A.15). We implement the
changed sub-tour elimination constraints (A.3 and A.15) as described. The
same vehicle assignment constraints are used, therefore each vehicle is as-
signed at most once (A.4 and A.18) and only to an open facility (A.5 and
A.19). The constraints defined in A.6 and A.7 or A.20 and A.21 enforce
that a vehicle is only assigned to a facility when leaving it and that it can-
not be assigned without leaving. As we described no extra constraint is
necessary to prevent vehicle from entering other open facilities.
No vehicle can deliver more goods in their tour than its capacity allows
(A.8 and A.22) and the combined quantity leaving a satellite cannot exceed
its capacity (A.11). Additionally, equations A.13 and A.23 enforce that
goods delivered by a vehicle are taken from the facility from which the ve-
hicle starts its tour. A customer or satellite can only receive goods from
a vehicle that uses an arc going into their node (A.10 and A.23). In the
second echelon, all customer demands must be fulfilled (A.9), whereas on
the first echelon, the satellites must be supplied with a large enough quan-
tity to load all vehicles with the required quantities (A.12). On the first
echelon, an additional routing constraint prohibits vehicles from entering
closed satellites (A.17).
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
Archetti, C, M G Speranza, and A Hertz (Feb. 2006). “A Tabu Search
Algorithm for the Split Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem.” In: Trans-
portation Science 40.1, pp. 64–73. issn: 0041-1655. doi: 10.1287/trsc.
1040.0103. url: https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.
1287/trsc.1040.0103.
Archetti, C., N. Bianchessi, and M. G. Speranza (Dec. 2011). “A column
generation approach for the split delivery vehicle routing problem.” In:
Networks 58.4, pp. 241–254. issn: 00283045. doi: 10.1002/net.20467.
Archetti, Claudia, Nicola Bianchessi, and M Grazia Speranza (2014). “Branch-
and-cut algorithms for the split delivery vehicle routing problem.” In:
European Journal of Operational Research 238.3, pp. 685–698. issn:
0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.04.026.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S037722171400352X.
— (Dec. 2015). “A branch-price-and-cut algorithm for the commodity con-
strained split delivery vehicle routing problem.” In: Computers & Op-
erations Research 64, pp. 1–10. issn: 03050548. doi: 10.1016/j.cor.
2015.04.023.
Archetti, Claudia, Martin W P Savelsbergh, and M Grazia Speranza (2008).
“To split or not to split: That is the question.” In: Transportation Re-
search Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 44.1, pp. 114–123.
issn: 1366-5545. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2006.04.003.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1366554506000391.
Archetti, Claudia, Martin W P Savelsbergh, and M Grazia Speranza (May
2006). “Worst-Case Analysis for Split Delivery Vehicle Routing Prob-
lems.” In: Transportation Science 40.2, pp. 226–234. issn: 0041-1655.
doi: 10.1287/trsc.1050.0117. url: https://pubsonline.informs.
org/doi/abs/10.1287/trsc.1050.0117.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
73
Archetti, Claudia, M Grazia Speranza, and Martin W P Savelsbergh (Feb.
2008). “An Optimization-Based Heuristic for the Split Delivery Vehi-
cle Routing Problem.” In: Transportation Science 42.1, pp. 22–31. issn:
0041-1655. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1070.0204. url: https://doi.org/
10.1287/trsc.1070.0204.
Archetti, Claudia and Maria Grazia Speranza (2008). “The Split Delivery
Vehicle Routing Problem: A Survey.” In: The Vehicle Routing Problem:
Latest Advances and New Challenges. Ed. by Bruce Golden, S Raghavan,
and Edward Wasil. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 103–122. isbn: 978-
0-387-77778-8. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77778-8{\_}5. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77778-8_5.
Boccia, Maurizio et al. (2010). “A Metaheuristic for a Two Echelon Location-
Routing Problem.” In: Experimental Algorithms. Ed. by Paola Festa.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 288–301. isbn: 978-
3-642-13193-6.
Boudia, Mourad, Christian Prins, and Mohamed Reghioui (2007). “An Ef-
fective Memetic Algorithm with Population Management for the Split
Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem.” In: Hybrid Metaheuristics. Ed. by
Thomas Bartz-Beielstein et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, pp. 16–30. isbn: 978-3-540-75514-2.
Chen, R and J Guo (2018). “Optimal Routing for Split Delivery Vehicle
Routing Problems.” In: 2018 7th International Congress on Advanced
Applied Informatics (IIAI-AAI), pp. 667–670. doi: 10.1109/IIAI-AAI.
2018.00140.
Clarke, G. and J. W. Wright (Aug. 1964). “Scheduling of Vehicles from a
Central Depot to a Number of Delivery Points.” In: Operations Research
12.4, pp. 568–581. issn: 0030-364X. doi: 10.1287/opre.12.4.568.
Contardo, Claudio, Vera Hemmelmayr, and Teodor Gabriel Crainic (2012).
“Lower and upper bounds for the two-echelon capacitated location-routing
problem.” In: Computers & Operations Research 39.12, pp. 3185–3199.
issn: 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2012.04.003.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0305054812000834.
Crainic, Teodor Gabriel et al. (June 2011). Location-Routing Models for
Designing a Two-Echelon Freight Distribution System. url: https://
www.cirrelt.ca/documentstravail/cirrelt-2011-06.pdf.
==PAGE:80==
74
Bibliography
Cuda, R., G. Guastaroba, and M. G. Speranza (Mar. 2015). “A survey on
two-echelon routing problems.” In: Computers & Operations Research
55, pp. 185–199. issn: 0305-0548. doi: 10.1016/J.COR.2014.06.008.
Dowsland, Kathryn A. and Jonathan M. Thompson (2012). “Simulated
Annealing.” In: Handbook of Natural Computing. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1623–1655. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-
92910-9{\_}49.
Drexl, Michael and Michael Schneider (Mar. 2015). “A survey of variants
and extensions of the location-routing problem.” In: European Journal
of Operational Research 241.2, pp. 283–308. issn: 0377-2217. doi: 10.
1016/J.EJOR.2014.08.030.
Dror, Moshe and Pierre Trudeau (May 1989). “Savings by Split Delivery
Routing.” In: Transportation Science 23.2, pp. 141–145. issn: 0041-1655.
doi: 10.1287/trsc.23.2.141. url: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.
23.2.141.
— (June 1990). “Split delivery routing.” In: Naval Research Logistics (NRL)
37.3, pp. 383–402. issn: 0894-069X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/
nav.3800370304. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800370304.
Esmaeilbeigi, Rasul et al. (2021). “Benders decomposition for a reverse logis-
tics network design problem in the dairy industry.” In: Annals of Oper-
ations Research. issn: 1572-9338. doi: 10.1007/s10479-021-04309-4.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04309-4.
Ferreira, Kamyla Maria, Thiago Alves de Queiroz, and Franklina Maria
Bragion Toledo (2021). “An exact approach for the green vehicle routing
problem with two-dimensional loading constraints and split delivery.” In:
Computers & Operations Research 136, p. 105452. issn: 0305-0548. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2021.105452. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305054821002045.
Gandra, Vinícius Martins Santos et al. (2021). “The impact of loading re-
strictions on the two-echelon location routing problem.” In: Computers
& Industrial Engineering 160, p. 107609. issn: 0360-8352. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cie . 2021 . 107609. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360835221005131.
Gao, Z, G Sun, and Z Yuan (2019). “Genetic Algorithm to the Split Delivery
Vehicle Routing Problem.” In: 2019 6th International Conference on Sys-
tems and Informatics (ICSAI), pp. 626–630. doi: 10.1109/ICSAI48974.
2019.9010082.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
75
Gschwind, Timo, Nicola Bianchessi, and Stefan Irnich (2019). “Stabilized
branch-price-and-cut for the commodity-constrained split delivery ve-
hicle routing problem.” In: European Journal of Operational Research
278.1, pp. 91–104. issn: 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejor.2019.04.008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0377221719303285.
Gu, Wenjuan et al. (2019). “Adaptive large neighborhood search for the
commodity constrained split delivery VRP.” In: Computers & Operations
Research 112, p. 104761. issn: 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cor.2019.07.019. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0305054819301959.
Gulczynski, Damon, Bruce Golden, and Edward Wasil (2010). “The split
delivery vehicle routing problem with minimum delivery amounts.” In:
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
46.5, pp. 612–626. issn: 1366-5545. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tre.2009.12.007. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1366554509001574.
Guo, Fang, Zhihong Huang, and Weilai Huang (2021). “Heuristic approaches
for a vehicle routing problem with an incompatible loading constraint
and splitting deliveries by order.” In: Computers & Operations Research
134, p. 105379. issn: 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cor.2021.105379. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0305054821001519.
Jacobsen, S. K. and O. B.G. Madsen (Dec. 1980). “A comparative study of
heuristics for a two-level routing-location problem.” In: European Jour-
nal of Operational Research 5.6, pp. 378–387. issn: 0377-2217. doi:
10.1016/0377-2217(80)90124-1.
Jesus Gonzalez-Feliu (2009). “The N-echelon Location routing problem: con-
cepts and methods for tactical and operational planning.”
Jin, Mingzhou, Kai Liu, and Burak Eksioglu (Mar. 2008). “A column gen-
eration approach for the split delivery vehicle routing problem.” In: Op-
erations Research Letters 36.2, pp. 265–270. issn: 01676377. doi: 10.
1016/j.orl.2007.05.012.
Laporte, G. et al. (Sept. 2000). “Classical and modern heuristics for the
vehicle routing problem.” In: International Transactions in Operational
Research 7.4-5, pp. 285–300. issn: 0969-6016. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-
3995.2000.tb00200.x.
==PAGE:82==
76
Bibliography
Li, Hong and Sujian Li (2020). “Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem
with Multi-fuzzy and Pick-Delivery Model and Algorithm.” In: Cyber Se-
curity Intelligence and Analytics. Ed. by Zheng Xu et al. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, pp. 600–610. isbn: 978-3-030-15235-2.
Nguyen, Viet-Phuong, Christian Prins, and Caroline Prodhon (2012a). “A
multi-start iterated local search with tabu list and path relinking for
the two-echelon location-routing problem.” In: Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence 25.1, pp. 56–71. issn: 0952-1976. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2011.09.012. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197611001655.
— (2012b). “Solving the two-echelon location routing problem by a GRASP
reinforced by a learning process and path relinking.” In: European Jour-
nal of Operational Research 216.1, pp. 113–126. issn: 0377-2217. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.07.030. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037722171100662X.
Ochelska-Mierzejewska, Joanna (2020). “Ant Colony Optimization Algo-
rithm for Split Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem.” In: Advanced In-
formation Networking and Applications. Ed. by Leonard Barolli et al.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 758–767. isbn: 978-3-030-
44041-1.
Palomo-Martínez, Pamela J, M Angélica Salazar-Aguilar, and Gilbert La-
porte (2017). “Planning a selective delivery schedule through Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search.” In: Computers & Industrial Engineering
112, pp. 368–378. issn: 0360-8352. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cie.2017.08.037. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360835217303960.
Pisinger, David and Stefan Ropke (2007). “A general heuristic for vehicle
routing problems.” In: Computers & Operations Research 34.8, pp. 2403–
2435. issn: 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2005.
09.012. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0305054805003023.
Rattanamanee, T (2021). “A Genetic Algorithm for Split Delivery Open
Vehicle Routing Problem with Physical Workload Consideration.” In:
2021 Research, Invention, and Innovation Congress: Innovation Electri-
cals and Electronics (RI2C), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/RI2C51727.2021.
9559769.
Ropke, Stefan and David Pisinger (Nov. 2006). “An Adaptive Large Neigh-
borhood Search Heuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
77
Time Windows.” In: Transportation Science 40.4, pp. 455–472. issn:
0041-1655. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1050.0135. url: https://doi.org/
10.1287/trsc.1050.0135.
Schrimpf, Gerhard et al. (2000). “Record Breaking Optimization Results
Using the Ruin and Recreate Principle.” In: Journal of Computational
Physics 159.2, pp. 139–171. issn: 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1006/jcph.1999.6413. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0021999199964136.
Schwengerer, Martin, Sandro Pirkwieser, and Günther R Raidl (2012). “A
Variable Neighborhood Search Approach for the Two-Echelon Location-
Routing Problem.” In: Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Op-
timization. Ed. by Jin-Kao Hao and Martin Middendorf. Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 13–24. isbn: 978-3-642-29124-1.
Shaw, Paul (1997). A New Local Search Algorithm Providing High Quality
Solutions to Vehicle Routing Problems. url: http://citeseerx.ist.
psu.edu/viewdoc/summary;jsessionid=944436DF456112C66E087E635F7844F5?
doi=10.1.1.51.1273.
Silva, Marcos Melo, Anand Subramanian, and Luiz Satoru Ochi (2015).
“An iterated local search heuristic for the split delivery vehicle routing
problem.” In: Computers & Operations Research 53, pp. 234–249. issn:
0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2014.08.005.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0305054814002159.
Wilck IV, Joseph Hubert and Tom M. Cavalier (2012a). “A Construction
Heuristic for the Split Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem.” In: American
Journal of Operations Research 02.02, pp. 153–162. issn: 2160-8830. doi:
10.4236/ajor.2012.22018.
— (2012b). “A Genetic Algorithm for the Split Delivery Vehicle Routing
Problem.” In: American Journal of Operations Research 02.02, pp. 207–
216. issn: 2160-8830. doi: 10.4236/ajor.2012.22024.
Xu, Y et al. (2021). “A Two-Echelon Location Routing Problem for Bio-
Waste Transportation.” In: 2021 1st International Conference On Cy-
ber Management And Engineering (CyMaEn), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/
CyMaEn50288.2021.9497293.
Yang, Peng and Lining Zeng (Dec. 2018). “Models and Methods for Two-
Echelon Location Routing Problem with Time Constraints in City Lo-
gistics.” In: Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2018, pp. 1–9. issn:
1024-123X. doi: 10.1155/2018/2549713.
==PAGE:84==
