==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Organisational Theory
MSc Thesis
Analysis Of The Organisational Implications Of Using An Internal Unified
Education System Within The Danish Defense
Study Number
Name
s205886
Kristian Mejer Daugaard
==PAGE:2==
ii
Preface
This report is a Master Thesis project from Industrial Engineering and Manage-
ment at DTU with supervisor Kasper Edwards, senior professor in Management at
DTU. The object of this report is to assess the culture and implications of using in-
ternal education systems, specifically in the Danish Defense. Independent sources
from the Danish Defense and organisational literature will be used to assess the
situation and implications thereof.
Technical University of Denmark, June 23, 2022
Abstract
This study explores some of the implications caused by the Danish Defense’s in-
ternal education structure. The focus of the implications are the cultural conse-
quences and the extension of these. Five persons with a relation to the Danish De-
fense was used as primary data source for the study. Interviews were conducted
separately for each person and an overall interview guide was used for them all.
The interviews were still designed to each individual as they come with different
backgrounds, area of interests and experience. The data was condensed into inter-
view summaries, agreed by the interview participants. The condensed data was
analysed more in-depth and compared cross-participant, to find patterns between
the different individuals and their experiences, still focusing on cultural friction.
The analysis focused on comparing the different perspectives on same phenom-
ena from the participants. Patterns were thus uncovered when cross-referencing
different experiences.
It is a large organisation with a rich history, especially in each regiment and sub-
culture - meaning the probability of cultures clashing internally in the organisation
at large, is high. The data is not extensive enough to justify concluding on all root
causes, but points in a general direction of several cases of internal friction. This
was linked to potentially stem from culture clashes in platoons, regiments and
branches - multiple levels in the organisation.
The study concludes that there
is enough data that supports a general set of patterns that indicate reoccurring
cultural clashes that it is not by chance.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
iii
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Literature and Theories
4
2.1
Military Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Shaping and Measuring Military Culture Development . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Military Culture and Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Restructuring of The Danish Defence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Organisational Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
16
3.1
Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Data
19
4.1
Data Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Interviews
21
5.1
Interview - Sergeant E.E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Interview - Major Jakob Barfod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Interview - Private J. Jørgensen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Interview - Captain Andreas Kellberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5
Interview - General Jens Garly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Analysis
34
6.1
Homosocial Reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Officer’s Schools Producing Identical Officers
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Three Branches of the Organisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4
Promotion System in the Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
2013 Restructuring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
Honorable Mentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusion
42
7.1
Subproblems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Final Remarks and Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
References
48
A Interview - Sergeant E.E.
49
B
Interview - Major Jakob Barfod
49
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
C Interview - Private J. Jørgensen
50
D Interview - Captain Andreas Kellberg
51
E
Interview - General Jens Garly
51
==PAGE:5==
2
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
According to Cambridge Dictionary, an organisation is defined as "A group of peo-
ple who work together in an organized way for a shared purpose"[2]. Such en entity must
be able to fulfill or try to fulfil its purpose as this is the primary reason for the
organisations existence (there may be multiple). In the case of a business, which is
primarily a profitable organisation, the purpose can seem straight forward: Make
profits by certain means or perhaps offer certain means while making profits - a
metric that may seem intuitive and simple. Looking at a vastly different organi-
sation, such as the Danish Defence, provides an entirely different purpose(s) and
one that might not be all that easy to measure. Any generic military’s (defence)
primary purpose is to defend the country, but in a complex political landscape,
this is also likely to be much more complex than just that - and equally complex
to measure.
For any organisation to thrive, it is in the organisation’s best interest to attract and
retain the best employees. The Danish Defense makes for an interesting combina-
tion - it is an organisation with a seemingly clear purpose , however, the real world
is complex and the Danish Defense is a large organisation with around 20.000 em-
ployees and many purposes and missions, and many of them independent of each
other. Same for all of the purposes is that the Danish Defense is or should be
striving towards best possible organisational performance with the available re-
sources. The human resources consist primarily of internally educated employees
(soldiers), while the remaining 25% of them have only civilian education [3]. This
means that three quarters of the staff has gone through internal education, which
could have implications on the culture and their behaviour as employees and by
extension the rest of the organisation. It could be as simple as a way of thinking
while at work or the method to approach problems with. With an organisation this
large and with this type of complex and multitudinous purpose, it can be difficult
to make clear research conclusions based on snippets of examples, demanding a
more narrow picture to provide a more specific and credible analysis.
Schein (Schein 2004 [9]) introduced organisational culture and its role in how
organisations can function in many different ways. Organisational culture is ev-
erything from visible artefacts such as clothing and buildings to individual funda-
mental assumptions about how things are or should be done, without question or
doubt. This understanding and de-structuring of organisational culture at differ-
ent levels is crucial to be able to alter (improve) the culture according to organisa-
tional needs. This can for example be a production company wanting to become
environmental friendly at the cost of some productional capabilities, due to using
higher cost recyclable plastic. The culture within the company must now include
a positive and proud view on being a sustainable company with environmental
==PAGE:6==
3
friendly goals, alongside their original production goals.
This thesis will explore how the Danish Defense has set up education structures
and what role these plays in the organisation’s culture and development. It will
focus on experiences from interview participants and dive into literature that can
piece the data together in a meaningful sense and conclude, more specifically, on
exactly where and how the education has caused implications in the organisation
at large and the different suborganisations.
Purpose Statement
This thesis will study the current educational, cultural and organisational struc-
ture in various places of the Danish Defense in an effort to shed some light on
potential problems and suggest improvements to the organisation, focusing on
the education structure and it’s possible implications in the organisational culture.
Research Objectives
Objectives of the study includes, but are not limited to: Qualitative data collection
in the form of cases, organisational theories applied to the cases and an analysis
and conclusion of the connection between the theory and experiences and frustra-
tions of the interview participants life in the organisation.
Problem Statement
"How is the Danish Defense’s education structure set up and what implications does this
have on organisational culture? Does this organisational culture affect the organisations
ability to fulfill its purpose?"
The following sub-problems will also be explored:
• Why and how is the Danish Defense using internal and unified education?
• What consequences can surface in an organisation when the majority of the
employees have gone through internal education as their primary education
basis?
• How can the organisational performance be measured in relation to this
education and employment structure?
==PAGE:7==
4
2
Literature and Theories
2
Literature and Theories
The included theory in this section is used throughout the report and is condensed
in brief subsections here, if the reader wishes to have a short overview of the
literature - without reading the whole thing. It can be read or skipped, and is only
here to serve those interested in it.
2.1
Military Culture
Soeters, Winslow and Weibull [1]. These organisations will be seen as Janusian
(two faced roman god Janus), because they have two sides - the coorporate and
the muddy boots, the soldier in the battlefield and the soldier in the barracks.
Essentially one side for prevention and preparation and another side for action.
Martin, 1992; Winslow, 2000 [1] proposes three perspectives on culture: The inte-
gration perspective, which revolves around homogeneity among all members. A
clear and consistent pattern of thoughts and priorities, creating a very tethered
society or organisation. The Differentiation culture is about subcultures and how
these co-exist in a larger context.
In the case of armed forces, this can relate
to the three wings: Army, navy and air force. It can also relate to officers and
non-officers, men and women and so on. The last perspective discussed is the
Fragmentation perspective. It emphasizes the same principles of subcultures, but
on a much smaller scale: Microcultures. This perspective accepts diversity and
an increasing number of different voices, opinions and ways of co-existing next to
each other. This may lead to more chaotic and volatile cultures, as there will natu-
rally be more views and thus more clashing opinions and disagreements. Culture
in the integrative perspective sees culture as a way to bind and connect subjects,
whereas the fragmentation much less so. The three perspectives can be seen as
ranging from macro to micro analysis of cultures. Most literature (Winslow, 2000
[1]) on military culture is based on the Integration perspective, as this is the most
tangible approach for broad comprehension and implementation.
Top leaders
would also like to believe that a top-down approach with a unified and singular
culture is the reality, as this makes things more simple - unlike the actual reality of
many sub- and microcultures that co-exist, sometimes in more chaotic ways than
what the management would like.
Communal Life
Traditionally, life in the military has come at a huge personal sacrifice. For the
most conservative armies (US, Russia), conscription and employment was almost
a life long decision that could extend to the family of the soldier as well. Long
deployments, life in barracks and the soldiers future existing primarily within
==PAGE:8==
2.1
Military Culture
5
the borders of military bases.
With the introduction of all-volunteering forces
(AVF) and, in Denmark, a more modern approach to employment of professional
soldiers, a life in the military does now not have to exclude leisure time and
generally speaking, a life outside the barracks. Contract agreed hours, military
education that has importance and use in the civilian world.
Belgium Italy and Germany appear to be more institution oriented, implying that
the officers are sacrificing many civilian opportunities (material gain, leisure time,
private life) for a military career that can last up to 40 years. This may play a
crucial role in the resulting military culture, as the type of personnel employed
are people who are truly interested in giving their life to this service.
Hierarchy
Organisations can function with many different systems of authority and man-
agement. Military organisations are typically old-school and conservative in this
regard, still utilizing a top-down hierarchy with soldier rank systems and com-
manding officers.
Military organisations are generally speaking more coercive
than their business counterparts, as shown in comparative studies (Soeters, 1997;,
Soeters and Recht 1998). Military organisations might also not be subject to fre-
quent reality checks that would force frequent adaptation, as peace time can last
for a long time where business organisations on almost a yearly basis will need
to provide performance metrics and reevaluate strategy and culture. Outliers do
exist. Norway and Canada (two countries easily compared with Denmark) have
military cultures that focus on enabling and quality fulfillment of the soldier job.
The organisation’s rules and hierarchy help enable the employee fulfill their task
instead of limit or shape the way they do it. These countries are very compara-
ble to Denmark, one of them being a straight neighbour with whom Denmark
shares uniform systems, amongst other things. Denmark has also shared weapon
systems with Canada and runs ongoing international missions on e.g. Greenland
with Canada. The Danish Defense is in many ways also designed and structured
to produce individual and critically thinking soldiers, who will be helped by the
structures, instead of limited. This may be easier to implement in a relatively small
army of 20.000 employees, compared to a USA-sized army where unification and
structural alignment may have to be much more strict to keep things as simple as
possible in the grand scheme.
Discipline
Discipline functions as a behavioral control mechanism, that serves to point the
employees in a general direction of what is acceptable and suits the overall pur-
pose. This can come in many forms, one of them being formal and ceremonial dis-
==PAGE:9==
6
2
Literature and Theories
cipline: Wearing the uniform correctly in terms of posture, polish boots and what
not. This is one of the least important aspects of discipline according to student
officers from Sweden, Denmark, Norway and more western countries (Soeters and
Recht, 1998). The Danish Defence has many levels of structural discipline Incor-
porated if employees act outside the accepted rules and norms. These include
but are not limited to warnings, behavioral evaluations, suspensions and end of
employment.
Remarks
The flexibility and adaption of military culture is largely dependent on the struc-
ture of which employment happens. With the introduction of AVFs (all-volunteering
forces) and mostly professional based military (properly educated, trained and
contracted), making the organisations move from institutional to coercive and en-
abling with discipline based on self steering and individuality. Countries sticking
with conscription and this commitment-based employment of especially officers,
the culture is likely to remain institutional for a longer period of time. This devel-
opment will slowly bridge the military organisations with business counterparts,
in the way it functions as an employer, a work environment with a private life on
the side (with exceptions, as being military personnel has e.g. certain life threat-
ening dangers connected with the job). This development can be attributed to
the innovation within western societies and national cultures, information and
communication technologies and the improving educational qualifications of the
population and by extension, soldiers. The latter is especially interesting, as the
Royal Danish Army’s Officers School started accepting academic civilians into
their education in 2013, seeking to increase overall academic level and diversity in
their officers ranks.
Hot and Cold Organisation
A military organisations life cycle can be described as cold and hot - referring
broadly to peace keeping time and war/missions. In cold times, the organisation
has priorities that include prevention of attacks, training exercises, keeping the
organisation running and functioning, ready to deploy itself or part of itself in a
hot environment. A hot environment is when action is required and the training
exercises become missions, deployments and other types of live events. The or-
ganisation will behave different depending on whether it is during a cold or hot
time period - and will require different competences from its employees as such.
An officer who is great and impactful during a cold period, mastering adminis-
tration, ceremony, education and other cold-period activities, might not be equal
to all his or her peers during hot period. During these, leadership skills, empathy
and the ability to move and deploy soldiers on foot becomes the new name of the
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Shaping and Measuring Military Culture Development
7
game.
It is an interesting balance to find, acquiring good employees for both types of
organisational existence and will highly influence how well the organisation per-
forms in both types of scenario. Optimally, the organisation would want both from
especially it’s officers and higher ranking personnel, although reality will always
consist of compromises.
2.2
Shaping and Measuring Military Culture Development
Frederic Labarre, Pierre Jolicoeur, 2016[4].
"We argue here that military culture transformation happens when the individual
military member can freely develop those skills as part of a reformed professional military
education (PME) framework."
"This has impressed upon them a program of socio-economic and military reform that has
resulted in a dilemma; on the one hand their desire to integrate Western institutions
suggests their societies naturally (but perhaps not culturally!) belong to the West, but on
the other hand, half a century of Soviet exposure has produced a military culture that is
“inappropriate” for interoperability with NATO and Western partners."
Social culture must adapt to western standards, military culture must adapt to
western, and by extension, democratic standards.
The militaries must operate
and act with responsibility. DEEP is a learning program from NATO that aims
at not unifying means of operation and increasing interoperability, but to increase
the intellectual framework for different military cultures - not for the sake of a
single task or mission, like previous NATO programs, but as a general culture
alignment program.
Aligning individual values is crucial to ever hoping that
organisational values, and military culture/values by extension, will align with
the west. Especially nations that are previous Soviet Union nations will have to
repress over 70 years of communism and its affect on the people, to hope of being
accepted into NATO and the west. This made it difficult for nations close to Russia
and old Soviet Union to join and operate in NATO successfully. In its essence, the
DEEP program is an effort to include new countries to NATO, especially those
contested by Russia - an effort to help align the interoperability, the culture, the
social values of the nation and each individual along the way. As long as the
tension exists, so will DEEP. With the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, such
programs may be more prominent now than ever before.
"That is, the divergence of military cultures of new NATO members threatened mission
success, especially in the context of the 9/11 Wars."
A last remark is that DEEP is a program with a specific goal in mind that has a
==PAGE:11==
8
2
Literature and Theories
start and end date, depending on the recipient nation and their willingness to un-
dertake the program. The goal is multicultural harmonization, not homogeneity.
The purpose is to facilitate interoperability between NATO nations, without hav-
ing military and social culture clash more than necessary as it can cause harm to
the mission. It can be vague and difficult to quantify the success of such programs.
The DEEP program coordinator described it as a wrong approach, to measure the
program’s reception; one should instead look at how the program impacted what
the recipient nation did differently, what changes did the DEEP program incur in
the nation.
"It occurs when host nations cease to be consumers of the program, and become
contributors by providing subject matter experts to other countries’ DEEP programs."
Notes On The Literature
A fine case example of how a military culture will have an impact on not only
the country’s own ability to defend itself, but also in the capabilities in terms of
cooperation with allied and friendly nations and interoperability with them in
military context. This may play a role in the nation’s future place in the grand
scheme of the political world picture - especially for the old Soviet countries and
their acceptance into NATO.
2.3
Military Culture and Education
Douglas Higbee, 2010 [5]. A tension between the civil and military population in
US, usually highlighted by presidents with different levels of past military experi-
ence. How to connect these two worlds or perhaps the tension is healthy?
"Through years of living between the two cultures (academia and military), he compiled a
list of most salient polarities between the two: Academia tends to value tolerance,
dialoguje and creativity and strives to nurture a multitude of points of view where the
military tends to value authority, utilitarianism and physical force (2002)."
D. Higbee (Higbee 2010) taught at the Command and General Staff College (CGSC)
but had some reservations about teaching military personnel as a civilian profes-
sor. He was not familiar with the culture and approach his students and staff (who
were a mix of academics and military personnel) would have to this collaboration
between the two worlds. He did, however, come to find that a certain rule set
could be followed, and the barrier between the two types of academia would van-
ish. This rule set was merely a set of implicitly accepted terms and they are pretty
simple: If you show up well prepared and teach quality material in a proper man-
ner, you would earn the students respect regardless of any prior (or lack thereof)
military experience. The military students and staff did not care much for the
==PAGE:12==
2.4
Restructuring of The Danish Defence
9
civilian professor’s prior life, as long as he provided interesting and relevant ma-
terial in a proper manner. It came as a slight, but indeed very welcome surprise, to
see how the two worlds could be unified over something so fundamental; Show up
on time, prepared and show respect - the rest will sort itself out. A fine discovery
and a good conclusion to sum up any differences there may have been in the long
run-up to this point in the students military career and a professor’s academic life.
2.4
Restructuring of The Danish Defence
N. Hækkerup is a former defence minister who wanted to follow the American
model of unifying the upper management in the defence with the defense minister.
In reality, this meant that the last danish Chief of Defence (highest ranking general,
responsible for all three branches - army, navy and air force) who had actual
managerial power over the entire organisation including its budgets, was Knud
Bartels (2009-2011).
Peter Bartram, who succeeded Bartels, was given a vastly
different job position, despite the name being the same (Chief of Defence). Now,
the organisation was no longer unified but split into sectors such as Economy,
Personnel, Materials and Property and each sector had its own civil CEO (except
for Chief of Defence), who were all on par with the Chief of Defense. This is
still the current way of running the Danish Defense and has, as also noted by
[8], introduced a plethora of problems such as employees having lost faith in the
upper management, employees actively seeking jobs outside the organisation and
more.
This restructuring may also have direct implications on the culture in the Danish
Defence, as this means that civilian employees are now CEO’s of each sector (ex-
ceptions may exist). The education sector (FPS) is now run by someone who is
not from inside the military part of the organisation (no military education), and
this may already steer away from a homogeneous existence in the organisation, as
this person could not have been affected by the culture during their education and
work experience up until their current job in the organisation.
2.5
Organisational Culture
This brief section will mention chapters from Schein 2004 [9] that are applicable
in this study and has been used it a some point - not including the whole book.
Chapter 1 - Organizational Culture Concept
Schein 2004 [9] uses most of the initial chapter to describe what culture is and
how it came to exist - or more along the lines of why it is interesting for us to
understand it and what can come of this understanding. The main takeaway is that
culture is a term that have been defined numerous different ways, none of which
==PAGE:13==
10
2
Literature and Theories
are neccesarily right and wrong, but are largely contextually and situationally
dependent. First, one must ask what is the purpose of understanding a certain
organisational culture - solving a set of problems is usually the answer to this,
but it does not have to be. As mentioned by Schein (Schein 2004), he provided
cases where he approached these cases with a set of assumptions and definitions
already in place. It was not until he let go of these, that he started to understand
the culture, the problems and provide solutions that worked and lasted.
Schein’s description of culture, which is described as his point of view, is that
culture is deeply founded in a stable group dynamic. It is something that stays
even when members do not, making it deeply rooted in the group. It also spreads
to every aspect of a group dynamic, expressing itself in virtually everything the
group does. He also links the relationship between culture and leadership - how
a leader can create a certain culture, but also how culture can affect future lead-
ers, emphasizing how leadership can also be about how and when to rethink the
culture and have the ability to do so.
"The bottom line for leaders is that if they do not become conscious of the cultures in
which they are embedded, those cultures will manage them. Cultural understanding is
desirable for all of us, but it is essential to leaders if they are to lead."
Chapter 2 - Levels of Culture
Schein discusses three different levels or layers of culture: Artefacts, beliefs and
values, and basic assumptions. Artefacts are clear and directly visible phenomena
such as language, dresscode, symbols, materialistic things. Beliefs and values are
something deeper in people, their opinions and perhaps moral compass. Basic
assumptions are the fundamental guidance system in people that is sometimes
part of people without them being aware - for example, that 2+2=4 is given as a
natural logic law of mathematics and if someone does not take part in this basic
assumption, it can be extremely difficult for a new member to integrate into the
culture. Now this example may be severe, but it proves the point. Something so
deeply founded in people it is rare to see a culture wrap around many different
perspectives in this matter, as it can pull the group apart. These assumptions are
usually nonnegotiable. Schein (Schein, 2004 [9]) makes the point that the human
cognitive mind needs stability and assurance, and if these basic assumptions are
challenged, anxiety and fear may strike, as one’s perception of the world might
build on these foundational ideas. It is crucial that these assumptions are some-
what recognized in a culture to allow people to reach each other and collaborate
with a mutual understanding - a term that in danish can be referred to as reaching
the same wavelength, mentally.
Schein wraps up the chapter by concluding that if one wants to actually change
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Organisational Culture
11
or have an impact on the culture, one must look at the deepest level, the basic
assumptions, and start pulling the roots - something that will be difficult, time-
consuming, anxiety provoking and many other things. The next task is thus deal-
ing with all these consequences once it has been set in motion, hopefully changing
a culture for something better!
Chapter 5 - External Adaptation Issues
It is important to have alignment between the organisation’s mission and strategy
and the concrete goals of said organisation. Mission and strategy can be a common
compass that the organisation uses, but they can often be interpreted in multiple
ways, they are timeless and rarely specific. Setting common goals are a way of
achieving said strategy, by using common language and understanding between
the employees to ensure a mutual understanding and agreement. These two terms
also have different assumptions connected to them, making it even more problem-
atic to deal with unless they are treated differently. Operational goals are a means
to adhere to the overall strategy and this distinction is crucial to understanding
different perspectives on an operational goal and strategy inside the organisation.
Schein (Schein 2004 [9]) also discusses how different subgroups within an or-
ganisation can have different cultures and especially regarding leadership and
management. He presented a case where different different groups approached
a manager, trying to cut in queue and essentially invade other groups territories,
and he describes this essential invasion of turf as an extremely volatile action that
quickly can lead to explosive social relations and create internal friction. In his
case, this made managers anxious on a long term basis.
It is also mentioned how an organisation must be careful about choosing self-
evaluation methods, as these will reflect their performance and the end result.
This evaluation should be carefully designed to adhere to the mission, strategy
and concrete goals so that when things go wrong, they can use it to go back to
the drawing board and correct the right things. If multiple managers disagree on
what is most important in a given time horizon, for example debt, revenue, market
share or customer satisfaction, it is impossible to decide on a plan as each criteria
will likely have a different play.
"...new chief executives come in and announce that they will emphasize product quality,
or bring costs under control, or get the organization to be more customer oriented. This
sometimes sounds like a real change in mission but on closer examination turns out to be
merely a new focus on how to measure success".
Schein summarizes the chapter by underlining the depth of culture and to what
degree it is difficult to compress for easier understanding and analysis.
==PAGE:15==
12
2
Literature and Theories
"The most important conclusion to be derived from this analysis is that culture is a
multidimensional, multifaceted phenomenon, not easily reduced to a few major
dimensions"
This even changes depending on where in the organisations life cycle it currently
is. Newer groups tend to be more easily molded to a culture, but as time pro-
gresses subcultures will develop and potentially collide.
Chapter 6 - Internal Integration
For a group to come to exist, there must exist common language and interpretation
of things. Humans can only tolerate so much disorganisation and confusion, so
for a group to function this must be kept below a threshold, which depends on the
individual tolerances. Schein explains how he approached and organisation but
had trouble connecting his task with the reality. He first had to establish common
language and understanding, before he could explore the problems he was hired
to extinguish. The employees did not find any conflicts to exist, but when Schein
asked about every day struggles and things making their job stagger, they started
talking about the exact issues the CEO hired Schein to investigate.
Another key issue in internal group integration are group boundaries, acceptance
and exits. Defining what the boundaries are, how they can be breached either
way are important for a group understanding of its existence. This can translate
to hiring policies, treatment of long time employees and organisational loyalty to
employees. Understanding the rules for getting in or out.
Other issues revolve around power distribution and reward and punishment sys-
tems.
All things that will inevitably take place in a newly formed group and
how these events turn out will have an impact on the culture to be in said group.
Agreeing on initial things such as language and systems of organising are only
first stages of group culture creating and this process will also repeat itself con-
tinuously. This is not to say that these concepts come to exist by themselves -
group members will, usually in turns, present ideas and methods of approach-
ing these subjects. These individual acts of leadership will create the following
culture. Sometimes a leader is already in place for a specific group and then this
leader will of course play a large role in this context, but it does not eliminate the
possibility of the group adding personal touches.
Chapter 7 - Assumptions About Reality and Truth
"If we cannot agree on what is real, how to determine the truth or falsity of something,
how to measure time, how space is allocated, what human nature is, and how people
should get along with each other, society is not possible in the first place."
==PAGE:16==
2.5
Organisational Culture
13
At all levels of assumptions, differences will conflict when they are presented -
be that from different countries, education institutes or religion (just examples).
Unifying the assumptions about reality, language, social relations and existence
will inevitably happen through group socialisation. Company cultures can be so
different compared to alternatives, meaning people will have to change and adapt
to find success and peace in this environment. If people feel like they are letting
go of too much or too important character traits or behaviour, they might find
themselves stuck in a mismatch after some months of trial and error - however,
Schein often found that after a couple of months of adjustment, people started to
click with the organisational culture, assuming there was a proper fit between the
employees and the organisation and its culture.
Defining what is true, what is false and the distinction between these two can
create vastly different ways of functioning as a group. This is seen in especially
religion and religious culture and traditions.
Chapter 8 - Time and Space
Time and space are often not talked about as they are almost subconscious and
taken for granted. They are however extremely important. Imagine someone be-
ing late or early - both might provoke a negative reaction, as there was a different
understanding between two parties of when to actually meet up. Space is also
a very physical trait and can represent biological needs - aka, personal space. It
can be irritating to have people up close, but it can also be irritating that peo-
ple are physically departing during a conversation that’s almost, but not quite
finished. Such ways of manipulating spacing in social interactions can provoke
many different reactions. It can also be represented by office sizes, building sizes
and placement (downtown for social status or ease of entry, or out of town for
economical reasons). Spacing can also be used symbolically by increasing office
sizes at promotions of employees for example.
In short, many of the deepest assumption levels are also rooted in time and space
culture. They people perceive and behave in terms of time and space can be vastly
different, yet so rarely discussed or mentioned. It is also something that easily
spreads downwards, something that any management should be aware of. To de-
cipher these cultural differences to minimize conflicts and unwanted interactions
as a result of this, is a key task of managing. To understand these, it is important
that managers be aware of even the most concealed cultural assumptions, as to
not impose his or her own onto the group - not because they may be bad or good,
but because they affect the resulting culture, making it more difficult to solve any
problems if this is not taken into consideration.
"Time is viewed as a valuable commodity that can be spent, wasted, killed, or made good
==PAGE:17==
14
2
Literature and Theories
use of; but once a unit of time is over, it is gone forever."
Temporal symmetry and pace. Monochronicity or polychronicity.
Chapter 9 - Human nature and relationships
Assumptions exist about relationships and they will have four problems anno-
tated:
• 1.) Identity and Role
• 2.) Power and Influence
• 3.) Needs and Goals
• 4.) Acceptance and Intimacy
Theory X and Theory Y introduced in the context of human characteristicha. Some
cultures praise doing and conquering, other cultures praise being and accepting a
more narrow place in the world. Group being individualistic and competitive or
communitarian and cooperative.
"We should note that culture is deep, wide, and complex and we should avoid the
temptation to stereotype organizational phenomena in terms of one or two salient
dimensions. Many such typologies have been suggested, as will be examined in the next
chapter."
Chapter 10 - Cultural Typologies
"The basic relationship between the individual and the organization can, therefore, be
thought of as the most fundamental dimension around which to build a typology"
Coercive, Utilitarian and Normative organisation typologies.
The different ty-
pologies will have different assumptions about the employees and their role in the
organisation. In coercive cultures, they are expected to exit as soon as they can,
in Utilitarian they are expected to be logically invested and will stay as it makes
sense and for Normative they are expected to be morally and perhaps personally
invested. However, reality is rarely this simple and many organisations will fall
into multiple of these typologies, demanding a more narrow description.
1,1 is an anomie, 5,5 is a compromise solution and 9,9 is a hero’s model. Goffee
and Jones used this model to derive four different culture types:
• 1.) Fragmented - low on both
• 2.) Mercenary - high solidarity, low sociability
• 3.) Communal - high sociability - low solidarity
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Organisational Culture
15
• 4.) Networked - high on both
The problem is that not one method for describing organisational culture might
be fitting or truly representing reality - because taking a viewpooint based on one
model will only allow the user to see through that lens, when in reality organi-
sations almost always are multitudinous and complex. Schein even introduces a
case where the interplay between two typologies was what made the culture what
it was in a specific organisation.
"The value of typologies is that they simplify thinking and provide useful categories for
sorting out the complexities we must deal with when we confront organizational realities.
They provide categories for thinking and classifying, which is useful. The weakness of
culture typologies is that they oversimplify these complexities and may provide us
categories that are incorrect in terms of their relevance to what we are trying to
understand."
Chapter 11 - Deciphering Culture
"The most obvious difficulty in gathering valid cultural data is a well-known
phenomenon: when human subjects are involved in research, there is a tendency for them
either to resist and hide data that they feel defensive about or to exaggerate in order to
impress the researcher or to get cathartic relief—“Finally someone is interested enough in
us to listen to our story.”
An important task of acquiring data is to make sure the data is accurate - and
not a way for employees to blow off steam or try to impress the researcher. The
researcher’s presence is known and has impacted whatever he or she is looking
into.
It is crucial to note what role the researcher plays in the organisation, what he/she
can offer and how the organisation thinks of this. Will the organisation welcome
this or keep the researcher at a distance? This plays a role in how the researcher
can observe the organisation and how real those experiences are. The researcher’s
presence must be accounted for as it interferes with the culture and daily life.
..." such that the organization members feel they have something to gain by revealing
what they really think and feel. Such a “clinical inquiry” relationship is the minimum
requirement for getting valid cultural data."
==PAGE:19==
16
3
Methodology
3
Methodology
The data collection for this thesis was collected in the form of five individual in-
terviews. These interviews have affected each other, as each interview unravelled
new scenarios, ideas and phenomena that was questioned further in the next inter-
view. The interviews are loosely structured with 5-6 questions for each participant
(slight changes were made depending on the interviewee - for example, sergeant
E.E. might not know much about the political landscape of the officer’s schools,
since he has not had any experience with this, rendering the question obsolete in
his case - see appendices for the specific questions.). This method of data collec-
tion was selected as the very questions this thesis aims to unravel, are questions
of understanding, which can be complex and often case and scenario specific. It is
not so much about creating a direct analysis with focus on numbers and metrics,
but more about approaching these experiences, stories and perspectives with an
open and understanding mind. The difficulties with such data can be organising
and understanding it after the collection. "It may be complex, long and disorganised"
(Schein, 2004 [9]).
3.1
Process
The process for this study closely resembles a model from Saunders, Lewis and
Thornhill 2019 [6]. The thesis began with an interest in the Danish Defense and
a hypothesis that the organisations internal education structure impacted the or-
ganisation’s culture and by extension, the organisations ability to die, survive or
thrive. Then appropriate literature was reviewed, before deciding on research de-
sign and data collection. The collected data was coded and analysed, rounding up
the study with the concluding findings of the thesis.
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Research Design
17
Figure 1: The general process of this thesis. Inspired by the research process model presented by
Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill 2019, p.12
3.2
Research Design
This study revolves around organisation culture and education structure, specifi-
cally in the Danish Defense. A loose and adaptive approach for research design fits
well here, as data collected along the way may impact the initial hypothesis and
alter the research questions slightly (Miles, Huberman 2019 [7]). This is the foun-
dation for the structure of the interviews - the structure even changed (adapted)
as the research project progressed, to explore new things that surfaced along the
study. The downside to this will be more data extraction and thus a higher work-
load when coding the data. This thesis has conducted relatively few interviews
(5), but based on this loose research design and exploratory discussions, has still
produced much interesting data. It will also increase difficulties in comparability
between the different cases, but can at the same time produce valuable patterns
and cross-references.
"Most qualitative researchers would agree with Snider’s (2010) observation that numbers
impress, but unfortunately, also conceal far more than they reveal." [10]
==PAGE:21==
18
3
Methodology
Not only will qualitative data provide much more thorough and in-depth descrip-
tions, it is also accessible, making it the go-to choice for this thesis. The data
sources are employees in the Danish Defence who provide insight into their expe-
riences with the organisation, education and structure, culture and general life at
their job. The interviews are summarized in key highlights of the interview and
these summaries are confirmed by the interviewer and interviewee in a mutual
agreement to be a rightful representation of the interview. The interview sum-
maries are included as well as researchers notes from the meeting - these are the
authors notable observations and are thus subjective and not necessarily correct.
"We have to face the fact that numbers and words are both needed if we are to understand
the world. The question is not whether the two sorts of data and associated methods can
be linked during study design but whether it should be done, how it will be done, and for
what purposes."[7]
As Miles and Huberman [7] says about mixing quantitative and qualitative data,
it is important to be aware of the choice of deciding to mix the two data types
and how. Due to the sheer size of the Danish Defense, quantitative data could
definitely suit the interviews to either confirm or debunk some of the patterns
extracted from the qualitative data. This has not been possible to gather, thus the
thesis will analyse and conclude on the qualitative data from the interviews solely.
==PAGE:22==
19
4
Data
4.1
Data Validity
When a researcher wants to truly experience and understand the inside of an or-
ganisation, many considerations must be taken into account to obtain accurate
and valid data. For example, the researchers presence will impact the environ-
ment. Schein (Schein 2004 [9]) discusses how deciphering culture is a task on its
own, especially when collecting qualitative data in this manner. If a researcher is
interviewing employees, the interviewee’s are likely to either hide toxic traits or
elevate themselves in the situation, because now someone wants to listen! It is
important to treat the data according to the situation and environment in which it
was gathered, as it highly impacts the credibility. A disclaimer for the data gath-
ered in this report, is that the data consists of five individual interviews. To get a
rightful representation of the organisation, culture and environment much more
should have been done and taken into consideration. Living in the organisation
for a while is necessary to truly experience the culture. Getting to become ac-
quainted and familiar with the daily routine, life and people is necessary. Become
part of the team, and not just stand next to it as an outsider. All of this was not
possible for the data collection from the Danish Defense, as there was no official
cooperation between the organisation and the thesis author - only helpful indi-
viduals. Their intention and reasons for collaborating in the interviews, is also
important for how the data might be altered - something Miles and Huberman
called "impression management" [7] p.30.
"Thus, the apparent simplicity of qualitative data masks a good deal of complexity,
requiring plenty of care and self-awareness on the part of the researcher." [7]
This is noted in each interview for that very reason.
Anonymity
The level of anonymity also impacts how participant’s will behave during the ob-
servations and discussions. Each participants level of anonymity was discussed
after the interview. The general observation was that Major Barfod and General
Garly were open to not being anonymous and accepted this as an initial term of
the interview request. They were both interviewed during their work hours. It did
also reflect in their interviews, in the sense that they both focused on a more gen-
eral approach to the questions and did not dive into deeper personal anecdotes
or stories that were primarily driven be emotions and opinions. Kellberg, Jør-
gensen and E.E. all shared opinions and frustrations alike with seemingly little or
no filter. To avoid any harm to the participants who voluntarily shared this, their
names might be abbreviated so they will not encounter trouble in their workplace
==PAGE:23==
20
4
Data
on behalf of their participation in this thesis.
Integrity
This study has no purpose other than curiosity and exploration of an organi-
sational cultural phenomena. There is nothing more at stake than the author’s
personal interest and education program assignment, and even then, the data and
findings are not the main point of the assignment - it is the author’s ability to sys-
tematise and make sense of it, not the data and results themselves. The majority
of the participants are also direct friends or acquaintances of the author, mak-
ing the consequences of misusing the data even greater (such as using interview
statements in untruthful ways that could harm the participants). The study will
include all data, also the data that contradicts itself, to give the reader a full picture
and let them create their own opinions of said topics and patterns, as opposed to
withholding parts of information that would not serve a specific hypothesis. It is
to be noted that some of the participants have a personal relation to the author,
meaning the interviews might be biased based on this relation.
==PAGE:24==
21
5
Interviews
5.1
Interview - Sergeant E.E
Sergeant E.E. is a staff sergeant currently employed at a battery in the artillery
regiment in Oksbøl. He is employed in an education sector (HBU Hærens basisud-
dannelse / The army’s conscription education) and has been so for approximately
2 years now. Initial problems observed during a 2-hour interview with sergeant
E.E.:
• Until 2013, the army’s officer school produced very identical officers, re-
sulting in the same solution to almost every problem - little diversity and
minimally thinking outside the box.
• In 2013 they allowed people of different academic backgrounds to apply, re-
sulting in massively different officers - but still believing the competences
available at the end of education were the same!
(I.e.
people are still
vastly different, despite having the same disciplinary and unified education
through the officers school).
• Problems regarding officers in misplaced positions arose (e.g. good teachers
are not equal to good leaders and vica versa, but they were treated as such
and placed in positions outside their competences).
• Communication is vital and core to how the Danish Defence operates, yet
FPS (Forsvarets Personelstyrelse - The HR department) functions almost as
a black box - decentralized from the rest of the Danish Defence, yet they are
responsible for selecting new personnel, playing a vital role in the future of
military culture and diversity.
Case
Sergeant E.E. is a 22 year old male, currently employed as part of the conscription
education. He himself completed his conscription service some months after this
high school education and continued in the sergeant program for the 9 months it
lasts. The conscription will naturally contain many different personalities (even
despite it consisting of 99% volunteers and not forced conscription) and this 4
month long education is thus vastly different from any other education type in
The Danish Defense - also since it is the only education structure that bridges
pure civilians to the military (exceptions exist, but are rare!). The people who
continue as sergeant recruits are only the best and most enthusiastic part of the
conscription units and will therefore represent much more professionalism and
quality than the conscription. This is essentially one of the first jumps from trial
period to a conscious career decision. Sergeant E.E. is in the army, and already
==PAGE:25==
22
5
Interviews
here many cultural differences will apply when compared with the air force and
navy. This will be explained in-depth later, but these three branches have little to
do with each other in terms of the job tasks and culture. For sergeant E.E., the
army represents extreme cohesion, loyalty, field work and compared to the other
branches, a more pure soldier experience. They are, after all, the only branch of
the three who regularly eats and sleeps in the wild, carrying heavy backpacks and
solving missions at the same time. This cohesion carries over into the job position
when the education is completed and will have an impact on where to look for
work and with who.
A conscription unit of platoon size will consist of 3-4 groups of 6-12 privates, a
sergeant for each group, a staff sergeant first rank and lieutenant commander for
each platoon and a captain to three platoons. Figure 2 shows a typical platoon
setup, showing how each group is accompanied by a sergeant who reports to
the platoon leader and his/her next of command. A captain and his/her next of
command will have three platoons, as opposed to only a single platoon as shown
in the depiction.
Figure 2: A visualisation of a classic company sized unit, with a single platoon despite a company
having three. This is shown with a single platoon only for space saving purposes.
When sergeant E.E. arrived at his new place of work after completed education, his
boss turned out to be a lieutenant commander, fresh off the line (this is the rank
you achieve after finishing the basis officers school of 3½ years, which includes
an extended sergeant basis education of 10-12 months, as opposed to 9).
His
==PAGE:26==
5.1
Interview - Sergeant E.E
23
educational based peers (other sergeants of different ranks) seemed to connect
much faster and better, especially his direct peers and friends from the education
program.
He started to experience problems between the orders given by his
superior and the hands-on experiences the sergeants have. There seemed to be a
misalignment in what is possible and how things in reality work, according to him
and his peers. Despite his superior also having completed the sergeants program,
the officers program seemed to have had a much greater impact on the person
after completion of education. The communication, body language, respect and
actions were all troublesome between the sergeants and their superior. Sergeant
E.E. has thought about the problem being related to Danish Defense’s method
of circulating managers/officers around after a 2-4 year period, expecting each
person to be able to fulfill a job position as well as another, based on their military
education. Sergeant E.E. (and his peers) believes that the job as an officer consists
of many different layers and they have seen officers great at some things, less
great at others and this is not taken into consideration enough.
Managers or
generally speaking, superiors, will often take the role of a teacher to some degree.
As described in (Soeters, Winslow and Weibull [1]), an organisation and be in
a hot and cold organisation/political climate.
The entry job levels of officers,
could be described in the same way, as agreed by sergeant E.E. Administration,
functionality and practicality are all components of a cold description of the job as
e.g. a platoon leader, but when field exercises or direct war is upon them, the job
description changes radically and turns into a hot version of the same job. Here
professionalism, determination, mental robustness and loyalty will have to shine
through and mark the officer as a great and natural leader.
"A great officer may be a great leader in several ways and they are not always connected.
A great teacher will show respect, friendliness and professionalism. A great leader will
show loyalty, determination and always pave the way."
Sergeant E.E. and his peers did not feel this was the case with his current platoon
leader, and even went as far as to say that they would not follow this person
into missions due to those exact issues. There was no trust, respect or faith in
this relation. They felt like they were constantly cleaning up after poor practical
decisions and also being the front leaders during field exercises. It is important to
mention, that it may be difficult to obtain proper understanding of things when the
whole picture is never visible. The interviewee and his peers are middle managers
and will presumably rarely, if ever, be given all the information that the platoon
leader has. This may make understanding things difficult and can lead to tensions
based on misunderstandings or just lack of understanding. Whether it is the case,
that a more transparent communication type could solve some of this, or whether
it is not the case - tensions exist as a result of this and are a real problem!
==PAGE:27==
24
5
Interviews
Notes
Sergeant E.E. Is a long time friend. He stood to gain room for ventilating some
frustrations - someone lending an ear and helping a friend who is writing his
thesis.
5.2
Interview - Major Jakob Barfod
J. Barfod is an army major currently employed at Forsvarsakademiet (an academic
branch of the danish defense). He has recently finished his PhD. His career has
primarily been within The Danish Defense and progressed throughout the years
in the organisation. In the later years, he supplied his military education with
courses in psychology, coaching and leadership in Roskilde University (A "Mas-
ter" worth 60 ECTS). He seemed to have a perspective that was larger and more
complex than sergeant E.E., which is understandable and likely due to age, ed-
ucation and experience differences. Relevant notes taken from the interview are
listed as below:
• Homosocial reproduction is a reoccurring theme in the education system,
for better or worse.
• Homosocial reproduction and general diversity is a balance of wanting new
and different input, while still maintaining necessary qualifications in em-
ployees such as discipline, mental robustness and sanity, and physical capa-
bilities - it is truly an equilibrium.
• The Danish Defense was in 2013 split into multiple and equal sectors, mak-
ing decisions across multiple sectors possibly troublesome (No unity of com-
mand).
• The change in recruitment to the officers schools in 2013 might be related
to an educational restructuring of the military educations in relation to the
civil academic degrees (now the officers schools are also on level 6, bachelor’s
degrees).
• The at-the-time Minister of Defence (Hækkerup) decided to split unity of
command into the now existing sectors (FMAK, FPS, The Danish Defense
and more).
• The Danish Defense tried to move all officer’s schools to the same location,
but the army’s officer’s school managed to circumvent the relocation and are
still located at Frederiksberg Castle.
==PAGE:28==
5.2
Interview - Major Jakob Barfod
25
Case
Major J. Barfod is an experienced and well spoken man. His past accomplishments
and education alone puts him up the years, but this reflects many levels of per-
spective and understanding. This was clear throughout the interview questions
- they were never answered in a rush, as if he could not wait to tell an answer.
He was well paced and always careful about formulations and speculations. This
may be related to not only his age and experience, but also the fact that he recently
finished writing his PhD, meaning he knows very well how his answers may have
an impact on this thesis. Perhaps for the same reasons, the interview was surpris-
ingly little about him and often the questions lead to large events in the Danish
Defense and the aftermath of said events. He was not dodging or avoiding any
personal questions, but before the interview started he even stated that he did not
think he was the right person for this. I assured him, I was interested in persons
of many different backgrounds and positions, but perhaps this may have led him
to believe his wisdom was better suited for the interview than his own story. In
any case, many relevant events regarding the Danish Defense was mentioned and
discussed, even elaborating on some mentioned issues from the other interviews
- such as sergeant E.E. thinking that FPS (Forsvarets personelstyrelse) is a black
box with no communication with the rest of the organisation. As it turns out, FPS
is as of 2013, a different section of the organisation and these sections have been
criticized heavily for having poor lateral communication and cooperation.
Trying to highlight his story, the primary part of his education in the organisation
dates back to prior 1990 and is thus perhaps a bit difficult to directly compare
with todays system - especially after the 2013 organisational restructuring in the
Danish Defense. He did however mention the culture, homosocial reproduction
and how certain things definitely are a product of a culture, but also how they
can be neccesary parts. For example, conscripts/privates are told everything from
what to wear, how to wear it, how to clean it and how to fold it. These things are
meant to teach them about systems, cooperation and unification of carrying out
orders. Soldiers must be punctual, cooperating and carry some discipline. These
things can be described as the culture or not, but major J. Barfod states that it is
part of the job description - so even if it is a product of culture, it is necessary
and non-negotiable (A basic assumption, Schein 2004 [9]). He also mentioned
how a biproduct of this, is the existence of many similar employees who all solve
problems the same way. A balance that the organisation is constantly trying to
maintain, post the 2013 restructuring, is acquiring a more diverse set of employ-
ees who still can fulfill the basic demands that are asked of soldiers. Truly, an
equilibrium.
==PAGE:29==
26
5
Interviews
Notes
Major J. Barfod is employed at Forsvarsakademiet - an academic branch of the
Danish Defense. His reasoning for signing up for the interview are possibly linked
to his academic life.
The mutual understanding of sharing and helping other
academic individuals along their path to knowledge.
5.3
Interview - Private J. Jørgensen
Key highlights from the interview with private J. Jørgensen:
• J. Jørgensen is primarily educated outside The Danish Defense, except for
the standard conscription - but this is a vastly different type of culture com-
pared to contract based work and education and is thus a completely dif-
ferent topic. He got to experience the organisation with initially no military
experience as he started before the conscription, and can thus provide a fresh
and less biased perspective.
• The culture difference between different branches of The Danish Defense is
enormous. The army, air force and navy have different ways of thinking,
doing things and a different way of understanding the same problems.
• His former boss (sergeant major) was a no-man and declined almost any-
thing that he did not like given to him by superiors. His current boss is a
yes-man (captain) who accepts almost anything - also things that J. Jørgensen
and his unit feel are problematic due to resource limitations in the unit. This
may be related to the promotion system in The Danish Defence - this will be
elaborated on later.
• The former boss was experienced, loyal, perhaps a tad conservative and stub-
born. The captain was relatively young (30), newly educated and brought a
different leading style to the table - likely still very affected by the officers
school’s education, theories and practices.
• J. Jørgensen prefers the former boss to his current, but also acknowledges
that it could not exist like this forever. The sergeant major would sometimes
diverge around the chain of command if he did not like an order from his
direct superiors - something that can potentially become problematic in the
long run.
Case
J. Jørgensen is a private, working at Flyvestation Karup in an IT-support unit. He
is a civil educated IT-supporter, who got a job offer within the Royal Air Force
==PAGE:30==
5.3
Interview - Private J. Jørgensen
27
as IT-support, on the notion that he would complete a basis education (conscrip-
tion/værnepligt, 4 months) within a year. His work is primarily technology and
support to all wings of the defense, not just the air force. They still do regular
courses and check-ups of physical, mental and military capabilities, as all em-
ployees of the defense must do this. His former boss, a sergeant major (highest
ranking sergeant, chefsergent), was the primary founder of this entire unit. The
boss position in this unit was always meant to be a captain (officer rank), but that
did not happen until the unit was completely built and ready to be handed over.
This means that the unit, and J. Jørgensen, got to experience two bosses with very
different backgrounds and this made for an interesting case. The main takeaways
of the interview is given:
It would appear that the difference in leading style between the sergeant major and
captain are indeed large, although they are very different people by many metrics.
To become a sergeant major, one must have at least 25 years of sergeant experience,
meaning a sergeant major will be at least 40-45 years old and have lived a full life
inside the organisation. A captain can be as young as 27-28 years old and have
a minimum of 6-7 years inside the organisation. Age, life experience, education
and many other factors are in play, but nonetheless are the differences present in
the way the two persons lead the unit. J. Jørgensens perception of this was that
generally speaking, the experienced sergeant ranks contain loyal and conservative
personnel who "were there when it was built" and has a lot of know-how and
hands-on experience due to pure time spent in the organisation. They know all
the loopholes and clever tricks, but can be tricky to deal with as their superiors
(this sergeant major even found a loophole to direct orders!). The captain on the
other hand, is a freshly educated officer "right out of the assembly line". They
bring their own take on new and modern theories and practices, that presumably
have roots in the officers schools education program.
The way to climb the ranks in The Danish Defense is by education, up to and
including major. After this, it is appointed to you by colleagues and superiors
for extraordinary service. Although the boss of J. Jørgensens unit is a captain
and thus can only promote through education, it may be smart to start building
good connections already, to secure and easier time in the future. This may be
problematic, as the resulting behaviour can be a boss who is a yes-man and lets
the unit suffer - as opposed to a sergeant major who does not seem to care one
bit about this and only cares about his unit and getting things done the right way
(albeit a bit too much at times!).
Schein (Schein, 2004 [9]) discusses the case of when a new member is introduced
to an already existing group and culture. This may very well be the case for J.
Jørgensen, as he was hired from even outside the organisation, thus having no
familiarities with them in regards to military culture - though they may share
==PAGE:31==
28
5
Interviews
plenty through their IT-support education, as this may have similarities even if
they did this at different times and places. The group was still relatively new and
is a cross-branch unit (across army, air force and navy), thus making it perhaps
much less culturally affected than what otherwise might have been.
Notes
Private J. Jørgensen is a friend of a friend and thus also has the same motivation
as sergeant E.E. In cooperating in this study - Friendship and lending an ear to
frustrations.
The interviewee is a bit different from the rest, in the sense that he did not get
accustomed to any military culture through any education program, but has rather
come in from the side and taken a small basis education (as per requested for his
job position). He thus has a perspective that might be less influenced by norms and
expectations that other interviewees may have presented. Sergeant E.E. showed a
more natural understanding and expectation of the behaviour in the organisation,
likely due to his sergeant education and experience (aprox. 2 years). This may
also be due to the fact that sergeant E.E. is in the army and private J. Jørgensen
is not - subcultures exist within an organisation and based on the interviews, it is
clear that the culture is not uniform across branches.
5.4
Interview - Captain Andreas Kellberg
This interview is conducted in an effort to gather and analyse organisational cul-
ture data related to the Danish Defense. Several people of different backgrounds
are interviewed in an effort to cover many perspectives. The interviews are semi-
structured, focusing on personal experiences and perspectives of being in the or-
ganisation. These are key points taken from the interview with captain A. Kell-
berg:
• After the 2013 restructuring, job positions now had employees apply for
them as opposed to the organisation moving the employees around and into
new positions.
The organisation still has the power to do so, but much
prefers the carrot over the stick method.
• The general approach to acquiring new personnel at any level is to make
sure they function as soldiers before anything else; Make sure they can learn
to shoot, provide first aid and then look at the rest of the qualifications later.
Perhaps, some candidates might be lost in the process if the reverse order is
never considered, i.e. the best shooters might turn out to only be mediocre
or even poor leaders, while the mediocre or poor shooter might be a great
leader.
==PAGE:32==
5.4
Interview - Captain Andreas Kellberg
29
• OFU education course is the first true test to differentiate the good leaders
and the great leaders. It is an education program. This is also where the
incident revolving around HC Mathiesen and his girlfriend occurred - he
helped appoint his girlfriend (wife?) to the program, as port of the election
committee. There was a general feeling of nervousness and unease around
this whole case and the involved people.
• The general organisational structure is typically pillars among regiments,
but will become more cross-connected towards the top of the organisation.
• At a point, it was decided to combine the aspirant program for the Huntsmen
corps and the Frogmen corps - this did not work out well, due to cultural
differences between the units. They are still cooperating on other levels.
• There are specific education programs that enable a First Lieutenant (pre-
mierløjtnant) to become eligible for a captain position and for a captain to
become eligible for a major position. They are not nearly as long and de-
manding as the initial officer’s school to a First Lieutenant rank, more a type
of additional academic knowledge and experience.
• Organisational culture is actively taught and managed at the officer’s schools,
to give the future First Lieutenants some tools to help create the best culture
for the environment. Schein (Schein 2004 [9]) is widely used in these schools.
• An example of how cultural differences created friction, is when A. Kell-
berg experienced some air force personnel as rude and ill mannered, due
to showing up right on time or a bit later (not ready a few minutes before,
as army procedure is), and they seemed very concerned about things that
seemed to not matter much to captain A. Kellberg. A. Kellberg’s own hind-
sight provided him with an understanding, that the air force unit was in this
deployment situation all the time, and could thus not provide much extra
leeway, in the same way the army people could - since they were only to
be here for a few months. A case of hot and cold organisational situations
that created vastly different reactions between the two cultures, resulting in
undesired internal friction.
Case
A. Kellberg is a 33-year old man currently studying a civil master’s degree, writing
this thesis. He presents himself with a broad vocabulary and has clear roots in the
army - for example, showing up exactly 5 minutes prior to the interview meeting,
not a minute before and not a minute after. Being able to occupy a captain position,
he has a few years worth of experience in the organisation - approximately 8 years.
This is definitely enough time to not only create opinions and perspective on the
==PAGE:33==
30
5
Interviews
organisation, both good and bad, but also reflect on these. Almost anything that
was mentioned in the interview, he had thought of before or had some opinion
about already. He comes off as a young but determined, experienced and opinion
stricken officer. The major and general were definitely more experienced, but they
presented themselves a bit more laid back, perhaps with a bit more care, one might
say. Whether this is a personality trait or a question of perspective and experience
or even age, is not to say.
Notes
Captain A. Kellberg was referred via a friend and this is the main motivation
for his participation. He also seemed to enjoy ventilating some frustrations and
perhaps some situations where he himself had gained insight later on in his life
and share these experiences. He also was the one to care the most about this study,
its’ work and seemed interested in reading the final conclusion of the work.
"I am just happy that someone wants to write about the Danish Defense. Let me know
about the results and findings of your work!" - A. Kellberg.
5.5
Interview - General Jens Garly
Key points taken from the interview and agreed upon by J. Garly, are listed below:
• The 2013 restructuring of the Danish Defence brought a hefty focus on effi-
ciency which resulted in an organisation that is cut to the bone in terms of
resources, manpower and utilities.
• Up to and including major positions are possible to occupy with education,
but anything further than this is determined primarily by promotions to
higher positions based on results and recommendations suggested by supe-
riors.
• This promotion system is a way to cherry pick the best candidates that are
to climb the ranks and become the future leaders and managers of the or-
ganisation - and is to a certain degree a necessity, as they cannot hire civil
personnel to fulfill military positions. A civil organisation will have a much
larger market to elect from, but almost all candidates for these positions
will be from inside this military organisation. This system works well, but
contains flaws and unfortunate cases as with almost any system.
• The 2013 restructuring also brought the officer’s schools to allow bachelor
degree civil candidates - but primarily as a way to modernize the officer
education degrees in relation to civilian counterparts and enable officer’s to
use this education outside the organisation and to elevate the academic level.
==PAGE:34==
5.5
Interview - General Jens Garly
31
It was a larger restructuring of the officers schools and was a part of the 2013
restructuring.
• An effort to try and unify The Huntsmen Corps and the Frogmen proved
futile, despite the initial stages of recruitment are similar on many levels
between the two units. This is likely a culture clash that caused too much
friction. They are currently cooperating on many other levels.
• The Danish Defense tries to promote individual officer’s personal and com-
petence development through tailored programs.
• After 2-4 years of service in a position, it is incentivized to apply for a new
position, to promote employee development and not get stuck in a loop of
the same old routine, both for the sake of the employee and the organisation.
The Danish Defense has the power to order employees around if necessary,
but has been primarily a voluntary application-for-desired-position system
after the 2013 restructuring.
• J. Garly does not directly agree with previous statements about homosocial
reproduction in the organisation. He and his peers have examples of doing
the exact opposite in an effort to create more diverse and broad perspectives,
and this is working well for him.
Case
General J. Garly is a long servicing member of the organisation - more than 40
years! His personal education and path up through the organisation is not as
interesting, as it is many years ago for the standardized education parts, such
as the sergeant and officer’s school.
His contribution is interesting due to his
impressive experience, many diverse employment positions (his CV is available
online) and his position in upper management, currently the CEO of the Danish
Home Guard.
Many of the topics discussed with J. Garly were topics previously mentioned by
other interviewees that came before him. For example, J. Jørgensen discussed how
bosses might overload their team in an effort to look good and possibly net himself
a future promotion. J. Garly discusses this system as the whole basis for acquir-
ing the upper management in the organisation. It is by no means a perfect and
flawless system, but he described it as necessary and by large, well functioning.
The organisation cannot look to recruit directly into the upper management from
outside, so this internal ladder is a way to promote the most promising candidates
and make sure the organisation thrives. This is also part of the reason why the
job position cycle is around 2-4 years in the organisation. An effort to incentivize
individual competency development, it is desired that this job rotation happens
==PAGE:35==
32
5
Interviews
naturally. Both so that the employee gets to experience new things and new chal-
lenges, but also so that other employees can come to this position and have a go
at this in a different manner - to avoid running things as they always have. An
innovation incentive, one might call it.
J. Garly has a wide perspective of the whole organisation, given his long em-
ployment and many positions there. When asked about culture, the answer was
concise and clear; There is culture everywhere. In this organisation specifically,
this exists on many different levels and show different levels of artefacts. He does
however mention it as primarily a good thing. For a foot soldier, this culture is
what binds the soldiers together in a brotherhood. The culture is what ties these
employees closer together than what civilian organisations might, as this line of
work can have the ultimate price to pay (killed in action, death). J. Jørgensen is
working in FSR, a cross-branch unit and also testified that the cultural differences
between the army branch and the air force branch are clear. An example was the
effort to try and joint the Huntsmen and Frogmen aspirant programs, as they are
similar. This did not work out in the end, mainly due to extreme culture differ-
ences and a bit of internal competition. These units do still cooperate on many
levels, but a complete joint program did not go well.
The 2013 restructuring brought with it many changes to the organisation, and
this alone could be basis for a thesis. Main points in this thesis is that the of-
ficer’s schools new and alternative application requirements (accepting civilian
bachelor’s) is primarily a product of unifying the officer’s education with civilian
counterparts, to help give cadets credit for this education outside the organisation.
Essentially trying to elevate the value of this education outside the organisation,
making it more attractive to take and to have.
Captain A. Kellberg and major J. Barfod both described a reoccuring theme of
homosocial reproduction, where employees are naturally more likely to appoint
someone like themselves to education programs and positions. J. Barfod also men-
tioned homosocial reproduction. He also mentioned how some of these education
programs are existing for longer than they should, since the quality might not be
great, but since some people went through it, they might think it helped them
in some areas and might be inclined to think it can do the same for others. The
problem is that even a bad course or program might develop some employees
- but maybe it could have been much better, if this repetitive cycle was broken
faster. J. Garly does not agree with this statement about homosocial reproduction
in the same manner. His personal and relatively new examples (within the last 5
years) of seeing himself and his peers deliberately select employee candidates that
are extremely unlike themselves to match opposing forces. J. Garly sees this as a
great opportunity to utilize opposing opinions, creating broader and more diverse
results that are better - or at least can offer alternatives, as opposed to a yes-man
==PAGE:36==
5.5
Interview - General Jens Garly
33
as his second in command.
Notes
J. Garly was a referral from a friend’s relative. He seemed genuinely interested
in helping, partly due to helping a good friend’s acquaintance, but also shared
some personal experiences and viewpoints with enthusiasm. He is experienced
and almost at the top of management in the organisation, thus is likely to gain
little or nothing from the study itself.
==PAGE:37==
34
6
Analysis
6
Analysis
Raw qualitative data is often complex and chaotic and thus methods to condense
and sort the data exist. The data matrix (Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994)
[7]) functions a tool for this exact purpose. In short, it is about condensing the
data, organising it to display any relevant patterns and phenomena and finally to
conclude on the given display of organised data. The interview summaries are
essentially already coded in some manner - they are the author’s representation
of the interview, mutually agreed by the participant (although the degree of ac-
ceptance is unlikely to be 100%, as that would require as much work, enthusiasm
and integrity from the participants side as the authors - and why would they care
as much about it?). The summaries include mainly data related to the hypothesis,
interview questions (which are related to the research questions) and the partici-
pants own input which might be relevant to the former. Thus, data that may have
been relevant but seemed initially irrelevant, might be lost.
The second cycle of coding will be presented in a conceptual cluster matrix. This
is essentially a matrix consisting of themes and the interview participants. Tables
with themes from the interviews will be presented below - a modified version of
a data condensation matrix from [7], as mentioned. The purpose of these tables, is
to systematise the common themes between the different interview participants.
The categories are explained as follows: Impact refers to if the participant believes
the phenomena has had an impact on themselves or the organisation environment
around them.
Opinion is whether they believe this is a good, bad or neutral
thing. Centrality relates to how central this person is in relation to the theme.
For example, is a private playing a central role in terms of a phenomena in the
officer’s school? Well, perhaps, since his commanding officer will almost always
be a relatively newly educated officer. Career Relevance is an anticipation of how
relevant the participant’s opinion is in terms of their career/experience. Is there a
good chance they have had some experience that can give their opinions a logical
foundation? The options and possible answers are based on a above, below or
average state of the participant in relation to the other participants. The purpose
of these data matrices is to increase comparability and try to boil essential data
points of the interviews. Not all topics were discussed equally with the different
participants, thus a participant may seem overly neutral in some of the matrices -
It was probably just not a topic of discussion with this individual.
Impact: Agree (1), Neutral (0) , Disagree (0)
Opinion: Positive (1), Neutral (0), Negative (-1)
Centrality: High (3), Medium (2), Low (1)
Career Relevance: High (3), Medium (2), Low (1)
The five matrices will establish significance of the different themes. The idea is
==PAGE:38==
6.1
Homosocial Reproduction
35
to multiply the centrality and career relevance on a scale from 1-3 (low, medium,
high) to transfer the opinion into numbers based on the participants significance.
If the opinion is negative, the number will deduct from the total points as opposed
to add, and if the impact is disagree or neutral, they will not be counted at all, as
this person does not believe the phenomena exists or has had experience with it.
The purpose of adding arbitrary numbers, is to give a fast and simple idea of what
all participants thought of some reoccurring theme from the interviews. As the
matrices will show, it is rare that more than two participants even have an opinion
or discussed the theme. That in itself is also information about how the different
participants connect patterns with other participants, unknowingly.
6.1
Homosocial Reproduction
Participant
Impact
Opinion
Centrality
Career Relevance
Score
E.E
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
Low · 1
-3
J. Jørgensen
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Low · 1
0
A. Kellberg
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
High · 3
-9
J. Barfod
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
High · 3
High · 3
0
J. Garly
Disagree · 0
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
High · 3
0
Sum values
4
-2
13
11
-10
Table 1: Homosocial Reproduction
In Table 1 it can be seen that the final sum score is -10, meaning the participants
agreed that it is something negative in the organisation more than otherwise. An
interesting takeaway is that all participants are either medium or high in terms
of how central they are in relation to this phenomena, and that Major Barfod and
General Garly both have their scores equal to 0 due to either not having stated an
opinion or not believing it is a reoccurring theme in the organisation at all.
A. Kellberg discussed Homosocial Reproduction as a phenomena that occurred
due to seeing the same greatness in others, that oneself contains - or thinks one-
self contains or perhaps wants to contain. This can be linked to chapter 6 about
internal integration from Schein (Schein 2004 [9]). This chapter describes how in-
tegration into a group can be difficult and many cultural barriers must be broken
down to truly integrate. If an officer is handed the task of recommending some
person as his or her replacement, right hand or other position, perhaps it is easier
to see eye to eye with someone like minded as these barriers may already be bro-
ken down - not giving someone different an opportunity based on this. J. Garly
disagreed on this topic, but a General (Garly) and a captain (Kellberg) are in vastly
different parts of the organisation and there is a good change that the culture is
==PAGE:39==
36
6
Analysis
different in these places, meaning they can both be right or wrong, independently
of each other. Martin, 1992; Winslow, 2000 [1] also proposes there is an integration
perspective to military culture, which emphasizes homogeneity among all mem-
bers. This will help tether the social relations together, but as can be seen it might
also keep the diversity low - for better and worse. However, as the literature also
states, reality is rarely this simple. Under the surface of initial cultural layers, sub-
cultures will exist and subcultures within these. This means that a newly educated
officer is likely to be affected by the school, the staff, his/her peers and colleagues,
social circle from that environment and so on.
In terms of the education part, E.E. has at least mentioned that the new officers
seem alike in their way of solving problems and J. Jørgensen confirmed his per-
sonal experience with this. However, the officer schools have standards that must
be met by the candidates, meaning it might not be homosocial reproduction - at
least not solely. As J. Barfod also discussed, the personalities of candidates that
are elected for e.g. Officer schools, must be of a certain kind simply due to the na-
ture of the education and the job - not necessarily because of some deeper cultural
stereotypes. Frederic Labarre, Pierre Jolicoeur, 2016 [4] also discusses how e.g. a
NATO nation has not only responsibilities of their own, but also a common field
for other NATO members. This could mean that considerations regarding what
type of soldier they educate and how they educate them must be made - not only
regarding Denmark’s own interests but also NATO members. On top of that, Den-
mark has just passed a public vote to get rid of an old Defense agreement, now
allowing Denmark to cooperate with EU in terms of military. This emphasizes
that perhaps this organisation and education structure should also accommodate
this new collaborative military structure cross-borders.
6.2
Officer’s Schools Producing Identical Officers
Participant
Impact
Opinion
Centrality
Career Relevance
Score
E.E
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
Medium · 2
-6
J. Jørgensen
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
Medium · 2
-6
A. Kellberg
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
High · 3
High · 3
0
J. Barfod
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
0
J. Garly
Disagree · 0
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
0
Sum values
4
-2
13
11
-12
Table 2: Officer’s Schools thinking they produce identical problem solvers equally good at every-
thing. J. Jørgensen clearly felt a different boss in his sergeant major compared to captain (only one
of them went through officers school).
==PAGE:40==
6.3
Three Branches of the Organisation
37
This phenomena is mentioned by many participants, but E.E. and J. Jørgensen
both had first hand impressions with their bosses being newly educated officers,
experiencing this (or their version of this) on themselves. Their take on this is that
it is problematic that the educated officer cadet’s are all similar in their approach
to daily work tasks and problem solving. They say and do things that makes
other employees think "Ugh, classic officer thinking". Whether this is a case of
experience beats education or a lack of understanding from the other employees,
is not to be decided as that is not the purpose of this study. It is simply to observe
and analyse that this misalignment of cultures clash and cause friction - friction
that can perhaps be negated or avoided. J. Barfod did also discuss homosocial
reproduction and especially among the officer’s schools and this might fit quite
well in with E.E. and J. Jørgensens experiences of this.
6.3
Three Branches of the Organisation
Participant
Impact
Opinion
Centrality
Career Relevance
Score
E.E
Neutral · 0
Neutral · 0
Low · 1
Low · 1
0
J. Jørgensen
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
High · 3
-9
A. Kellberg
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
High · 3
-9
J. Barfod
Neutral · 0
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
0
J. Garly
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
-4
Sum values
3
-3
11
11
-22
Table 3: The three branches of the Danish Defense are hardly comparable and have vast differences
in terms of daily life, international operations and culture.
The participants seem to agree the most on this topic - that the three branches
(air force, army, navy), united as the Danish Defense has cultural clashes in terms
of daily life and operations with a final score of -22. As Higbee also experienced
at his time on a Navy ship (Higbee 2010 [5]), the were multiple layers of culture
differentiation between the US navy and air force. The air force also operated on
the ship as it had jets and helicopters on it. His initial impression was that rank
(in the air force) was more of an institutional token or symbol and much less an
authoritarian position. People were familiar with each other and had specialised
functions. This meant that focus was on the job and the tasks, much more so than
it was on the rank or education level. If a higher ranking officer needed help,
he would without hesitation put a lower ranking employee, but a specialist, in a
position of power for a scenario or discussion. This is delving into the three layers
of culture as described by Schein (Schein 2004 [9]), where different uniforms and
ranking systems represents the outer layer - artefacts. The next layer is also visible,
beliefs and values. The value is put on the employee and his/her specialisation
==PAGE:41==
38
6
Analysis
and skill set within - not on the rank or education level. It is truly believed that
this is what makes things work best, rather than adhering to the same hierarchi-
cal system used in the army and navy. The third layer, basic assumptions, is so
fundamental to the culture that it is difficult to observe initially. In Higbee’s case
of air force personnel on a navy ship, it was the fact that the individual was more
than the rank and this was the default. Not that the navy (or army) only looks at
rank, but that the initial impression is specialised, not systematised.
Going back to the cases of A. Kellberg and J. Jørgensen, who both provided first-
hand experience with culture clashing between the branches. A. Kellberg encoun-
tered this while stationed in an international operation. He is an army captain
and met the air force throughout the mission. The army was the primary holder
of the military base that served as foundation for the mission, while the air force
was responsible for transport and logistics. The second layer of culture, beliefs
and values, came into play here. A. Kellberg was not understanding of how much
the air force personnel complained about the work environment (shifts, conditions,
meals etc.). They also seemed to barely show up on time, if not a few minutes late.
They showed, what A. Kellberg found to be, disrespectful and unprofessional be-
haviour in multiple ways. Going back to Schein’s (Schein 2004 [9]) discoveries,
his literature on time and space can also play a role here. The air force is an in-
dependent branch of the Danish Defense and they are not necessarily operating
in the same time frame as the army, despite being deployed as part of the same
mission. In this case, they were a transport unit, working in shifts. The army
soldiers were basically deployed around the clock. Soeters, Winslow and Weibull
2006 [1] describe an organisation as having two states; Hot and cold. It could be
the case that for the army deployment, the regiments have been training for an
international operation for months or years (in a cold organisation environment)
and when they are deployed for a 6 month long mission, they operate in the organ-
isation’s hot environment - This is what they trained all this time for. This is not
the case for the air force in the same way. They are essentially on duty half of the
time, but for the entirety of the mission. They are almost working as it was a con-
stant mix of hot and cold organisation. A. Kellberg had difficulties understanding
"Why they couldn’t just keep it together for a short time and fight through it" - but this
may very well just be because the temporal element and hot/cold organisational
environment are so different, despite them working in collaboration.
In the case of J. Jørgensen, he is working in a branch-neutral unit meaning that
employees from all branches are there, and they work with all branches. He often
described observing intriguing differences between the branches and also specific
regiments - different ways to walk, talk and work. He is relatively new in his job,
and an IT specialist, but he was still able to quickly pick up on this.
==PAGE:42==
6.4
Promotion System in the Organisation
39
6.4
Promotion System in the Organisation
Participant
Impact
Opinion
Centrality
Career Relevance
Score
E.E
Neutral · 0
Neutral · 0
Low · 1
Low · 1
0
J. Jørgensen
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
High · 3
High · 3
-9
A. Kellberg
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
High · 3
High · 3
0
J. Barfod
Neutral · 0
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
0
J. Garly
Agree · 1
Positive · 1
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
4
Sum values
3
0
11
11
-5
Table 4: Promotions past officer school: The method to progress in ranks when reaching a major
position and upwards is by a superior appointing oneself, creating a conflict of interest in some
cases.
This was primarily discussed by J. Garly and J. Jørgensen and they seemed to
disagree on the matter. They are two individuals very far opposite each other in
the organisation, one being a high ranking officer, the other a private. Perhaps the
difference in perspective and understanding can lead to such different opinions
on the same matter? Truly, they cannot both be right at the same time.
This is a quite direct link to the original hypothesis about education (promotion)
structure and the effect it has on the organisation. J. Jørgensen experienced a boss
(captain) who promised his superior much more than could actually be expected
from the unit, according to J. Jørgensen. This did not only mean a less desirable
work environment and work hours, but also a growing dislike for the boss. Schein
(Schein 2004 [9]) describes how leadership can shape culture and how culture can
shape leadership - a yin and yang type of relation, they coexist in synergy. Clearly,
this new captain came to the unit with a vastly different approach and background
than compared to J. Jørgensens former boss, the Sergeant Major. There were some
differences in the basic assumptions about what is realistic for the unit to perform
and what is not possible within a time frame. It can relate to many different social
understandings that are not aligned between the unit and the captain - such as
time, truth and integration. The captain appeared as a "...lap dog for his superiors,
providing unrealistic promises" J. Jørgensen. This situation looks much like a The-
ory X and Theory Y case, where his current captain boss is emphasizing personal
interest, supervision, strict rules and deadlines and a generally limited/gated ac-
cess to methods for solving the tasks (Theory X). The previous boss played a bit
outside the regular ruleset as J. Jørgensen explained, by working around his supe-
riors if he did not like their decisions, but he seemed to allow the same freedom
within his unit - providing a dynamic and flowing work environment with a better
boss-employee relation.
Whether this is purely the fault of the promotional system is difficult to decide
==PAGE:43==
40
6
Analysis
based on this analysis of a single case - but it does show a tendency. The sergeant
major boss did not stand to gain anything himself, and might have acted differ-
ently because of this. J. Garly argued that this method of promoting officer em-
ployees is, to a degree, a necessity to ensure the best candidates climb the ranks -
in the organisations best interest, making sure the future upper managers are the
best of the lot. He did also state that it is not a flawless system, but then again -
what is? For the most part, he found it to be a successful structure that worked as
intended.
6.5
2013 Restructuring
Participant
Impact
Opinion
Centrality
Career Relevance
Score
E.E
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
Low · 1
Low · 1
-1
J. Jørgensen
Neutral · 0
Neutral · 0
Low · 1
Low · 1
0
A. Kellberg
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
Medium · 2
Medium · 2
0
J. Barfod
Agree · 1
Negative · -1
Medium · 2
High · 3
-6
J. Garly
Agree · 1
Neutral · 0
High · 3
High · 3
0
Sum values
4
-2
9
10
-7
Table 5: The 2013 restructuring of the Danish Defense as an organisation, brought many implications
with it - such as splitting up the department responsible for recruitment (FPS), the department
responsible for the three branches (air force, army, navy), the department responsible for equipment
and so on. Eight departments in total.
This was primarily discussed with J. Barfod and J. Garly, but is something that
has impacted all participants as it is an organisational change that was made with
many ripples still in the water. It would probably require that an individual has
experienced it for them to be able to truly have an opinion on the matter, thus
ranking J. Barfod and J. Garly relatively high in this matrix. On the surface level,
this restructuring is not really connected to the study and the problems it explores,
but is a worthy mention due to the sheer size of the event and what it meant for the
organisation as a whole. This could easily have been the central point in another
study, exploring the reasoning and consequences of this decision to split up the
organisation into departments.
6.6
Honorable Mentions
As previously discussed, culture clashes have already shown themselves, for ex-
ample in the case of the Huntsmen Corps and the Frogmen Corps. The organisa-
tion tried to assemble some of the entry-level education for the two Corps and it
did not work out the way it was intended. They are still collaborating to this day,
but not on the level that was desired from upper management. This is perhaps a
==PAGE:44==
6.6
Honorable Mentions
41
case where the Danish Defense admitted that merging two regiments with differ-
ent cultures is not admissible, but they still have mutual benefit of a cross-regiment
collaboration.
Another mention is the relocation, or lack thereof, of the army’s officer’s school. It
was planned that all officer’s schools should relocate to Svanemøllen Kaserne, but
the army’s officer’s school managed to dodge this. The reasoning from their side,
was that the school had always existed at Frederiksberg Castle, and thus the place
was filled with rich tradition and history. Something they valued as a big part of
the education and experience. An example of how culture is connected to not only
regiments and people, but also places of history. To this day, it seems the army’s
officer’s school has won the case and are not due to relocating anytime soon.
==PAGE:45==
42
7
Conclusion
7
Conclusion
To briefly recap this study; An initial hypothesis transformed to a problem state-
ment, was given as follows along with three subproblems:
"How is the Danish Defense’s education structure set up and what implications does this
have on organisational culture? Does this organisational culture affect the organisations
ability to fulfill its purpose?"
• Why and how is the Danish Defense using internal and unified education?
• What consequences can surface in an organisation when the majority of the
employees have gone through internal education as their primary education
basis?
• How can the organisational performance be measured in relation to this
education and employment structure?
In it’s nature, the hypothesis is an open and explorative problem, using "how" as
the guiding question type. Answering such a type of problem statement is not
a simple or easy task and requires an elaborate answer that ties, essentially the
entire study, together in a manner that is comprehensible.
7.1
Subproblems
Going back to the problem statement and the sub-problems, we can now connect
the analysis of the data to the initial hypothesis.
Why and how is the Danish Defense using internal and unified education?
The question of why and how the Danish Defense uses internal and unified educa-
tion was the first of the sub-problems. The "why" is answered, in simple terms, as
a necessity. Soldiers are not taught elsewhere, and if they are (e.g. other countries)
many other political problems would exist, such as nationality, security levels, po-
litical relation of Denmark and the other nations and so on. It is simply explained
as the only option the Danish Defense has.
The "how" part builds on an initial hypothesis that the Danish Defense actually
has such a structure. The organisation’s education structure is set up in a way
that allows each branch (army, navy, air force) to independently plan their branch-
specific education. The education is rank specific, meaning you either go through
constable school (foot soldier), sergeant school (lower level leader/manager) and
eventually officer’s school (leader/manager). There are also specialist educations,
but they will all include one of the initial types of education first. It is set up in this
==PAGE:46==
7.1
Subproblems
43
way to allow as much unification as possible, without compromising the need for
adapting the education to the specific branch and regiment. The interviews, espe-
cially with A. Kellberg proved, however, that this might be too broad or even false
claim - the existence of unified education. Not only does the Danish Defense pro-
vide a wide array of different types of education (Conscription, Private, Sergeant,
Officer, Multiple Specialisation Courses, Officer Courses etc.), it is also done in
different institutes within different branches - and it has already been established
how different the culture and education can be across regiments and branches.
The simplicity of this part of the hypothesis should be either more specific, re-
lating to perhaps a specific type of education, i.e. A. Kellberg mentioned how a
certain negative authoritarian culture in sergeants have traditionally existed, but
he argued that it is not stemming from the education institute - rather, it is col-
leagues and work environments in their native regiments (Employees usually get
sent back to their original regiment/place of work). Such a hypothesis could then
either falsify or confirm that claim and build some understanding of why it could
be. A. Kellberg also mentioned how the organisation is probably losing out some
good potential employees when using their "learn to shoot, first aid and soldier -
then we will look at anything else you have to offer" strategy, as opposed to giving
great specialists a second chance if they, at first, do not succeed in e.g. riffling on
the same level as other candidates, who might not posses other special skills.
What consequences can surface in an organisation when the majority of the
employees have gone through internal education as their primary education
basis?
This relates to the sub-problem just above. Instead of just disregarding the sub-
problem as too broad or false, it was still visible that some behaviour or phenom-
ena surfaced in the data collection phase, that is likely linked to the education
structure. One of the issues correlated to this, could be how the officer’s schools
streamline the cadets in a uniform manner, producing similar employees that think
alike. Sergeant E.E. Seemed to believe this was the case based on his experience
with fresh-off-the-line officers, and J. Jørgensen confirmed that he could also tell
if his superior was newly educated or came with some prior experience. Major
Barfod described this problem as a bit of an equilibrium and it might not necessar-
ily be linked only to the education, but also the selection and perhaps homosocial
reproduction tendencies - intended or not. If the selection process simply favors
one type of person, then the education structure itself might not be what creates
identical officer’s, but the selection phase. In either case, the outcome is the same.
Whether it is a good thing, that the organisation knows exactly the capabilities
of the officer’s due to the highly streamlined and unified process or a bad thing,
because it will mean limited diversity (and perhaps creative thinking, outside the
box, alternative options?) is another debate. A. Kellberg agreed that while it is
==PAGE:47==
44
7
Conclusion
true that the fundamental requirements to become any soldier (private, officer or
specialist, etc.) must be fulfilled, such as handling a weapon, being physically
able, the outcome is a rather narrow spectrum of personality types among the
organisation’s employees.
How can the organisational performance be measured in relation to this educa-
tion and employment structure?
Creating a direct link between organisational performance and education structure
can be difficult. The interviews and analysis did show some negative experiences
connected with the education structure and culture - such as E.E. And J. Jørgensen
disliking their bosses, one of them even to the extent that his colleagues and him
would not join an international operation with the boss. It is, however, difficult
to assess whether they, E.E. and J. Jørgensen, are in the right or whether their
perspective is too narrow to understand why things must be a certain way, in
the interest of the organisation at large. Surely, it is difficult, if not impossible,
to make everyone happy with everything all the time. To explore this question
further, specific cases would need to be analysed with both sides (also the officer’s
perspective) shared, in an effort to really understand what is going on, why it is
going on and if it is the best way to do it - and what role education and culture
played in the scenario. Since this is not available data for this study, lets assume
that there is some truth to the negative experiences, then we can pick an example
from E.E.’s interview; He and his colleagues would not go on an international op-
eration with their platoon leader due to behaviour and culture differences. A very
straight forward action and consequence where extra resources must be allocated
for the organisation to fulfill the purpose of this mission. Either the organisation
would have to find replacement personnel and allocate time and resources to al-
low this platoon to train for the mission, or spend time and resources handling
this situation with current personnel.
Instead of focusing on end-purpose metrics for the entire organisation, just focus-
ing on evaluating whether things are good or bad is much more tangible and thus
a better option for this thesis. It can be near impossible to decipher precisely how
much worse the organisation is because of some phenomena, but that might also
not be necessary - just concluding it could be better in certain ways, should be
enough to motivate change. It is in both the employee and organisation’s best in-
terest to attain a healthy culture that cultivates motivation, discipline and loyalty.
A true balance must be found, and perhaps it already is - who am I to say.
==PAGE:48==
7.2
Problem Statement
45
7.2
Problem Statement
In an effort to try and answer this rather elaborate problem, lets break it down
into smaller bits first. The organisation’s structure is set up in the way that new
candidates of any military rank will have to go through some basic (conscription
or conscription-style) soldier education where they are taught how to e.g. handle
a weapon and function in a platoon. The specifics will depend on which branch,
as they have slightly different tasks (e.g. swimming is also important for navy
soldiers). Each barracks, regiment and even platoon will have their own subculture
and thus the education might vary slightly depending on this also. E.g., the King’s
Guard regiment focus heavily on appearing professional to the public, as one
of their primary tasks is to guard royal buildings - and be extremely visible to
the public and tourists. There exists different independent institutes for specific
purposes, such as educating sergeants (Sergeant’s School) or officers (Officer’s
School) and many more, including specialist courses. These each follow company
guidelines, but are independent schools that have their own agenda and own
subculture within the full organisation.
To begin drawing conclusions on the analysis and begin answering the hypothesis,
then lets go back to some previous examples: J. Jørgensen and E.E. In particular,
have felt how strongly their bosses were affected by their respective officer educa-
tion and the experience was not good for them. This is, of course, a very thin slice
of reality and there is probably much more to the case, but from their perspective,
it is true. A. Kellberg mentioned how there is a great likelihood that elected can-
didates represent the managers own personality during the selection, keeping a
specific personality type well represented in the majority of the organisation. This
most definitely affects the organisations ability to perform its task and fulfill its
purpose, but it is probably much more nuanced than just that. As also agreed
among multiple participants, soldiers need fundamental skills regardless of how
great they are at e.g. specialisation tasks - if you cannot aim and fire a weapon,
what good are you in the end. A balance and trade-off between keeping attrac-
tive soldier traits while still acquiring personnel with diverse and creative ways
of thinking. Being able to adapt and not produce identical personnel that solves
problems in the same old way.
J. Barfod and J. Garly both discussed the promotional system and how this part
of the structure is necessary but as we cross-referenced this idea with E.E. and
J. Jørgensen, there seemed to be disagreements across the board. Below officer’s
ranks, the effect was negatively received and above that rank threshold, it was
seen as a necessity and well functioning system, exceptions taken into account.
There seemed to be the biggest agreement across all participants that the branch
subcultures have the biggest negative impact on life in the organisation. This is
==PAGE:49==
46
7
Conclusion
even despite the fact that it is extremely easy to apply for jobs across branches, de-
spite the branches having similar, but by no means identical educations. Ironically
enough, there seems to be the biggest agreement on the power the educational
institutes have over the cultures they foster, relating to Schein’s (Schein 2004 [9])
loop of leadership creating culture and culture shaping leadership. A. Kellberg
mentioned how the sergeant’s school foster a healthy, modern and professional
culture in the new sergeants, but that the tendency is that this culture does not ex-
tend beyond the institute, and as soon as the sergeants return home, they integrate
into that culture instead.
7.3
Final Remarks and Suggestions
It would appear that the education institutes definitely have great influence in the
development of the culture. Perhaps, the problem seems to root in the fact that
there are so many institutes and departments that do not do things the entirely
same way, that they breed different cultures; Values, beliefs and assumptions. Per-
haps it is not even feasible or attractive to try and unify all education cultures in
an organisation so large, but the solution should maybe focus more on building
bridges cross-culture instead of trying to merge them - Such as explaining to an
army regiment how the air force is operating and supporting, to give personnel
such as A. Kellberg a better opportunity to understand his fellow soldiers in op-
erations and minimise internal friction when on missions. Or, in the case of the
Frogmen and Huntsmen Corps to accept that they are too different to feasibly
merge straight away, and accept different terms for cross-regiment collaboration.
The Danish Defense as an organisation is large and has probably one of the longest
organisational histories among danish companies. This history carries with it cul-
ture and this is vastly different between branches, regiments and even platoons.
Embracing these subcultures and the strengths they can carry, emphasizing on
positive differences but accepting that they exist and making it part of the educa-
tion program’s could improve mutual understanding and thereby reduce cultural
friction. It would greatly help if leadership cultivated a desire to understand and
respect other traditions and habits - such as The King’s Guard wearing black bear
hats or the Winged Hussar’s wearing horseback riding equipment when they pa-
rade. The general initiative of keeping employees in positions for 2-4 years creates
frequent rotation and this could alleviate cultural differences, allowing employ-
ees to experience many different subcultures and everything that comes with it -
Maybe that is even the very reason this initiative exists.
The Danish Defense has already had to come to terms with accepting cultural pri-
ority over direct organisational desires - such as relocating an officer’s school due
to finances and convenience or keeping two elite forces, Huntsmen and Frogmen,
separate for the most part. Whether they accepted this out of necessity or were
==PAGE:50==
7.3
Final Remarks and Suggestions
47
prepared for the outcomes beforehand, is unknown.
==PAGE:51==
48
References
References
[1]
Giuseppe Caforio. Handbook of the Sociology of the Military, Chapter 14. 1st ed.
Springer, 2006.
[2]
Cambridge Dictionary. Organization. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/
dictionary/english/organization. 2022.
[3]
Forsvaret. Om Os. https://www.forsvaret.dk/da/om- os/#:~:text=
Forsvaret%20har%20cirka%2019.500%20medarbejdere,eksempel%20officer%
2C%20sergent%20og%20konstabel.. 2022.
[4]
Pierre Jolicoeur Frederic Labarre. Shaping and measuring military culture devel-
opment: a case study of the defence education enhancement program. Vol. 22, No.
2, 135-146. Canadian Foregin Policy Journal, 2016.
[5]
Douglas Higbee. Military Culture and Education. 1st ed. Ashgate, 2010.
[6]
Philip Lewis Mark N.K. Saunders and Adrian Thornhill. Research Methods
for Business Students. 8th ed. Pearson, 2019.
[7]
Johnny Saldana Matthew B. Miles A. Michael Huberman. Qualitative Data
Analysis A Methods Sourcebook. 4nd. SAGE Publications, 2019.
[8]
Peter Ernstved Rasmussen. Den misforståede general/The misunderstood general.
https://olfi.dk/2017/01/16/den-misforstaaede-general/. 2017.
[9]
Edgar Schein. Organizational Culture and Leadership. 3rd ed. Jossey-Bass, 2004.
[10]
W. Newton Seuter. Introduction to Educational Research: A Critical Thinking
Approach. 2nd. SAGE Publications, 2012.
==PAGE:52==
49
Interview Question Sheets
A
Interview - Sergeant E.E.
Sergeant E.E. is a staff sergeant currently employed at a battery in the artillery
regiment in Oksbøl. He is employed in an education sector (HBU Hærens basisud-
dannelse / The army’s conscription education) and has been so for approximately
2 years now. Initial problems observed during a 2-hour interview with Sergeant
E.E.:
• Until 2013, the army’s officer school produced very identical officers, re-
sulting in the same solution to almost every problem - little diversity and
minimally thinking outside the box.
• In 2013 they allowed people of different academic backgrounds to apply, re-
sulting in massively different officers - but still believing the competences
available at the end of education were the same!
(I.e.
people are still
vastly different, despite having the same disciplinary and unified education
through the officers school).
• Problems regarding officers in misplaced positions arose (e.g. good teachers
are not equal to good leaders and vica versa, but they were treated as such
and placed in positions outside their competences).
• Communication is vital and core to how the Danish Defence operates, yet
FPS (Forsvarets Personelstyrelse - The HR department) functions almost as
a black box - decentralized from the rest of the Danish Defence, yet they are
responsible for selecting new personnel, playing a vital role in the future of
military culture and diversity.
B
Interview - Major Jakob Barfod
J. Barfod is an army Major currently employed at Forsvarsakademiet (an academic
branch of the danish defense). He has recently finished his PhD. His career has
primarily been within The Danish Defense and progressed throughout the years
in the organisation. In the later years, he supplied his military education with
courses in psychology, coaching and leadership in Roskilde University (A "Mas-
ter" worth 60 ECTS). He seemed to have a perspective that was larger and more
complex than sergeant E.E., which is understandable and likely due to age, ed-
ucation and experience differences. Relevant notes taken from the interview are
listed as below:
==PAGE:53==
50
C
Interview - Private J. Jørgensen
• Homosocial reproduction is a reoccurring theme in the education system,
for better or worse.
• Homosocial reproduction and general diversity is a balance of wanting new
and different input, while still maintaining necessary qualifications in em-
ployees such as discipline, mental robustness and sanity, and physical capa-
bilities - it is truly an equilibrium.
• The Danish Defense was in 2013 split into multiple and equal sectors, mak-
ing decisions across multiple sectors possibly troublesome (No unity of com-
mand).
• The change in recruitment to the officers schools in 2013 might be related
to an educational restructuring of the military educations in relation to the
civil academic degrees (now the officers schools are also on level 6, bachelor’s
degrees).
• The at-the-time Minister of Defence (Hækkerup) decided to split unity of
command into the now existing sectors (FMAK, FPS, The Danish Defense
and more).
C
Interview - Private J. Jørgensen
J. Jørgensen is a private, working at Flyvestation Karup in an IT-support unit. He
is a civil educated IT-supporter, who got a job offer within the Royal Air Force
as IT-support, on the notion that he would complete a basis education (conscrip-
tion/værnepligt, 4 months) within a year. His work is primarily technology and
support to all wings of the defense, not just the air force. They still do regular
courses and check-ups of physical, mental and military capabilities, as all em-
ployees of the defense must do this. His former boss, a Sergeant Major (highest
ranking sergeant, chefsergent), was the primary founder of this entire unit. The
boss position in this unit was always meant to be a Captain (officer rank), but that
did not happen until the unit was completely built and ready to be handed over.
This means that the unit, and J. Jørgensen, got to experience two bosses with very
different backgrounds and this made for an interesting case.
• Until 2013, the army’s officer school produced very identical officers, re-
sulting in the same solution to almost every problem - little diversity and
minimally thinking outside the box.
• In 2013 they allowed people of different academic backgrounds to apply, re-
sulting in massively different officers - but still believing the competences
available at the end of education were the same!
(I.e.
people are still
==PAGE:54==
51
vastly different, despite having the same disciplinary and unified education
through the officers school).
• Problems regarding officers in misplaced positions arose (e.g. good teachers
are not equal to good leaders and vica versa, but they were treated as such
and placed in positions outside their competences).
• Communication is vital and core to how the Danish Defence operates, yet
FPS (Forsvarets Personelstyrelse - The HR department) functions almost as
a black box - decentralized from the rest of the Danish Defence, yet they are
responsible for selecting new personnel, playing a vital role in the future of
military culture and diversity.
D
Interview - Captain Andreas Kellberg
This interview is conducted in an effort to gather and analyse organisational cul-
ture data related to the Danish Defense. Several people of different backgrounds
are interviewed in an effort to cover many perspectives. The interviews are semi-
structured, focusing on personal experiences and perspectives of being in the or-
ganisation. These are key points taken from the interview with Captain A. Kell-
berg:
• Personal introduction and background
• How is the general employment and education structure in The Danish De-
fense? (Requirements, further education, capabalities and possibilities when
done)
• Can this education structure have an affect on the general military culture?
Is this acknowledged in the management and treated accordingly?
• Can you describe any events or cases where difference in culture has in-
trigued you? Perhaps difference between ranks, units, branches (Navy, Army
and Air Force)?
• Do you have a feeling of how this organisation may have affected your per-
sonality/characteristics? In a good or bad way?
E
Interview - General Jens Garly
This interview is conducted in an effort to gather and analyse organisational cul-
ture data related to the Danish Defense. Several people of different backgrounds
are interviewed in an effort to cover many perspectives. The interviews are semi
==PAGE:55==
52
E
Interview - General Jens Garly
structured, focusing on personal experiences and perspectives of being in the or-
ganisation. The interview will follow a course similar to this:
• Personal introduction and background
• How is the general employment and education structure in The Danish De-
fense? (Requirements, further education, capabalities and possibilities when
done)
• Can this education structure have an affect on the general military culture?
Is this acknowledged in the management and treated accordingly?
• Can you describe any events or cases where difference in culture has in-
trigued you? Perhaps difference between ranks, units, branches (Navy, Army
and Air Force)?
• Do you have a feeling of how this organisation may have affected your per-
sonality/characteristics? In a good or bad way?
