==PAGE:1==
Optimization and characterization of paper
bottles’ manufacturing process
Master Thesis
Civil and Mechanical department
Department of Manufacturing Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimization and characterization of paper bottles’ manufacturing process
Author:
Alin-Cosmin Ivanache - S202734
Education:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
M. Sc. Materials and Manufacturing
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Giuliano Bissacco
Project period:
03.01.2022 - 03.06.2022
Project type:
Master thesis - 30 ECTS
==PAGE:4==
This work is dedicated to my parents
For you will always be my strength
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Abstract
Moulded pulp products (MPPs) are products made through a process of forming and drying
a slurry mixture containing water and typically wood/paper pulp on a shaped mould. This
work studies the creation of a paper shell with use of an automated system for moulding. The
intended use of the paper shell is as primary packaging of liquid/solid contents like beverages
or powders.
The aim is to develop an automated test bed, for paper shell manufacturing in the shape of a
bottle, in which slurry flow is regulated, air temperature and pressure are controlled along with
the timing of operations. The levels of parameters must be monitored and saved. The present
study looks at parameters influencing shell manufacturing: paper slurry concentration, vacuum
levels, air temperature and pressure levels and filling and flushing times of the mould. The
parameters and production system need to be optimized for the best pulp distribution inside
the mould, removal of non-conformities on the shell, and better dewatering..
The method of analysing bottle quality was through developing and using design of experiments
(DOEs). After the experiments were performed the data was analyzed using analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA) software to determine which parameters are significant and if their interactions
are significant as well. Optical microscopy was used for determining cellulose fiber diameter
and length as well as surface roughness and porosity characterization of the mould.
The construction of an automated test bed was completed in which the aforementioned reg-
ulation capabilities were implemented and optimized for the best paper shell results. It was
observed that rotation is not needed for achieving even pulp distribution inside the newly de-
veloped mould. From the investigated parameters it was discovered that filling flow, drying
time and flushing flow are the most significant ones.
A literature search was carried out for impermeabilization and reduction of oxygen and water
vapour permeation rates with prospects of being used on the manufactured shell. The internal
coating has the role of smoothening the bottle surface to allow for better secondary coating.
The secondary coating works as a diffusion barrier for gases and water vapour. The outside
coating provides impermeabilization and scratch resistance.
To conclude it was showed that the novel process, which is an improval of a patented process
by use of a porous mould compared to the additive manufactured one, can produce paper shells
with regular distribution of pulp thickness. The shells are suitable for coating due to their
smooth internal surface.
iv
==PAGE:7==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank Giuliano Bissacco for the chance to take part on this long journey
starting in 2020 and hopefully continuing to something great. He offered guidance and help on
technical and administrative levels but also opening entrepreneurship doors for me, for which
I will always be grateful. Secondly I would like to thank postdoc Matthias Geiselhart as he
offered so much support from technical standpoints but also with getting around the network
of DTU people.
From the DTU workshop of building 427 I would like to thank Jan Frank for keeping up with
all requests and managing the manufacturing of needed parts. Claus Bremer helped greatly
with the mould manufacturing and he will certainly not machine porous foams again. Peter
Westermann was of great help in a crucial period for etching the mould and his fast actions are
very much obliged. I would like to mention Henrik, Torben and Johnny which humoured me
for the extent of the thesis and helped me in making ad-hoc constructions so much faster.
For help regarding controls and LabView I would like to thank Benny Edelsteen, Frida Gideon,
Jakob Nielsen, Affan Waafi, Kenneth Meinert and Tudor Zsurzsan which thought me a new
programming language and put up with all my questions and doubts with regards to controls
engineering.
From outside DTU I thank Thomas Ingtrup from Burkert which was so kind as to give us
a crucial valve for the setup for no cost.
From Endress+Hauser Danmark Christian Frost
helped with purchasing and setting up of the flow meter.
Finally I would like to thank my parents, my brother and my sister in law for their warm
support through this journey for listening to my technical blabber and still supporting me. My
gratitude goes out to all my close friends Jay, Kaarel, Quentin, Ioana, Yasmine, Aron, Austris,
Stephen and Bishal, Noah, Marco and Romans whose support was unwavering through this
degree and who cheered me on when the night was darkest.
v
==PAGE:8==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
iv
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the art
4
2.1
Moulded Paper Packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Pulp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Types of pulp and their characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Impermeabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
System design
16
4
Mechanical system
20
4.1
Mechanical construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
Mould design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
Mould manufacturing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Transparent mould setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.4
Water, air and vacuum system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Machine operation and maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Control system
41
5.1
Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Labview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Pulp characterization
51
vi
==PAGE:9==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
7
Experimentation
53
7.1
Moulding findings due to testing using 3D metal printed old mould . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Transparent mould testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.3
System testing for dosing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.4
Porous mould testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.4.1
Qualitative analysis and parameter screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.4.2
Quantitative analysis of the moulding process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Coating
78
8.1
Internal coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.2
External coating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9
Economics
81
10 Alternative manufacturing
82
11 Conclusions
83
11.1 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
11.2 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
References
86
APPENDIX
1
A Labview Block Diagram
1
B Flushing velocity calculation
3
C Clamping and stress calculations on the mould
4
D Pulp measurements diameter and length
9
E DOE pulp dosing by using PID control
14
F Manufacturing process chain
15
G Pulp pump flow characterization with control voltage
23
H DOE Rotational velocity of the mould during injection
24
I
State diagram details and the producer consumer loop
26
vii
==PAGE:10==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
J
Technical drawings
40
K Porous mould trials
55
L
DOE filling, flushing, drying, air ramp, temperature
58
M Roughness/porosity analysis on negative mould half
63
N DOE ANOVA report
68
O Thickness and weights measurements of bottles
92
viii
==PAGE:11==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Packaging is a large and important part of industry and has been important for society es-
pecially in the domain of food preservation. Cellulosic fiber materials have been known for
centuries as traditional food packaging material but have been progressively replaced by high
performance plastic-based solutions. Typically less expensive and lightweight, plastic materi-
als have enabled the development of new packaging types and packaging conversion processes,
which in turn enabled effective preservation and distribution of fresh and processed food, con-
tributing to a reduction in food losses[33]. Due to their low cost, high performance, and ease of
processing, consumers and businesses have become used to disposable plastics. Usage of these
materials has resulted in the accumulation of plastic products in the environment during the
last several decades. Of the 8.3 billion metric tons plastics that has been produced since 1950,
60% has ended up in either a landfill or the natural environment[2].
Starting with January 1st. 2021 the EU enforced the Member States to pay a contribution
based on the amount of non-recycled plastic packaging waste produced by each member state.
The contribution is calculated by the weight of non-recycled plastic packaging waste with a
uniform rate of EUR 0.80 per kilogram[35]. As this was unfolding, a return to cellulosic pack-
aging was taking place in the industry. The use of ’cellulose-containing’ words, in documents
like scientific articles and patents regarding food packaging, has been growing exponentially
for the past two decades[13]. At the same time, there are serious expectations —undoubtedly
impacting current legislation— that cellulosic materials should replace single-use plastics in the
short term[34]. The moulding process for cellulosic materials can be electrified and uses less
power than glass and plastic due to lower process temperatures, steam can be used as a heat
source and no fossil fuels are needed[7].
The difference between all fossil-based plastic materials and all cellulosic fiber-based materials
is marked: all impacts of plastics are above 3 kg CO2eq/kg, while all impacts of cellulosic
fiber-based materials are below 1.5 kg CO2eq/kg[...]this does not necessarily indicate that all
fiber-based packaging has a better environmental performance than plastic-based alternatives,
since the quantity of fibers required for a given protection might be more than the amount
of plastic required[33]. Thus care must be taken when designing products and their specific
strength must be considered or the ratio of stiffness to density.
1
==PAGE:12==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
No regulation can be as effective as a well informed, environmentally conscious, ethical pub-
lic[26]. In turn, the consequences of an uninformed and environmentally unconscious public are
firstly felt by itself through high levels of pollution of land and water, then by the rest of world
sparking a more global protection phenomena which has been growing ever since the means of
communication became easy to access internationally. That is why technology is currently ap-
plied to stop pollution with harmful materials until the social circumstances become favorable.
Moulded pulp products (MPPs) are products made by a moulding process and use pulp as
the conformable material. They normally imply the use of water as a dispersion medium, the
content of pulp varying from < 1% to 4%[7]. The pulp suspension is either vacuum sucked onto
a mould or pumped through a mesh and vacuum is used to aid the process. Complex 3D free
form surfaces and geometries can be manufactured by use of the method. This project is a step
towards the implementation of a pilot prototype production system to validate and optimize a
specific moulding process.
The work is a continuation of the author’s previous work on the automation of the paper bottle
setup, work performed during two special courses inside DTU during 2020-2021[17],[16] and of
previous work described in subsection 2.3.
1.2
Scope of the project
The scope of the thesis is to characterize the production of paper bottles’ using the existing
setup and to further develop it for a better understanding of the factors influencing bottle
manufacturing. The work includes pulp characterization for finding out the parameters influ-
encing mechanical properties of the bottles. Process optimization will be conducted by refining
the parameters of the process and by the addition and implementation of any instrumentation
needed to do so.
2
==PAGE:13==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The objectives of the project are:
• Pulp characterization with respect to fiber length, diameter and their influence on mould-
ing.
• Monitoring and control of processing parameters of the bottle manufacturing setup.
• Labview (data programming language used in controls engineering) system architecture
and implementation of monitorization and control loops.
• Mechanical and system design for implementing new features and components on the
existing setup.
• Implementation of new instruments for an improved performance of the setup with regards
to control and the removal of random variables.
• Updating of wiring diagrams.
• Design of standard procedures for testing (DOE).
• Performing experiments and gathering data.
• Statistical analysis of parameters influencing bottle manufacturing (ANOVA) and corre-
lation with moulding outputs.
• Recommendations for process improvement
3
==PAGE:14==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
2
State of the art
2.1
Moulded Paper Packaging
The aim of this section is to give an overview of the advents of technology regarding moulded
paper packaging in terms of manufacturing techniques and to show the advances in pulp de-
velopment. U. Schenker et. al.[33] give a good overview of cellulosic fiber produtcs and their
provenience Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Schematic of fiber packaging [33]
The number of publications on the topic of cellulose-containing food packaging follows an
exponential growth in the past decade due to the emerging need of sustainable and biodegrad-
able materials[33]. To classify the products in the category of moulded pulp the International
Molded Fiber Association (IMFA)[9] has the following breakdown:
Type-1 Molded Fiber Products – Thick Wall: Manufactured using a single mold with product
wall thickness from about 5mm to 10mm. One surface is relatively smooth, with one side rough.
Primarily used for support packaging of non-fragile, heavier items. (vehicle parts; furniture,
motors etc.). As well as, plant, floral and nursery pots and containers. Oven dried.
Type-2 Molded Fiber Products – Transfer Molded: Manufactured using one forming mold and
one transfer mold with product wall thickness from about 3mm to 5mm. Surfaces are relatively
4
==PAGE:15==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
smooth on one side. Most common use is for egg cartons and trays. New designs are used for
many types of electronic product packaging such as cell phones, DVD players etc. Also, used
for hospital disposables, electrical appliances, office equipment, tableware and fruit and drink
trays. Oven dried.
Type-3 Molded Fiber Products – Thermoformed (Sometimes called “thin-wall”): Manufactured
using multiple heated molds with product wall thickness of about 2mm to 4mm. Surfaces are
smooth and forms are well detailed with minimal draft angles. Products are dried in the mold
and no oven curing is needed. Due to the hot mold pressing process, the walls are somewhat
more dense. Type-3 thermoformed fiber, products closely resemble thermoformed plastic mate-
rial. This type is refers to molded fiber products that require some type of secondary or special
treatment other than simply being molded and cured.
Type-4 Molded Fiber Products – Processed: This type is refers to molded fiber products that
require some type of secondary or special treatment other than simply being molded and cured.
Examples of Type-4 are:
Hot or after pressed – Die-cut or perforated – Printed – Colored – Special mold -Special slurry
formulations – Embossments – Special design features – Special additives
In addition to these there is another process in the industry called pulp injection moulding[25].
In this process a mixture of paper, water and starch is injected at high temperature inside of a
heated mould, very much like plastics are injection moulded. The mixture flows inside of the
cavity creating complex 3D shapes. This process cannot however create a geometry in which
the inside cavity of the container is bigger than the opening like in bottles. A collapsible core
might be devised for creating such geometries but the ratio cannot differ to a great extent.
Regarding paper bottle production there are a few players on the market including Paboco (lo-
cated in Denmark), Pulpex, Just, Choose, Frugalpac and Ecologic. Their bottles fall into three
categories: a plastic bag wrapped with a paperboard removable outside cover; a blow moulded
plastic container inside a paper shell and a fully paper based container. The latter has yet to
hit the market in any of the aforementioned companies, only renderings being available. The
challenges are two fold one being the creation of a stable bottle only using paper and the other
being coating the paper to create barrier layers for liquids and gases. The barrier layer must
be biodegradable and compostable to align with the substrate which is paper.
5
==PAGE:16==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
2.2
Pulp
Pulp is made from cellulosic materials, usually trees and wood, but husks and straw can be
other types of provenances. In the process of pulping alongside pulp fibers there are a certain
amount of fines and shives. Shives are small fiber bundles of fibers that have not been separated
into individual fibers during the pulping process. They appear as “splinters” that are darker
than the pulp[4]. Fibrillation is another phenomenon that takes place during the processing
of pulping.
During mechanical refining the cell wall becomes delaminated due to repeated
shearing and compression of the fibers creating fines. Fines are pieces of the cell wall mainly
from the outer layers of the fibers called S1 and S2, see Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Fibrillation on fiber cell wall and shape change to a more ribbon like structure[2]
Fines represent a certain percent of the solid weight of pulp along with shives. Fines can
be seen in section 6 as found in the supplied pulp of this study. The amount and size of fines
affects mouldability, water drainage and paper properties like tensile and burst strength due to
binding of fibers. Some pulps, through extensive pulping become nano fibrilated e.i. fines are
on the level of hundreds of nanometers in diameter. Nanofibrilated pulp has shown promise as
an effective bonding agent but it has a very strong negative effect on dewatering rates[2].
2.2.1
Types of pulp and their characteristics
Mechanical pulp
Mechanical pulps use mechanical energy to separate the fibers (fiberation) from the chips of
the cellulosic material broken down.
No chemicals are used in the process only water and
6
==PAGE:17==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
steam. The yield is high 90-98% because lignin is retained in the pulp. Mechanical pulps have
high yield, high bulk, hight stiffness and low costs. They have low strength because the lignin
interferes with hydrogen bonding between fibers when paper is made. The lignin also causes
the pulp to turn yellow with exposure to air and light. Normal uses include: newsprints, books
and magazines[4].
Chemimechanical and semichemical pulp
The chemimechanical pulping process consists of two stages with yields of 85%-95%. A par-
ticularly mild chemical treatment is followed by a drastic mechanical action but not as drastic
as without chemical pretreatment. The original lignin structure and content is preserved, but
extractives and small amounts of hemicellulose are lost. The pretreatments are hot sulfite or
cold soda and are particularly applicable to hardwoods that otherwise do not give mechanical
pulps of high quality. Semichemical process also called high-yield chemical pulping, involves
two steps with pulp yields of 60% to 80%. In the first step, a mild chemical treatment is used,
which is followed by moderate mechanical refining. There is partial removal of both lignin
and hemicellulose[4]. Pulps made by these processes make paper stiff and they find uses in
corrugating mediums, food packaging and magazines[5].
Chemical pulp
The chemical pulping process is the most used process of pulping in the industry[5]. The pulp
is processed by using chemicals in an aqueous solution at elevated temperatures to produce
fibers from chips. Chemical processes have a low yield in the range of 40–55% but the pulp
produced is of very high quality. The more the chemicals are involved, the lower the yield and
lignin content because chemical action degrades and solubilizes components of the wood, espe-
cially lignin and hemicelluloses[4]. These high quality pulps are mainly used for higher quality
paper production, such as office paper. Kraft pulping is the most common pulping process
used by several plants in the world for virgin fiber. In this process the wood chips are steemed
to softem them then combined with a highly alkaline solution called white liquor containing
sodium hydroxide and sodium sulfide. After ’cooking’ them for several hours at 160-170°C the
chips degrade into fibers which are later on separated from the chemical solution. The kraft
process produces long, strong, stable fibers and finds use in products like: bags, wrapping,
linerboard and newsprint[5].
In the sulfite pulping process the cooking liquor is an acidic mixture of sulfurous acid and
bisulfite ion. The sulfite pulping process uses the acid solution in the cooking liquor to degrade
the lignin bonds between wood fibers. Sulfite pulps have less color than kraft pulps and can be
7
==PAGE:18==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
bleached more easily, but are not strong. The sulfite process is used for making items like: fine
paper, tissue, glassine and newsprint.
Mechanical pulps are bulkier and more stiff used for structural items like paperboards and
cardboards whilst chemical pulps are used for papers and fine papers for printing that require
low surface roughness and low stiffness fibers. The more refined the structure of the paper i.e.
the prevalance of pores is reduced and the tortuosity from one surface of the paper to the other
is increased, the better it is is suited for foodstuff items. Paper that comes in contact with
food has to have low water transmission rates and low oil permeability that is why glassine is
an interesting type of paper to study[20].
2.2.2
Additives
To change the properties of the moulded products additives can be added to the pulp re-
cipies.
There are three main categories of additives: binders, hydrophobic substances and
flocculants (Flocculation is a process by which a chemical coagulant added to the water acts
to facilitate bonding between particles or fibers, creating larger aggregates which are easier to
separate[Flocculationdeffinition]). The binders can be starches or resins. The starches can
increase the strength of the products when added to the slurry at levels of 0.5 to 1.5% based on
solids relative to fiber solids. [...]dry-strength cationic starch mainly functions by strengthening
the existing areas of contact between cellulosic fibers rather than by increasing the relative
bonded area between adjacent fibers[2]. The resins, which develop covalent crosslinked bonds
when cured at increased temperature during drying, offer better strength when the products
becomes wet because they retain more of the initial strength after wetting. An example of such
a resin is polyamidoamine-epichlorohydrin.
Some of the major hydrophobic agents used in moulded pulp applications can be classed as
sizing agents, lignin and waxes[2]. Alkylketene dimer (AKD) is likely to be the most practical
sizing agent to be added to the pulp slurry before forming the products. Waxes can be added
to the surface of the moulded products to reppel water. Lignin, being a main component of
wood is relatively cheap and has a generally hydrophobic nature. Since it has a potential for
contributing to bonding when heated, it is used as an additive to thermoformed or heat-cured
MPPs. It can increase the bonding strength of the fibers and thus can lead to an increase of
product strength.
Flocculants are used to improve the dewatering of wet formed slurries. Two classes are routinely
used in moulding processes, sulfate and copolymers of acrylamide. Sulfites create a porous mat
8
==PAGE:19==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
structure that drains well and which retains fine particles during vacuum application. The
polymers are used when the pH of the slurry is in the range of 7 to 8.5[2].
2.2.3
Impermeabilization
According to Kjellgren[20], when dried sheets are resaturated or when dried fibres are reslushed
and formed into a sheet again, less water is associated with the cellulose and there can be more
space between the fibres open to water flow. A consequence is that the permeability can in-
crease[22]. High fiber swelling leads to a high WRV-value (water retention value), and therefore
to high energy requirement during drying, but the high fiber swelling improves the conforma-
bility of sulfite fibers leading to a dense sheet[20]. This means that sulfite pulps, which show
higher swelling, are better suited for conforming to a mould and would increase the density
of the shell at the expense of dewatering which would require higher air pressures and higher
temperatures to remove the extra water. It is interesting to investigate this difference between
sulfite and sulfphate pulps but the alloted time for this study does not allow for an experiment
to be conducted in which the density and dewatering can be compared between the two. The
concept of using a highly beaten sulfite pulp in the current process to get a surface which has
a low density of pores and a reduced pore size appears to be testable in the setup. Papers in
use today that showcase those properties are called glassine or greaseproof papers.
’Glassine is manufactured in a similar way (to paper), but the paper from the machine (of-
ten referred to as body paper) is subsequently subjected to very heavy supercalendering in
the presence of a high percentage of moisture.[...]Greaseproof is made in both bleached and
unbleached grades of pulp and is almost invariably manufactured from a furnish of sulphite
softwood pulp[11].
The reason highly refined chemical pulp fibers can resist grease can be attributed not only to
the high density of such paper layers but also to the extensive and well-organized hydrogen
bonding that occurs between cellulosic surfaces dried while remaining in contact. The idea is
that the relatively high energy of a hydrogen bond, in comparison to the dispersion component
of van der Waals forces, means that cellulosic and related polysaccharide barrier layers can be
more effective in comparison to such plastics as polyethylene, which are bound together only
by the weaker class of forces.[...] The high energy requirement has been noted as a primary
concern associated with the preparation of glassine paper.The other thing that glassine product
manufacturing is known for is very long Fourdrinier dewatering zones, associated with the rel-
atively slow rates of drainage. The slow drainage can only partly be compensated by advances
9
==PAGE:20==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
in mechanical dewatering equipment[15].
Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) could lead to a superior structure of paper packaging or
self-binding all-cellulose construction materials with low porosity and low gas permeability.
Because of the same anionic character of charges on pulp and NFC, the electrostatic repulsion
prevents NFC integration in the network of pulp microfibers during drying. In addition, NFCs
can block some pores of the network and eventually the draining flow channels, resulting in a
reduced dewatering rate of the pulp/NFC slurry combined with a loss of NFCs[21]. Supattra
et. al. showed that the dewaterig capabilities of NFCs can be improved by modifying them
through ultrasonic-assisted esterification with lactic acid at different amplitudes and times. The
dewatering time for NFC in bagasse (pulp made from sugarcane leftovers) increased by 110%
compared to conventional bagasse but the modified NFC only increased the dewatering time
by 30%. A rise of 40% in ultimate tensile strength was measured comparing the conventional
bagasse with the modified NFC[21]. NFC is more expensive to produce than conventional size
fibrillated celullose due to the beating level or the chemical liquor used, requires more time and
use of chemicals and its uses will mainly be as an additive to the pulp recipe or as a coating layer
for paper to reduce water and water vapour transmission rates as well as oxigen transmission
rates[18].
2.3
Previous work
The activities related to manufacturing of paper bottles at DTU started in 2015 and a number
of projects, among which a PhD project, have contributed to the current state of development.
An original process has been developed and patented and a workbench has been designed and
constructed. The system before the author’s work is schematically shown in Figure 2.3
10
==PAGE:21==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 2.3: Previous system schematic
The previous physical setup can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Previous system physical construction
Following the diagram in Figure 2.3, a tank with a paper pulp suspension provides the
pulp. From the tank a peristaltic pump pumps the slurry into the mould, which is inside the
vacuum chamber. After the shell formed on the walls of the mould the pulp is flushed. After
flushing hot air under pressure is pumped through the same passage inside the mould to press
the shell and dry it. To showcase the process of moulding Figure 2.5 shows how the paper shell
is formed.
11
==PAGE:22==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 2.5: Moulding process of paper bottle
Looking at Figure 2.5, water with pulp (slurry) is injected into a mould with directional
holes. The mould being in a vacuum chamber allows the water to be sucked out and the pulp
to deposit on the walls like seen in the center of the figure. The water is then flushed. The
setup has the ability to rotate the mould as well to contribute towards the dewatering of the
formed paper shell. Hot air under pressure is released in the cavity to press and dry the shell
before ejection.
The setup has gone through a number of refinements, of which the latest was performed by the
author. The author’s previous work during the two special courses[17][16] addressed the au-
tomation of the process through the purchase and the physical setup of control instrumentation
for the system. The workbench can be seen in Figure 2.6. The work included the building of
a control panel that incorporates all electrical wiring which has been certified by an electrician
for use. The vacumm chamber has been upgraded from the polycarbonate/aluminum profiles
to a steel vacuum chamber. A desk was purchased for ease of working and back pannels for
instruments, pneumatic components fixing and cable handling.
12
==PAGE:23==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 2.6: Workbench status at the beginning of this study
The old mould, which is made by metal 3D printing, during testing was proven to have
clogged channels and the problem of no channels in the neck area[7]. The mould is made of
stainless steel and has directional channels from the inner surface towards the outside. The
channels are conical with the larger diameter pointing to the outside for better water evacuation.
The conical shape of the channels poses the problem of having equally spaced holes on a free
form surface see Figure 2.7.
13
==PAGE:24==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 2.7: CAD model of additive manufactured mould with no holes on the neck area
The mould needs to be permeable to allow the water and air from inside the mould to escape
through the aid of vacuum and pressurized air and not to create surface features on the bottle
shell after drying. There are two ways of providing the needed permeability of the mould.
One by using deterministic features of the mould like straight holes in a negative of the bottle
or by using non-deterministic ones represented by a material with interconnected tortuosity.
Saxena[7] gives an overview of the ways in which the moulds can be manufactured.
One
distinction about the processes is that the non-deterministic one would allow for the creation
of attachment points on the mould for closing the two halves, without areas that would close
the surface features. As an example the old mould has flanges attached to its sides, those
flanges due to the additive manufacturing technique, are closing the pathways for the water to
be drained from the shell see Figure 2.8.
14
==PAGE:25==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 2.8: Additive manufactured mould with no holes on the connecting clamping flange
The following are the areas in which the workbench can be improved:
• No automated regulating capabilities for pulp delivery and flushing since the controls
were not developed only the instrumentation was bought and the wiring was pulled.
• No automated motor control for mould rotation.
• No automated sequencing of processes.
• Mould with faults in the neck area and issues with cleaning and clogging.
• Complex and unstable closing mechanism of mould.
• No mixing in the pulp tank causing deposits to gather on the bottom due to gravity.
• Issues with clogging inside the rotating union and pulp valve.
• No safety shutdown sequence for all valves, motors etc.
The previous work did not finalize the automation leaving programming, optimization of
control instruments and mould development to be completed in the current study.
15
==PAGE:26==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
3
System design
The design methodology uses French’s model of conceptual design[12] in which a need is for-
mulated and and a solution is developed through conceptual design. The model can be see in
Figure 3.1. Since the work in this study is a continuation of previous atempts to develop an
automated solution, the initial need will be given. There is a need for containers or for the
purpose of this attempt, a bottle, that is biodegradable and compostable when discarded in a
recycling stream or by an unfortunate event in nature[7]. The problem is that current contain-
ers and bottles are mainly made out of non-biodegrable materials like fossil based polymers
which take a very long time to degrade. Since the best solution is to educate the population
but that takes at least one generation a faster solution needs to be implemented. Thus the
automation of a biodegradable bottle manufacturing process was undertaken.
Figure 3.1: French’s model of conceptual design [12]
To explain how the system should work the following diagram gives an overview Figure 3.2.
The paper pulp, to allow it to be moulded to a bottle shape, needs to be mixed with a fluid
the best being water as the fibers dissolve in it. The slurry needs to be injected inside a mould.
Inside the mould a shell can be formed which needs to be drained of excess water and then
dried. The shell needs to have a coating to allow for impermeabilization and to gain a diffusion
barrier against pressurized gasses and water vapours.
16
==PAGE:27==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
A list of subproblems was made in each chart section to break down the problems and give
an in depth overview of the things that need to be solved see Table 3.1.
Figure 3.2: Shell making flow chart
Pulp
Slurry
Injection
Shell formation
Flushing
Drying
Coating
Type of pulp
Additives
Concentration wt%
Heating
Agitation
Dosing
Rate of filling
Pressure
Piping
Vacuum
Rotation
Mould
closure
Mould
Rate of
flushing
Recirculation
Drying temperature
Drying time
Air pressure
Air ramp
Methods
Inside
Outside
Table 3.1: Physical problems break down structure
The descriptions of the subproblems:
• Type of pulp: virgin or recycled and the production method e.g. chemical pulp
• Additives: binders, hydrophobic substances and flocculants
• Concentration wt%: weight of pulp relative to weight of water in the slurry
• Heating: implementation of a heating element for slurry temperature control
• Agitation: implementation of a stirrer in the pulp tank
• Dosing: control of slurry amount to be pumped in during the process
• Rate of filling: flow control of the slurry during injection
• Pressure: ability to inject by built up pressure
• Piping: design of piping system and selection of fittings, hoses etc.
• Vacuum: improve vacuum levels from -0.4
• Rotation: implementation of rotation control for the motor
17
==PAGE:28==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
• Mould closure: improve existing mould closure
• Mould: new mould design and closing mechanism, manufacture and material selection,
surface characterization
• Rate of flushing: control of flow during flushing of the mould
• Recirculation: implementation of slurry recirculation after injection
• Drying temperature: finding the right drying temperature for shell water evaporation
• Drying time: finding the drying time for a bottle
• Air pressure: finding the air pressure needed to press the bottles and maximum process
capabilities
• Air ramp: determining the pressure built up time to avoid peeling of bottle neck
• Methods: research existing methods for coating paper substrates
• Inside: inner surface coating of bottles for impermeabilization and gas diffusion barriers
• Outside: outer surface coating applications for impermeabilization and physical protection
e.g. scratches
To connect all the processes in Figure 3.2 the automation of the process is crucial. To
that extend Table 3.2 shows what problems need to be solved regarding programming and
optimization. The top row shows problems and the rows below are subproblems. The columns
show different problems.
Control individual
instruments
Sequence
the process
Data gathering
Optimization
of parameters
Safety and
debugging
Transfer functions
State diagram
Set up real time monitoring
PID control
Error handling
Control loops
Timers
Write to file
Process times
Safety shutdown
Delays
Function building
Status checking
for debugging
Table 3.2: Automation problem break down structure
The descriptions of the subproblems:
18
==PAGE:29==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
• Transfer functions: change of representation from physical measure e.g. pressure [bar] to
voltage [V] by use of formulas called transfer functions
• Control loop: implementation of programming functions called loops e.g. while loop for
control of components
• State diagram: control feature that moves sequentially through states of the machine
• Timers: countdown functions for process timing
• Delays: wait functions that allow timing of operations e.g. A happens 5 seconds after B
• Set up real time monitoring: implementation of real time counters for data gathering
• Write to file: implementation of data writing to file based on wanted aquisition rates
• PID control: implementation of self regulating process controls proportional, derivative
and integral (PID)
• Process times: finding the right times for wait, execute, and implementing user inputs
for timing
• Function building: developing programming functions e.g.
temperature monitor and
control for air heater
• Error handling: building error recognition on the graphical user interface
• Safety shutdown: user operated or error based safety shutdown of control instruments
e.g. cut power to air heater, close valves
• Status checking for debugging: implementation of status bar for error handling but also
machine state value to ease debugging and direct the user to the root problem and code
location
19
==PAGE:30==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
4
Mechanical system
In the first part of the work improvements were made to the old moulding setup to allow for
automation testing. That included using the old mould mechanism for trial tests to optimize
waiting times and build up the control sequence.
4.1
Mechanical construction
4.1.1
Mould design
The old clamping mechanism of the mould was not stable due to it being an inverted pendulum
type. In Figure 4.1 it can be seen how the setup has one stable point in the center of the pin.
The old clamping mechanism worked by tightening the top screw which would press on top of
the mould. The frame would start to raise as the screw was tightened until the frame would
touch the pins at point A. The pins are on the round flange and the flange is not moving.
Looking at the sketch on the right of Figure 4.1 the frame can still rotate about point A,
provided the runout from mounting was not eliminated (there was no mechanism to prevent
runout besides visually adjusting it). During use, the pin at point A since it is aluminium, was
filed away by the stainless steel frame due to runout thus creating two stable points both off
axis. During one test the pendulum swung from the axis to one of the stable points off axis,
creating a momentum that destabilized the system and it crashed into the vacuum chamber
causing a dent.
Figure 4.1: Previous clamping mechanism of the mould. Point A shows the wear at the contact point
20
==PAGE:31==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Due to the accident a new mould clamping system was devised. It used a solid construction
of three stainless steel bars that could not move off axis. The same old flange was used holes
being drilled through for attaching the stainless steel rectangular bars. The new design is shown
in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Intermediary fixture for the additive manufactured mould. In gray color the new parts in red
color the old parts
The new fixture allowed for much better concentricity of rotation of the mould because it
had very little runout. It was also easier to insert the mould and tighten it, compared to the
old frame, since there was no inverted pendulum that needed to be held vertically with two
hands during mounting. The finished assembly is seen in Figure 4.3.
21
==PAGE:32==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 4.3: Intermediary fixture construction assembled
As the shortcomings of the old mould were discussed in subsection 2.3, in addition, the
mould was relatively small creating bottles of 90mL in volume which cannot be used as models
for scaling up the process. For those reasons a new mould was designed. To manufacture a
new mould a set of requirements needed to be met:
• Resistance to water and oxidation
• Usable internal volume of 250mL
• Pore sizes smaller than 300 µm[32]
• Manufacturable into the required mould shape
• Surface roughness low enough to allow for a smooth paper shell wall
• Able to withstand 10 bars of pressure during drying
• Able to be clamped without closing pores/stopping water evacuation
• High interconnected porosity > 50%
• Allows for cleaning of micro-pores
22
==PAGE:33==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
A material was found that was able to fulfill the requirements. It is a sintered austenitic AISI
316L stainless steel from the manufacturer called AMES[3]. The datasheet is shown in Fig-
ure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Mould material datasheet
The design must take into consideration material characteristics. It was decided that drilling
holes into the porous material would act as stress concentrators along with sharp edges. Smooth
curvatures were deemed a must to make sure the mould would not develop cracks during use
but also during manufacturing, in this case milling.
The first mould design can be seen in Figure 4.5. It featured two halves connected by a pin.
To ensure closure clamps would slide down the side flanges, the bottom would be secured by a
set screw and the top by the pin connection. The pin connection was deemed as a weak point
even if the connection to the main body would be strengthened by a more robust pin holder.
23
==PAGE:34==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 4.5: First mould design
Thus to improve on the way the mould would be attached to the flange that connects it to
the shaft, an alternative was devised in which only clamping with distributed pressure would
be used. The final version of the mould can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Final mould design
24
==PAGE:35==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The calculations regarding the chosen geometries for wall thickness and flanges can be seen
in Appendix B. The mould has four locating features to remove the degrees of freedom once
installed. On the bottom flange there is a step which helps with putting the two halves together
manually, and prevents them from sliding parallel with the plane of the other three flanges.
The three other flanges prevent movements in the parting line plane, showed with red on the
right hand side of Figure 4.6. Two degrees of freedom are left. One is for allowing the bottle
shell to be taken out of the mould so pulling the two halves from each other. The other will be
locked by the flange. To make sure that the two halves will not come apart due to the internal
pressure of the process a clamping solution was devised.
(a) Axial clamping mechanism
(b) Lateral flanges claping mechanism
Figure 4.7: Clamping mechanisms of the mould
Figure 4.7a shows how the mould is kept attached to the flange by the use of the pink swings
which have screwed to them the black polymer cylinders that distribute the pressure. It is a
fast way of connecting the mould to the flange and allows for quick attachment/detachment
actions. In Figure 4.7b the light blue rods distribute and provide the needed pressure to close
25
==PAGE:36==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
the mould against the fluid pressure inside (water and air, for clamping force calculations see
Appendix B).
To have a deterministic neck formation of the paper shell the mould has a feature that allows
the paper to form at a certain level in the mould. The feature can be seen in Figure 4.8 with
the flange connection having the negative mating part. The mould is shown in gray and the
flange in light turquoise. Here the tapering of the mould flanges is evident making it easy to
insert the mould into the flange. The yellow blocks under the pink swings do not touch the
mould but they are behind it, the section view creating an illusion. The blocks that hold the
mould are the black ones in Figure 4.7a.
Figure 4.8: Deterministic bottle neck start feature inside the mould and flange
During use the mould did not seal properly leaving gaps between the two halves. One reason
for the gaps was the tolerance between the two halves and the tolerance between the mould
and the hexagonal flange. That was fixed with the insertion of a paper seal which was laser
cut into the shape of the smaller mould half.
4.1.2
Mould manufacturing
Manufacturing process chain for the porous mould
The process chain used for manufacturing the mould can be seen in Appendix F.
The process chain was developed with help from Matthias Geiselhart and my supervisor Giu-
liano Bissacco.
26
==PAGE:37==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The manufacturing of the mould was a time taking and difficult process.
Due to time
pressures during the thesis, the material could not be characterized in terms of machinability
and chemical etching capabilities. The finished mould half looked like Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Mould half with flat flanges
The mould assembly can be seen in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Mould assembly
27
==PAGE:38==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The way the mould was used is the following: in Figure 4.10 the mould is already mounted
on the hexagonal flange which during use is attached to the shaft that provides the pulp slurry
and air. After a bottle is dry, one screw from the flange is untighntened from each half. That
allows the swings to pivot and remove the polymeric stops which are white. Then the mould
can be removed.
The main concern during manufacturing was about the smearing phenomenon during machin-
ing and the possibility of material fracture from chatter. If time allowed, a characterization
of the material with respect to cutting speed, axial cut depth, and feed rate needed to be
performed like Zhiqiang et. al. did in their study[23]. The project time did not allow for
such a characterization. The available porous material was only enough for four small moulds
each 250mL or three moulds with one being 330mL. Since the material is porous 50%, during
machining the teeth of the end mills experience discontinuous cutting which cause vibrations.
The vibrations are travelling through the material depending on the rotational velocity of the
end mill. Those vibrations might cause the material to fracture away from the cutting edge of
the end mill tooth. During machining that phenomenon was experienced when chamfering one
edge of the mould. As seen in Figure 4.11 the edge is broken in a non predictable way exposing
the rough structure of the porous material below. .
Figure 4.11: Mould half with damaged flange
The other side of the same piece was not affected which suggests that the material charac-
teristics are not isotropic due to the inhomogeneous material. Kuo et. al.[27] in their patent
recommend using a resin to fill in the gaps of the machined surface, machine, then burn or
28
==PAGE:39==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
chemically remove the resin to open the pores. There was not enough time to investigate if
resin could be used to stop the smearing. The mould material is made through isostatic press-
ing of stainless steel granules. If the pressure distribution is not homogeneous the material
will develop non-homogeneous properties as well. If the yield strength and the stiffness are
orthotropic, depending on the pressing direction, the material will chip differently depending
on the machining direction with respect to the pressing direction. To better the surface char-
acteristics but also the machining characteristics a conversation with the supplier, about the
pressing direction, needs to be had so the orthotropic material characteristics can be allined
with the machining.
Considering smearing of the surface, it was much more apparent and it closed the surface almost
completely on the sides of the internal cavity. The flat portions of the flanges were milled with
a flat bottom end mill which did not smear nearly as much as the ball end mill as it is shown
in Figure 4.12.
(a) Smearing phenomenon on the cavity of the mould vs the
flange
(b) Smearing phenomenon on the cavity of the mould vs the
flange higher magnification
Figure 4.12: Smearing of material during machining
Figure 4.12b in the lower part of the image shows how smooth and reflective the surface is
compared to the top which is much more porous. Even when the mould cavity was filled with
water the drainage was very slow for droplets of water compared to the same droplets on the
flange. The same smearing phenomenon was observed on the outside of the mould thus making
it almost impermeable.
When the mould was finished it was discovered that inside the vacuum chamber the rising water
level caused the mould to be submerged. To increase the volume of water the vacuum chamber
can hold before covering the mould’s bottom flange an extension to the shaft was made. It is
a flange that connects the shaft to the flange that keeps the mould in place during operation.
The increase in the vertical distance allows for more water to be contained during the filling as
29
==PAGE:40==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
seen in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Height difference due to flange addition
The volume of water initially held in the vacuum chamber before the level was beyond the
neck of the bottle was 4.5L, with the addition of the extension flange that was increased to 9L.
The extension flange has a conical opening on the bottom side to remove the sharp transition
between the shaft and the mould flange, which was acting as an attachment point for fibers in
the slurry during injection.
Mould etching
Due to almost no drainage of the water through the mould the pores needed to be opened
again. Chemical etching was used to that purpose. For the first trial one the mould halves
was submerged into an iron chloride solution (20 wt% FeCl3) for a duration of one hour. The
solution did not create any visible improvement of the surface.
Then to the iron chloride
solution hidrochloric acid (HNO3) was added 5 wt%. The rate of etching was faster with more
gas bubbles being apparent during the process.
The mould was left in the solution for 45
minutes then tested for moulding. The moulding was effective. The total time for etching was
105 minutes and that was sufficient. The etching was relatively uniform but in some areas the
pores became bigger as multiple pores coalesced to form larger openings on the surface. These
pores did ultimately contribute to increased surface roughness and stiction when demoulding.
30
==PAGE:41==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
(a) Mould half before etching
(b) Mould half after etching
Figure 4.14: Mould half before and after etching
The surface roughness was determined by using a laser microscope and then handling the
images in SPIP, a microscopy program. Figure 4.14 shows the mould before and after etching.
The flat mould half was investigated in different areas as seen in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Measurement locations on the porous mould
31
==PAGE:42==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The flanges are easily accessible for the microscope with the neck being hard to access.
The area between the flanges (cylindrical) could not be characterized as the microscope cannot
access a cavity which is so deep. The only area that could be accessed was the one called
’Cavity right side’ in Figure 4.15. The roughness and porosity measurements can be seen in
Table 4.1.
Location
Rz [µm]
Ra [µm]
Porosity [% area]
Mean pore diameter [µm]
Largest pore size [µm]
Left flange
417,65
24,02
84
5,4
2336
Right flange
390,72
44,46
39
6,4
1810
Cavity right side
381,8
41,42
54
6
729
Top neck
163,57
14,07
46
5,4
847
Middle neck
152,7
13,13
42
5,2
512
Lower neck
122,95
11,49
46
5
704
Table 4.1: Surface characteristics of the negative side of the mould
The neck of the negative half, depicted in Figure 4.15, was hand polished with a 1200 grit
stone to see the effect on the asperities and roughness. The surface characterization shows
that there are differences between the flanges and the neck. There are two influences on the
roughness variance. One is the polishing aforementioned, and the other is the type of end
mill used. The flat end mill used on the flat flanges did not smear the surface as much as
the ball end mill, which was used on the neck and the rest of the cavity. This difference in
the smearing caused the etching to remove more material from areas with less smearing thus
creating rougher surfaces. Clearly the surfaces of the neck, which were polished, show reduced
Rz and Ra values. The etching created very large pores evident in the largest pore size values
and by the fact that they can be seen with the naked eye. The largest pores are on the flanges
where smearing happened the least. The full report of the roughness and porosity analysis can
be seen in Appendix L.
4.1.3
Transparent mould setup
To visualize the filling and see the process of moulding a transparent mould was made using
a PET bottle. The PET bottle had holes punched through by hand using an old end mill
of 0.3mm in diameter. For mounting it on the existing shaft a 3D printed adaptor with two
threads was made. One thread mates with the existing shaft and the other with the PET bottle
like in Figure 4.16.
32
==PAGE:43==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 4.16: Transparent mould setup in CAD
The 3D printed connection has a tapering cross section to allow the pulp to enter the bottle
without getting caught on the transition area. The connection has an ergonomic flange for ease
of mounting. The results from the transparent mould testing are seen in subsection 7.2
4.1.4
Water, air and vacuum system
The pulp delivery system was upgraded with a recirculation capability. To that extent a new
pneumatic water valve and an air solenoid valve were purchased. The new diagram of the system
is in Figure 4.17. The improved system can vent the accumulated pressure during filling, then
empty the mould cavity of the slurry. If the venting was not done, all the pressure accumulated
during injection and dosing would need to be vented by the pump. The accumulated pressure
is provided by the expansion vessel which during use has an effective capacity of 11 liters. To
pump all that volume backwards with the pump, considering the maximum flow of 4.2L/min, it
33
==PAGE:44==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
would take almost three minutes which is too much for the cycle time. The recirculation system
vents the accumulated pressure fast (5 seconds) and can be used, as the name suggests, for
recirculating the slurry before injection to flush sediments deposited during periods of inactivity.
The manual drain valve, seen in Figure 4.17 under the vacuum chamber, needs to be replaced
with a solenoid valve to have the full process automated.
Figure 4.17: Water, vacuum and air diagram of the system
There is a need for a large working area solenoid valve that would not be clogged by residual
cellulose fibers in the drained water during testing.
The main change was brought during testing when it was discovered that the diaphragm valve
previously used as the regulating valve for pulp flow was clogging severely during use. In Fig-
ure 4.17 it is situated on the water line (blue) after the expansion vessel and the electromagnetic
flow meter. The differences between the working principles are seen in Figure 4.18.
34
==PAGE:45==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
(a) Diaphragm valve working diagram and clogging phenomenon
(b) Angle seat valve working diagram
Figure 4.18: Valve working principles diagram
In Figure 4.18a the diaphragm valve working principle is illustrated. The pipe channel has
a sudden change of direction upwards toward the diaphragm and the hydraulic area is reduced
causing the fibers (pink) to flocculate and clog. The solution was provided by Burkert, the
initial supplier, by supplying a different kind of valve. In Figure 4.18b the angle seat valve
working principle is illustrated. This sort of valve has a bigger area when open and it does not
change the direction of the fluid flow meaning clogging did not happen anymore. The angle seat
valve is pneumatically operated and it provides more closing force than the eletromechanical
linear actuator diaphragm valve[28], meaning that the cellulose fibers can be effectively sheared
by the sharp seat edge compared to the soft EPDM diaphragm.
After doing trials with the old mould and discovering that the vacuum chamber was only
capable of holding a vacuum level of -0.45bars a silicone sealant was used to overcome the
existing rotating seal see Figure 4.19. It improved the vacuum performance from -0.45 bar to
-0.75 bar which is a considerable increase. That of course meant the the shaft could not be
rotating anymore but that was proved to be alright.
35
==PAGE:46==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 4.19: Silicone sealant on the existing rotating seal for vacuum improvement
Air funnel integration
During testing of the old mould, see section 7, it was discovered that when the water is flushed
out it can, depending on the strength of the wall layer, remove the neck area of the bottle along
with it. On top of that, it was discovered that when the air rushes in, due to the geometry, it
can peel off the wet neck. The wet neck being pushed inside the bottle making it impinge on
the inside walls creating a very rough surface inside. To counter that phenomenon two ideas
were suggested. One was an air funnel that wdirected the air away from the neck of the bottle
like seen in Figure 4.20a. This idea implied one extra component to be made unless the flange
would incorporate it.
36
==PAGE:47==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
(a) Collar adaptor for directional flow of air away from the
bottle neck, shown in red
(b) Brass pipe inside the mould cavity, directing air away from
the bottle neck
Figure 4.20: Neck irregularities
The other idea was to prologue the air pipe of the system until it reaches inside the mould
cavity like in Figure 4.20b. The pipe directs the air to the bottom of the mould causing local
holes to be created due to air inertia. An air dispersion device like a silencer used in pneumatic
cylinders is recommended. The pipe needs to be as thin as possible to allow the pulp slurry to
enter and exit the mould.
Once the new mould was tested it was apparent that those phenomena do not happen anymore
as the porous mould provides enough suction force on the neck to keep it from being flushed
or blown in by the air.
4.2
Machine operation and maintenance
The machine operation is split in two. One part contains the physical connections and buttons
and the other contains the GUI of the software. The physical operation is the following:
1. Connect the air to the machine and open the manual valve located on the hose close to
the connection.
2. Prepare the pulp mixture and add it to the mixing tank.
3. Start the tank mixer by using the manual air valve on the workbench (vertical line).
4. Deliver air pressure to the pulp valve by opening the manual air valve on the workbench
(horizontal line).
37
==PAGE:48==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
5. Connect the machine to power by using the plug on the underside of the electrical panel.
6. Make sure the fuses are in the down position inside the electrical cabinet.
7. Turn on the switch located on the left side of the electrical panel.
8. Turn on the fuses inside the electrical panel.
9. Set the position of the vacuum switch on the electrical cabinet to on.
10. Set the position of the air heater switch on the electrical cabinet to on.
11. Insert the mould into the vacuum chamber and tighten the screws keeping the assembly
closed.
12. Close the lid of the vacuum chamber.
13. Shut off the manual valve for the drain hose coming out of the vacuum chamber.
14. Turn the pump frequency drive to the FWD rotating position.
To use the GUI the user can refer to Figure 4.21. On the left hand side pressures are displayed
and the temperature of the air heater. Next to them are LEDs that show what components
are on/actuated and if some measurands are at wanted levels or not. For example the LED
Vacuum OK only lights up when the vacuum level has reached the wanted level. In the central
area the levels for inputs and outputs can be set. The graph on the right ’Flow vs setpoint’
shows the flow of pulp compared to the setpoint. The gray box on the top right called ’status’
shows which loop in the state machine has run or if an error occured. The ’PID gains’ under
the ’Flow vs setpoint’ graph, are the inputs to the PID control and the values they should
have are written as guides on the right: 0.3; 0.02; 0.0. Under those the ’Output range’ shows
the limit levels of the pulp valve opening where 10 corresponds to 100% opening and 0 to 0%
opening. Normal levels being 10 and 0.15 due to considerations talked about in subsection 7.3.
38
==PAGE:49==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 4.21: GUI of machine inside Labview
To the right of that there is the ’Flow setpoint [L/min]’ where the wanted pulp slurry flow
can be set and to the right of that the wanted level of slurry to be delivered to the mould can be
inputted inside ’Desired pulp volume [L]’. Under those is the box called ’Residual extra volume
to pump’ this includes the extra volume needed to fill up the pipes leading up to the mould,
adding the 0.54 shown and the 0.157 leads to an extra volume of 0.7 that can be inputted (the
reasoning can be found in subsection 7.3. On the far bottom right the ’Pulp valve position’
indicator will show the position of the valve in % opening thus the user can see in real time
the actuation of the valve. On the bottom right the ’stopProgramBtn’ button serves as a stop
program buttom that shuts off the process in a secure manner. The white boxes in the central
top to bottom area are self explanatory except for the following. ’Heater voltage’ is the control
voltage to the air heater 0V no power 10V full power and so it dictates how fast the heater
heats up.
’Pump in voltage’ uses 5-10V as inputs to no pumping and full speed pumping
respectively. ’Pump out voltage’ uses 5-0V as inputs to no pumping and full speed backwards
pumping respectivelly. Both having a linear relationship from voltage to frequency of the pump
motor. ’POutTime’ is the time the pulp valve will stay open for pumping out the slurry from
the mould cavity. The ’Wanted air pressure’ sets the maximum pressure of the pressurized
air that will enter the mould cavity. The ’Inflection point[s]’ and ’Air ramp duration [s]’ are
connected. The air ramp duration is the duration in which the air pressure regulator will open
39
==PAGE:50==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
to the set wanted air pressure following a linear relationship from 0 to set amount of bars.
The inflection point is a duration, between 0 and the air ramp duration, which dictates the
inversion of the signal meaning that the pressure regulator will start to close back to 0 bars. As
an example, if the wanted air pressure is set to 5 bars, the inflection point to 9 seconds and the
air ramp duration to 10 seconds, the air will slowly start to rise in pressure from 0 bars up to 5
bars in a linear fashion in 9 seconds, then will go down to 0 bars in one second (the difference
between 10 and 9). The ’Drying time [s]’ is the input setting the air drying time of the bottle
shell. ’Time to drying [s]’ is a simple stopwatch counting down from the set drying time to 0
seconds. The ’Volume pumped [L]’ shows the amount of slurry that was pumped inside the
cavity (this contains the extra residual volume mentioned earlier). The long white bar under
the inputs is an input for the directory where the user wants to save all the measured data,
the wanted extension can be added to the file name e.g. csv, txt. The gray box in the bottom
central area called ’error out’ is the error status code where the user can see the error messages
that come in if an error runs. After all the inputs have been set the program can be run and
the machine will start the process.
Maintenance
The main concern during use is the clogging of the system with pulp. If the consistency of
the pulp slurry ever becomes bigger than 0.3% that is dry weight of pulp relative to the water
amount, there is risk of clogging. The main clogging point is the rotating union under the
shaft. The rotating union has a spring in its construction that acts as depositing points for
paper pulp. In the advent of clogging the connection point between the flow sensor and the
union must be taken off. Then the union can be cleared of deposited pulp. If the clogging
is severe then the flow meter passage way must be checked as well since the effective area is
smaller than the hose size and can thus cause clogging. The pulp valve might get clogged as
well if the union becomes agglomerated with pulp deposits. The screw clamps can be removed
from both ends of the pulp valve and its passage way can be checked and cleared by blowing air
with the air pistol. Before doing maintenance make sure the pulp valve is in the open position
and that the power is off.
The inside of the vacuum chamber needs to be cleaned of pulp remnants after testing so that
the drain line will not clog when opening the valve to drain. If the line gets clogged, pressurized
air from the air pistol can be inserted through the drain valve to push the deposits and clear
the clogging.
If air can be heard hissing around air fittings, they should be taken down, Teflon tape applied
40
==PAGE:51==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
on the threaded parts and they should be re-fitted with no air leakage.
The porous mould needs to be cleaned with the selected solution and compressed air pushed
through the pores from the outside towards the inside using the air pistol.
5
Control system
5.1
Controls
The control work is a continuation of the system development done by the author in two pre-
vious works, which were special courses inside DTU[17][16]. All previous developments used
National Instruments (NI) instrumentation and the software used for controlling is Labview[24].
Since the last development of the work[16], the overall structure of control has been redesigned.
In this particular study the controls refer to data gathering and graphing as well as instrumen-
tation control so the term is being used in a broader sense.
The main objective of the control system is to have a process which is fully adjustable and
includes data gathering of all measurands. To achieve proper dosing of the pulp some compo-
nents have been added, the details are seen in subsection 5.2. The addition of the flow meter
and the recirculation valve, but also of the new NI chassis, brought changes to the wiring of
components. The wiring diagram for the temperature and voltage inputs as well as the voltage
outputs are shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Wiring control diagram
41
==PAGE:52==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Five NI modules are used in the machine control. Those are two 9263 voltage outputs, one
9201 voltage inputs, one 9482 relay module and one 9211 thermocouple module for temperature
inputs.
The relay diagram and the changes from the old setup are shown in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Relay control diagram
5.2
Instrumentation
To have feedback on the amount of pulp solution being pumped a flow sensor was acquired.
A new chassis and voltage modules were bought as well. Since the old pulp valve, which is a
electromotive valve i.e. driven by a linear actuator, was constantly clogging due to the internal
geometry see subsection 4.1, Burkert, the supplier of the valve supplied a new valve with a
different internal geometry and closing mechanism. During testing the air pressure regulator
along with the air flow meter were damaged. The flow meter was destroyed and the pressure
regulator did not close properly again an would not open to full air pressure values. A new air
pressure regulator was purchased. The new instruments were:
Electromagnetic flow sensor: Picomag DMA25-1009/0 with a G1 BSPP thread connection
PLC frame: NI cDAQ-9178
Voltage module: NI-9263 analog voltage output
42
==PAGE:53==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Electropneumatic valve: Burkert type 2300 DN20 + Burkert 8692 process regulator Elec-
tropneumatic actuator: SMC ITVX2030-31F3N
5.3
Labview
Overview
The best way to illustrate the functionality of the program is by showing the state diagram
Figure 5.3. The full description of the state diagram with its respective loops and the producer
consumer functionality is in Appendix I.
Figure 5.3: State diagram
Following the arrows in the diagram shows a logical path with the states constantly being
switched either sequentially or switching from the idle state to the state dictated by the events
i.e. orange arrows. As explained in the previous work[16] the programming is done on the basis
of a producer consumer loop[29] in which the consumer dequeues the events that happened
43
==PAGE:54==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
inside the event handler. The advantage of using a queue compared to a notification is that
they are actually ’queued’ meaning that in the order they happen the consumer takes the next
one in as soon as the last one was computed. For notifications that is not possible and all
intermediary ones are effectively lost[10].
In Figure 5.4 the process cycle time is shown. The time needed for the pumping in is based
on the wanted amount of slurry and the wanted flow thus it can vary significantly. The full
cycle time just over 11 minutes due to the initial waiting time for the heater. For the next run,
assuming the heater is at temperature, the time will be eight minutes. For the initial run the
handling is disregarded but if it is added then the cycle time would become 15 minutes.
Figure 5.4: Process cycle time
Next, the individual loops will be described. The previous work [16] described the function-
ality of the Temperature, Vacuum and Air pressure loop. Since, more functionality has been
added i.e. the ability to control the flow of pulp slurry, the monitoring of slurry pressure, motor
spin for the mould, drying timer and the ability to control the flushing of the mould through
the mould motor control.
Pulp pressure reading
In this loop Figure 5.5, the reading of pulp pressure is taken from the pulp pressure sensor on
the physical connection and then a transfer function is used with a slope of 3.23 and an intercept
of -4.19. This is being displayed on a graph continuously. If the user wants to inject the slurry
under pressure then pressure can be built up to the required level, when that happens the
44
==PAGE:55==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
’Pulp pressure OK’ LED lights up which will be an event in the event handler causing the pulp
valve to open and deliver the slurry. If the user wants to add motor spin during the injection,
the motor will start spinning a few seconds before the wanted pressure is reached so that full
rotational speed is reached. If the user does not want rotation or pressure build up they can
set the pressure level close to 0 and give the motor a 0 RPM value. The pressure is still being
monitored and when the LED, that shows if the reverse pumping has started, ’Pumping reverse’
lights up the pulp valve will open again for flushing. The third case structure makes sure that
the flushing starts only if all residual pressure has been released through the recirculation valve.
Figure 5.5: Pulp pressure reading loop
Mould motor control
In this loop Figure 5.6, a signal is being sent to the motor controller with the wanted RPM
coming from the user interface through the control called ’Motor RPM 3000 max’. Since the
input to the motor is a 0-10V the RPM value has to be divided with 300. The loop contains an
LED that will show that the motor is rotating. As for future work a sensor must be mounted
which detects motor rotation and so through the use of a case structure the LED showing motor
rotation would be true.
45
==PAGE:56==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 5.6: Mould motor control loop
Flow metering
This loop has two functions, Figure 5.7. One is the real time flow display and the other is
the calculation of pumped volume inside the cavity. The signal coming from the flow sensor
is changed through a transfer function which has a slope of 0.08 and an intercept of -2. To
calculate the volume pumped through an acquisition rate of 200ms is used, that makes sure
that the display update on the graph is smooth when the program is run. Since the volume
pumped is displayed in liters and the acquisition rate is 200ms that means that every minute
300 measurements are taken so if the flow is divided up in 300 discrete parts and added up with
each iteration then the volume can be determined. The addition is being made by using a shift
register with an initial value of 0, then with each iteration the volume pumped is added to the
last value. The ’ResidVol’ control is a constant that was determined during experimentation
and is explained in subsection 7.3 but it also contains the extra amount needed to fill the
connection between the mould and the pulp valve.
Figure 5.7: Flow metering loop
When the required volume is pumped the ’Volume pumped’ LED lights up starting other
processes through the event handler. The same LED stops the loop from taking more measure-
ments since the volume has been pumped.
46
==PAGE:57==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Flow control
The flow control loop Figure 5.8, controls the pulp valve by the use of a PID VI block. The
details of the experiments for the PID parameter determination can be seen in subsection 7.3.
The setpoint for the flow is user defined then the PID VI will effectively try to adjust the flow
of the slurry by closing or opening the valve the right amount at the right time. To display
the data in a more clear manner a filter is used which takes the median of 25 data points
and displays only one. The input to the valve is set in the range of the PID output and it is
displayed as well with the help of the indicator called ’Valve position’. The value is multiplied
with 10 since the input is a 0-10V connection and so the valve is showed in percentage opening.
When the required volume is pumped the loop stops and the valve closes.
Figure 5.8: Flow control loop
Pulp flushing control
In this loop Figure 5.9 the reopening of the valve is controlled effectively regulating the flush-
ing of the cavity and the shaft connection up until the pulp valve. Two parameters can be
controlled, the opening time of the valve and the speed of the pulp pump motor, these two
defining the pumping velocity and the volume pumped. It was determined during trials that
the volume of the connections is 540mL and that a fitting constant of 150mL gives closer values
to the experiments see subsection 7.3. When the timer elapses and the ’Pulp flushed’ LED
turns on the event handler moves on to the other states through the state machine.
47
==PAGE:58==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 5.9: Pulp flushing control loop
Air pressure control
Due to an accident during testing the old electropneumatic pressure regulator was damaged.
Boiling water managed to come up the air hose from the pulp line through the heater and inside
the regulator. A new regulator was purchased and tested to determine the transfer function.
The new transfer function has a slope of 2.3763 and an intercept of -2.4485 for the voltage
output of the device. For the input the slope is 3.1978 with an intercept of 0.0319. The new
values were added to the air loop Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Air pressure control loop
Drying time loop
The role of the loop in Figure 5.11 is to have a control for the drying time i.e. the time between
the start of the air being released in the cavity and the stopping of the machine. The flat
sequence on the top part has a wait function that incorporates the closing time of the pulp
valve, so no air travels backwards toward the pulp tank. The while loop on the bottom is a
simple timer from which, with each iteration, one second is subtracted. It has only a visual
purpose as it is seen on the GUI for the user. When the timer ends the ’Drying done’ LED
lights up which causes the shutdown sequence in the state diagram effectively shutting off all
processes previously started.
48
==PAGE:59==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 5.11: Drying time loop
Data gathering
The VI in Figure 5.12 takes all the measurands and a control setpoint and writes them to a
text file which can be formated to any conventional format .txt or .csv etc. depending on the
need.
Figure 5.12: Write to file diagram
The VI’s block diagram in Figure 5.13 contains a Write delimited spreadsheet VI which uses
a matrix of inputs as column headlines, then all the data is transformed into strings and fed as
an array into the respective columns aforenamed. Two time stamps are taken, one being the
absolute time, to denote the time of day in which the measurements are taken, which brings
transparency and the ability to back track the measurements for analysis later on. The other
is the relative time from the start of the program so that the process can be tracked using this
time frame which is more practical when debugging or doing parameter optimization. When
run the VI asks for a location to save the file to, if kept the same the program will simply
49
==PAGE:60==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
append the new measurements to the old ones by using new headlines at the end of the old
measurements and adding all the new ones downwards.
Figure 5.13: Write to file VI block diagram
The full description of the state diagram with its respective loops and the producer consumer
functionality is in Appendix I.
Graphical User Interface (GUI)
The GUI is the way the user can input all the required parameters for the process control. It
can be seen in Figure 4.21 and its description was already done in subsection 4.2. The full
block diagram for the entire Labview program is in Appendix A.
50
==PAGE:61==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
6
Pulp characterization
Two companies have been kind enough to send two types of pulp for testing. One is a pulp
called SCA Pure 80 ECF a bleached softwood kraft pulp from the company SCA and the other
is called Robur Flash UKP kraft pulp from the company called Rottneros. The other ones
are recycled fibers from two old newspapers (ONP) BT and Teknik and fibers from uncoated
paper trays. The paper trays are made out of sugar cane fibers. The fibers were characterized
with respect to their lengths, diameters and the distribution of diameters and length in the
population (number of measured samples). The measuring was done on an optical microscope
and the measurements were taken with the measuring tool of the software called DpxViewPro
1.14.8 after calibrating it.
The measurements on the individual fibers were done at three
locations along the length to find the average diameter like in Figure 6.1a and along the length
of the fiber like in Figure 6.1b.
(a) Diameter measurements on paper fiber measured in µm
(b) Length measurement of fiber measured in µm
Figure 6.1: Measuring method of paper fibers
The standard deviation of the measurements for six repeated measurements of the same
length is 4.66 µm for the length and 1.13 µm for the diameter. When preparing the pulp for
injection it has to be fibrated and three methods were used. An amount of pulp was chosen,
the same in each case, and mixed in water in three ways: by hand, by a paint mixer using a
hand drill and by a food blender with sharp blades. The influence of the mixer and the blender
on the fiber lengths were looked at. Table 6.1 shows the comparison with the datasheets and
the three mixing operations. Twenty fibers were measured from each type of pulp and mixing
method. It is apparent that the average length value is decreasing with more aggressive mixing
when comparing hand broken pulp with blended one. Some of the fibers are cut and thus their
51
==PAGE:62==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
length decreases. The diameter decrease is not associated with the mixing.
[HTML]ECF4FF Pulp type
Processing
[HTML]ECF4FFAverage diameter [m]
[HTML]ECF4FFAverage length [m]
SCA Pure 80 ECF
Datasheet as delivered
-
2000
Rottneros Robur Flash UKP
Datasheet as delivered
25,66
2080
SCA Pure 80 ECF
Hand broken
30,64 ± 1,13
2253,48 ± 4,66
Rottneros Robur Flash UKP
Hand broken
31, 36 ± 1,13
2141,84 ± 4,66
SCA Pure 80 ECF
Mixer
27,15 ± 1,13
2092,98 ± 4,66
Rottneros Robur Flash UKP
Mixer
29,81 ± 1,13
1938,33 ± 4,66
SCA Pure 80 ECF
Blender
26,86 ± 1,13
1910,12 ± 4,66
Rottneros Robur Flash UKP
Blender
26,39 ± 1,13
1724,43 ± 4,66
BT ONP
Mixer
38,97 ± 1,13
2381,1 ± 4,66
Paper Tray
Mixer
22,68 ± 1,13
1199,3 ± 4,66
Teknik ONP
Mixer
32,01 ± 1,13
1771,2 ± 4,66
Table 6.1: Measurements of average diameters and lengths of several types of pulp and three types of mixing
In Appendix D all measurements along with the histograms can be seen. For the last three
types of pulp coming from recycled pulp only mixing was used as processing as it offered the
best fibration. It was discovered that hot water offered much better fibration of pulp than water
at the source temperature from the tap. For that reason all tests further on were performed
with pulp that was mixed with hot water. After the water cooled down, for example 24 hours
later, the pulp was still in solution without flocs forming again.
52
==PAGE:63==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
7
Experimentation
7.1
Moulding findings due to testing using 3D metal printed old
mould
To test the capabilities of the new automated system a DOE was devised that allowed for inputs
to be changed and outputs to be visually analyzed. The inputs were the voltage used in the
pumping in (which is proportional to the rotation velocity of the pulp pump) and the injection
time. The results can be seen in Figure 7.1. The top right values were not tested because the
mould would be completely full with pulp.
Figure 7.1: DOE Injection time vs voltage
The best result was seen by using 10V (maximum pulp velocity which equates to 4L/min see
Appendix G) and 55 seconds for injection. The rest of the parameters can be seen in Table 7.1.
Air temperature [°C]
Air pressure [bar]
Air ramp duration [s]
Vacuum level [bar]
Pump out voltage [V]
Pump out duration [s]
Mould rotation
200
5
20
-0.5
0.1
15
Off
Table 7.1: DOE non variable inputs
53
==PAGE:64==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
After testing it was apparent that the pulp distribution was uneven due to the clogged holes
of the mould. To counteract that a DOE was devised with rotation as another input parameter.
All the results can be seen in Appendix H. The best result is seen in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: DOE RPM best results
The distribution was more uniform than before but the bottom of the bottle did not form
as thin as it should. A vortex effect was seen inside with tapering walls. At higher RPMs the
effect was removed but the adverse effect could happen where the bottom becomes too thin,
see Figure H.2 last two rows.
When experimenting with the old mould, which has irregularities around the neck area i.e. that
the holes in the transition region are missing due to the metal 3D printing process see Figure 2.7,
it was discovered that the neck of the bottle was affected by three different occurrences. First,
when the water flowed in it went in through the opening of the bottle which is the beginning
of the neck, the increased velocity of slurry made it difficult for the particles in the neck to
adhere and deposit. Second, when the bottle was flushed the flow increased in velocity due to
the decrease in diameter, the increased velocity of flow, similar with the inflow, peeled off the
formed layer if the velocity wass too high see Figure 7.3a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.3: Neck irregularities
54
==PAGE:65==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Third, when the air was being released into the mould it peeled off the formed neck due to
the geometry of the mould. The reason for that can be seen in Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: Bottle neck inside mould. Air impinging on the wet neck shown by red arrow taking it off the
wall of the mould and depositing it on the bottom of the bottle shell
When the air comes through the flange it encounters the bottle (red arrow meets dark yellow
bottle neck) and will detach the neck from the walls due to it being still wet. Depending on
the velocity of the flow entering the mould the neck can be ruptured and propelled inside the
bottle. In Figure 7.3b the neck is seen inside of the bottle, attached to the bottom since it was
impinging while still wet and so the fibers intertwined and attached to each other during drying.
7.2
Transparent mould testing
After the transparent mould was devised, certain experiments were performed to understand
the behaviour of the process with a clear view inside the mould.
Filling
During the filling of the bottle the transparent mould showed the flow of the slurry very clearly.
Turbulence was observed due to the neck diameter being smaller than the diameter of the
cavity. The velocity gradient in the flow causes internal friction and the water follows a circular
pattern from the axis Z down the walls and up the axis again see Figure 7.5. The neck acts like
a diffuser with a big enough difference in diameters for flow separation to happen. The angle
between the axis of the bottle and the tangent line of the curved bottom part is 35°, the angle
needed for flow separation is 7°[6]. This behaviour is not affecting the production in a negative
55
==PAGE:66==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
way because the flow inside the bottle is relatively low, with a maximum of 4 L/min. That
means that the level of the fluid is rising slowly inside the cavity allowing for pulp deposition.
The ratio of the neck opening to the inner big cavity is 2.4 thus the flow velocity slows down
from the neck to the walls with that ratio. Depending on the control voltage of the pump the
velocity of the slurry on the neck ranges from 25 mm/s to 160 mm/s. See Appendix B for the
full velocity calculations of the fluid inside the bottle.
Figure 7.5: Flow turbulences. Blue arrows velocity profile, red arrows separated flow due to the diffuser
nature of the neck
Deposition and packing
During filling there will be deposition of pulp fibers starting with the neck area. The fibers
are puled towards the walls, as the vacuum makes the slurry flow through, and in the case of
the transparent mould a fraction are ejected through the holes (the holes are too big because
they were punched by hand). An effective mould would have the pores small enough not to let
the fibers pass through them and preferably not cause visible surface features or features that
can prevent coating. After the mould is emptied the trapped fibers can be seen in Figure 7.6.
Watching the figure it is easier to imagine how if the holes become closer together and small
enough not to let the fibers come out, the fiber layer begins to coalesce and form a uniform
structure.
56
==PAGE:67==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.6: Pulp deposition on the transparent mould
Emptying
To test if the air can be pumped inside the bottle before it is flushed by the peristaltic pump
(see Figure 4.17), the sequence was changed so as soon as the pulp valve is opened for flushing,
the air would be slowly pumped into the mould. It was observed though videos that the air
pressure presses the water, causing some of it to escape through the mould walls, but if a filled
mould is assumed then the water will try to exit only through the neck. At the moment the
valve opens a certain amount of liquid from the mould is evacuated by air pressure into the
available space inside the line to the tank. When the hose pump rotates backwards it creates
a vacuum with each rotation, at the moment the hose is depressed inside the pump there is a
pathway for the water from the mould to the tank, and that is when the air pressure inside the
cavity rapidly presses the water out. The flushing happens with a velocity that can cause pulp
to delaminate and detach from the neck area of the bottle. Due to that reason the cavity should
be flushed with the use of the pump and not air. It was observed that the air pressure regulator
has a certain pressure drop during opening. It was observed that a peak of 0.4 bar of pressure
is released very rapidly during opening (depening on the level of the vacuum in the system),
which is accounted for in the span of one second. That burst of pressure is sufficient to push
the water out with enough velocity to peel the neck away or at least to cause nonconformities
in the neck area[32]. The pressure drop is caused by the vacuum inside the vacuum chamber.
When the pressure regulator is opened the vacuum rapidly pulls the air through, causing a
surge of air to enter the mould and if not directed properly, it can detach pulp from the mould
57
==PAGE:68==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
walls or punch a hole, due to its inertia, through the formed layer of pulp.
During the packing phase the concentration of pulp inside the mould rises. The gradient goes
up from the axis of the bottle Z, see Figure 7.7, to the surface of the mould. This is a differential
problem that takes the input of slurry with concentration c0 and the output of water with c1 = 0
assuming all fibers are stopped by the mould wall. With time the layer thickness increases,
water escapes from the mould and the slurry inside becomes higher in concentration. That
makes for a viscous slurry that needs to be pumped out of the mould after the wanted layer
thickness.
Figure 7.7: Concentration gradient inside bottle
7.3
System testing for dosing
To automate the flow control a PID function was used. To randomize the tests for dosing by
PID use a DOE was developed. Its purpose was to discover at which levels of flow and at which
levels of volume delivered there is the best fit to the desired pumped volume. PID tuning is a
delicate procedure where knowledge of the process, in this case of the valve capability, is crucial.
Since the valve is electropneumatic its response is not as fast as a complete electrical one that
moves with the aid of a linear actuator[28]. The lack of speed and accuracy is compensated
by force. The force is needed to overcome the strength of the fibers, effectively shearing them
when the valve closes.
Tests were conducted to tune the PID variables. The trial and error method was used for
58
==PAGE:69==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
getting the right variables for the PID control parameters. First the gain Kc was changed
keeping the Ti and Td constant. Since the valve needs to move around 5-10% of its range to
control the flow, the gain does not have to be bigger than 0.5. A gain of 0.5 was satisfactory for
only using the Kc value. The problem that arises is the appearance of a constant error which
cannot be solved for using only the Kc control parameter, thus the need for the Ti parameter
becomes apparent. By introducing the Ti parameter, the steady state error can be eliminated
since the Ti component evaluates the full integral, the area under the graph, and compares it
with the setpoint, thus checking if the two areas are similar and so the steady state error can
be eliminated, see Figure 7.8. When the derivative term is introduced the operation time of the
valve becomes too fast i.e. the piston cannot follow the input sent to the electronic pressure
regulator. This latency causes the reaction to be out of phase with the input thus effectively
rendering the process unstable. Further testing determined that a Kc value of 0.3 and a Ti
value of 0.02 are the best for a response that is stable after the time constant of the system.
The time constant is the time needed for the system response to reach the setpoint. In this
case the time constant includes the acceleration time of the pulp pump which is five seconds
(the acceleration time can be changed from the frequency drive controller). A normal response
can be seen in Figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8: Time constant and step response of the PID control system
The pulp valve needs output range to limit the opening and closing of the valve. The upper
limit is set at 10V which will correspond to a 100% opening of the valve. The minimum point
59
==PAGE:70==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
of the output range cannot be lower than 1.5V meaning 15% opening of the valve, otherwise
there will be the risk of clogging due to the small opening area of the valve thus flocs can get
stuck during flow. Because of this the minimum flow that can be obtained is 2L/min. One way
for creating increased flow is to increase the pressure in the system and open the valve slightly,
thus the velocity will increase but the same clogging can be observed due to increased flow
and narrow opening. During steady state it was observed that the flow varies by ±0.3L/min.
Air pistons, which is the actuation system of the valve, cannot be controlled as finely as linear
actuators, and the electropneumatic actuator that controls the pressure to the air piston has
error of about 0.6% of the full pressure value thus explaining the variation in the flow.
To see the dosing capability of the new PID control, two DOEs were devised. DOE 1 showed
that the dosing control was delivering on average 157mL less than wanted. That was added
as a constant in the delivery program and the second DOE was performed. The second DOE
showed that the average error from the wanted pumped volume was ±3.6% see Figure 7.9.
Both DOE results can be seen in Appendix E.
Figure 7.9: Results showing errors in pulp volume delivery. Error bar is average error
60
==PAGE:71==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
7.4
Porous mould testing
7.4.1
Qualitative analysis and parameter screening
The porous mould was tested for performance using multiple types of pulp. To have a correlation
between the moulding behaviour of the four types of pulps and their physical characteristics
the pulp fibers were measured for length and diameters, see section 6. During the testing trials
it was discovered that the recycled pulp from the newspaper BT had the best performance with
regards pulp distribution inside the mould see Figure 7.10. The recycled paper tray pulp on
the right has slightly better performance than the SCA Pure 80 virgin pulp on the left. The
influence of the additives from the newspaper allows for the best distribution of pulp.
Figure 7.10: Moulding differences between pulps. Left SCA Pure 80, middle BT old newspaper, right
recycled paper tray
When dissolving the pulp in hot water for testing it was observed that the BT old newspaper
had the best fiberation behaviour with a high dissolution rate compared to the paper tray pulp.
The paper tray pulp had abundant flocs during mixing which reduced partially after 24 hours
of soaking. The BT old newspaper pulp dissolved in a manner of minutes in hot water > 40°C.
If the water was cold e.g. tap water 10°C the BT newspaper pulp dissolved with flocs which
would not dissolve by further mixing only by heating up the solution above 40 °C. In Figure 7.10
61
==PAGE:72==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
the central bottle made of BT newspaper presents a dark outside layer of < 0.4mm that flakes
off easily. That is the influence of the ink being deposited on the surface.
It was discovered during the testing of the porous mould that the PID flow control function does
not deliver a stable flow in the rise of the function like seen in subsection 7.3. The overshoot and
stabilization of the function pulse the flow thus causing non uniform distribution of the pulp on
the mould walls. Therefore it was decided to remove the PID flow control and continue with a
constant flow during filling. The constant flow was varied as seen in the experimentation trials
in Appendix J. During repeated use the mould pores clog with pulp and prevent the water flow,
thus impeding deposition, process that happens in a non-uniform way. The pulp pressure when
the mould is clogged is seen in Figure 7.11 and when the mould is free is seen in Figure 7.12.
As the flow decreases the pressure increases up to a point in which there is no more effective
flow, that was the point where the testing stopped and the cleaning of the mould was initiated.
Figure 7.11: Pressure on the pulp line when the mould pores are clogged
62
==PAGE:73==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.12: Pressure on the pulp line when the mould pores are free
When the pressure rose, it forced the sealing to be pushed out of the mould halves and the
pulp fibers deposited in between the mould halves causing flashes on both sides. The sealing
was pressed out of the mould only in the areas where there was no mechanical stop to keep it in
place. Along the bottom of the bottle and the straight walls the flanges of the mould keep the
sealing in place but starting with the diameter reduction of the neck area the seal was pushed
out causing the flash seen in Figure 7.13.
Figure 7.13: Flash from overpressure
63
==PAGE:74==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The best result of the moulding trials can be seen in Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14: Best moulding results
The holes apparent on the surface are due to delamination during demoulding. After drying
the bottle sticks to the surface of the mould since some fibers were pushed inside the pores of
the mould walls. The hypothesis is that when demoulding, the thinner areas of the bottle can
be delaminated since there is not enough strength in the bulk to overcome the stiction forces
and the mechanical attachments of the fibers that are inside the pores. The concept can be
seen in Figure 7.15 with the light yellow being the cellulose layer depositing on the porous foam
material. The right side of the figure having more layer thickness has enough strength and
material to impede the fractures developing from the breakage of the protuberances. The left
side of the figure, the layer thickness being smaller, allows the fractures of the protuberances
to move through the depth even causing through layer fractures.
64
==PAGE:75==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.15: Layer thickness difference on deposition and delamination influence on the mould wall
The protuberances left in the mould after breakage add up with consecutive runs and clog
the mould. The tests suggest that the pore size needs to be reduced so that most of the pores
stay as micro-pores in the range 5-30 µm. The mean size of pores was found to be in that region
for the current mould (5-6µm) but that includes all the pores < 1µm contributing in reducing
the mean. The current mould material has a filtering efficiency of 98% at 35µm particle size in
water, see Figure 4.4. That means that some cellulose fibers can still be pressed into those pores
and mechanically attach to the walls during pressing/drying. Nilsson et. al.[30] recommend a
filter threshhold of 15 µm to allow the water and vapours to permeate though the mould and
ensure that fibers do no cling to the mould during demoulding. Kuo et. al.[27] have similar
recommendations in their patent: ’For a mean diameter of a common paper fiber is about 16-45
µm, and the dimension of the pore between every two of the metal particles [in the mould] is
naturally less than a mean diameter of the metal particle’. Meaning that if the average particle
size of the sintered mould is smaller than the smallest fiber diameter, and agreeing that the
pore size in between two or three particles is always smaller than the particle size, the fibers
cannot attach to the mould.
To clean the mould sulfuric acid was used for the dissolution of cellulose. It is a process that
was very fast, by dipping the mould halfs in a 98% sulfuric acid solution they were cleaned in
five minutes. Other ideas were suggested like burning with an open flame or putting the mould
halves inside an oven at high temperatures but due to concerns to the microstructure of the
steel they were not performed. It was considered that short exposure to an open flame would
be enough to burn the cellulose fibers but without test pieces the uncertainty of the process
65
==PAGE:76==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
during this study was deemed too great.
Another phenomenon discovered during moulding was that wet bottles will demould with less
delamination of the deposited layer. It was not apparent if the protuberances break off or
conform and are extracted from the porous material without breaking. Here the connection
between wet and dry strength is crucial to develop a demoulding procedure that ensures the
least amount of fibers getting stuck to the mould wall, and no delamination. Figure 7.13 shows
how if the bottle is wet there is no delamination of the pressed pulp after extraction.
Different parameters are involved in the demoulding behaviour of the bottles: size of pores,
mould surface roughness, water content of pulp layer, wet strength of pulp (pulp and additive
dependent), pulp layer thickness and the type of release agent used in the pulp recipe and on
the mould wall.
7.4.2
Quantitative analysis of the moulding process
The trials mentioned before allowed for parameter screening towards developing a DOE which
gave insights into the influence of the inputs on the outputs. The inputs that brought the most
change in the shape of the bottles were the following Table 7.2:
Flow in [L/min]
Air temperature [°C]
Air ramp time [s]
Flow out [L/min]
Drying time [s]
Levels
1
40
25
3
90
3
150
90
1
300
Table 7.2: 25 factorial design table
The outputs were thicknesses along the 16 points on the bottles, see Figure 7.16 and wet/dry
weights of the paper bottles and will be described below. The outputs can be seen in Table 7.3.
Top
Middle
Corner
Bottom
Weight wet [g]
Weight after drying [g]
Runs
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Point 5
Point 6
Point 7
Point 8
Point 9
Point 10
Point 11
Point 12
Point 13
Point 14
Point 15
Point 16
Table 7.3: Outputs table for DOE
Because of time consideration due to heating and cooling of the air heater it was decided
to block the tests in two, with high and low temperatures each block becoming a 2n with n=4
full factorial design. Cleaning was done after each 8th trial to make sure they were not biased
by clogging. To make sure that the bottles were equally dried after demoulding a drying step
ensued. The bottles were dried in an oven at 120 °C for four hours to bring them all to the
66
==PAGE:77==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
same water content in the web. This made sure that the measurements are repeatable later on
without considering the water level reduction due to evaporation.
The other parameters that were kept as constants are in Table 7.4:
Pulp type
Pulp concentration [wt%]
Air pressure from source [bar]
Vacuum level [bar]
Injection pressure [bar]
Valve opening time [s]
Volume pumped [L]
Valve closing time [s]
BT ONP
0,3
6,5
-0,75
0,01
1
5
0,3
Table 7.4: Constants used during the testing trials
The valve opening time signifies here the time it takes for the electropneumatic valve to
fully open and not the pulp delivery time. Conversely the valve closing time is the time taken
by the aforementioned valve to close. The time between filling and flushing was dependent
on the pressure built up during filling. The time between filling and flushing was equal to
the time needed for the pressure in the filling line to decrease to 0.01 bar after opening the
recirculation circuit. To better understand see Figure 4.17 and Figure 5.3 following the arrows
of ’VolumePumped’ notification and ’Pulp flushed’ notification in the latter figure. The bottles
were measured in 16 locations which are crucial to be known, see Figure 7.16. The top two cir-
cumferences show the thickness in two location on each side of the mould and can be compared
to each other for variance. They can be compared with respect to each mould half but also
with respect to the vertical position along the bottle height. The bottom four measurements on
the corners will allow comparison of the transition region of the walls to the bottom. The last
four measurements on the bottom will show the thickness distribution of the bottom compared
to all the rest.
67
==PAGE:78==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.16: Measuring points on the bottle shells
The optimal measurement strategy would be by computed tomography where the thickness
distribution is characterized with high accuracy and precision but due to time constraints that
was not possible. The measurements were done by cutting the bottle along the circumference
and parallel to the parting line and a caliper was used to measure at the selected points. In the
areas where delamination caused increases in wall thickness they were measured as delaminated
to see the influence of parameters on delamination. The inputs and outputs were ran through
the ANOVA tool of the software called JMP to analyze the correlations between the parameters
and levels. All the results of the trials are seen in Appendix L. The full report of the ANOVA
can be seen in Appendix N.
The bottle halves were given numbers to differentiate between them. The negative half was
given number 0 and the positive was given 1. The negative one was polished with a 1200 grit
stone on the neck area see Figure 7.17.
68
==PAGE:79==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.17: Mould polishing on neck area with 1200 grit stone
When comparing side 0 with side 1 it was evident that side 0 presented less damage during
demoulding due to the lower roughness (see subsubsection 4.1.2 and Table 4.1). The influence
is visible in the trials, see Figure 7.18. The polishing should be implemented on all surfaces of
the mould to ease demoulding and achieve a better surface.
Figure 7.18: Surface difference between mould halves 0 and 1
The best result is seen in Run 8 see Figure 7.19 for parameters see Figure 7.20 with an even
wall thickness distribution and almost no delamination of the layer.
69
==PAGE:80==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.19: Best moulding results with even wall distribution
70
==PAGE:81==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.20: Run 8 moulding parameters
The fissure encircled in red in Figure 7.19 is at the parting line of the mould. The parting
line created a flash, due to the use of the seal which was being pushed out by the compressed air
rushing in, which was acting as a weak spot allowing the air to rupture the layer during drying.
That same fissure is seen in multiple runs of the DOE in Appendix L as the seal was being
pushed out with all runs. Because of that the bottleneck for pressure build up inside the bottles
is the inability of the mould to be sealed 100%. The maximum pressure that was achieved by
the air was 4.5 bars but that is low when compared to hot nip pressing of other MPPs[8]. It
is crucial that a better sealing method be implemented in the mould closing mechanism to
achieve better pressing. The pressing achieves two things: higher strength due to the fibers
bonding better when impinging onto each other with higher forces and the other is a smoother
surface. The initial recommendation is to machine a channel all around the parting surfaces of
the mould and insert a seal. In that way the seal cannot be pushed out of the mould by the
air or slurry pressure.
To see the influence of the inputs on the outputs of the process the ANOVA was run. It was
decided that a significant value for P to be 0.05 and all results above that to be disregarded.
This means that if P < 0.05 there is less than a 5% chance that the null hypothesis is correct
(and that the results are random)[36].
After the trials were run it was obvious that the range of the air ramp incorrect as no peeling
71
==PAGE:82==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
of the bottle neck happened during the trials. That means that the air ramp can be reduced
to under 25 seconds to reduce cycle time. The points 1-16 were looked at for correlations with
input parameters and then the weight of the bottles was analyzed with respect to the inputs.
The neck thickness (1, 2, 3, 4) is affected positively by the flow in, see Figure 7.21, with a
strong correlation and a significant value of P but only on points 1 and 2 with P being 0.0056
and 0.0004 respectively. The air temperature seems to be affecting the thickness on the neck
but the P values show the truth with no significance. The thickness appears to go down with
higher temperatures due to the bottles sticking more to the mould and so during demoulding
more material gets peeled off resulting in a thinner neck. The results are inconclusive with
regards to the parameter influence on the neck thickness.
Figure 7.21: Prediction profiler for points 1-4
Looking at the wall thickness 5, 6, 7, 8 see Figure 7.22 only points 7 and 8 show decrease
of wall thickness with an increased level of the flow out. The fact that it is only 7 and 8
might mean that clogging was playing a role preferentially during testing or that that half is
72
==PAGE:83==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
predisposed to more deposition. Judging from the pictures of the DOE and the thickness levels
of points 5 to 8 it is apparent that a low level of flow in (or injection) will cause a thickness
increase of the bottle walls. Since deposition happens at a slow rate the layers are not pressed
together as much as if they would be pressed upon a higher flow. Also, the flow in is varying
due to the pump, thus each layer which is slowly deposited can be subject to delamination after
drying and cause thicker walls.
Figure 7.22: Prediction profiler for points 5-8
For points 9, 10, 11 and 12 the prediction profiler Figure 7.23 suggests that there is a
correlation between the flow out and the thickness of the corners. Evaluating the P value there
is no significance in the data. The only qualitative argument is that with increased flow during
the flushing more of the bound fibers can be detached from the corners and drained along with
the slurry out of the bottle thus causing the corners to decrease in thickness.
73
==PAGE:84==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.23: Prediction profiler for points 9-12
Evaluating the points 13, 14, 15 and 16 in Figure 7.24 there is no correlation with the
inputs since the P values are all above 0.05 with a few exceptions that are not consistent see
Appendix N. This suggests that different parameters influence the thickness distribution of the
bottle bottom. One parameter would be the amount of time between injection and flushing,
when only gravity and vacuum act on the water inside the bottle causing it to permeate the
paper layer. This parameter might influence how the bottom is formed to some extent and
most definitely plays a role in the surface characteristic of the paper.
74
==PAGE:85==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.24: Prediction profiler for points 13-16
The significant parameter for the wet weight is the drying time in Figure 7.25 and not
temperature, shown by the very low value of P see Appendix N. That is an interesting correlation
because it directly affects the cycle time of the process. In production the aim is to reduce
cycle time as much as possible even if that means using higher temperatures. This test should
be repeated to make sure that the wet weight of the bottles is being reduced predominantly
by the time spend in air flow rather than by evaporation due to high temperature. There is
no significance between the air ramp duration and the wet weight which would mean that the
time under air flow is more important than the time in which the pressure inside the bottle
increases (ramp time).
75
==PAGE:86==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure 7.25: Prediction profiler for dry and wet weight of bottles
The dry weight of the paper bottle is correlated with the flow in and flow out both having
low levels of P meaning high significance. It appears that a high level of flow during injection
will make a heavier bottle and not necessarily cause increased wall thickness as witnessed on
points 5, 6, 7, 8. This means that increased flow during injection will press the depositing
layers together and even after flushing they will still be packed tightly enough not to be flushed
away during slurry flushing. It is an interesting finding since the amount of fluid pumped in was
always the same and with the same concentration. One thing was not considered and that is the
fact that when the bottles are flushed the fluid flushed out has a significantly more concentrated
pulp solution than the one being injected. It is easy to see how during tank depletion with
sequential injections the fluid pumped back increases the concentration of the remaining fluid.
This influence is not evidently shown in the dry weight of paper bottles in Figure 7.26
Figure 7.26: Dry and wet weights of bottles and the average values
76
==PAGE:87==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
As it can be seen in Figure 7.26 the weight of the wet bottles varies significantly compared
to the dry one. This means that the influence of bound water will contribute to the mechanical
characteristics of the dry bottle since the bottles are very similar in dry weight. The average
weight of the wet bottles was 45.8g with a standard deviation of 16.1g and the average weight
of the dry bottles was 12.4g with a standard deviation of 2.4g. All measurements for the bottle
thicknesses and weights can be seen in Appendix O. The experiments showed that the air ramp
time can be reduced, that the injection flow can be increased if a different pump is used, that
the flushing out flow velocity does not have to be very slow and that in fact the time between
injection and flushing might be crucial. The air temperature is not as important as the drying
time in this experiment. One reason for that might be the heat losses of the air from the heater
to the bottle and higher temperatures will eventually equal the dewatering capabilities of the
air flow time.
77
==PAGE:88==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
8
Coating
The decision to coat the shell with an existing process was made before due to business rea-
sons[16]. Using existing processes that have attained maturity in development shortens pro-
duction times and makes implementation faster. For coating the inside of the shell there are
available processes that are well developed in the production of PET bottles[31]. For the out-
side coating suitable processes were looked at and recommendations made.
The coatings will have different functions an overview is given in 8.1.
Functions
Requirements
Inside coating
Liquid barrier
Impermeable to liquids
Gas barrier
Diffusion inhibiting
Deformable
Flexible to allow for bottle handling like pressing
Inert barrier
Chemically stable to bottle contents
Outside coating
Liquid barrier
Impermeable to protect shell from moisture
Labelling
Printable for branding and FDA regulatory texts
Physical barrier
Scratch resistance
Ergonomic
Pleasant user experience when handling the bottle
Table 8.1: Functions and requirements of the inside & outside layer
8.1
Internal coating
To ensure the use of an existing process like the PVD SiOx (Physical Vapor Deposition Silicon
Oxide) used on PET bottles the substrate needs to be very smooth. During PVD the atoms
removed from the surface of the coating material are moving freely and randomly inside the
chamber where the process happens. Since the process happens on the nanometer scale with
each atom attaching itself to the surface of the substrate that need be coated, it is crucial to
have a surface which can be covered by a layer that is continuous and which does not fold onto
itself. If the surface is very rough shadowing might happen, which means that protrusions or
valleys on the surface of the item do not allow atoms to cover all areas because of the line of
sight nature of the process. Since SiOx coatings are very thin <100nm, it can be difficult to
coat rough and interweaving fibers like the cellulosic fibers used in this study. When fibers
overlap during shell formation they form sharp valleys which might obstruct the atoms of the
78
==PAGE:89==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
coating layer. To that extent starch can be used as an intermediary coating which can provide
the smooth surface needed by the PVD process. Hydroxypropylated starch has found use in
both food and non-food applications, and shows excellent film-forming properties along with
high binding power, high adhesive strength and beneficial rheological properties. Furthermore,
non-ionic starch ethers are not sensitive to changes in electrolyte concentration and pH. Hy-
droxypropylation reduces the tensile strength of the film but increases the elongation and burst
strength and the resistance to folding. Films have also been shown to be impermeable to oxy-
gen[19].
Chitosan is another available organic polymer that can be used as a pore filler and smoothen-
ing component see subsection 8.2. Chitosan shows good film-forming properties. The films are
transparent, flexible and semicrystalline, thus giving low oxigen permeation. Due to its cationic
character, chitosan will bind strongly to anionic cellulose fibres. This cationic property also
provides numerous possibilities for further derivatization and favourable interactions with coat-
ing or food components. Chitosan also exhibits natural antibacterial and fungicidal properties,
thus making it attractive for use in the coating of paper and paperboard for food or medical
applications[19].
A. Gruniger et. al.[14] performed plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition on paper
and PET and showed that the same reduction in the oxigen transmission rate is possible for
both substrates. They found that the same order of magnitude in reduction can be obtained
in a paper that has a sealed surface, meaning no pores that can perform free diffusion. An
improvement factor of 20 was achieved during their tests.
This is a relative measurement
comparing uncoated to the coated counterparts. But the result goes to show that the process
can be done and the SiOx deposition process can effectively be used on paper.
8.2
External coating
After cellulose, chitin is the the most abundant polysaccharide. Additionally, polysaccharides
are generally biocompatible, biodegradable, and non-toxic, making them appealing materials
for food contact applications, such as paper coating[1]. Chitosan is a polysaccharide derived
from chitin, acting as a load-bearing component in the shells of shellfishes. Chitosan forms a
highly viscous, shear-thinning solution that can be coated on cellulose substrates or cast into
transparent, free-standing films[19]. The hygroscopic character of polysaccharide and protein
coatings means that, in order to be useful as barriers for packaging applications, they need
protection through a hydrophobic top layer such as beeswax[19].
79
==PAGE:90==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Adibi et. al.[1] showed that natural rubber (NR) latex mixed with a component called alpha-
1,3 glucan is a coating solution for paper. They coated paper with a thin layer of the mixture
(20µm), varying the composition of glucan from 0 wt% to 100 wt% relative to the natural
rubber. The 100 wt% rubber coating proved to be the best in terms of its low water transmission
rate due to its hydrophobicity while the 10 wt% glucan one had the lowest water vapour
transmission rates and oil cobb value. During the testing it was noticed that the same 10 wt%
glucan had the best pore covering of all the tested mixtures as they possibly form a percolated
network of alpha-1,3 glucan particles. The well dispersed network of natural rubber and alpha-
1,3 glucan leads to a more tortous path for the water vapour to go through the coated papers
thus increasing the wt % to more than 10, likely creates aggregates leaving a permeable route
for moisture transport[1]. To give a perspective to the results Adibi et. al. compared the coated
papers to polyethylene PE and polyvinyl alcohol (PVOH). Overall, the combined oxygen and
moisture barrier properties of the NR/alpha-1,3 glucan coating was in between the PVOH and
PE, adjusted for thickness. The oil Cobb results demonstrated that by increasing the thickness
of the NR/alpha-1,3 glucan coating, similar Cobb values as PE coating films can be achieved[1].
This means that by coating the outside of the paper shell with a biodegradable coating it is
possible to rival the barrier properties of synthetic polymers leaving the inside coating the same.
The extra step needed being the smoothening one with starch for example.
80
==PAGE:91==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
9
Economics
All costs can be seen in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Costs of components
81
==PAGE:92==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
10
Alternative manufacturing
This section refers to alternate ways of making the paper shell that became apparent during
trials and experimentation. Making the shell on a core by dipping the existing mould, with
vacuum applied, into a vat of pulp until a shell forms. A collapsible core needs to be used so
that it can be extracted after the shell is semi-solid. After the shell formation, the core and
the shell need to be pressed into a heated porous mould that makes sure the outside surface
becomes smooth as well. The pressing from the outside will impinge the pulp in the inner core
thus creating smooth surfaces on both sides. If high temperature air is being released through
the core before extraction then the shell will remain in the outer mould when the collapsible
core is removed. The main difference to the current method being the use of a collapsible core
instead of air pressure only for pressing. The main challenge is the ratio of the neck to the
inside cavity. The closer they are in diameter the easier it is to manufacture the core.The other
alternative involves the breakdown of the current studied process into shell making and then
pressing. The shell making would happen in a vat with the conventional vacuum forming of
the pulp on the mould walls. In effect the mould, with vacuum applied on its walls, would be
submerged in the pulp slurry then slowly pulled out pouring the excess liquid out. The process
being different since it would allow the bottle to be drained by gravity very slowly. Then a
robot would attach the mould to the pressing and drying unit. Here the pulp would be pressed
by high temperature and pressure air to attain the smooth surface inside. The advantage is
that the flushing would be done by gravity and it does not need a mould. At the same time
multiple moulds can be submerged in a larger vat and the shaft used later on for drying does
not need to have slurry passing through as well. The disadvantage being the need to move the
mould from the vat to the drying unit.
Dampening a rough shape moulded bottle, which was produced using a conventional process
that leaves the inside very rough, inside of a mould to make it conformable. Then inserting
heated pressurized steam to dry and press the bottle to the walls creating smooth surfaces
inside and outside. The dampening would ensure that it is conformable and if the pressure of
the steam is high enough it will compress and dry the bottle just like the process presented in
this study. The only downside would be that the asperities formed by the rough process risk
not being flattened by the steam pressure.
82
==PAGE:93==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
11
Conclusions
11.1
Conclusion
The existing paper manufacturing setup, which was manually operated through the use of man-
ual valves and buttons, was upgraded to a fully adjustable process that uses a GUI for ease of
interaction and control. It allows for parameter change along with timing and data gathering
from monitored measurands for a fully automated process.
A new mould was designed and manufactured that uses non-deterministic tortuous channels
for creating a paper shell. A closing mechanism was developed that allows for fast handling of
said mould which includes clamping, demoulding, mounting and de-mounting in a safe manner.
The mould allowed the study of paper bottle manufacturing and the results showed that a low
roughness surface causes less stiction when demoulding bottles. The roughness value Rz can be
reduced by hand polishing by a factor of two and the Ra values can be reduced by a factor of
three compared to etched surfaces. No rotation was needed during the process to attain good
pulp distribution on the mould.
The supplied pulp was characterized and compared with the supplier specifications but the
evidence suggested that the recipe of pulps like the BT old newspaper had a bigger influence
on the moulding behaviour than length and diameter. The additives that aid fiberation and
give the paper its wet strength were influencing the behaviour of pulp since the old newspapers
and the paper food tray performed better than both virgin fibers SCA and Robur.
DOEs were performed to see the influence of parameters and to optimize the automated system.
The results of the ANOVA showed that a paper bottle can be manufactured and that the flow
in parameter was crucial for bottle manufacturing, with low levels causing delamination of the
shell. Fast injection times with slow flushing times gave the best bottle properties with respect
to pulp distribution and inner surface characteristics. Air flow time was determined to be the
most significant drying parameter compared to temperature and air pressure ramping time.
Suitable coating methods were researched like the surface smoothening chitosan and starch
that close the pores of the fibers and allow for lower WVTR and OTR bringing paper closer to
PE films with regards to those properties. The application of starch or chitosan as an internal
surface smothening layer allows for SiOx coating for lowering OTR and acting as a diffusion
barrier. As for the outside coating latex rubber is chiefly the choice for impermeabilization and
biodegradability.
83
==PAGE:94==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
11.2
Future work
This is a list of future improvements that can be done for the setup and for reaching an MVP
(minimum viable product):
• The rotating union and centrifugation can be removed and still achieve good pulp dis-
tribution during moulding. A comparison is needed between dewatering capabilities of
the centrifugation compared to higher temperatures and/or air flows in terms of water
removed/energy used.
• Investigations regarding the pulp characteristics, with respect to moulding behavior, like:
type of wood, beatability and amount of beating of pulp, mechanical-chemical combina-
tions wt%, additives, level of fibrillation.
• A new flange with the right thread (M38x2h) needs to be manufactured.
• Regarding the controls system feedback needs to be incorporated for all actuation com-
ponents like: motor rotation, pump rotation, valve activations, motor brake status.
• The vacuum chamber closing must be automated.
• Gradual vacuum increase, during filling/flushing with potential intermediary stops to
allow for re-expansion of the pulp layer which can account for increased drainability
compared to a densified layer through a one vacuum step process[2]. Because moulded
pulp operations typically employ a single vacuum step, drawing the fiber suspension
toward a mat under low hydrodynamic shear conditions, such systems are likely to be
especially susceptible to the adverse effects of the densification and sealing aspects of fiber
mats during dewatering[2].
• Characterization of mould material for mechanical properties and machinability including
electro-discharge machining.
• Metallographic study of the post etched mould to predict future oxidation during and
after use of the mould. During use the mould is heated up to 200°C causing diffusion of
Cr, thus compounds prone to oxidation might form.
84
==PAGE:95==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
• A release agent for the mould needs to be found. An element of the pulp recipe that aids
demoulding needs to be found.
• The applicability of chitosan, SiOx, starch and latex layers on the surface of the shell
must be tested. The reduction in WVTR and OTR needs to be tested and compared
with conventional PET bottles.
• FEA analysis of the porous mould under pressure and high temperature 200 °C.
• Modelling of the flow behaviour and pulp deposition on the mould walls during shell
creation.
• Redesign of vacuum chamber/mould closing setup for size reduction and automation of
closing/opening mechanism.
85
==PAGE:96==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
References
[1]
Azin Adibi et al. “Sustainable barrier paper coating based on alpha-1,3 glucan and nat-
ural rubber latex”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 282 (2022), p. 119121. issn: 0144-8617.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2022.119121. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014486172200025X.
[2]
Debnath et. al. “Moulded Pulp Products for Sustainable Packaging: Production Rate
Challenges and Product Opportunities”. In: (2022).
[3]
AMES porous materials. https://amespore.com/en/amespore-stainless-steel-
filters-characteristics/. Accessed: 2022-05-05.
[4]
Pratima Bajpai. “Chapter 12 - Pulping Fundamentals”. In: Biermann’s Handbook of
Pulp and Paper (Third Edition). Ed. by Pratima Bajpai. Third Edition. Elsevier, 2018,
pp. 295–351. isbn: 978-0-12-814240-0. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
814240-0.00012-4. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128142400000124.
[5]
Pratima Bajpai. “Chapter 3 - Pulp and Paper Production Processes and Energy Overview”.
In: Pulp and Paper Industry. Ed. by Pratima Bajpai. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016, pp. 15–
49. isbn: 978-0-12-803411-8. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803411-8.
00003-2. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128034118000032.
[6]
Vinod Chandavari. “DIFFUSER ANGLE CONTROL TO AVOID FLOW SEPARA-
TION”. In: 2014.
[7]
Mattia Didone et al. “Moulded Pulp Manufacturing: Overview and Prospects for the
Process Technology”. In: Packaging Technology and Science 30 (Feb. 2017), pp. 231–249.
doi: 10.1002/pts.2289.
[8]
Mattia Didone et al. “On the drying process of molded pulp products: Experiments and
numerical modelling”. In: Drying Technology 38 (Aug. 2019), pp. 1–19. doi: 10.1080/
07373937.2019.1653905.
[9]
Difference-between-Queue-and-Notifier-how-it-use-in-LAbview. https://www.imfa.org/
molded-fiber/. Accessed: 2022-02-10.
86
==PAGE:97==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
[10]
Difference-between-Queue-and-Notifier-how-it-use-in-LAbview. https : / / forums . ni .
com/t5/LabVIEW/Difference- between- Queue- and- Notifier- how- it- use- in-
LAbview/td-p/2680813. Accessed: 2022-04-10.
[11]
J.P. FIRRELL. Stuff Preparation for Paper and Paperboard Making. Pergamon, 1965.
isbn: 978-0-08-010650-2. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780080106502500145.
[12]
Michael J. French. In: Conceptual Design for Engineers. Ed. by Springer. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg GmbH, 1985, p. 2. isbn: 978-3-662-11366-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
662-11364-6. url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-3-662-
11364-6.pdf.
[13]
Manuel Garrido-Romero et al. “From traditional paper to nanocomposite films: Analy-
sis of global research into cellulose for food packaging”. In: Food Packaging and Shelf
Life 31 (2022), p. 100788. issn: 2214-2894. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
fpsl . 2021 . 100788. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article /
pii/S2214289421001563.
[14]
A. Gr¨uniger and P. Rudolf von Rohr. “Deposition of SiO2-like diffusion barriers on PET
and paper by PECVD”. In: Surface and Coatings Technology 174-175 (2003). Proceedings
of the Eight International Conference on Plasma Surface Engineering, pp. 1043–1047.
issn: 0257-8972. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0257- 8972(03)00327- X. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S025789720300327X.
[15]
Martin Hubbe and Przemyslaw Pruszynski. “Greaseproof paper products: A review em-
phasizing ecofriendly approaches”. In: BioResources 15 (Feb. 2020). doi: 10.15376/
biores.15.1.1978-2004.
[16]
Alin Cosmin Ivanache. Special Course Automation and process optimization. 2021.
[17]
Alin Cosmin Ivanache. Special Course GFB project. 2021.
[18]
Kaiyan Jin et al. “Nanofibrillated cellulose as coating agent for food packaging paper”.
In: International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 168 (2021), pp. 331–338. issn:
0141-8130. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.12.066. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0141813020352235.
87
==PAGE:98==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
[19]
Caisa Johansson. “New ways to enhance the functionality of paperboard by surface treat-
ment - A review”. In: Packaging Technology and Science 21 (Oct. 2008), pp. 339–373.
doi: 10.1002/pts.823.
[20]
Henrik Kjellgren. “Barrier properties of greaseproof paper”. PhD thesis. Karlstad Uni-
versity, 2005.
[21]
Supattra Klayya et al. “Tailoring nanofibrillated cellulose through sonication and its
potential use in molded pulp packaging”. In: Nanocomposites 7.1 (2021), pp. 109–122.
doi: 10.1080/20550324.2021.1949517. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/20550324.
2021.1949517. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/20550324.2021.1949517.
[22]
J.D. Lindsay and Brady. “Studies of anisotropic permeability with applications to water
removal in fibrous webs. Part 1: Experimental methods, sheet anisotropy, and relation-
ships to freeness”. In: Tappi Journal 76 (1993), pp. 119–127.
[23]
Zhiqiang Liu et al. “Experimental investigation of porous metal materials in high-speed
micro-milling process”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part
B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture 232.14 (2018), pp. 2488–2498. doi: 10.1177/
0954405417699011. eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0954405417699011. url:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0954405417699011.
[24]
National Instruments Corp. LabView. Version 20.0.1. 2020. url: https://www.ni.com/
da-dk/shop/labview.html.
[25]
F. A. Paine. “Moulded pulp, expanded polystyrene, moulded and thermoformed plas-
tic containers”. In: The Packaging User’s Handbook. Ed. by F. A. Paine. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 1991, pp. 313–347. isbn: 978-1-4613-1483-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4613-
1483-7_16. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-1483-7_16.
[26]
Eva Pongr´acz. “The Environmental Impacts of Packaging”. In: Mar. 2007, pp. 237–278.
isbn: 9780470168219. doi: 10.1002/9780470168219.ch9.
[27]
Porous metal mold for wet pulp molding process and method of using the same. https:
//www.freepatentsonline.com/20160168800.pdf. Accessed: 2022-06-02.
[28]
Practical guide to electric and pneumatic actuators which one to choose. https : / /
valveman.com/blog/practical-guide-to-electric-and-pneumatic-actuators-
which-one-to-choose/. Accessed: 2022-04-04.
88
==PAGE:99==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
[29]
Producer Consumer. https://labviewwiki.org/wiki/Producer/Consumer. Accessed:
2022-04-10.
[30]
PULP MOULD AND USE OF PULP MOULD. https://patents.google.com/patent/
US8246784B2/en. Accessed: 2022-06-02.
[31]
“Recent Progress in Gas Barrier Thin Film Coatings on PET Bottles in Food and Bever-
age Applications”. In: Coatings 2015.5 (Dec. 2015), pp. 987–1001. issn: 2079-6412. doi:
10.3390.
[32]
Prateek Saxena and Giuliano Bissacco. “Assessment of the inflatable core assisted paper
bottle moulding process”. In: Procedia Manufacturing 33 (May 2019). doi: 10.1016/j.
promfg.2019.04.038.
[33]
Urs Schenker et al. “Short communication on the role of cellulosic fiber-based packaging
in reduction of climate change impacts”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 254 (Feb. 2021),
p. 117248. issn: 0144-8617. doi: 10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2020.117248.
[34]
Ferran Serra-Parareda et al. “Techno-economic and environmental evaluation of a market
pulp reinforced with micro-/nanofibers as a strengthening agent in packaging paper”.
In: Journal of Cleaner Production 347 (2022), p. 131265. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.131265. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959652622008964.
[35]
The drive toward sustainability in packaging—beyond the quick wins. https://home.
kpmg/xx/en/home/insights/2021/09/plastic-tax.html. Accessed: 2022-01-03.
[36]
What a p-value tells you about statistical significance. https://www.simplypsychology.
org/p-value.html#:~:text=A%20p%2Dvalue%20less%20than,and%20accept%20the%
20alternative%20hypothesis.. Accessed: 2022-05-31.
89
==PAGE:100==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
APPENDIX
A
Labview Block Diagram
Diagram on next page due to size.
Page 1 of 92
==PAGE:101==
Event handler
NewVal
OldVal
CtlRef
Time
Type
Source
Value
Motor flag
Value
Motor rotating
PulpOKForRotating
 True 
 [6] "Motor flag": Value Change 
Value
Exit
10
State machine
Start the air write and air read tasks
Drying time
StartAir
AirRegulatorWriteTask.vi
airWriteTask
String
status
Air pressure loop started
Air pressure State
 "Air pressure" 
Value
Exit
10
Vacuum reading loop
Vacuum pressure graph
1
Wanted vacuum level [-bar]
Vacuum pressure [bar]
VacuumPressureReadVI.vi
DAQmxName
voltageReadTask
Boolean
Error
Boolean
Vacuum OK
Vacuum OK
10
when the vacuum pressure 
is OK open the valve
 "StartVacuumRead" 
Value
Exit
Temperature control
Air heater temperature [°C] 
     Wanted air temperature [°C] 
heaterON
Analog DBL 
1Chan 1Samp
auto start
Temperature graph 
Value
temp write task
1
send voltage 
to heater
Val(Sgnl)
Heater at temp
LoopRateTempRead
Heater voltage [V] 
DAQmxName
temp read task
Boolean
Exit
OnLineErrorVI.vi
Boolean
Error
10
Turn on heater if temperature is under wanted 
level. When temperature reaches the level 
turn off heater by sending 0V volts through, 
send 0V if stop button is pressed.
0
 "StartTemp" 
Value
Exit
Drying time loop
Drying time [s]
1000
Value
Air ramp duration [s]
1000
valve closing time
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Drying done
Drying done 
LED turns 
on stopping 
the process
1000
Time to drying [s]
Timer for knowing when the drying is done
1
Boolean
Error
After the drying time stop all processes
 "StartDrying" 
Value
Exit
Air pressure control
Value
airWriteTask
RampVoltageVI.vi
Wanted air pressure [bar]
Inflection point [s]
Air ramp duration [s]
Analog DBL 
1Chan 1Samp
auto start
Air pressure graph
DAQmxName
voltageReadTask
dt from the signal 
generator
1000 samples = 10 s of 
signal bc dt is 10ms
Air pressure [bar]
10
1
Boolean
Error
AirRegulatorReadVI.vi
Air pressure graph
100
100
2,957
0,0932
There is something wrong in the loop by a factor of 4 
4
4
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Air releasing
Wait time for 
the pulp valve 
to close
1000
 "StartAir" 
Value
Exit
Value
airWriteTask
Mould motor control
Analog DBL 
1Chan 1Samp
auto start
Value
motor write task
Motor RPM 3000 max
300
Value
Motor rotating
 "StartMotorControl" 
Value
Exit
Pulp pressure reading loop
Boolean
Error
Value
voltageReadTask
1
3,23
4,19
Pulp pressure graph
Pulp pressure [bar]
Analog 1D DBL 
NChan 1Samp
1
10
Wanted pulp pressure [bar]
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pulp pressure OK
 False 
Pulp pressure OK
Motor flag
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Motor flag
 False 
0,5
Pumping reverse
0,01
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pulp valve open 2
 False 
Pulp valve open 2
 True 
When the pressure level reaches the wanted 
pressure injection level light up the LED 'Pulp 
pressure OK'. When the pressure drops 
again light up Pulp valve open 2
 "StartPulpPressureRead" 
Value
Exit
0
Notification line
Queue line
Value
Exit
Exit
Error
Error Vacuum Line
eventMsg
taskNotifier
Vacuum valve
status
Drain valve
Heater at temp
Pulp valve
Init
Vacuum OK
Pulp valve flag
Drying done
Motor rotating
History
Temperature graph 
0
0
History
Vacuum pressure graph
History
Air pressure graph
History
Pulp pressure graph
Air flag
Air releasing
0
Air heater temperature [°C]
Vacuum pressure [bar]
Pulp pressure [bar]
Air pressure [bar]
Pumping flag
Pulp pressure OK
Motor flag
Recirculation valve
Volume pumped
Volume pumped [L]
Pumping reverse
Pumping reverse flag
Pulp valve open 2
Pulp flushed
stopProgramBtn
Debugging 
status help
Flow of pulp [L/min]
error out
Val(Sgnl)
Value
heaterON
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Heater at temp
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Vacuum OK
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pulp valve flag
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Air flag
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pulp pressure OK
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pumping flag
-200279
-200088
removing the 
uninitiated 
task error
-200088
-200088
Clearing the graphs 
before measuring again
Turning off LEDs before 
the sequence starts
This VI writes to a file all the 
measurements needed like 
temperature and pressures 
and flow
Setting the values 
to 0 for the display of measurants
-200088
Drying time [s]
Digital
Air pressure [bar]
Digital
Pulp pressure [bar]
Digital
Vacuum pressure [bar]
Boolean
Exit
Digital
Air heater temperature [°C] 
Flow metering
Value
Exit
Value
voltageReadTask
Analog 1D DBL 
NChan 1Samp
3
0,08
2
300
Flow of pulp [L/min]
Volume pumped [L]
200
1
Boolean
Error
Desired pulp volume [L]
Volume pumped
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Volume pumped
 False 
-2 and divide by 
0,08 is the TF from 
voltage to L/min
ResidVol
 "StartFlowMetering" 
0
Initially no volume is 
pumped into the cavity
-200088
Pulp flushing control
1
Boolean
Error
Analog DBL 
1Chan 1Samp
Value
Pulp valve task
10
Open for 15s
Open 100% for  
flushing the system
POutTime
1000
LED
Val(Sgnl)
Value
Pulp flushed
 "OpenPulpValve2" 
Value
Exit
-200088
Digital
Flow of pulp [L/min]
Flow control
Value
Pulp valve task
1
Boolean
Error
Volume pumped
Flow of pulp [L/min]
Flow setpoint [L/min]
25
PID gains
output range
Analog DBL 
1Chan 1Samp
auto start
10
50
Valve position
The PID controller regulates the flow to the 
setpoint by opening and closing the valve. 
Once the volume was pumped in, the 
valve is closed. The filter smoothens the 
flow meter data
Flow vs setpoint
 "StarFlowControl" 
Value
Exit
-200088
Since the aquisition is every 200ms it has to be divided by 300 to get the flow per minute. 
5 aquisitions per second, 60 sec in a minute so 5*60=300 or 1/5/60 which is being added 
with each loop iteration, thus calculating the pumped volume.
When the volume is pumped the loop stops, thus showing the pumped volume
Slide
Flow setpoint [L/min]
==PAGE:102==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
B
Flushing velocity calculation
Figure B.1: Flushing velocity calculations
Page 3 of 92
==PAGE:103==
To give an overview of the clamping mechanism the pictures below will give on overview 
of the clamps and the geometries involved. The four bars clamp the flanges of the mould 
halves with screws. The right clamping force will be determined and the stresses in the 
flanges will be compared to the yield strength of the porous material.
It can be seen that the clamps formed by the four bars are not the only ones that 
provide closing forces to the system. The bottom tapered part does not allow the mould 
halves to open, the pressure only pushing the two halves open by elastically deforming 
the two halves towards the top. The contribution of the lower clamping is disregarded 
and all the clamping force is assumed to be contributed by the fours bars held together 
by screws.
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
C
Clamping and stress calculations on the mould
Page 4 of 92
==PAGE:104==
Maximum pressure inside the mould
≔
P
10 bar
≔
σy
34 MPa
Yield stress of the porous material
≔
t
5 mm
Wall thickness
≔
r
32.5 mm
Radius of mould
≔
R
=
―
r
t
6.5
Since the ratio of the radius to the wall thickness is under 10 the thick 
walled cylinder criterion must be used
≔
A
((
+
+
+
+
+
+
6320
979
576
440
752
1480
350)) mm 2
Area of bottle half
≔
F
=
――
⋅
P A
⋅
2 π
⎛⎝
⋅
1.734 103 ⎞⎠N
Force from projected area on bottle half
≔
ri
27.5 mm
Inner radius of mould
≔
ro
32.5 mm
Outer radius of mould
≔
r
32.5 mm
Radius where the calculation is of importance i.e. outer one for 
maximum stress
≔
pi
10 bar
Inner pressure of the mould
≔
po
1 bar
Atmospheric pressure
≔
σc
=
-
―――――
-
⋅
pi ri
2
⋅
po ro
2
-
ro
2
ri
2
――――――
⋅
⋅
ri
2 ro
2 ⎛⎝
-
po
pi⎞⎠
⋅
r2 ⎛⎝
-
ro
2
ri
2 ⎞⎠
4.438 MPa
stress in thick walled cylinders
≔
Fp
=
――
⋅
P A
⋅
2 π
⎛⎝
⋅
1.734 103 ⎞⎠N
Fp is the force which is calculated on the 
projected area of the mould thus the 2π
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 5 of 92
==PAGE:105==
Moving on, the clamping force required to keep the mould haves together will be 
calculated.
Diagram representing the half 
mould (looking only at the right 
one) and the forces acting on it. 
Fp being the pressure from 
inside, Fc being the clamping 
force from the bars and FA being 
the reaction from the other half 
mould.
≔
Fc
0 N
≔
FA
0 N
positive clock-wise
＝
-
+
+
⋅
Fp 33.32 mm
⋅
Fc 2.18 mm
⋅
⋅
FA 33.32 mm 2
⋅
Fc ((
+
⋅
33.32 mm 2
2.18 mm))
0
positive towards right
＝
+
-
Fp
⋅
2 Fc
⋅
2 FA
0
≔
Fc
FA
⎡
⎢⎣
⎤
⎥⎦
=
find ⎛⎝
,
Fc FA⎞⎠
334.146
-533.01
⎡
⎢⎣
⎤
⎥⎦N
＝
ΣMA
0
＝
ΣFx
0
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 6 of 92
==PAGE:106==
With a required force of 
350N to clamp the halves, 
M4 screws are more than 
enough
≔
Ft
6742 N
The tightening force
≔
Sf
=
―
Ft
Fc
20.177
Next, the shear force and the bending stress in the flange, in the thinnest location will be 
calculated
≔
α
=
atan⎛
⎜⎝
――
8
12.3
⎞
⎟⎠
33.04 deg
Calculating the angle from CAD software
In the diagram the cut on the 
right hand half is seen. The 
shear force and the bending 
moment are assumed to be 
going in the -x and clockwise 
directions respectively. The cut 
is made on the thinnest section 
of the mould where the wall 
section is t=5mm. 
＝
ΣFx
0
positive towards the right
≔
V
=
―――
→
＝
+
-
FA
Fc
⋅
V sin((α))
0
,
solve V
――――――――――
⋅
867.155707436192 N
sin((
⋅
33.040237778069219 deg))
1.59 kN
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 7 of 92
==PAGE:107==
Here the flange geometry can be seen on the right. It is a 
rectangular section. The smaller flange was considered as the 
other half has a considerable bigger cross section due to 
opening reasons.
≔
h
5 mm
Width of the flange
≔
y
2.5 mm
Distance from neutral axis to 
surface of flange
≔
L
50 mm
≔
Aflange
=
⋅
L h
250 mm 2
Area of the flange
≔
τshear
=
―――
3 V
⋅
2 Aflange
9.543 MPa
Maximum shear stress
≔
Sf
=
――
σy
τshear
3.563
Safety factor regarding shear
＝
ΣMA
0
positive clockwise
＝
+
+
M
⋅
V 16.2 mm
⋅
Fc 2.18 mm
0
≔
M
=
-
-((
⋅
⋅
756.159777780499 N mm))
⋅
⋅
10.306092466263089988 mm kN
-11.062
⋅
N m
=
M
-11.062
⋅
N m
Bending moment in the flange
≔
I
=
⋅
L h3
⎛⎝
⋅
6.25 10-9⎞⎠m4
Second moment of area for the flange
≔
σbending
=
―――
⋅
||M|| y
I
4.425 MPa
Bending stress in the flange
Thus the mould geometry and material are sufficient to handle the pressure from 
the fluid inside
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 8 of 92
==PAGE:108==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
D
Pulp measurements diameter and length
Figure D.1: SCA measurements hand mixed
Page 9 of 92
==PAGE:109==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure D.2: Rottneros measurements hand mixed
Figure D.3: SCA measurements mixed
Page 10 of 92
==PAGE:110==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure D.4: Rottneros measurements mixed
Figure D.5: SCA measurements blended
Page 11 of 92
==PAGE:111==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure D.6: Rottneros measurements blended
Figure D.7: BT measurements mixed
Page 12 of 92
==PAGE:112==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure D.8: Papper tray measurements mixed
Figure D.9: Teknik measurements mixed
Page 13 of 92
==PAGE:113==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
E
DOE pulp dosing by using PID control
Figure E.1: Results showing dosing volumes under wanted levels
Figure E.2: Results showing errors in pulp volume delivery. Error bar is average error
Page 14 of 92
==PAGE:114==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
F
Manufacturing process chain
To manufacture the mould two clamping systems were devised for use during the milling of the
internal and external features. Step 00: initial porous cylinder 390x91.7mm Figure F.1
Figure F.1: Step 00 initial porous cylinder
Page 15 of 92
==PAGE:115==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Step 01: Saw the initial porous cylinder 390x91.7mm in half in radial direction Figure F.2.
Spare material thickness in axial direction for cut: 8mm.
Assumption: Saw blade thickness max. 4mm leaving 2mm spare material on each side.
2x porous cylinder 193x91.7mm.
Figure F.2: Step 01 sawing of porous cylinder
Step 02: Saw 1 cylinder half in 2 identical halfs in axial direction Figure F.3
Assumption: Max. saw blade thickness 4mm leaving 1mm spare material on top.
Figure F.3: Step 02 halving cylinder
Page 16 of 92
==PAGE:116==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Step 03 negative: Milling mating surfaces + fixture features Figure F.4.
Clamping in vice on end faces.
Figure F.4: Step 03 milling half
Milling mating surfaces (red) of the negative mold, fixture threads M5 (blue) and reference
surfaces for subsequent machining steps (violet) Figure F.5.
Figure F.5: Step 03 milling fixtures and making threaded holes
Page 17 of 92
==PAGE:117==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Step 04 negative: Milling outer contour.
The cylinder half is clamped on a vice using the fixture screwed with M5 (blue) and the mating
surface of the fixture (green) Figure F.6, with the slot of the porous cylinder (violet) as reference
Figure F.7.
Figure F.6: Step 04 milling fixture with holes and fixating artefact shown with green
Figure F.7: Step 04 showcasing the purple mating surface
The assembly is seen in Figure F.8.
Page 18 of 92
==PAGE:118==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure F.8: Step 04 milling fixture assembled with the porous block
Step 05 negative: Milling inner contour.
The cylinder half is clamped on fixture step 04 with 10um spacing on the mating surfaces
Figure F.9.
Figure F.9: Step 05 negative milling inner contour
Page 19 of 92
==PAGE:119==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Step 03 positive: Milling mating surfaces + fixture features
Clamping in vice on end faces.
Milling mating surfaces (green) of the positive mold, fixture threads M5 (blue) and reference
surfaces for subsequent machining steps (violet) Figure F.10.
Figure F.10: Step 05 negative milling inner contour
Step 04 positive: Milling outer contour
The cylinder half is clamped on a vice using the fixture screwed with M5 (blue) and the
mating surface of the fixture (green) Figure F.11, with the slot of the porous cylinder (violet)
Figure F.12 as reference.
Figure F.11: Step 04 positive fixture with mating part showed in green
Page 20 of 92
==PAGE:120==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure F.12: Step 04 positive porous block with the mating part showed in purple
The assembly can be seen in Figure F.13.
Figure F.13: Step 04 positive assembled parts for outside milling
Page 21 of 92
==PAGE:121==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Step 05 positive: Milling inner contour and logo recess.
The cylinder half is clamped on fixture step 04 with 10um spacing on the mating surfaces
Figure F.14
Figure F.14: Step 05 positive inner cavity milled out along with the logo recess
Page 22 of 92
==PAGE:122==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
G
Pulp pump flow characterization with control voltage
Figure G.1: Pumping in flow characteristic with input voltage
Figure G.2: Pumping in flow characteristic with input voltage
Page 23 of 92
==PAGE:123==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
H
DOE Rotational velocity of the mould during injec-
tion
Various rotational velocities are used to see the pulp distribution. Pulp concentration used
0.25% for all tests.
Figure H.1: DOE RPM table as influence in pulp distribution
Page 24 of 92
==PAGE:124==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure H.2: DOE RPM table as influence in pulp distribution part 2
Page 25 of 92
==PAGE:125==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
I
State diagram details and the producer consumer loop
This section will showcase the state diagram details through the loops in each state. To have an
overview of what needs to happen based on the sequence please refer to Figure 5.3 and follow
the arrows through the states.
The first state is the ’init’ state meaning initialization where the tasks for the pulp pump
and valve plus the motor task are made along with their channels that can be visualized in
Figure 5.1. Signals are sent to make sure the pump is stopped, the pulp valve is closed and
that the motor is stopped. The state is seen in Figure I.1. Then the state machine advances
like seen in Figure 5.3 to the vacuum valve state and this will happen automatically inside the
block diagram that being the nature of the ’enum’ in LabView.
Figure I.1: Initialization state
In the vacuum valve state Figure I.2 the relay task is initiated and a signal is sent to close
it and turn the LED on to showcase it has closed. The author needs to mention that physical
feedback of valve or motor actuation should be implemented for accurate and robust controls
and not only reliance on digital feedback with LED flags. In all loops there is a block called
status update and its role is to send a string that will be displayed on the GUI with the wanted
text. This is a great tool used for tracking when the program runs and it is crucial when
debugging. It allows the user to vizualize where the program stopped by reading the last string
displayed on the GUI status update.
Page 26 of 92
==PAGE:126==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.2: Vacuum valve state
In the recirculation valve closed Figure I.3 loop a signal is sent to close the valve so pulp
can enter the mould when needed and not just be pumped back into the tank. The next state
is Drain.
Figure I.3: Recirculation valve closed state
The drain state is empty Figure I.4 because the former solenoid valve has been changed to
a manual valve due to clogging. The next state is Temperature.
Figure I.4: Drain state
The Temperature state Figure I.5 initialized the read and write tasks and also the relay
task which is the relay for turning the heater on.
Page 27 of 92
==PAGE:127==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.5: Temperature state
The notification is sent ’StartTemp’ to start the control loop for the heater. Then the idle
state waits for the ’Heater at temp’ LED to turn on from the temperature loop which triggers
the event handler which then sends the queue ’temperatureOK’ to the state machine which in
turn goes to the Vacuum ON state as seen in Figure I.6. The event handler will not send the
temperatureOK unless the Vacuum pump started LED is not on as a check on the previous
step. That is a safety feature used in all the rest of the producer consumer interaction.
Figure I.6: TemperatureOK in idle
The vacuum On state Figure I.7 starts the vacuum pump relay task and turns on its LED
to show the state of the vacuum pump.
Page 28 of 92
==PAGE:128==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.7: Vacuum ON state
The next state is Pulp valve vacuum reading Figure I.8 where the voltage reading tasks are
started. The voltage reading task reads all sensor data in volts. Inside the task all channels are
set and their max values 0-10V which will be read in their respective loops Figure I.9. This is
the better way of handling voltage reading compared to having a task initiated for each channel.
Figure I.8: Pulp valve vacuum reading state
Figure I.9: Voltage reading task
Next the idle state waits for the vacuumOK LED to turn on, which in turn makes the event
handler send the queue to the state machine which then turns to Pulp pressure reading like
seen in Figure I.10.
Page 29 of 92
==PAGE:129==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.10: VacuumOK in idle
In the Pulp pressure reading state Figure I.11 the notification is sent to start the pressure
reading loop and the next state will be Pumping On.
Figure I.11: Pulp pressure reading state
In the Pumping On state the pulp pump task is initiated Figure I.12 then the state is idling
waiting for the next event.
Figure I.12: Pumping On state
Page 30 of 92
==PAGE:130==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
The next event comes from the pulp pressure reading loop which detected that the pulp
reached the wanted pulp pressure for rotation (which is slightly lower than injection pressure to
allow the motor to spin up) and turned the motor flag on. The event handler sends the queue
PulpOKForRotating to the state machine and it in turn switches to Motor On see Figure I.13.
Figure I.13: PulpOKForRotating in idle
The next state is Motor On where the notification is sent for the motor control loop to start
spinning the motor Figure I.14.
Figure I.14: Motor On state
Next is the idle state. Then the pulp pressure reaches the injection level of pressure so the
event handler detects the change of boolean of the LED called Pulp Pressure OK and sends
the queue PulpPressureOk to the state machine see Figure I.15. The state machine changes to
flow metering.
Page 31 of 92
==PAGE:131==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.15: PulpPressureOK in idle
In the flow metering state Figure I.16 the notification is sent to start the flow metering loop
and then advance to Flow control.
Figure I.16: Flow metering state
In the Flow control state Figure I.17 the notification is sent to start the flow control loop
and move to idle.
Figure I.17: Flow control state
Page 32 of 92
==PAGE:132==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
When the volume is pumped (Volume pumped LED turn on) the event handler sends the
queue to the state machine VolumePumped. The state machine then switches to Pulp valve
closed Figure I.18.
Figure I.18: Volume pumped idle
The Pulp valve closed state Figure I.19 closes the pulp valve and gives the LED booleans
the ON state for closing then switches to the Recirculation Valve Open state.
Figure I.19: Pulp valve closed state
The Recirculation Valve Open state Figure I.20 opens the valve and goes to the Pumping
Reverse state to clear the pressure and flush the system.
Page 33 of 92
==PAGE:133==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.20: Recirculation Valve Open stat
The Pumping Reverse state Figure I.21 reverses the direction of the pulp pump and then
switches to idle.
Figure I.21: Pumping reverse state
Inside the Pulp pressure reading loop the reading will detect if the pulp pressure level went
under 0.01bar and will make the LED Pulp valve open 2 turn on inside the event handler as
well, see Figure I.22. Through dequeuing the queue in the state machine the Pulp valve open
2 state will become active.
Page 34 of 92
==PAGE:134==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.22: Pulp valve open 2 idle
The Pulp valve open 2 state will start the pulp flushing control loop and then move on to
the state called Recirculation valve closed 2 see Figure I.23.
Figure I.23: Pulp valve open 2 state
The Recirculation valve closed 2 state closes the valve and moves the state to idling again
see Figure I.24.
Figure I.24: Recirculation valve closed 2 state
Page 35 of 92
==PAGE:135==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
When the timer elapses for the pulp to flush, which happens in Pulp flushing control, then
the LED called Pulp flushed will turn on which will make the event handler send the queue
PulpValveClosed2 which in turn will change the state machine to the Pulp valve closed 2 state
like in Figure I.25.
Figure I.25: Pulp valve closed 2 idle
The Pulp valve closed 2 closes the pulp valve yet again to end flushing and moves on to
Pumping off like seen Figure I.26.
Figure I.26: Pulp valve closed 2 state
The Pumping off state stops the pulp pump and moves on to the state called Air pressure
like seen in Figure I.27.
Page 36 of 92
==PAGE:136==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.27: Puping off state
The Air pressure state sends the notification to start the air pressure control loop like seen
in Figure I.28. It then advances the state machine to the Drying time state.
Figure I.28: Air pressure state
The Drying time state send the notification to start the Drying time loop see Figure I.29
which has a countdown for the preferred drying time.
Figure I.29: Drying time state
When the Drying done LED is turning on at the end of the countdown the event handler
will send the queue ’stop’ to the state machine which was idling. The state machine will then
switch to the state stop like seen in Figure I.30.
Page 37 of 92
==PAGE:137==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.30: State machine idle stop
The stop state in the state machine Figure I.31 sends the signals to the VI called Shut-
downSequence.
Figure I.31: State machine stop
Inside the ShutdownSequence VI all tasks are cleared and all LEDs are changing their state
corresponding to the signal supplied On/Off. The two figures Figure I.32 and Figure I.33 show
the full extent of the signals sent the the state of the LEDs showing the state of the control
elements.
Page 38 of 92
==PAGE:138==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Figure I.32: ShutdownSequenceVI block diagram part 1
Figure I.33: ShutdownSequenceVI block diagram part 2
That completes the sequence and the machine has reached its safe shutdown. The program
stops running since all loops are effectively stopped.
Page 39 of 92
==PAGE:139==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
J
Technical drawings
The technical drawings list as listed from the next page:
• Back support for mould milling
• Flange for mould attachment
• Bottle half negative side
• Swing for locking the mould
• Base plate for machining the mould
• Middle support for mould machining
• Neck support for mould machining
• Intermediary fixture for testing old mould
• Pin for fixing side bars of the intermediary fixture
• Rod of clamp mechanism with M4 hole
• Rod of clamp mechanism with thru hole
• Polymer spacer for clamping mould
• Side bar for intermediary fixture
• Top bar for intermediary fixture
Page 40 of 92
==PAGE:140==
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Aluminium stock
WEIGHT: 
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
TITLE:
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL:
DATE
DRAWN
CHK'D
   LINEAR:
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768 f
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
Back_support
A
 R4,00 
 34,27 
 25,52 
 35,00 
 22,00 
DETAIL A
SCALE 5 : 1
 0,50 
 5,00 
 5,00 
 5,00 
 20,00
M6 - 6H 
 15,00
 6,05 X 90°, Near Side
If thread is too long, tap from both sides 15mm
 6,05 X 90°, Near Side
 5,00 THRU ALL
 M6  THRU ALL
 5,00 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:141==
 SW 100 
 
94 
M8x1.25 6x60 (=360 )
A
A
 20 
 42 
 
23 
 2.5 
 M38 x 2.0-6h 
 105.00° 
 105.00° 
B
D
C
SECTION A-A
R2
 10 ±0.02 
 R1.0 
 105° 
 R1 
DETAIL B
SCALE 2 : 1
Rz  6.3
 R0.2 
DETAIL D
SCALE 6 : 1
 R1 
 R0.2 
 9.95 
DETAIL C
SCALE 6 : 1
chamfer on all edges 0.4 x 45
amount: 1x
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Rz  40
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Aluminum Alloy
AL 6061
M. GEISELHART
01.03.2022
Porous bottle mold
Flange
MGEIS
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH: 
TOLERANCES: DIN 2768 - fH
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Bottle_250ml_Flange
REV 3
REV 2
REV 1
03.05.2022
MGEIS
M. GEISELHART
==PAGE:142==
 
23 
 
32.4 
 
34.17 
 
38.63 
 
48.14 
 
55 
 R7.50 
 15° 
A
A
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
 20 
 54 
 68.31 
 75.76 
 82.80 
 94 
 168 
 175 
 R4.00 
 184 
 186 
 75.00° 
 R1.2 
 5.00 
 10.00 
 15° 
B
SECTION A-A
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
Rz  6.3
 R4.00 
 R2.00 
 73.00 
 9.00 
 3.34 
 75.00° 
Rz  6.3
 R1.00 
 0.2x45  
 10 ±0.02 
DETAIL B
SCALE 3 : 1
chamfer on all edges 0.2 x 45
amount: 1x
Rz  6.3
Rz  40
Rz  6.3
Porous block
M. GEISELHART
08.03.2022
Porous bottle mold
Half - negative
MGEIS
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH: 
TOLERANCES: DIN 2768 - fH
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
Bottle_250ml_Half_neg
REV 3
REV 2
REV 1
==PAGE:143==
 
10 
F8
h6 
 
4.5 
 18 
 28.46 
 52.95 
 
10.2 0.05 
 R1.90 
 R21.50 
 40.70 
 23.5 
 81.41 
t = 8mm
chamfer on all edges 0.4 x 45
amount: 2x
Rz  10
Rz  40
Rz  10
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH: DIN 2768 - fH
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Aluminum Alloy
AL 6061
WEIGHT: 
M. GEISELHART
28.02.2022
Bottle_250ml_Swing
Porous bottle mold
Swing
MGEIS
REV 3
REV 1
REV 2
==PAGE:144==
 15,52 
 61,75 
 19,00 
 125,73 
 17,00 
 10,00 
 120,00 
 10,00 
 230,00 
6 x 
 6,40 THRU ALL
 11,00 
 4,40
 11,05 X 90°, Near Side
Plate thickness is not crucial
as long as the holes are thru
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
3
MATERIAL:
E
F
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MFG
APPV'D
1
2
1
REVISION
Q.A
CHK'D
DRAWN
NAME
SIGNATURE
EDGES
DATE
FINISH:
4
TITLE:
A4
A
B
C
D
F
4
3
2
SHEET 1 OF 1
A
B
C
D
E
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
WEIGHT: 
Bottom_mounting_plate
Aluminium stock
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768 f
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:145==
B
 110,00 
 34,77 
 R32,50 
 12,00 
 35,00 
from both sides 15mm
If thread is too long tap 
A
2 x 
 5,00 THRU ALL
M6  THRU ALL
 6,05 X 90°, Near Side
MFG
SIGNATURE
FINISH:
DATE
Q.A
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
TITLE:
REVISION
E
DRAWN
F
1
1
APPV'D
2
CHK'D
2
EDGES
NAME
4
3
SHEET 1 OF 1
A
B
C
D
E
F
4
3
SCALE:1:2
A4
A
B
C
D
DWG NO.
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
WEIGHT: 
Middle_support_alternative
Aluminium stock
MATERIAL:
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768 f
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
 5,00 
DETAIL B
SCALE 2 : 1
 R4,00 
 R6,50 
 3,77 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:146==
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:147==
6
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
5
3
2
2
A
1
C
CHK'D
3
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
EDGES
F
SIGNATURE
MATERIAL:
DATE
   LINEAR:
3
DRAWN
1
C
4
D
B
E
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
TITLE:
SCALE:1:5
A4
A
B
D
E
F
4
REVISION
DWG NO.
SHEET 1 OF 1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
WEIGHT: 
NAME
S202734
070100
New fixture asse
1
4
2
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
QTY.
1
Existing base
1
2
Top
1
3
B18.3.1M - 8 x 1.25 x 20 
Hex SHCS -- 20CHX
8
4
Side
2
5
Pin
4
6
Old side pin
2
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
QTY.
1
Existing base
1
2
Top
1
3
B18.3.1M - 8 x 1.25 x 20 
Hex SHCS -- 20CHX
8
4
Side
2
5
Pin
4
6
Old side pin
2
6
A
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:148==
 
4,00 
REVISION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
070104
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
MATERIAL:
DATE
DRAWN
   LINEAR:
NAME
1
1
TITLE:
SIGNATURE
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768-0
EDGES
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
Pin
3,00 
 25,00 
 45° 
 
 0,50 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:149==
CHK'D
REVISION
MFG
DWG NO.
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
SHEET 1 OF 1
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
   LINEAR:
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DATE
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
SCALE:1:2
TITLE:
SIGNATURE
BREAK SHARP 
DRAWN
MATERIAL:
APPV'D
A4
   ANGULAR:
Alin Ivanache
DEBURR AND 
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768-m
EDGES
NAME
Q.A
WEIGHT: 
SURFACE FINISH:
FINISH:
Rod_clamp_8mm
_tapped_hole_M4
A
 130,00 
 10,00 
 
8,00 
DETAIL A
SCALE 5 : 1
 0,40x 45 deg all around 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:150==
DRAWN
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
APPV'D
TITLE:
SCALE:1:2
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
BREAK SHARP 
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
   LINEAR:
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
1
2
SIGNATURE
MATERIAL:
DWG NO.
REVISION
NAME
MFG
1
DATE
A4
SHEET 1 OF 1
Alin Ivanache
   ANGULAR:
CHK'D
DEBURR AND 
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768-m
EDGES
Q.A
WEIGHT: 
SURFACE FINISH:
FINISH:
Rod_clamp_8mm
_thru_hole
DETAIL A
SCALE 5 : 1
 0,40x45deg all around 
A
 130,00 
 
 
4,20 THRU 
4,20 THRU 
 10,00 
 
8,00 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:151==
 
10 
 M4 
 16 ±0.05 
chamfer on all edges 0.5x45
amount: 4x
Rz  25
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH: DIN 2768 - fH
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:2:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
polymer
POM or similar
WEIGHT: 
M. GEISELHART
28.02.2022
rubber_spacer
Porous bottle mold
Rubber spacer
MGEIS
REV 3
REV 1
REV 2
==PAGE:152==
DWG NO.
REVISION
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
070102
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
SCALE:1:2
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
DATE
DRAWN
CHK'D
   LINEAR:
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768-m
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
Side
SECTION A-A
 40,00 
 3,50 
 7,50 
 165,00 
 3,50 
 4x M8x10  
 10,00 
 15,00 
2x
4,00 H7
10,00
A
A
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:153==
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: ISO 2768-m
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1
SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
Stainless Steel
WEIGHT: 
070101
Top
 7,50 
 7,50 
 4x M8 TRHU 
 M12 THRU 
2x
4,00 H7 THRU
 3,50 
 120,00 
 40,00 
 15,00 
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:154==
In mould
Top 
Bottom
Side 1
Side 2
Inside view
Run 1
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
8V
Vol pumped 
4,8L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Air pressure
3,5bar
Flow
4 L/min
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 2
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,8L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,8L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 3
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
10V
Vol pumped 
10L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
45 s
Flow
4L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 4
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
3L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,8L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 5
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
3L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,65L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 6
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,65L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
SCA Pure 80 pulp
All deposition happens at the bottom 
which means that the dispersion of the 
fluid is poor during injection. The 
vacuum does not pull the fibers to the 
walls during injection instead they are 
deposited at the end of travel and the 
turbulences cause by that impeded the 
deposition of pulp on the walls. Meaning 
that the backwards stream delaminate 
any deposition that might have 
happened until the bottom grows in size.
More pulp only caused the bottom 
deposition to increase axially as a plug 
with no wall deposition
Moulding parameters
Pictures
The inside surface 
is very poor
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
K
Porous mould trials
Page 55 of 92
==PAGE:155==
Run 7
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
6L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,65L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 8
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,65L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,20%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
SCA Pure 80 pulp
Run 9
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
3L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,6L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 10
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
3,5L
Pump out 
3,5V
Pumping out 
90 s
Flow
1,2L/min
Air pressure
0
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 11
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4L
Pump out 
3,5V
Pumping out 
60 s
Flow
1,2L/min
Air pressure
4,1 bar
Drying 
230s
Temperature 
No
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 12
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,5L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,4 bar
Drying 
300s
Temperature 
150deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Delamination is due to differential 
drying caused by differences in wall 
thickness
Good neck 
formation with 
delamination due 
to the pulp being 
stuck on the 
mould
Much more even distribution and a 
smooth inner surface. Not enough 
deposition on the neck
Even more filling due to more volume 
being pumped inside. 
==PAGE:156==
Run 13
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,75L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,4 bar
Drying 
600s
Temperature 
200deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 14
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,75L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,4 bar
Drying 
900s
Temperature 
200deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 15
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
9V
Vol pumped 
6L
Pump out 
2V
Pumping out 
50 s
Flow
3L/min
Air pressure
4 bar
Drying 
900s
Temperature 
190deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Run 16
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,75L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,3 bar
Drying 
900s
Temperature 
190deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
Paper tray pulp
Run 17
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
4,75L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,3 bar
Air ramp duration
60s
Drying 
120s
Temperature 
190deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
Paper tray pulp
Run 18
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
2L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,3 bar
Air ramp duration
60s
Drying 
120s
Temperature 
190deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
Paper tray pulp
Run 19
Vacuum 
-0,7
Pump in 
7V
Vol pumped 
2L
Pump out 
3,7V
Pumping out 
100 s
Flow
1L/min
Air pressure
4,3 bar
Air ramp duration
60s
Drying 
120s
Temperature 
190deg
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT ONP
Clogging of pores cause the seal to be 
pushed outwards and leads to flash 
formation. The flow becomes limited as 
pressure starts to build. Alternatively the 
internal surface is still smooth
The pumping was stopped short due to 
pressure built up. The pressure build is 
due to clogging of the pores
Air ramping used. The deposition is 
localized.
Flange view from pressure builtup
Accident with air pressure there was no 
ramping up of pressure but instant 
release to 4 bars. Deposition is localized 
and the rest of the water just drains 
through the available space
More pulp pumped in but there was an 
accident with the air pressure release 
thus the bottle collapsed. The 
Neck irregularities on the inside surface due to 
the high water level on the outside of the mould 
during drying. The vacuum could not act in the 
same way due to the water impeding its fiber pull
These are the best results achieved before the 
mould clogging
==PAGE:157==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
L
DOE filling, flushing, drying, air ramp, temperature
The next four pages show the results of the DOE for the parameters changed filling flow,
flushing flow, air ramp duration, drying duration and drying temperature.
Page 58 of 92
==PAGE:158==
Water out [L]
Section view after drying
In mould
Top 
Bottom
Side 0
Side 1
Inside view
Run 1
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
3
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 2
4,37
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,3
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 3
4,22
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,7
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 4
4,42
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,4
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 5
2,82
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,7
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 6
4,5
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,7
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 7
4,58
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
4,4
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,5
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 8
3,6
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,5
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 9
4,6
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,5
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
The best overall 
distribution of wall 
thickness with almost 
no delamination. Neck 
broke due to mould 
stiction.
High delamination and 
thick corners
Delamination and thick 
walls
Pumped 4,4 L. Severe 
delamination and thick 
corners
Little delamination, 
thin walls but corner 
delamination is high
The surface came out 
better because of 
compressed air used 
during demoulding. 
Extreme delamination
Pictures
Moulding parameters
Little delamination 
thick walls
Very much 
delamination and thick 
corners
Very much 
delamination and thick 
corners
==PAGE:159==
Run 10
3,15
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,5
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 11
4,3
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,5
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 12
4,15
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 13
5
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 14
4,16
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 15
4,22
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 16
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
40
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 17
4,57
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 18
4,72
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,2
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Thick walls and 
rounded corners and 
delamination at the 
neck formation
Thick walls with 
delamination at the 
neck formation
Rounded corners and 
delamination at the 
neck formation
Severe delamination 
but not with thick 
corners
Overall thick walls
Thick walls and little 
delamination
Thick areas at the neck 
formation and the 
corners with 
delamination only at 
the neck
Good distribution but 
corners are 
delaminating
Severe delamination 
and thick corners
==PAGE:160==
Run 19
4,68
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 20
3,93
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 21
4,93
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 22
4,06
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 23
4,92
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 24
4,44
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 25
2,25
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 26
4,56
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 27
4,55
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
1
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Almost no deposition 
on the neck
Almost no deposition 
on the neck
Almost no deposition 
on the neck
Delamination at the 
corners and rounded 
corners
Thick walls, thick 
cornrs and 
delamination of the 
walls
Delaminatio at the 
neck formation and 
rounded corners
No delamination but 
rounded corners and 
thick walls
Extreme delamination 
at the walls
Severe stiction to the mould 
==PAGE:161==
Run 28
4,8
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 29
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
1
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
90
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 30
3,8
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 31
4,13
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
90
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Run 32
3,9
Vacuum [bar]
-0,75
Flow in [L/min]
3
Vol pumped [L]
5
Flow out [L/min]
3
Pumping out [s]
60
Air pressure actual [bar]
4,1
Air ramp duration
25
Drying 
300
Air temperature [°C]
150
Concentration
0,30%
Rotation
NO
No PID control
BT
Wall delamination and 
thin bottom relative to 
body with good neck 
formation
Severe delamination
Almost no deposition 
on the other side of 
the neck and corner 
delamination
Too damaged 
Too damaged 
Too damaged 
Too damaged 
Uneven distribution 
and high stiction to the 
mould
Even distribution but 
high stiction to the 
mould and 
delamination
==PAGE:162==
SPIP image roughness Left flange 
 
SPIP porosity Left flange 
 
 
SPIP image roughness Right flange 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
M
Roughness/porosity analysis on negative mould half
Page 63 of 92
==PAGE:163==
SPIP porosity Right flange 
 
SPIP image roughness Top neck 
 
 
SPIP porosity Top neck 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 64 of 92
==PAGE:164==
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPIP image roughness Middle neck 
SPIP porosity Middle neck 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 65 of 92
==PAGE:165==
SPIP image roughness Lower neck 
  
SPIP porosity Lower neck 
 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 66 of 92
==PAGE:166==
SPIP image roughness Cavity right side 
 
SPIP porosity Cavity right side 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 67 of 92
==PAGE:167==
Least Squares Fit 
Effect Summary 
 
Source
LogWorth
PValue
Flow in [L/min]
3,353
0,00044
Drying time [s]
2,555
0,00278
Flow out [L/min]
1,766
0,01715
Air temperature [°C] 
1,766
0,01715  
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1,759
0,01744  
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1,640
0,02293  
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1,558
0,02767  
Air ramp time [s]
1,336
0,04608 ^
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1,325
0,04731  
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1,146
0,07152  
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1,020
0,09548  
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
0,860
0,13797
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
0,852
0,14074  
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
0,775
0,16774  
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
0,716
0,19235  
 
Response Point 1 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
N
DOE ANOVA report
==PAGE:168==
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
6,2481125
10,2288
0,0056*
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,0120125
0,0197
0,8902
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
2,8560500
4,6757
0,0461*
Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,8192000
1,3411
0,2638
Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,4535125
2,3796
0,1425
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,6160500
1,0085
0,3302
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,3570125
0,5845
0,4557
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,3828125
0,6267
0,4401
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,0450000
0,0737
0,7895
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,2211125
0,3620
0,5558
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,1653125
0,2706
0,6100
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,0144500
0,0237
0,8797
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,5512500
0,9025
0,3563
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
2,8203125
4,6172
0,0473*
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
1,6836125
2,7563
0,1163
 
 
Response Point 2 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
-0,5
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
Point 2 Predicted RMSE=0,6443 RSq=0,63 
PValue=0,1233
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 69 of 92
==PAGE:169==
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
8,0500781
19,3922
0,0004*
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,9556531
2,3021
0,1487
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,3140281
0,7565
0,3973
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0236531
0,0570
0,8144
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,3140281
0,7565
0,3973
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,1968781
0,4743
0,5009
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,0116281
0,0280
0,8692
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0935281
0,2253
0,6414
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,0069031
0,0166
0,8990
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,0108781
0,0262
0,8734
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,5859031
1,4114
0,2522
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,5075281
1,2226
0,2852
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0000281
0,0001
0,9935
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,1287781
0,3102
0,5853
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,1237531
0,2981
0,5926
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 70 of 92
==PAGE:170==
Response Point 3 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
3,2334245
4,4297
0,0515
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
1,3744820
1,8830
0,1889
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,0602045
0,0825
0,7777
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,6193845
0,8485
0,3706
Drying time [s]
1
1
0,0102245
0,0140
0,9073
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,9085520
1,2447
0,2810
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,8153645
1,1170
0,3063
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0068445
0,0094
0,9241
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,2987645
0,4093
0,5314
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,3978320
0,5450
0,4710
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0216320
0,0296
0,8655
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,3595520
0,4926
0,4929
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 71 of 92
==PAGE:171==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,0011045
0,0015
0,9695
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
2,1156245
2,8984
0,1080
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,0005445
0,0007
0,9785
 
Response Point 4 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
1,2363781
1,4525
0,2457
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
1,7813281
2,0927
0,1673
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,5382031
0,6323
0,4382
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,2983781
0,3505
0,5621
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,1845281
0,2168
0,6478
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,6699031
0,7870
0,3882
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 72 of 92
==PAGE:172==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,2869031
0,3370
0,5696
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0047531
0,0056
0,9414
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,4117781
0,4837
0,4967
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
1,0841281
1,2736
0,2757
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,2064031
0,2425
0,6291
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,0258781
0,0304
0,8638
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,5434031
0,6384
0,4360
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
3,5577781
4,1796
0,0577
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,0790031
0,0928
0,7646
 
Response Point 5 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
 
Effect Tests 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 73 of 92
==PAGE:173==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
0,3260281
0,0722
0,7916
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,1471531
0,0326
0,8590
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
2,0655281
0,4575
0,5085
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
4,8594031
1,0762
0,3150
Drying time [s]
1
1
1,5444031
0,3421
0,5668
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
4,3438781
0,9621
0,3413
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
6,4890031
1,4372
0,2481
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,9625781
0,2132
0,6505
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,4072531
0,0902
0,7678
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
7,5369031
1,6693
0,2147
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,0442531
0,0098
0,9224
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,5967781
0,1322
0,7209
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
2,2419031
0,4965
0,4912
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
2,1063781
0,4665
0,5044
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
9,7350781
2,1561
0,1614
 
Response Point 6 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 74 of 92
==PAGE:174==
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
1,906128
0,3674
0,5529
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
3,733278
0,7195
0,4088
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,894453
0,1724
0,6835
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
7,059403
1,3605
0,2605
Drying time [s]
1
1
0,014878
0,0029
0,9580
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
2,370753
0,4569
0,5087
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
4,140003
0,7979
0,3850
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,425503
0,4675
0,5039
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,010153
0,0020
0,9653
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
19,019028
3,6655
0,0736
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
3,624778
0,6986
0,4156
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
16,287778
3,1391
0,0955
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
3,531153
0,6805
0,4215
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,664128
0,1280
0,7252
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
19,328653
3,7252
0,0715
 
Response Point 7 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 75 of 92
==PAGE:175==
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
1,729800
0,4553
0,5095
Air temperature [°C]
1
1
0,049613
0,0131
0,9104
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
6,643013
1,7485
0,2047
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
26,864450
7,0711
0,0171*
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,171113
0,0450
0,8346
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C]
1
1
0,180000
0,0474
0,8304
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
21,780000
5,7328
0,0292*
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
18,574513
4,8891
0,0419*
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
7,488450
1,9711
0,1794
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
6,142513
1,6168
0,2217
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,001800
0,0005
0,9829
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s]
1
1
7,239013
1,9054
0,1865
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,273800
0,0721
0,7918
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,762613
0,2007
0,6601
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,744200
0,1959
0,6640
 
Response Point 8 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 76 of 92
==PAGE:176==
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
1,344800
0,2049
0,6569
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,551250
0,0840
0,7757
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
2,010012
0,3063
0,5876
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
16,704200
2,5452
0,1302
Drying time [s] 
1
1
15,484613
2,3594
0,1441
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
2,257813
0,3440
0,5657
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
5,346450
0,8146
0,3801
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
41,541613
6,3297
0,0229*
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,201250
0,1830
0,6745
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
1,065800
0,1624
0,6923
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
5,008613
0,7632
0,3953
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,024200
0,0037
0,9523
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,708050
0,1079
0,7468
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
9,923513
1,5121
0,2366
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
1,428050
0,2176
0,6472
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 77 of 92
==PAGE:177==
Response Point 9 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
2,096128
0,1810
0,6762
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
1,518153
0,1311
0,7221
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
1,781328
0,1538
0,7001
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
9,148503
0,7898
0,3873
Drying time [s]
1
1
0,114003
0,0098
0,9222
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,163878
0,0141
0,9068
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
9,041878
0,7806
0,3900
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
9,912378
0,8558
0,3687
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
1,492128
0,1288
0,7243
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
17,895153
1,5450
0,2318
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,662278
0,2298
0,6381
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
14,783203
1,2763
0,2752
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 78 of 92
==PAGE:178==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
1,562028
0,1349
0,7183
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
3,373503
0,2913
0,5968
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
7,990003
0,6898
0,4184
 
Response Point 10 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
6,993800
0,5824
0,4565
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
1,852812
0,1543
0,6996
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
1,264050
0,1053
0,7498
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
13,755012
1,1455
0,3004
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,051200
0,0043
0,9487
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
2,163200
0,1802
0,6769
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 79 of 92
==PAGE:179==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
5,831113
0,4856
0,4959
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,376200
0,1979
0,6624
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,035112
0,0029
0,9575
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
27,232200
2,2679
0,1516
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,825613
0,0688
0,7965
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
15,792200
1,3152
0,2683
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,040200
0,1699
0,6857
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,588613
0,0490
0,8276
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
14,580000
1,2142
0,2868
 
Response Point 11 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 80 of 92
==PAGE:180==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
0,151250
0,0204
0,8882
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
3,393013
0,4578
0,5083
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
10,834513
1,4620
0,2442
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
22,984200
3,1014
0,0973
Drying time [s]
1
1
2,311250
0,3119
0,5843
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
13,728800
1,8525
0,1924
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
31,521800
4,2535
0,0558
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
32,361013
4,3667
0,0530
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,094612
0,0128
0,9114
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
1,505113
0,2031
0,6583
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
10,672200
1,4401
0,2476
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,068450
0,0092
0,9246
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,092450
0,0125
0,9125
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,729800
0,2334
0,6355
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,006613
0,0009
0,9765
 
Response Point 12 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 81 of 92
==PAGE:181==
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
3,997378
0,5017
0,4890
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,196878
0,0247
0,8771
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
10,499653
1,3177
0,2679
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
21,763503
2,7313
0,1179
Drying time [s]
1
1
0,669903
0,0841
0,7756
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
2,720278
0,3414
0,5672
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
55,994653
7,0273
0,0174*
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
22,094628
2,7729
0,1153
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
4,432753
0,5563
0,4666
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
3,270403
0,4104
0,5308
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
7,305753
0,9169
0,3525
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,579753
0,1983
0,6621
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
4,197753
0,5268
0,4784
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
1,076778
0,1351
0,7180
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
6,633903
0,8325
0,3751
 
Response Point 13 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 82 of 92
==PAGE:182==
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
0,009453
0,0041
0,9498
Air temperature [°C]
1
1
16,344903
7,0705
0,0171*
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
1,679028
0,7263
0,4067
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,755378
1,1919
0,2911
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,126253
0,0546
0,8182
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C]
1
1
0,585903
0,2535
0,6215
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
13,507003
5,8429
0,0279*
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
3,706003
1,6032
0,2236
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,326028
0,1410
0,7122
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
2,305878
0,9975
0,3328
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
5,636403
2,4382
0,1380
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,212878
0,0921
0,7655
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,190653
0,0825
0,7777
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,699153
0,3024
0,5900
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,001378
0,0006
0,9808
 
Response Point 14 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 83 of 92
==PAGE:183==
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
1,913457
1,0709
0,3161
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
9,630563
5,3900
0,0338*
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
0,109863
0,0615
0,8073
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
1,168538
0,6540
0,4305
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,179251
0,1003
0,7555
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,645532
0,3613
0,5562
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
1,952782
1,0929
0,3114
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,775957
1,5536
0,2305
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,104082
0,0583
0,8123
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
10,482476
5,8668
0,0277*
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
3,951563
2,2116
0,1564
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,392363
0,7793
0,3904
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,067988
0,0381
0,8478
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,225288
0,1261
0,7272
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
1,413301
0,7910
0,3870
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 84 of 92
==PAGE:184==
Response Point 15 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
1,872113
0,5735
0,4599
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
7,239013
2,2175
0,1559
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
11,664450
3,5732
0,0770
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
11,858450
3,6326
0,0748
Drying time [s]
1
1
1,080450
0,3310
0,5731
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
2,645000
0,8102
0,3814
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
16,791013
5,1436
0,0375*
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
14,661113
4,4911
0,0501
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,357013
0,1094
0,7452
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
2,796612
0,8567
0,3684
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
3,712813
1,1373
0,3020
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,147612
0,3515
0,5615
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 85 of 92
==PAGE:185==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
7,840800
2,4019
0,1407
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
2,784800
0,8531
0,3694
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,014450
0,0044
0,9478
 
Response Point 16 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min] 
1
1
0,010878
0,0037
0,9524
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
12,663028
4,2825
0,0551
Air ramp time [s]
1
1
1,697403
0,5740
0,4597
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
5,289378
1,7888
0,1998
Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,013203
0,0045
0,9476
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,175528
0,0594
0,8106
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 86 of 92
==PAGE:186==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
10,822878
3,6602
0,0738
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
17,716128
5,9914
0,0263*
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
1,819278
0,6153
0,4443
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,034453
0,0117
0,9154
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
0,065703
0,0222
0,8834
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,091378
0,0309
0,8627
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
0,841753
0,2847
0,6010
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,468028
0,1583
0,6960
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,294528
0,0996
0,7564
 
Response Weight wet [g] 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 87 of 92
==PAGE:187==
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
0,5000
0,0022
0,9628
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
220,5000
0,9899
0,3346
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
12,5000
0,0561
0,8157
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
364,5000
1,6364
0,2191
Drying time [s]
1
1
2775,1250
12,4589
0,0028*
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
24,5000
0,1100
0,7445
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
0,0000
0,0000
1,0000
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
180,5000
0,8104
0,3814
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s]
1
1
465,1250
2,0882
0,1677
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
112,5000
0,5051
0,4875
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
128,0000
0,5747
0,4594
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
28,1250
0,1263
0,7270
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min]
1
1
242,0000
1,0865
0,3128
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
171,1250
0,7683
0,3937
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
45,1250
0,2026
0,6587
 
Response Weight after drying [g] 
Actual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Residual by Predicted Plot 
 
 
Studentized Residuals 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 88 of 92
==PAGE:188==
Externally studentized residuals with 95% simultaneous limits (Bonferroni) in red, individual limits in green. 
 
Effect Tests 
 
Source 
Nparm
DF
Sum of 
Squares
F Ratio
Prob > F
Flow in [L/min]
1
1
63,562813
8,1510
0,0115*
Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
8,925313
1,1445
0,3006
Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
4,727812
0,6063
0,4476
Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
46,802813
6,0018
0,0262*
Drying time [s]
1
1
4,727813
0,6063
0,4476
Flow in [L/min]*Air temperature [°C] 
1
1
0,427812
0,0549
0,8178
Flow in [L/min]*Air ramp time [s] 
1
1
15,540313
1,9928
0,1772
Flow in [L/min]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
27,937812
3,5826
0,0766
Flow in [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
0,475312
0,0610
0,8081
Air temperature [°C]*Air ramp time [s]
1
1
13,650313
1,7505
0,2044
Air temperature [°C]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
4,575313
0,5867
0,4548
Air temperature [°C]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
3,577812
0,4588
0,5079
Air ramp time [s]*Flow out [L/min] 
1
1
2,152813
0,2761
0,6065
Air ramp time [s]*Drying time [s]
1
1
0,037813
0,0048
0,9453
Flow out [L/min]*Drying time [s] 
1
1
5,362812
0,6877
0,4191
 
Prediction Profiler 
 
 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 89 of 92
==PAGE:189==
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 90 of 92
==PAGE:190==
 
 
 
 
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
Page 91 of 92
==PAGE:191==
S202734 Alin Ivanache
Master Thesis
O
Thickness and weights measurements of bottles
Figure O.1: Thicknesses and weights of paper bottles
Page 92 of 92
==PAGE:192==
The future is green and we can make it happen!
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels All´e, 425
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1960
www.mek.dtu.dk
