==PAGE:1==
Fabrication of truncated
waveguide metasurfaces for
bio-sensing
Markos Kaiseroglou
Master Thesis July 2022
==PAGE:2==
Fabrication of truncated waveguide metasurfaces for
bio-sensing
Master Thesis (35 ECTS credits), Markos Kaiseroglou (s202911)
Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark.
Author E-mail address: s202911@student.dtu.dk
July 3, 2022
Supervisors
Professor Anders Kristensen (Department of Health Technology)
Research Assistant Andreas Raimund Stilling-Andersen (Department of Health
Technology)
Research Assistant Emil Alstrup Jensen (Department of Health Technology)
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
The completion of this Thesis signifies the end of my 2-years Master’s degree journey at
Technical University of Denmark. A journey hard and difficult but simultaneously enjoy-
able and full of new experiences which I would never been able to complete without the
contribution of some people.
First of all, I would like to express my warm thanks to my supervisor Anders Kristensen
for the trust he has shown me both in the assignment of this work and for my inclusion in
the Optofluidics team. The constant interaction through the meetings helped me decisively
in the development and acquisition of necessary knowledge and skills, generally speaking.
I would also like to thank Andreas R.Stilling Andersen and Emil Alstrup Jensen for their
valuable contribution with respect to the cleanroom and optical characterization work re-
spectively. The time they devoted to help me and guide me resolving questions played a key
role in the completion of this assignment. Moreover, the friendly and cordial atmosphere
from all the group members is something I could not omit.
Last but not least, I would like to express my special thanks to my family and friends
for their understanding and invaluable moral support at any time over this journey.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Waveguide metasurfaces are promising as replacements of traditional optical components
due to their high versatility and low spatial demands. In this thesis, the focus is con-
centrated mostly on the nanofabrication of truncated metasurfaces which can widely be
used as biosensors when operating on Raman setup. The underlying reason for this utility
stems from the field enhancement in the slot area of the truncated metasurface where the
field concentration is higher than the neighbouring flat ones. The main strategy for the
nanofabrication of nanoholes is deep reactive ion etching using a suitable masking ma-
terials (poly-Si), in order to etch as deep as possible while keeping the perfect nanohole
geometry all over the area. An optimization process is accomplished to get the best geo-
metrical features (depth and diameter) where TiO2 is conformally deposited via ALD. An
investigation of the actual intensity enhancement is performed using Raman spectroscopy,
in order to further investigate the intensity increase of the metasurface area with respect
to the flat area, as well as the effect of the TiO2 in this field rise. Thus, not only the field
enhancement due to the metasurface area is studied but also the importance of the TiO2
layer of specific thickness.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Metasurfaces & Meta-atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Waveguide Metasurfaces: Principle & Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope & Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory & Methods
6
2.1
Metasurface: Nanofabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Broad Picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Process Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2.1
Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) . . . .
7
2.1.2.2
Spin coating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2.3
Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2.4
Etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.2.5
Plasma Ashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.2.6
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Metasurface: Dimensions Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Ellipsometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Metasurface: Optical Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.1
Raman Spectroscopy: Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.2
Raman Spectroscopy: Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
24
3.1
Nanofabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Master & Daughter Stamp: Design & Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.2
Process Wafers: Optimization Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Optical Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2.1
Raman Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
4
Discussion
48
4.1
Nanofabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Optical characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
53
References
54
Appendix A Results
58
A.1 Nanofabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.1.1
AFM Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2 Optical Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
iv
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the past 10-15 years, significant developments in optical metamaterial design, engineer-
ing, and fabrication has created excitement among researchers and consumers alike [1].
In brief, a metamaterial is any material engineered to have properties that are extended
beyond the limits provided by nature and resulting in something completely different in
properties than materials employed. There is a bundle of unusual properties typically
accompanying the term meta-materials in optics such as negative refractive index and so
negative refraction [2].
It is known that, for conventional materials, the electromagnetic parameters such as
magnetic permeability and electric permittivity arise from the response of the atoms or
molecules that make up the material to an electromagnetic wave being passed through.
However, in the case of metamaterials, these electromagnetic properties are not deter-
mined at an atomic or molecular level. Instead, these properties are determined by the
configuration of a collection of smaller objects that make up the metamaterial which are
called meta-atoms (subwalength scatterers of light).
Due to the fact that the proper-
ties of the metamaterial can be determined from the composition and structure of such
small (nanoscale) objects, the electromagnetic properties of the metamaterial (such as
permittivity and permeability) can be accurately tuned on a very small scale.
The fascinating functionalities of metamaterials typically require multiple stacks of mate-
rial layers, which not only leads to extensive losses but also brings a lot of challenges in
nanofabrication. However, the vast unusual optical effects do not necessarily imply the
use of the volumetric (3D) metamaterials. As a result, in more recent years, the focus
of researchers has mainly shifted towards the so-called metasurfaces, the two-dimensional
analogues of metamaterials [3]. Metasurfaces are thin-films composed of individual (sub-
wavelength) elements deliberately distributed in a plane that have initially been developed
to overcome the obstacles that metamaterials are confronted with [4]. The relief in fab-
rication was so pronounced that now metasurfaces are the fastest developing branch of
metamaterials.
1.1
Metasurfaces & Meta-atoms
The advantageous character and design of metasurfaces has assured for an impressive range
and variety of applications, such as electric field and intensity enhancement, wavefront
shaping, tailoring of the phase and more. Using conventional optical devices and com-
ponents, the optical path of the light is controlled by the optical properties of the bulky
medium, such as the refractive index, extinction coefficient, thickness medium etc. On the
other hand, the nanoscaled components of a metasurface can result in abrupt changes of
1
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
optical properties of light when it passes through the medium. More particularly, electro-
magnetic waves passing through a metasurface undergo phase jumps on distances small
compared to the wavelength of operation. The total action of the metasurface can lead to
reflection/transmission of the beam under a pre-designed angle, conversion or filtering of
polarization, like so-called λ/2 and λ/4 plates routinely used in optical labs, planar lens
and meta-holograms (Fig.1.1). Also, they are designed to modify different characteristics
of light such as its wavefront, polarization distribution, intensity distribution or spectrum,
focusing / defocusing, imaging, beam shaping and many other useful functions [5].
Fig. 1.1. State-of-the-art metasurface applications [5].
It is obvious that optical metasurfaces are inextricable part in a variety of interesting
applications. One of the most noteworthy application example is meta-lenses. These are
flat lenses fabricated by optical components that use metasurfaces to focus light. Their
advantages range from their flat surface and reduced thickness (in contrast to classic bulk
refractive lenses) to their very promising high focusing efficiency.
Together with small thicknesses such exceptional abilities in light manipulation have made
metasurfaces extremely popular objects in optics and photonics. Their simplified fabrica-
tion processes (compared to metamaterials) and flat geometry are promising for integration
with on-chip nanophotonic devices. One of the classical examples of a metasurface appli-
cation is associated with the generalized Snell’s Law [6], where a phase shift is observed
due to the subwavelength meta-atoms and the phenomenon of abnormal refraction:
nt · sin(θt) −ni · sin(θi) = λ0
2π · dΦ
dx
(1.1)
where: ni and nt are the refractive indices at the incident and the transmission side of the
metasurface, λ0 is the vacuum wavelength, θi and θt are the incident and refractive angle
respectively, and dΦ
dx is the phase shift on a unit length.
Undoubtedly, a lot of progress has been accomplished related to the metasurfaces due to
their exotic optical properties and phenomena which are useful in planar optical devices,
generally speaking. There are many promising metasurface based applications which can
replace the conventional optical devices, as they largely benefit from ultrathin, light weight,
and ultracompact properties, provide the possibility of overcoming several limitations
suffered by their traditional counterparts, and demonstrate versatile novel functionality
[5].
2
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Waveguide Metasurfaces: Principle & Design
One of the most well known geometries to guide, confine and split light is based on using
a high index material core and low index material cladding. In this way, the total internal
reflection (TIR) takes place and the light is guided inside the high index medium. Silicon
waveguides provide a platform for highly integrated optical systems and so there are
abundant cases where Si is used as a high index cladding material.
In recent years, many researchers and scientists have shifted their interest towards slot
waveguides, a newly developed class of waveguides that has received significant attention
and promise many applications over the years. A slot waveguide consists of at least one
narrow low index region sandwiched between high index regions. More particularly, a
low-index slot (ns) can be embedded between two high-index slabs (nH) where due to
the strong discontinuity of the electric field at high index-contrast interfaces, the field
amplitude in the low index side can be nH 2
ns2 higher than inside the high index one [7].
Another study has analyzed not only the effect of sharp bends of the slot area, but also the
asymmetrically placed slots relative to the center of the waveguides [8]. More specifically,
it has been revealed that by displacing the sharp bended slot region from the center of
the waveguide, not only can maximize the power inside the slot regime, but also reduces
the bending losses in the structure with bending radii increase, primarily due to enhanced
confinement in the slot area.
Moreover, it has been presented that by adding multiple nanoscale slot layers inside a high
index medium of Si material, a very high confinement factor and power concentration can
be achieved in nanometer size low-index media [9]. Another advantage of the addition
of slot layers is the direct decrease of the high index layer thickness and in turn the
counterbalance of the confinement reduction.
An improvement with respect to the scattering loss has been recorded by fabricating
horizontal slot waveguides [10]. Using, PECVD instead of etching, the roughness at the
interface can be further decreased, especially in the vertical sidewalls, and so the scattering
losses will be further lower for the fundamental mode. Again, by considering horizontal
multiple slot configuration, it provides enhanced optical confinement in low index slot
regions compared to a horizontal single slot structure with the same total SiO2 cladding
layer thickness. It is obvious that the slot waveguide geometry and principle is constantly
under research for further improvements and utilization.
In general, a metasurface fabrication can be accomplished with different ways, the most
widespread of which are:
• Lithographical methods
• Direct writing methods
To start with, lithography is by far the most used and most mature fabrication method.
In most cases, the pattern is defined in the resist polymer or a hard mask and then the
structuring of the functional layer via etching is taken place. Among a lot of lithographic
methods such as Probe Scanning Lithography, Hybrid Patterning Lithography etc.[11],
Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL) is used in this work. Its main advantages are the low
operation cost combined to the high throughput. In briefly, Nano-imprint lithography
(NIL) is a technique that utilizes mechanical deformation to replicate nanostructures.
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
After the imprinting, an etch process is necessary to transfer the pattern that was defined
in the resist (a sacrificial material) to the functional material.
With regard to direct laser writing, it is a very popular form of optical maskless lithography
which includes three different methods employing either particle beam, mechanics or laser
to pattern nanostructures. In turn, particle beam lithography uses a focused Gaussian
particle beam to generate a highly concentrated spot being exposed to one pixel at a time.
Two well-established particle beam methods for the fabrication of optical metasurfaces are
electron-beam lithography (EBL) and focused-ion-beam (FIB) lithography [11]. In this
work, EBL is used only for the master stamp fabrication (due to its high cost, complex
process and low throughput) from which the actual used in the nanoimprinting lithography
”daughter” stamps can be developed.
The laser direct lithography (LDWL) utilizes a focused laser beam to directly write mi-
cropatterns on a photoresist film [12]. It is a non-contact, maskless and flexible patterning
technology, and has great potential for the fabrication on non-planar surfaces. In this
case, the optics can be controlled via a computer and a mask is inserted in the software.
In this work, the truncated waveguide geometry and principle is used, where the low index
core is air and high index cladding is TiO2 layer. The underlying reason for choosing TiO2
cladding is associated with the optical properties of this material. The absorbance and
extinction coefficient are very low (close to zero) at 785nm excitation wavelength while
the transmission can be approximately 70% [13]. However, the most important is the
high refractive index of 2.52 of the TiO2, which is one of the main reasons for the field
enhancement inside the hollow core area. The light is guided due to total internal reflection
and the electric field in the low index core is much higher (enhanced) because of the strong
discontinuity of the electric field at high index-contrast interfaces. With rescpect to the
meta-atom design, cylindrical holes of specific depth and varying diameter are fabricated
in fused silica substrate where conformal TiO2 is deposited on top of them, as shown in
Fig.1.2.
Fig. 1.2. Broad picture of the (a) metasurface and (b),(c) meta-atom design.
All the dimension parameters of the waveguide metasuface design are optimized in order
to accomplish enhancement of the electric field component inside the slot area at specific
wavelenngth of λ = 785nm. The hypothesis and determination of the optimized parame-
ters is achieved by numerical modeling using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS software.
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Scope & Overview
The main scope of this work is the actual fabrication of truncated waveguide metasurfaces
which can be used in biosensing. The main feature of the process device is the resulted field
enhancement and so the increased Raman signal. More particularly, this report includes
five main chapters where in:
• Chapter 1 Introduction: The first Chapter gives a first introduction to the meta-
surfaces and meta-atoms. It also provides the general geometry and composition
of the under-studied metasurface as well as the waveguide principle which gives the
enhancement of the field.
• Chapter 2 Theory & Methods: In the next Chapter, the theory and methods for the
fabrication and characterization of the metasurfaces are represented. Not only all
the process and characterization equipment are explained, but also the underlying
theory of them as well.
• Chapter 3 Results: In Chapter 3, the main results are explained analytically. At first
place, the nanofabrication procedure of the master and daughter stamp as well the
process optimization for the metasurface nanofabrication are described. Afterwards,
the optical characterization results via Raman spectroscopy measurements are in-
terpretted. The results are compared with the expected simulated using COMSOL
MULTIPHYSICS software.
• Chapter 4 Discussion: Then, the results are discussed in terms of accuracy, errors
and uncertainties. Also, further considerations and future suggestions are discussed
and proposed which can play a key role in this study.
• Chapter 5 Conclusion: Last but not least, the final chapter summarizes the findings
of this work and concludes this thesis. It is concluded that the TiO2 has a primary
role for the electric field enhancement and so the higher intensity signal in the Raman
measurement of the metasurface compare to the neighbouring flat area.
5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theory & Methods
In the next Chapter, the processes used for the fabrication and optical characterization
of the templated metasurfaces are described where the main underlying theory and tech-
niques of each equipment are analyzed.
2.1
Metasurface: Nanofabrication
In this part, the focus is mainly concentrated on the metasurface nanofabrication. In order
to fabricate the metasurface which is comprised of array of cylindrical holes, the use of a
stamp is necessary. The stamp fabrication process is briefly described in the next Chapter
3.1.1.
2.1.1
Broad Picture
An overview of the used process flow for the templated metasurface fabrication is depicted
in the next Fig.2.1:
Fig. 2.1. Metasurface nanofabrication process flow.
It is obvious that, in order to end up having a conformal titanium dioxide on top of
the fused silica substrate, a lot of steps are needed. Before providing a more analytical
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
explanation of the parameters, recipes and method that is used on each step, it is of
primary importance to give a basic summary of the steps as follows:
(a) Firstly, the Poly-Si is deposited via the Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition
(LPCVD) technology on top of the RCA cleaned fused silica substrate.
(b) Secondly, the photocurable resist mr-NIL200 series is spin coated onto the Poly-Si
surface.
(c) Nextly, the UV-NIL occurs using a daughter stamp (as explained in Section 3.1.1)
(d) Afterwards, the residual layer of the resist is etched using Deep Reactive Ion Etch-
ing (DRIE) in order to accomplish suitable etching and pattern transfer onto the
substrate.
(e) Then, the Poly-Si is etched via DRIE process.
(f) The remaining mr-NIL200 resist is stripped using the Plasma Asher.
(g) Following to the next step of the process, the fused silica substrate is etched using
the Advanced Oxide Etching (AOE) process.
(h) Also, the Poly-Si is stripped using wet etching (Poly-Si etching bath).
(i) Lastly, the TiO2 is deposited uniformly all over the metasurface using the Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD).
2.1.2
Process Analysis
2.1.2.1
Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD)
Low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) is a chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
technology that uses heat to initiate a reaction of a precursor gas on the solid substrate
[14] and it takes place at high temperature and relatively low pressure. The solid phase
material is formed by the reaction which takes place at the surface. As the name implies,
the low pressure target is to minimize any unwanted gas phase reactions, and also increases
the uniformity across the substrate. Thus, the purpose of the furnace is to deposit a layer
of LPCVD polysilicon or amorphous silicon on a batch of wafers [15]. With respect to the
reaction mechanism of the LPCVD, the batch of wafers are entered into a vacuum chamber.
Then, gas species react on the heated wafer/solid surface, and the reaction produces a
solid phase material [16]. More particularly, the CVD chamber is under vacuum and the
sample surface is heated. The process gas(es) are entering the chamber and they react
in the gas phase, producing reactive species and by-products. Then, the reactive species
are transported to the sample surface where they adsorbed. When the number of process
gases is high enough, the reactive species will stop to diffuse together. At this point, a
surface reaction will take place and this reaction will result to a film growth. Also, due
to the surface reaction, some volatile reaction products will be desorbed. Finally, all the
by products from the gas phase reaction and the surface reaction are pumped out of the
chamber. The overall process is illustrated in the next Fig.2.2a
The LPCVD deposition takes place in a horizontal tube furnace equipped with a cantilever
where the wafers placed in a quartz boat. In the furnace, LPCVD reactions take place
7
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
(a) LPCVD process steps.
(b) Main LPCVD equipment parts.
Fig. 2.2. LPCVD mechanism.
on a sample surface, either by thermal decomposition and/or by a reaction of gas(es).
Moreover, the furnace is heated by heaters/coils around the furnace tube (heating takes
place at the center of the tube). So, the gas are introduced inside the tube (from the enter
side), the flow of which is controlled by the mass flow controllers as the Fig.2.2b depicts.
Last but not least, a pump is connected because the overall process is in vacuum and a
valve can control the pressure.
In order to have a LPCVD reaction, some requirements should be valid such as:
• Flow of reactive gases.
• High temperature, required to initiate the reaction.
• Low pressure (vacuum) in order to ensure a good deposition uniformity over the
wafers, lower the diffusion rate of the reactive species, so that they can approach the
sample surface more closely and decrease any unwanted gas phase reactions.
Generally, the deposition rate is limited by the surface reaction rate of the reactive species
on the sample surface. However, LPCVD provides many advantages: it is a batch process,
the deposition occurs on both sides of the wafers, the layer is uniform, the step coverage
is good and the results are very reproducible. On the other hand, the process is relatively
slow (low deposition rate of 0.5-2 ˚A/s) and only few materials are allowed due to cross
contamination.
So, for the deposition of Si, Silane gas is used and it is thermally decomposed on the
sample surface. Thus, the Si layer is formed onto the surface and hydrogen by-product is
formed as the below reaction describes:
SiH4(g) −→Si(s) + 2H2(g)
(2.1)
It is important to point out that the crystal structure and deposition rate depend on the
temperature. In order to get Polycrystalline Silicon (Poly-Si) deposited on the surface, the
temperature should be relatively high (between 600-650oC ) the prefer grain orientation
is [110] and the deposition rate is approximately 8-10 nm/min.
Just before the LPCVD of poly-Si, the wafers should be properly cleaned and so, a RCA
clean is fulfilled. With respect to the cleaning process:
• The wafers are placed inside a first solution bath containing hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2), ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) and deionized water mixed in the ratio
(1:1:5) for 10min at temperature of 70oC.
8
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
• Then, a quick dump rinse of the wafers in water for 3min is accomplished.
• Afterwards, the wafers are placed in a second solution bath containing hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2), hydrochloric acid (HCl) and deionized water mixed in the ratio
(1:1:5) for 10min at temperature of 70oC.
• Similarly, a quick dump rinse of the wafers in water for 3min is happened.
• Finally, the wafers are spin-dried and then transferred directly to the LPCVD fur-
nace.
In this work, an etch mask layer of 61nm poly-Si thickness is deposited on both sides
of each wafer. More specifically, the deposition takes place at temperature of 618-625oC
with a gas flow of 80sscm of SiH4 (B2H6 gas flow of 0sccm and PH3 gas flow of 0 sccm) at
pressure of 200mTorr [15]. Last but not least, the process/deposition time is approximately
8min because the deposition rate fluctuates around 8nm/min.
2.1.2.2
Spin coating
Spin coating is a procedure used to deposit uniform thin films onto flat substrates. Usu-
ally a small amount of resist is deposited on the center of the substrate, which is either
spinning at low (or high) speed or not spinning at all [17]. The spin speed is interre-
lated to the obtained film thickness. The purpose of the spinning is to spread the coating
material by centrifugal force uniformly. An equipment used for spin coating is called a
spin coater, or simply spinner and in this case, it is used a LabSpin6 spinner from S¨USS
MicroTec company. Moreover, the photocurable resist is the mr-NIL200 series by Micro
resist technology GmbH with typical application field as an etch mask in pattern transfer
processes for e.g. photonic applications [18]. Just before the spin coating, a proper clean-
ing procedure of the wafers should take place, to ensure the best surface quality. This
cleaning can be achieved via the plasma asher as described in Sec.2.1.2.5. With respect to
the parameters used in the spin coating, the spinning time is set to 30s, the velocity and
acceleration to 3000rpm and 1000rpm/s respectively. These parameters can give 100nm
uniform resist thickness on top of the poly-Si. After the spin coating process, a softbake
of 3min at 65oC is taken place.
2.1.2.3
Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL)
One of the most widespread methods of fabricating nanometer scale patterns is the
Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL). Generally speaking, it is a simple nanolithography pro-
cess with low cost, high throughput and high resolution [19]. NIL relies on direct mechan-
ical deformation of the resist and can therefore achieve resolutions beyond the limitations
set by light diffraction or beam scattering that are encountered in conventional litho-
graphic techniques [20]. The working principle is based on the mechanical modification
of a thin polymer film/resist (mechanical deformation of the resist) using a stamp/mold
containing the micro/nanopattern, in a thermo-mechanical (Thermal-NIL) or UV curing
process (UV-NIL). These two fundamental processes are illustrated in the next Fig.2.3
9
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
Fig. 2.3. (a)-(c) Thermal-NIL and (d)-(f) UV-NIL process.
In a standard T-NIL process (Fig.2.3(a)-(c)), a thin layer of imprint resist (thermoplastic
polymer) is spin coated onto the substrate. Then the mold/stamp, which has predefined
topological patterns, is brought into contact with the sample and they are pressed together
under certain pressure. When heated up above the glass transition temperature of the
polymer, the patterns on the mold are pressed into the softened polymer film. Afterwards,
being cooled down, the mold is separated from the sample and the pattern resist is left on
the substrate [21].
In UV-NIL (Fig.2.3(d)-(f)), on the other hand, a substrate is spin coated or drop dispensed
with a UV-curable resist. Thus, imprinting is carried out with a transparent template
(quartz glass or soft working stamps) and the imprinted structures are cured by UV-light
exposure which cross-links the resist [22]. As a result, the template is released from the
imprinted substrate. It is important to point out that the use of quartz glass stamps is
regarded as hard UV-NIL whereas the use of soft working stamps refers to soft UV-NIL.
In both NIL processes, the stamp/mold is mainly fabricated using another ”Master” stamp
which in turn fabricated via Electron Beam Lithography (EBL). Thus, the Master stamp
is actually utilized to fabricate the so-called ”daughter” stamp (via UV-NIL) which is
applied in the actual NIL process fabrication, as described in Section 3.1.1. So, in the UV-
NIL step applied in this project, a developed daughter stamp (from the master stamp) is
used for the imprinting at room temperature. The model followed by the polymer is called
squeezed flow model. In this case, the polymer is treated as an incompressible, viscous
fluid of constant viscosity η0 [23].
Before the imprint, the polymer film has an initial thickness h0 and the depth of the
protrusion (also called relief height) is hp. When the imprint takes place, the resist height
decreases from the initial height h0 to the residual height hr (Fig.2.4). The residual height
can be calculated by the conservation of volume before and after the imprint process,
considering a single stamp protrusion.
10
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
Fig. 2.4.
(a) Initial polymer height and (b) resulting residual layer thickness due to imprint
process.
If the initial and final polymer volume is Vi = h0 · A and Vf = (hr + (1 −PC) · hp) · A
respectively, the residual layer thickness can be estimated by:
hr = h0 −(1 −PC) · hp
(2.2)
where PC is the protrusion coverage, hr is the residual layer thickness, h0 is the initial
polymer height and hp is the protrusion height.
Actually, the residual layer of resist must be removed with a descum process using DRIE,
as described in the next section 2.1.2.4.
With respect to the NIL recipe, the resist is
imprinted for 2 minutes at a pressure of 0.5bar. The pressure is kept constant and the
resist is cured with UV light for 5 minutes. The stamp is then separated from the sample
using a razor blade.
2.1.2.4
Etching
Dry Etching
In nanofabrication, etching is the process of removing regions of deposited films or sub-
strates. There are two main categories of etching namely dry and wet etching. Basically,
dry etching is vapor or gas phase etching. Etchants are inserted as a gas and byproducts
leave as a gas. So, having a volatile byproduct is essential for dry etching. In the case
of wet etching, a material is removed from a wafer by using liquid chemicals or etchants.
The specific patterns are defined by masks on the wafer and the materials that are not
protected by the masks are etched away by liquid chemicals. A common type of dry etch-
ing is reactive-ion etching. More particularly, deep reactive-ion etching (DRIE) is a highly
anisotropic etch process used to create deep penetration, steep-sided holes and trenches
in wafers/substrates, typically with high aspect ratios [24]. In the case of Plasma Dry
Etching, the plasma offers extra control, not available by wet etching where liquids are
used. The dry etching is mainly used for removal of blanket layers and resist after an
etch process. Secondly, it can be used for patterning with the aid of a photoresist mask.
11
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
Typically, etch profile is critical for structutre application. So, for nanostructures, a high-
fidelity reproduction of the film is desirable in the underlying structure [25]. With respect
to directionality/uniformity of etching, an anisotropic etching is completely vertical etch-
ing and it completely replicates the mask in the film. On the other hand, in anisotropic
etching, there is an undercut equal to the etch depth (no preferred direction). Last but
not least, the near-anisotropic etching is a combined case where a little bit of undercut
and slope is observed.
Furthermore, selectivity is an important parameter in etching process. It is defined as:
Selectivity = Etch rate of material to be removed
Etch rate of material to remain
(2.3)
Normally, it is desirable to have as high selectivity as possible. In general, there are a lot of
reasons why plasmas for etching are used. The main reason is that they can generate local
reactants from stable source of gases. It is often easier than wet etching and it can provide
high aspect ratio structures. Concerning this work, the dry etching performed with an
inductively coupled plasma (ICP) configuration. The inductively coupled plasma reactive
ion etching (ICP-RIE) is a selective dry etching method used in fabrication technology
of various semiconductor devices [26], based on the use of an inductively coupled plasma
source. In the next Fig.2.5, it is depicted an overview of an inductive coupled plasma
reactive ion etching equipment similar to that used in the present process.
Fig. 2.5. ICP-RIE process chamber overview [27] similar to the DRIE used in this work.
More particularly, the ICP source generates a high-density plasma due to inductive cou-
pling between the RF antenna and the plasma. Then, the antenna, located in the plasma
generation region, creates an alternating RF magnetic field and induces RF electric fields,
which energize electrons that participate in the ionization of gas molecules and atoms at
low pressure. It is important to point out that there is no ion bombardment or erosion
of the walls due to the absence of an electric field near the reactor walls. Furthermore,
the separate ICP RF power source connected to the cathode that generates DC bias and
attracts ions to the wafer differentiates the ICP-RIE from RIE. So, materials are etched
with the use of a chemically reactive plasma under low pressure conditions, potentially
combined with ion-induced etching [28].
12
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
In this work, the dry etch equipment utilized is Advanced Deep Reactive Ion Etching
(DRIE) Pegasus from SPTS Technologies. The first dry etch process is used to remove
the residual layer of the mr-NIL200 resist (which remains after the imprinting process as
described). With respect to the dry etching recipe, a gas flow of 10sccm and 2sccm of Ar
and O2 respectively is used, while the coil and platen power are set to 100W and 25W
correspondingly. Also, the pressure in the chamber is kept at 4 mTorr at a temperature
of −19oC and the process etch time is 29s. Continuing to the next step, the poly-Si layer
should be appropriately dry etched. As a result, after the aforementioned etch of the
residual resist layer, another dry etch process is taken place without removing the wafer
(two sequentially dry etch processes on each wafer) out of the chamber. For the poly-Si
etch process, the recipe includes a gas flow of 38sccm of SF6 (reactive fluorine leads to
the etching), 75sccm of C4F8 (etching inhibitor), coil and platen power of 800W and 40W
correspondigly while the pressure is remained at 4mTorr at −19oC as before. Taking into
account the etch rate of (160 ± 8)nm/min, the poly-Si etch process time is set to 20s. The
aforementioned dry etch times were calculated after an optimization process described
analytically in Section 3.1.2
The last dry etching process is related to the fused silica substrate etching.
For this
purpose, advance oxide etching (AOE) is preferred where fluorocarbons for SiO2 etching
are mainly used [29]. The AOE and the DRIEs are for silicon based etching. However
Al and to some extent Cr is allowed for masking material in the AOE. Chromium can
be allowed because it gives less re-deposition problems than aluminum and it is therefore
sometimes needed for SiO2 etching.
For this project, the STS Advanced Oxide Etcher (STS MESC Multiplex ICP) equipment
is handled. In this case, the coil and platen power are 1300W and 500W respectively. The
platen temperature is set to 60oC and the pressure at 4mTorr. Last but not least, the
flow of process gases is 300sccm and 18sccm of He and C4F8 correspondingly.
W et Etching
Wet etching is the process of removing a material chemically with a liquid reactant. It
may involve a chemical which dissolves the material to be etched, or may utilize a chemical
mixture which first oxidizes the material and then dissolves the oxide [30]. The reactions
occurring at the sample surface deplete the surface of its atoms and thus, the surface
is etched. A wet etching process involves multiple chemical reactions that consume the
original reactants and produce new reactants [31]. The wet etch process can be described
by three basic steps:
• Diffusion of the liquid etchant to the structure that is to be removed.
• The reaction between the liquid etchant and the material being etched away.
• Diffusion of the byproducts in the reaction from the reacted surface.
Actually, wet etching of poly-Si is utilized in this work because not only is it very fast,
but also a batch of wafers can be processed simultaneously (high throughput). Another
advantages are the low cost and the excellent selectivity with respect to both mask and
substrate materials [32].
However, due to the bath utility, the etch can not be easily
controlled and the exact etch time is defined by the user. The isotropically poly-Si etch is
based on the combined oxidation of silicon (by nitric acid) followed by an etch of the formed
13
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
silicon oxide (by hydrofluoric acid) at room temperature. The etch solution consists of
HNO3:BHF:H2O-(20:1:20) [33]. So, Silicon (single-crystal or poly-crystalline) may be wet-
etched using a mixture of nitric acid (HNO3) and hydrofluoric acid (HF). The nitric acid
consumes the silicon surface to form a layer of silicon dioxide, which in turn is dissolved
away by the HF. So, the poly-Silicon etching follows the reaction:
Si + HNO3 + 6HF −→H2SiF6 + HNO2 + H2 + H2O
(2.4)
The effectiveness of the etch depends on the bath conditions (mixture date and previous
usage) and the user (correct agitation and perceive when the etch should stop). In other
words, the exact etch time is decided by carefully observing the substrates submerged in
the bath. More specifically, when the wafers become transparent (and lose their color due
to poly-Si strip), the etch is terminated and rinse in water bath is taken place nextly. The
poly-Si etch bath etches Si(100) with 80-200nm/min (depending on doping concentration)
and SiO2 at a rate about 7nm/min [34]. In this case, the SiO2 etch is unwanted and causes
a deformation in the shape of the formed nanoholes.
2.1.2.5
Plasma Ashing
Plasma ashing is the process of removing the photoresist from an etched wafer [35]. Using
a plasma source, monatomic substances known as reactive species are generated. Plasma
ashing a surface requires introducing oxygen (O2) into the vacuum chamber which ionized
and becomes oxygen plasma.
This assists in the removal of the etching mask of the
photoresist [36]. The model of plasma asher used is called 300 Semi Auto Plasma Processor
from TePla manufacturer. In the current process flow, the plasma asher is applied in two
steps:
• Just before the spin coating, as a cleaning process of the surface for the self-priming
photocurable mr-NIL200 resist. In this case, the process time is 5min, the power is
1000W and the flow of O2 and N2 is 400 and 70 mL/min respectively.
• Just before the AOE etching, to strip the remaining resist. To achieve this removal,
the time is set to 60min, the power is 1000W and the flow of O2 and N2 is 400 and
70 mL/min corresponidgly.
2.1.2.6
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD)
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a thin-film deposition technique based on the sequential
use of a gas-phase chemical process and it belongs to the family of chemical vapor de-
position (CVD) techniques, which use chemical reactions occurring on top of the sample
surface to create a new layer of material [37]. In most of the ALD reactions, two chemicals
are used which are called precursors (also called ”reactants”) which can be liquids, solids or
gases. Moreover, precursor bottles can be heated or cooled if necessary. These precursors
react with the surface of a material one at a time in a sequential, self-limiting, manner.
Thus, a thin film is slowly deposited through repeated exposure to separate precursors.
The mainly reasons why ALD is so unique are:
• Depositions can be done on almost all kinds of samples, including samples with low
melting pont and complex 3D structures.
14
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
• Ultra thin, uniform and conformal layers can be deposited monolayer by monolayer
everywhere on the sample surface.
Also, there are two different kinds of ALD: The Thermal ALD which is thermally driven
reaction and Plasma enhanced ALD where plasma is used to form reactive species. ALD
reactions take places in cycles in an ALD reactor chamber where one monolayer is deposited
per cycle. After a certain number of cycles, a uniform layer with a decided thickness is
deposited. Typical deposition rate is 0.5-1 ˚A/cycle. It is important to point out that
the two precursors are not introduced in the ALD chamber at the same time because all
reactions should take place on the sample surface and not in the gas phase. Also, it is a
self-limiting reaction meaning that one monolayer is deposited per ALD cycle. Once the
sample surface is completely saturated, no further reaction can take place. Moreover, it
is a sequential deposition meaning that the number of cycles controls the thickness of the
deposited layer. Thus, multilayers of different materials can be deposited [38].
With respect to the cycle time for the ALD reaction, not only does it depend on the surface
reaction behaviour, but also on the sample surface structure and the volume of the ALD
reactor chamber, in which the deposition takes place. So, uniform layers can be deposited
on almost all structures with ALD, e.g. complex three dimensional structures, porous
structures and high aspect ratio structures. More particularly, in the case of high aspect
ratio structures, it is of primary importance to increase the purge time for the deposition
because as the aspect ratio increases, it becomes more difficult for the precursor material
to reach the bottom of the structure. Ideal ALD depositions take place within a certain
temperature range where the ALD reaction is self-limiting (one monolayer is deposited
per cycle), complete and irreversible. Outside this temperature ”window”, the deposition
rate is uncontrolled (too high or too slow), or nothing is deposited.
It is obvious that ALD can offer some significant advantages. However, there are also
some drawbacks and limitations such as:
• It is a chemical reaction. So, the sample surface has to be reactive with the precursors
(otherwise no reaction will occur).
• Some monolayers have to be deposited, before closed layer is formed on the sample
surface, especially if there are impurities on the surface.
• The deposition rate is slow (0.01-0.1˚A/cycle).
In the current project, ALD is used to deposit TiO2 and Al2O3. With respect to TiO2, it
is deposited on top of fused silica by using the two precursor gases TiCl4 and H2O. At first
place, TiCl4 is introduced and purged from the chamber followed by H2O. The process
occurs at temperature range of 100°C to 300°C and a film of TiO2 is deposited through
the reaction:
TiCl4 + 2H2O −→TiO2 + 4HCl
(2.5)
The equipment used for the deposition is a Picosun thermal ALD model R200 at a tem-
perature of 150 °C. With regard to the recipe, it is called ”TiO2T” deposition on trenches.
More particularly, each precursor is introduced into the chamber in two steps, first followed
by a very short purge time of 0.5s and then followed by a longer purge time of 20s. So,
TiCl4 is pulsed for 0.1s, purged for 0.5s into the chamber followed by pulsed of 0.1s and
purge of 20s. Similarly, H2O is introduced for 0.1 s and purged for 0.5s into the chamber
15
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
followed by 0.1s and 20s of pulse and purge respectively [39]. Using the standard recipe,
the deposited thickness is 0.041nm/cycle at 150°C, which implies that the deposition rate
is approximately 3.56 nm/h (each cycle takes 41.4 s).
The correct thickness of the deposited TiO2 on top of the fused silica holes is interrelated to
the optical characterization measurements via enhanced Raman spectroscopy method at
785nm wavelength. Thus, a thickness of 42 nm TiO2 is deposited. The resulted thickness
is extracted from simulations using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS, as presented in Section
3.1.2.
With regard to Al2O3 deposition, the precursors used are Trimethylaluminum (TMA) and
H2O at nitrogen flow of 150sccm and 200sccm respectively. Last but not least, the pulse
time is 0.1sec & 0.1sec and purge time 3sec & 4sec for TMA & H2O respectively.
2.2
Metasurface: Dimensions Characterization
In nanofabrication, it is crucial to keep track of the process parameters in many steps, to
have an insight about the progress and the results of each step in the recipe. So, a variety
of equipment is utilized to gain a detailed overview of the process steps. In this study,
Atomic Force Microscopy, Ellipsometry and Scanning Electron Microscopy are mainly
performed and so analyzed below.
2.2.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
To begin with, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is an advanced technique of studying
material properties at the nanoscale [40].
A common AFM uses a probing tip at one end of a cantilever (spring-like) to interact
with the sample under study. So, when the tip interacts with the sample, attractive or
repulsive forces occur. More particularly, an attractive (or repulsive) force deflects the
cantilever towards (or away) the sample, when the tip is close (or into contact) with the
sample. Thus, the cantilever functions as a force sensor because an incident laser beam is
reflected off the surface of the cantilever and so any deflection will have a direct alteration
in the direction of the reflected from the cantilever beam. Then, the reflected beam is
directed to a photosensitive diode/detector through a mirror. In general, the changes may
be large or small but the detector sensitivity can also amplify even very small deflections.
It is obvious that the feedback loop registers and control the deflection of the cantilever
via the controller and the computer. A schematic representation of the operation principle
of a commercial AFM is depicted in the next Fig.2.6:
16
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
Fig. 2.6. Left: a Operation princliple of AFM, AFM operating at b contact and c tapping mode
respectively. Right: Example of an AFM 3D image construction.
In general, the AFM can be operated in two main modes. In the contact mode (Fig.2.6b),
the AFM is at its simplest working mode. The cantilever approaches the sample until
the probing tip gets into contact with the sample. Then, the scan starts over the area
of interest. In the tapping mode, a microcantilever with a very sharp tip at the apex is
vibrated at its resonance frequency while moving over the sample surface. An optical beam
is directed onto the backside of the cantilever and reflected back into a photosensitive diode
(PSD) (as shown in Fig.2.6c). When the cantilever tip touches the surface, the position of
the reflected beam on the PSD changes. A feedback loop ensures that the z-position of the
cantilever is readjusted accordingly to refocus the reflected beam in the center of the PSD.
This continuous change of z-position is recorded and used to regenerate a topographical
image of the sample surface.
Thus, 3D imaging of surface nanotopography with area scans and measurement of surface
roughness can be accomplished as shown in the right of Fig.2.6 [41].
2.2.2
Ellipsometry
The purpose of Ellipsometry technique is to determine the film thickness and optical
constants of a material [41]. It actually measures the change in polarization as light is
reflected or transmitted from a material structure. The polarization change is represented
as an amplitude ratio (Ψ) and phase difference (∆). The measured response is interrelated
to the optical properties and thickness of individual materials.
To begin with, Ellipsometry is a non-destructive and non-contact very sensitive character-
ization technique. The beam coming from a light source passes through a polarizer before
reaching the sample at an angle, where it interacts with the material, and the phenomena
of reflection, transmission, absorption, and scattering occur. As the light enters a material
with higher refractive index, its velocity decreased to:
υ = c
n
(2.6)
where c = 2.99x108m/s and n is the refractive index of the material.
However, the frequency remains constant and so the wavelength will shorten, as shown in
Fig.2.7a. The energy loss to the material can be described via the extinction coefficient
17
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
(imaginary part of the complex refractive index) which is interrelated to the absorption
coefficient as shown in the next equation:
α = 4πκ
λ
(2.7)
where α is the absorption coefficient and κ the extinction coefficient.
Also, light loses intensity (Fig.2.7a) in an absorbing material according to Beer’s Law:
I = I0 · e−iαx
(2.8)
In addition, Ellipsometry is primarily interested in how p- and s- polarization components
of the incident beam change upon reflection or transmission in relation to each other.
So, a known polarization is reflected or transmitted from the sample and the output
polarization is measured. The change in polarization is the ellipsometry measurement,
commonly written as:
ρ = tan(Ψ)ei∆
(2.9)
where Ψ and ∆are the amplitude ratio phase difference correspondingly.
With respect to the components utilized, a common ellipsometer setup includes a light
source, polarization generator, polarization analyzer, detector, rotating analyzer, rotating
polarizer, rotating compensator and phase modulation [42].
Although optical techniques are inherently diffraction-limited, ellipsometry exploits phase
information and can achieve sub-nanometer resolution, which is why the technique is ap-
plicable for measuring film thicknesses from atomic monolayers up to several micrometers.
The main downside is that ellipsometry is an indirect method, so any measurement must
be related to a model analysis. In addition to film thickness, ellipsometry can be used to
determine the optical constants of a material, as shown in Fig.2.7b
(a) Wave travels from air into high refractive in-
dex (n=4) Film 1 (absorbing medium) and then into
(transparent) lower index (n=2) Film 2.
(b) Complex dielectric function of TiO2 film cover-
ing wavelengths from the infrared to the ultraviolet.
Fig. 2.7. Basic theory, concepts and results related to ellipsometry technique.
2.2.3
Scanning Electron Microscopy
The Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is used for inspection of micro- and nanostruc-
tures during and after fabrication. When the specimen is irradiated with an electron beam,
backscattered (BSE) or secondary electrons (SE) are emitted. The SE are primarily able
18
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
to reconstruct an image of surface topography, while the BSE also include information
about bulk material properties. A typical SEM requires an electron optical system which
consists of an electron gun, a condenser lens , an objective lens, an electron probe and a
scanning coil to scan the electron probe [43]. Also, a specimen stage, a secondary-electron
detector to collect secondary electrons, an image display unit, and an operation system to
perform various operations are some of the main parts of a common SEM as illustrated
in Fig.2.8b
(a) Electron beam interaction with the sample
leads to ejection of different category of electrons
and X-rays from it.
(b) Simplified SEM configuration.
Fig. 2.8. SEM principle and configuration
Some of the main advantages of an SEM are:
• The large depth of the field (focus of larger area of the specimen).
• The higher resolution where very closed specimens can be distinguished and magni-
fied at high levels.
• The high degree of magnification control due to electromagnets rather than conven-
tional lenses use.
• The strikingly clear image of a sample.
In brief, a beam of electrons is produced at the top of the microscope by an electron
gun, in most cases a thermionic emission gun. The electron beam follows a vertical path
through the microscope, which is held within a vacuum. The beam is focused on top of the
sample after traveling through electromagnetic fields and lenses. Thus, an interaction of
the electron beam and the sample occurs which leads to the ejection of X-rays, secondary
electrons (SE) and backscattered electrons (BSE) from the sample, as shown in Fig2.8a.
These extracted electrons and X-rays are collected from detectors which convert them into
a measurable signal. Finally, this signal is transferred to a screen where the final image is
constructed [44].
19
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
2.3
Metasurface: Optical Characterization
2.3.1
Raman Spectroscopy: Theory
It is a well known fact that light interacts with matter in different ways such as transmitting
through some materials, while reflecting or scattering off others. Both the material and
the colour (wavelength) of the light affect this interaction. In general, this study of light is
called ”spectroscopy”. A substance might appear blue, for example, if it absorbs the red
parts of the spectrum of light falling upon it, only reflecting (or scattering) the blue parts
into our eyes. One of the most widespread optical characterization techniques is Raman
spectroscopy. It is a non-destructive chemical analysis technique which provides detailed
information about chemical structure, phase and polymorphy, crystallinity and molecular
interactions [45]. Also, it is based upon the interaction of light with the chemical bonds
within a material.
Raman is a light scattering technique, whereby a molecule scatters incident light from a
high intensity laser light source. Most of the scattered light is at the same wavelength as
the laser source and does not provide useful information – this is called Rayleigh scattering.
However a small amount of light is scattered at different wavelengths, which depend on
the chemical structure of the analyte – this is called Raman scattering. Thus, a Raman
spectrum features a number of peaks, showing the intensity and wavelength position of
the Raman scattered light.
When a sample is exposed to a monochromatic light in visible region, the sample absorbs
light and major portion of the light gets transmitted through the sample. However, a
minor part of the light is scattered by the sample in all the directions. One can observe
the scattering at right angle to the incident beam. It is known that the incident light
has a particular frequency νi and so if the scattered light has the same frequency as
the incident light, then the scattering is called Rayleigh scattering. However, it has been
observed that about 1% of total scattered intensity occurs at frequencies different from the
frequency of incident light, which is called Raman scattering. Thus, the light scattered
photons include mostly the dominant Rayleigh and the very small amount of Raman
scattered light [46]. In other words, Raman scattering is far less probable than Rayleigh
scattering. In a typical Raman experiment, a laser is used to irradiate the sample with
monochromatic radiation. If visible excitation is used, the Raman scattered light will also
be in the visible region. It is of primary importance to point out that Raman scattering
is a two-photon process. The electrons have different vibrational levels which are defined
by specific energy differences. When an incident monochromatic light interacts with an
electron in the sample, the electron absorbs energy from the incident photon and rises to
a virtual state of energy. The energy transfer is given by the formula:
E = h · νi
(2.10)
where νi is the energy of incident photon.
Then, the electron falls back to an energy level by losing energy. If the energy lost is
equal to the energy of the incident photon, the electron falls back to its initial level and
in this process emits another photon. Since the energy lost is equivalent to the energy
of incident photon, the released photon has same frequency as the incident one (νs=νi).
As the frequency is same, Rayleigh scattering occurs. However, electron sometimes, when
losing energy from the virtual state, can fall back to a different vibrational level. In this
20
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
case, the energy lost by the electron is different than the energy absorbed from the incident
photon (hνi ̸= hνi). As a result, the photon emitted by the electron has energy different
than the incident photon. This is possible when the frequency of the emitted photon is
different than the incident photon. This gives rise to Raman scattering. Depending upon
the final energy of the electron or final vibrational level of electron, Raman scattering
can be separated into Stokes lines and anti-Stokes lines. If the frequency of the scattered
photon is less than the frequency of incident photon, Stokes lines are observed in Raman
spectrum, and this happens when the electron absorbs energy, as Fig.2.9 describes.
Fig. 2.9. (a),(b) Schematics of vibrational Raman process. Stokes process gives scattered lights
that are lower in energy than the incident light, and anti-Stokes process gives scattered lights that
are higher in energy than the incident light.
Similarly, when frequency of emitted photon is greater than that of the incident photon,
anti-Stokes lines are observed. This means that energy is released by the electron. Fur-
thermore, with respect to the intensity of the two lines, the Stokes Raman lines are much
more intense than anti-Stokes since at ambient temperature most molecules are found in
the ground state. The intensity of the Raman scattered radiation IR is given by [46]:
IR ∝ν4
i · Io · N · ( ∂α
∂Q)
2
(2.11)
where: Io is the incident laser light, N is the number of scattering molecules in a particular
state, νi is the excitation laser frequency, α is the polarizability of the molecules, and Q
is the vibrational amplitude.
The Raman spectrum gives the molecular fingerprint and it is different for different
molecules.
By studying the spectrum, one can identify the rotational levels and thus
a particular molecule because each peak corresponds to a specific molecular bond vibra-
tion, including individual bonds, groups of bonds, polymer chain vibrations, lattice modes
and more. [47]. This helps in performing qualitative analysis. Similarly, the intensity
value of a particular Raman line helps to determine the concentration of a molecule in a
sample. In this manner, quantitative analysis can be done. Thus, Raman spectroscopy
can be used to perform both qualitative and quantitative analysis on a sample.
2.3.2
Raman Spectroscopy: Setup
The optical characterization measurements of the metasurfaces are accomplished by using
a near-IR Raman spectroscopy setup where the excitation light source is a diode laser
of 785nm wavelength (Toptica DLD DL-pro 780nm). The beam waist is approximately
21
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
2.86µm and the depth of focus 20µm. Also, the laser power at the output is estimated
257.1mA, corresponding to 95.9mW. Since a beam splitter is utilized (50/50 BS) to guide
the light, an important part of it is lost (approximately 75%).
Moreover, an inverted microscope setup and an imaging spectrometer (Shamrock SR-303I)
are utilized with a build in CCD, as the Fig.2.10 illustrates.
Fig. 2.10. Raman spectroscopy setup.
Despite the fact that the wavelength of the laser can be adjusted from 765nm to 805nm
(tunable laser), the wavelength is kept constant at 785nm, where the enhancement is
expected. Furthermore, a tunable bandpass filter is installed directly after the diode laser
to ensure that frequencies (or wavelengths) only within a certain range allowed to pass
through (around 785nm for this purpose). Two mirrors are utilized to align the laser beam
when entering the microscope objective system.
With respect to the microscope system, a 50/50 beam splitter is the first component
located when the laser light enters the microscope system. Furthermore, a 785nm long pass
filter is used in order to transmit wavelengths only within a certain wavelength range. The
magnification of the objective lens is 50X. It is important to point out that the objective
lens is located on the substrate/backside of the wafer/metasurface and the excitation light
is perpendicular onto the sample. The 4” wafer is placed on a piezo stage with 0.01µm and
0.1µm z-movement precision (as shown in the orthonormal system convention in Fig.2.10)
which can provide the high precision focusing of the excitation laser light on the sample
and in turn to the exact metasurface area. Also, the inverted microscope on the setup
can be extensively utilized to inspect the sample and in turn how to center and focus the
500µm metasurface area.
With regard to the spectrometer, a notch filter is placed in the optical path entrance of
the spectrometer systems. It is mainly applied to reject frequencies within a certain band
and transmit frequencies outside of the band (inverse bandpass filter functions) and also
to suppress Rayleigh scattering in order not to saturate and overexpose the CCD camera.
Also, an aperture slit of 300µm is positioned at the entrance to control how much light
enters the spectrometer and increase the resolution while suppressing light away from
the laser spot. The grating in the setup provides the probe of specific wavenumbers and
partially determines the optical resolution that the spectrometer can achieve.
When a measurement is accomplished, the imaging spectrometer obtains an image where
pixels along the horizontal and vertical axis denote the spectral dispersion and the aper-
22
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY & METHODS
ture slit position correspondingly. So, by adding the position row pixels on the aperature
slit of the strongest signal with the 5 upper and lower rows, the final spectrum can be
extracted (an example of pixel image is shown in Fig.4.2). More particularly, the spec-
tral dispersion is immediately translated to a Raman shift (cm−1) where the excitation
wavelength is λ =785nm and the integration/excitation time can be set to tint=60s for
each measurement. Multiple measurements are needed in order to extract a broad Raman
spectrum at large range of wavenumbers. In order to achieve this, the grating should be
moved after each measurement and so a higher exposure time is necessary. As a result,
the Raman spectra in different wavenumber regimes can be stitched together to take a
final broad, with respect to the wavenumber scale, spectrum.
23
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Results
This chapter is focused on the results of this project. At first place, the followed nanofabri-
cation of Master and Daughter stamp is introduced. Then, the optimization of the actual
process wafers is analyzed. Finally, nanofabrication results using optimized parameters are
presented analytically, where the optical characterization of them via Raman spectroscopy
is taken place.
3.1
Nanofabrication
The nanofabrication process flow is described in Section 2.1. It is of primary importance
to choose wisely the utilized parameters on every step (such as the process time etc).
However, before moving on the nanofabrication process. it is necessary to have an initial
estimation of the expected dimensions of the metasurface and the target of the nanofab-
rication. Thus, a COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS model was built in order to simulate the
metasurface and to decide the optimal parameters which are going to give enhancement
of the field at wavelength of 785nm inside the slot area of the metasurface waveguide. In
this simulation, different sweeps were accomplished with respect to the slot area diameter,
depth and TiO2 deposited layer. As illustrated in the next Fig.3.1, the optimal simulated
parameters that give the maximum field inside the slot area are:
• Depth: d = 375nm
• Diameter: D = 615nm
• Thickness of TiO2 layer: T = 42nm
As a result, the process flow for the truncated waveguide metasurface nanofabrication
should be optimized accurately to get the aforementioned desirable parameters of it. De-
spite the fact that simulations give the desired parameters, in reality a lot of restrictions
and difficulties can be appeared during the actual process. These restrictions not only are
they interrelated to the different processes, but also to the equipment condition.
24
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Fig. 3.1. COMSOL simulations of the electric field component [V/m] of the meta-atom design
for excitation wavelength of λ = 785nm and depth d = 375nm.
Upper row: Different TiO2
thickness (36nm, 42nm, 50nm) effect on the electric field component for a given nanohole diameter
of D = 615nm. Lower row: Different nanohole diameter (605nm, 615nm, 625nm) effect on the
electric field component for a given TiO2 layer of T = 42nm.
To elaborate, the electric field (V/m) is illustrated in Fig.3.1. For all the different sim-
ulations, the excitation wavelength is set to λ = 785nm and the depth to d = 375nm.
So,
• In the upper row of Fig.3.1, the change of the electric field due to the TiO2 thickness
alteration is depicted. It is immediately obvious that, the optimal TiO2 thickness
is around 42nm where the field appears more intense and concentrated. For smaller
(T = 36nm) and higher (T = 50nm) TiO2 layer thickness, the field appears weaker
and more dispersed even outside of the nanohole area, respectively.
• In the lower row of the Fig.3.1, it is illustrated the electric field change with respect
to the hole diameter increase (from D = 605nm to 625nm). These simulated results
show that the optimal diameter (for a specific TiO2 thickness of 42nm) is D =
615nm. For smaller (D = 605nm) and higher (D = 625nm) diameter, the electric
field is faded.
In this way, the targeted thickness of TiO2 as well as the depth and diameter of the
nanoholes are 42nm, 375nm and 615nm correspondingly. It is important to make clear
that the electric field is concentrated mainly in the nanohole and between the neighboring
holes region and not exactly on top of the TiO2 it self, as it will be discussed widely in
the next parts of this work.
25
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.1.1
Master & Daughter Stamp: Design & Fabrication
Master Stamp
Before starting the optimization process flow for the actual wafers, it is important to
analyze the design and fabrication process not only of the Master stamp but also of the
Daughter stamp as well. To start with, the Master stamp was prepared and fabricated by
Andreas Raimund Stilling-Andersen due to the high amount of time needed to authorized
on E-Beam lithography equipment. A simplified overview of the Master Stamp design is
shown in the next Fig.3.2.
Fig. 3.2. Simplified overview of the Master stamp.
The Master stamp is a Si wafer substrate where CSAR resist has been spin coated (Fig.3.3
(b)). Then, an E-Beam lithography (Fig.3.3 (c)) takes place using a dose test in 5 different
areas of the sample, after which the development and rinse of the sample occurs. In order
to get the nanoholes of the Si substrate, the Si is dry etched (Fig.3.3 (d)) and the remaining
resist is removed using oxygen plasma (Fig.3.3 (e)). Finally, the Master stamp is placed on
Molecular Vapor Deposition (MVD) equipment to deposit an antistiction FDDS coating.
In the next Fig.3.3, a brief overview of the Master stamp fabrication process is illustrasted:
Fig. 3.3. Process flow of the Master stamp nanofabrication.
26
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
As a result, the Master stamp is composed of 5 different 500x500µm squared areas (inside
of two frames of 550x550µm and 650x650µm) where different hole diameters (Area 1:
615nm, Area 2: 600nm, Area 3: 585nm, Area 4: 570nm and Area 5: 555nm) of depth
250nm have been developed with same pitch size of 660nm. In the next Fig.3.4, the optical
microscope and SEM images of the different areas of the Master stamp are depicted:
Fig. 3.4. Optical microscope (left) and SEM (right) images of (a) Area 1, (b) Area 2, (c) Area
3, (d) Area 4 and (e) Area 5.
Daughter Stamp
Due to the complexity, high amount of time and low throughput of the Master stamp
fabrication caused by the usage of the E-Beam writing/lithography, daughter stamps are
developed and used as molds in the NIL process. The nanofabrication process flow of the
daughter stamps is illustrated in Fig.3.5. More particularly,
(a) The fused Silica wafers are purchased
(b) Having clean the wafer inside the Plasma Asher for 5min, Ormoprime resist is spin
coated at speed and accelaration of 4000rpm and 4000 rpm/sec respectively for 60s.
(c) A small droplet of Ormostamp is deposited on the fused Silica wafer as well as on
the Master stamp.
27
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(d) When the two wafers are brought very close to each other, a tiny ’bridge’ of Or-
mostamp will be formed between them. The capillary forces from the Ormostamp
pull the two wafers together.
A protective plastic frame is placed on top of the
wafers. Then, the aluminum block is situated on top of the plastic frame (and so on
top of the wafers) in order to spread nicely and evenly the Ormostamp across the
pattern.
(e) Afterwards, a UV flood exposure is performed (where the UV transparent wafer must
face the inclined UV lamp) at 1000W for 15min. The two stamps are separated using
a razor blade.
(f) An antistiction FDTS coating is deposited on the daughter stamp using MVD.
Fig. 3.5. Process flow of the Daughter stamp nanofabrication.
In order to gain an indication of the height protrusions of the daughter stamp, a quick
stylus profilometer measurement (using Dektak XTA) is accomplished. The stylus tip is
5µm in diameter and the point of the tip is in 45o. It is not possible to accurately measure
features with a high aspect ratio or small x-y dimensions relative to this geometry. In
this way, a single step measurement on the edge of the structure/metasurface (of the two
frames) is obtained to gain an insight of the protrusion height dimension of the daughter
stamp as the next profilometer measurement illustrates in Fig.3.7. It is obvious that the
height difference is approximately 250-260nm which is very close to the expected 250nm
holes depth of the master stamp.
As a result, the pattern transferring is considered
accurate. Moreover, an optical inspection of the daughter stamp is always important and
so the optical microscope images of the different areas of the daughter stamp are also
depicted in the next Fig.3.6:
28
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Fig. 3.6. Optical microscope images of the daughter stamp at (a)-(b) Area 1, (c)-(d) Area 2,
(e)-(f) Area 3, (g)-(h) Area 4 and (i)-(j) Area 5.
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Fig. 3.7. Stylus profile measurement of the daughter stamp.
3.1.2
Process Wafers: Optimization Procedure
To start with, a first batch of fused silica wafers is RCA cleaned and placed directly on
the LPCVD furnace to deposit an aimed thickness of 60-65nm of poly-Si on the fused
silica substrate. In order to get an indication of the poly-Si thickness, a test wafer is also
included in the deposition process and it is then measured in Filmtek setup. The resulting
thickness of the deposited poly-Si is dpoly−Si = 61nm and the measured refractive index
npoly−Si = 4.15. Nextly, the mr-NIL200 resist is spin coated onto the poly-Si surface. The
spin speed, acceleration and time give a resist thickness of approximately dmr−NIL200 =
100nm.
Directly after the spin coating, the NIL is accomplished using the fabricated
daughter stamp as a mold. All the process parameters for the above mentioned steps are
described in Section 2.1.2 and they remained constant over the experiments. After the
NIL, optical microscope images of the wafers are taken and a first AFM measurement is
fulfilled in order to investigate the cavity filling of the resist, in all the different areas of
the process wafers, and so to compare the protrusion height with the relief height. In the
next Table3.1, all the AFM results after NIL are gathered. All the relative AFM images
of all the results are illustrated in the Appendix A.1.1:
AFM Results after NIL
Sample
Holes Diameter [nm]
Wafer 5
Wafer 6
Wafer 7
Wafer 8
Area 1 depth [nm]
615
268
262
261
268
Area 2 depth [nm]
600
258
260
260
264
Area 3 depth [nm]
585
259
258
258
259
Area 4 depth [nm]
570
249
264
261
262
Area 5 depth [nm]
555
255
266
263
263
Table 3.1. AFM results after NIL process step.
It can be seen that the measured depths are very close to the measured protrusion height
30
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
of hp = 267nm of the used daughter stamp. Before continuing to the etching process, it
is necessary to calculate the expected residual layer thickness for each area of the sample.
As shown in Section 2.1.2.3, the residual layer thickness is given by:
hr = h0 −(1 −PC) · hp
(3.1)
where: h0 is the initial resist thickness, PC is the protrusion coverage and hp the protrusion
height.
The protrusion coverage for the given stamp can be calculated as:
PC = Protrusion Area
Unit cell
=
π·D2
4
α2
(3.2)
where D is the diameter of the holes and α is the pitch size.
Due to the dependecy of the protrusion coverage from the hole diameter, it is different for
each area. Thus, the residual layer thickness will vary for the different areas of the same
sample, as the next Table 3.2 illustrates:
Protrusion Coverage and Residual layer thickness results
Diameter [nm]
Pitch size [nm]
PC
Residual layer thickness [nm]
Area 1
615
660
0.68
20
Area 2
600
660
0.65
12.5
Area 3
585
660
0.62
5
Area 4
570
660
0.58
-5∗
Area 5
555
660
0.55
-12.5∗
Table 3.2. Protrusion Coverage (PC) and Residual layer thickness calculations.
It is important to point out that, for the areas 4 & 5 where the diameter is the lowest, the
residual layer thickness is negative∗. The meaning of the negative sign is the fact that an
incomplete cavity filling occurs in these areas. Thus, a main characteristic of nanoimprint
lithography is the residual layer following the imprint process. The minimization of this
layer is important, especially for critical dimensions control.
Afterwards, the etching of the residual layer and poly-Si mask is taken place. It is of
primary importance to optimize as much as possible the DRIE process to get the suitable
etch mask of the poly-Si onto the fused silica substrate. For the residual layer etching, the
descum process is utilized where the etch rate is estimated at 0.75nm/sec from a previous
study. So, in order to etch at least 20nm of residual layer thickness (maximum for area 1),
a descum etch time of 27s is needed. In order to investigate the consistency and accuracy
of this time, descum time of 27s is used for two of the wafers (Wafer 6 & 7), 29s for
the third (Wafer 8) and 32s for the last one (Wafer 5). A good way to decide about the
validation of the etch time is to compare the poly-Si thickness measured using Filmtek
(after the LPCVD) with the AFM measured depth after the etching of the residual layer,
poly-Si and resist strip. Thus, after the descum, it is useful to continue directly to the
etching of the poly-Si. A proper way to define the etch rate of the poly-Si is to recall
the etch time utilized on the Si Master stamp, where a depth of 250nm was achieved in
70sec. So, the etch rate is estimated approximately 3.57nm/sec. In the etch process, it is
convenient to add an uncertainty time to ensure that all the targeted material has been
31
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
etched completely. So, in order to etch 60.63nm of poly-Si, an etch time of 20sec is needed.
After the DRIE process, the resist is stripped by placing the wafers in Plasma Asher for
1h. In the next Table 3.3, an overview of the overall etch time for each wafer, as well as
the depth measurements are illustrated:
AFM Results after DRIE and resist strip
Sample
Wafer 5
Wafer 6
Wafer 7
Wafer 8
Residual layer etch time [s]
32
27
27
29
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
20
20
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
52
47
47
49
Area 1 depth [nm]
54.9
62.7
60.9
60.5
Area 2 depth [nm]
54.3
62.8
61.7
60.8
Area 3 depth [nm]
60.8
64.5
60.9
60.2
Area 4 depth [nm]
60.3
63.3
60.2
60
Area 5 depth [nm]
57.8
62.7
61.1
60.4
Table 3.3. AFM results after DRIE of the residual layer, poly-Si and resist strip.
It is obvious that, the poly-Si thickness measurement of 60.63nm using Filmtek right after
LPCVD and AFM after combined etch of the residual layer (29s time), poly-Si (20s time)
and resist strip (60min time) (as shown in Table3.3) are almost identical. As a result,
the overall DRIE etch process time of 49s (with small variations of time inside the error
limitation of the equipment fluctuation and use) is suitable and valid.
Having optimize the DRIE etch process, the next step is to etch through the fused silica
substrate using the poly-Si as an etch mask material, in order to achieve the desired 375nm
depth holes on the fused silica substrate. In this case, the etch rate has been calculated
at 450nm/min (or 7.5nm/sec) while the selectivity to mask was recorded at 1:16 [48].
However, due to the time variations on the etch process and the fact that the etch rate
and selectivity were estimated on 2013, an optimization process is necessary to ensure the
correct etch time and so the final depth.
Thus, the fused silica substrate of the wafer 6 is etched for 50s using steps of 10s, where
after each 10s etching, an AFM measurement is accomplished to keep track of the hole
depth and diameter variation over etch time. The AFM results are illustrated in Table
3.4:
AFM Results after AOE step
Wafer 6
Residual layer etch time [s]
27
27
27
27
27
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
20
20
20
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
47
47
47
47
47
Overall AOE time [s]
10
20
30
40
50
Area 1 depth [nm]
111
163
218
263.6
318.5
Area 2 depth [nm]
109
161
216.9
263.7
317.9
Area 3 depth [nm]
111
160
215.5
263.6
318
Area 4 depth [nm]
113
160
223.4
263.1
333
Area 5 depth [nm]
106
160
213.6
261.5
311.6
Table 3.4. AFM results after fused silica etching of Wafer 6 (AOE optimization).
32
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
The visualization of the data can give better interpretation of the different etch times/depths
of the different areas, but also of the estimated etch rate. Thus, the measured depth as a
function of the AOE etch time for the different areas is depicted in the next Fig.3.8:
(a) Measured depth variation over etch time of the
different areas.
(b) Linear regression model of depth over etch
time.
Fig. 3.8. Depth variation over etch of Wafer 6.
In order to extract the etch rate, a linear model fit should be used in the data, as shown
in Fig.3.8b. The linear equation which fits the data is given by:
y = α · x + β = 5.2 · x + 57.7
(3.3)
where the inclination α = 5.2nm
sec is the etch rate.
It is obvious that the etch rate is significantly different from the expected 7.5nm/sec. Due
to the fact that 10sec of etch time is very low, the plasma can not be stabilized directly
and so it needs some time before initializing the etching. Thus, it is not accurate enough
to be considered for the process.
In order to ensure this, at first stage the next Wafer 7 was etched for 30sec and then on
steps of 10sec in AOE to check the etch rate variation. The results are gathered in the next
Table3.5. Again, the etch depth as a function of the etch time is fitted linearly (Fig.3.9),
to confirm the decreased etch rate due to the very low etch time used.
AFM Results after AOE step
Wafer 7
Residual layer etch time [s]
27
27
27
27
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
20
20
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
47
47
47
47
Overall AOE time [s]
30
40
50
60
Area 1 depth [nm]
253
269.9
315.9
368.3
Area 2 depth [nm]
267
263.2
314.6
368.2
Area 3 depth [nm]
250
258.9
316.8
369.1
Area 4 depth [nm]
246
248.8
319.7
367.3
Area 5 depth [nm]
253
254.3
301.7
365.5
AVG Etch Rate [nm/sec]
7
5.4
5.4
5.4
Table 3.5. AFM results after fused silica etching of Wafer 7 (AOE optimization)
33
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a) Measured depth variation over etch time of the
different areas
(b) Linear regression model of depth over etch
time.
Fig. 3.9. Depth variation over etch of Wafer 7 after AOE process.
It is known that the plasma needs some time to initialize and also to reach the steady
state. As a result, the very low etch time (and so the etch rate) is not representative. As
the etch time increases, the etch rate increases until some point where the plasma reaches
a steady state and so the etch rate remains almost stable.
Moreover, due to the anisotropic nature of the etching process, the diameter of the holes is
expected to change. So, an approximation of the diameter increase due to the AOE etching
can be accomplished by measuring the estimated diameter of the holes in each area using
the AFM images. It is important to point out that this would be only an approximation
with low accuracy due to the tip convolution. It is known that during AFM scanning,
the tip-sample convolution effect is caused by the geometrical interactions between the
tip and surface features being imaged. Thus, artifacts caused by the finite sharpness and
characteristic geometry. In many cases, the tip may be in inadequate condition due to
some bending. As a result, the diameter increase is only an estimation to illustrate that
the dimensions of the holes are dramatically affected during the etch process. The hole
diameters from each area have been measured from the AFM images (shown in Appendix
A.1.1) and plotted as a function of etch time, as shown in the next Fig.3.10:
(a) Measured diameter variation over etch time of the
different areas
(b) Linear regression model of diameter increase
over etch time.
Fig. 3.10. Diameter variation over etch of Wafer 6 after AOE process.
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Then, the last Wafer 8 is used in order to establish the etch rate. Thus, a direct AOE
etching of 50s was used and the depth measurements are illustrated in the next Table3.6:
AFM Results after AOE step
Wafer 8
Residual layer etch time [s]
29
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
49
Overall AOE time [s]
50
Area 1 depth [nm]
405.6
Area 2 depth [nm]
403.2
Area 3 depth [nm]
406.6
Area 4 depth [nm]
405.4
Area 5 depth [nm]
405.9
AVG Etch Rate [nm/sec]
7.4
Table 3.6. AFM results after fused silica etching of Wafer 8.
In this case, the etch rate for the AOE is approximately 7.4-7.5 nm/sec and the selec-
tivity 1:16. Despite the fact that 50s of AOE can give the desired 375nm depth of fused
silica holes, the shape of the holes changes. More particularly, the holes are expanded
and distorted. This phenomenon is a result of the anisotropic nature of the AOE where
the sidewalls are also etched in the process. It is of primary importance to have perfectly
rounded/separated holes of accurate depth in order to estimate afterwards the field en-
hancement inside them. So, the AOE etch time is further optimized to ensure the perfect
separation of the holes. In this way, a batch of six new wafers (Wafers 9-14) are prepared
where the optimized overall DRIE time of 49s is utilized for all of them. Using a single
wafer (Wafer 10), the process is kept track off until the AOE step. In the next Table3.7,
the AFM measurement after the NIL and poly-Si (after resist strip) are depicted:
AFM after NIL
Wafer 10
Area 1 depth [nm]
257.4
Area 2 depth [nm]
255.8
Area 3 depth [nm]
255.9
Area 4 depth [nm]
255.9
Area 5 depth [nm]
255.7
(a) AFM measurements of Wafer 10 after NIL.
AFM after DRIE & Resist Strip
Wafer 10
Residual layer etch time [s]
29
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
49
Area 1 depth [nm]
61
Area 2 depth [nm]
61.7
Area 3 depth [nm]
61
Area 4 depth [nm]
61.7
Area 5 depth [nm]
60.4
(b) AFM measurements of Wafer 10 after DRIE
and resist strip.
Table 3.7. AFM results of Wafer 10.
Once more, it is important to point out that the overall DRIE etch of residual layer
thickness and poly-Si leads to accurate and consistent results because the measured poly-
Si thickness is approximately the same as measured in the FilmTek after the LPCVD
deposition.
Taking into consideration that the hole diameter increases during the AOE etching process
35
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
and the fact that the pitch size is very small, the focus is shifted to areas 4 & 5 with the
initial holes diameter of 570nm and 555nm respectively. Due to the high diameters and
small pitch size of 660nm, the nanoholes of the Areas 1-3 are merged in quite small etching
depth of the substrate, which is not identical for this study because the field enhancement
is weakened significantly as the depth of the nanohole decreases.
Knowing that 50s of AOE time is too high, different AOE times from 42s to 48s with
2s step are used in the different Wafers 9, 11, 12 and 14. The AFM measurements are
obtained exactly after the AOE and the results are gathered in the next Table.3.8:
AFM after AOE
Sample
Wafer 11
Wafer 9
Wafer 14
Wafer 12
Residual layer etch time [s]
29
29
29
29
Poly-Si etch time [s]
20
20
20
20
Overall DRIE time [s]
49
49
49
49
Overall AOE time [s]
42
44
46
48
Area 4 depth [nm]
349
366.9
381.4
394.5
Area 5 depth [nm]
347.6
366.1
376.5
393.9
Table 3.8. AFM measurements of Wafers 9, 11, 12, 14 after AOE.
From the extracted AFM images, it is possible to have an indication about the separation
of the holes in the areas of interest. The holes of the area 4 appeared merged especially
for increased etch time of the substrate, as shown in the next AFM images of Wafer 9
(Fig.3.11a), where the AOE etch time is 44sec.
(a) AFM measurement of area 4 of Wafer
9.
(b) AFM measurement of area 5 of Wafer
9.
Fig. 3.11. AFM images of Wafer 9 after 44sec of AOE.
As a result, the area 5 can give full separated holes, for maximum etch time of 44s. In this
way, the depth of the developed holes inside the fused silica substrate on area 5 will be:
dholes = dAFM
measured −(dpoly−Si −wetched
poly−Si) = 366 −(60.4 −22.9) = 328.5nm
(3.4)
where dpoly−Si = 60.4nm the initial poly-Si thickness and wetched
poly−Si = 22.9nm the poly-Si
etch thickness due to the selectivity of 1:16.
36
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
A more accurate representation of the holes can occur by acquiring the SEM images of the
areas of interest (area 4 & 5) after stripping the poly-Si, as depicted in the next Fig.3.12:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3.12. SEM images of (a), (c) area 4 and (b), (d) area 5 of Wafer 9.
It is obvious from the SEM images that the hole diameter has increased which is the
main reason for the hole merging. More particularly, the area 4 holes of initial diameter
DArea 4
i
= 570nm went up to DArea 4
f
= 642nm which corresponds to 12.63% inrease.
Similarly, the area 5 holes of DArea 5
i
= 555nm scaled up to DArea 5
f
= 632nm (13.87%
increase). This diameter growth due to etching processes is something considerable because
it leads to merging of holes and decrease in the sidewall height. In turn, the holes will not
be completely circular and uniform with respect to shape and depth. In Fig.3.12c, the
SEM image of area 4 reveals directly the decreased sidewall height and how the shape of
the holes starts to change. In other words, the only area which is substantial to focus is
area 5, because in all the other cases, the counterbalance between increased diameter and
depth will lead to very shallow holes in order to avoid the merging.
As a result, knowing all the parameters in the process flow for the fabrication of the
truncated waveguide metasurface, it is possible to fabricate a batch of wafers using the
optimized parameters. Thus, a batch of six wafers (Wafers 15-20) are prepared where one
wafer is used to keep track of the dimensions on each step (Wafer 16).
In the next Fig.3.13, the AFM measurement and SEM images of area 5 (of Wafer 16) after
poly-Si strip are illustrated. From this images, a lot of important results with respect to
the geometrical parameters of the nanoholes can be concluded.
37
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3.13. (a) AFM measurement and (b), (c), (d) SEM images of area 5 of Wafer 16 for different
magnifications and tilt.
To start with, the SEM images reveal the complete hole separation between them, despite
the very small pitch size of 660nm.
It is noteworthy that the measured depth of the holes is 332nm which is also identical to
the theoretically calculated/expected depth:
depth = 44s · 7.5nm
sec
= 330nm
(3.5)
where 7.5nm
sec is the extracted fused silica etch rate during AOE process.
Having a batch of wafers where the area 5 is composed of holes with depth = 330nm and
approximate diameter of 632nm, the optimal thickness of TiO2 via ALD is deposited. As
analyzed in the introduction of Section 3.1, the optimal TiO2 thickness which can give
a resonance at 785nm wavelength is 42nm. Despite the fact that the simulations have
been made for depth of 375nm of nanoholes, the same is applied for the 330nm fabricated
ones. As shown in the simulations of Fig.3.14, different thicknesses of TiO2 are sweeped
in order to visualize the resonance of the field enhancement at the specific dimensions of
the fabricated metasurfaces. Thus, a targeted TiO2 of 42nm is deposited via ALD. The
thickness can be measured after the deposition on a test sample (included in the deposition
process) using Ellipsometer setup. The measured thickness is 42.1nm and the refractive
index nTiO2 = 2.43 at 632.8nm.
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Fig. 3.14. COMSOL simulations of the electric field component [V/m] of the meta-atom design
for excitation wavelength of λ = 785nm and depth d = 330nm. Different TiO2 thickness (36nm,
42nm, 50nm) effect on the electric field component for a given nanohole diameter of D = 632nm.
39
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.2
Optical Characterization
3.2.1
Raman Spectroscopy
In order to ascertain the electric field enhancement and more importantly the origin of
it, different materials are deposited on the same aforementioned design-fabricated wafers.
The main cases which are investigated are:
• Wafer 18: Pure Fused Silica (without any material deposited).
• Wafer 9: Fused Silica with 42nm of amorphous TiO2.
• Wafer 10: Fused Silica with 42nm of amorphous TiO2 and 6nm of Al2O3.
• Wafer 11: Fused Silica with 42nm of amorphous TiO2 and 187nm of Al2O3.
• Wafer 16: Fused Silica with 6nm of Al2O3 and
• Wafer 20: Fused Silica with 187nm of Al2O3.
• Wafer 9: Fused Silica with 42nm of anatase TiO2 (annealing).
A typical Raman spectrum of fused silica, aluminium oxide (Al2O3) and titanium dioxide
(TiO2) sample is illustrated in the next Fig.3.15:
(a)
Fused silica Raman spec-
trum.
(b)
Amorphous
(up)
and
anatase
(down)
Titanium
dioxide Raman spectrum.
(c) Aluminium oxide Raman
spectrum.
Fig. 3.15. Typical Raman spectra.
Each of these wafers consists of 5 metasurface areas, where the focus is concentrated on
area 5 (as mentioned before) and a neighbouring flat area. In the below measurements,
the flat area is chosen to be very close to the metasurface (area 5) to avoid any offset
in the z-scan coordinate and so to have more systematic results. Thus, for each wafer,
a number of Raman measurements are extracted with respect to the z-direction of the
objective to ensure the focus of the beam inside the desired structure (area 5) and flat
area respectively. The z-scan measurement can show the potential increase/resonance in
the intensity of the metasurface area compare to the flat area at excitation wavelength of
785nm. In the next figures, all the Raman spectra of the different samples are depicted,
for different z-coordinate positions.
A first indication of the intensity enhancement in the two neighbouring areas (metasurface
and flat area) can occur by analyzing the Raman spectra for the different cases:
40
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
• Wafer 18 (Fig.3.16a & 3.17a): In this case, the nanoholes and flat area are empty
and so no material has been deposited on top of them. For the different z-position,
the two Raman spectra seem identical with no enhancement.
The z-scan graph
(Fig.3.18a & 3.19a) also shows the same behavior in the intensity signal of the two
areas (void nanoholes and flat area).
• Wafer 9 (Fig.3.16b & 3.17b): when conformally deposited 42nm of amorphous TiO2,
the Raman spectrum appears more enhanced in the metasurface area. More partic-
ularly, the metasurface measurement signal reaches a peak at z = −7310µm for the
various Raman shift positions (Fig.3.18b & 3.19b) compare to the flat area. After
the Raman measurements with the amorphous TiO2 layer, the wafer is annealed in
order to get the anatase TiO2 spectrum. The Raman signal for amorphous TiO2 is
very weak as Fig.3.15b illustrates. Thus, it is not possible to distinguish any peak
with respect to the TiO2 layer presence. So, in the last part of optical character-
ization, the Wafer 9 which contains 42nm of TiO2 is annealed in order to get the
anatase TiO2, a metastable form of titanium dioxide with a tetragonal crystal struc-
ture. The annealing temperature and time are Tanneal = 490oC and tanneal = 90min
correspondingly. In this way, the Raman peaks at 396cm−1, 518cm−1 and 639cm−1
can be visualized, as shown in Fig.3.20b.
• Wafer 10 (Fig.3.16c & 3.17c): when firstly deposit 42nm of TiO2 and then 6nm of
Al2O3, the Raman spectra appears more enhanced in the metasurface area. More
particularly, the metasurface measurement signal reaches a peak at z = −7310µm
for the various Raman shift positions (Fig.3.18c & 3.19c) compare to the flat one.
Despite the fact that a thin layer of Al2O3 is present, it neither seems to have a direct
effect in the enhancement nor the Al2O3 peaks are distinguishable. The underlying
reason is the almost identical Raman shift position of the distinct peaks of Al2O3
(490cm−1 and 640cm−1) and fused silica (495cm−1 and 606cm−1). Thus, the fused
silica peaks predominate and vanquish the Al2O3 ones.
• Wafer 11 (Fig.3.16d & 3.17d): In order to investigate the effect of Al2O3 thickness
and if it is possible to visualize the distinct Raman peaks of it, a thicker layer of
187nm of Al2O3 was deposited on top of the 42nm TiO2. As the Raman spectrum
illustrates, the signal appears enhanced in the metasurface area. Again, the meta-
surface measurement signal reaches a peak at z = −7310µm for the various Raman
shift positions (Fig.3.18d & 3.19d) compare to the flat area. Despite the fact that
the Al2O3 is thicker, it is not feasible to distinguish any of the Al2O3 peaks for the
same aforementioned reasons.
• Wafer 16 (Fig.3.16e & 3.17e) and Wafer 20 (Fig.3.16f & 3.17f) : In the last stage,
it is of primary importance to ensure that the field enhancement originates from
the TiO2 presence.
Thus, a thin (Wafer 16) and thick (Wafer 20) layer of 6nm
and 187nm Al2O3 respectively was deposited directly on the fused silica surface to
investigate the field behavior. It is perceivable that the intensity difference between
the areas of interest is almost identical (Fig.3.18e, 3.19e, 3.18f & 3.19f) for both
Al2O3 thicknesses. As a result, there is no any field increase compared to the flat
area which leads to the effect of TiO2 presence in the intensity rise.
41
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.16. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of -
7500µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer). It can seen that the two
Raman spectra measured on top of the metasurface area 5 (red) and in a neighboring flat area are
almost identical at z = −7500µm. The focusing of the laser beam on the fused silica sample is the
main reason for the overlapping of the two Raman spectrum at the given position. In other words,
this z-position gives the fused silica Raman spectrum without any enhancement of the metasurface
area intensity over the flat one.
42
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.17. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of -
7300µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer). It can seen that the two
Raman spectra measured on top of the metasurface area 5 (red) and in a neighboring flat area are
identical at z = −7300µm only for samples were the TiO2 layer is absent. However, when a 42nm
layer of TiO2 have been deposited, the spectrum at the metasurface area appreas shifted to higher
intensities. In this case, the focusing of the laser beam on the TiO2 layer of the nanohole is the
main reason for the increased scale intensity of metasurface area 5 Raman spectra. However, the
amorphous TiO2 spectra is almost flat which is the reason for distinguishing only the fused silica
peaks.
43
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.18. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots of (a) Wafer
18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10 (42nm TiO2 + 6nm
Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer 16 (+6nm of Al2O3
layer) and (f) and Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer) at Raman shift of 606cm−1. It can be seen
that, for the different z-positions of the objective, the peak intensity is almost identical (with small
variations) between the flat and metasurfaces areas when there is not TiO2 layer present. On the
other hand, when 42nm of TiO2 has been deposited, the metasurface peak intensity at 606cm−1
reaches a peak at position of z = −7310µm compared to the flat area.
44
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.19. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots of (a) Wafer
18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10 (42nm TiO2 + 6nm
Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer 16 (+6nm of Al2O3
layer) and (f) and Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer) at Raman shift of 640cm−1. It can be seen
that, for the different z-positions of the objective, the peak intensity is almost identical (with small
variations) between the flat and metasurfaces areas when there is not TiO2 layer present. On the
other hand, when 42nm of TiO2 has been deposited, the metasurface peak intensity at 640cm−1
reaches a peak at position of z = −7310µm compared to the flat area.
45
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.20. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at different z-positions
between -7250µm and -7500µm of Wafer 9 wafer (+42nm TiO2 layer) after annealing process at
490oC for 90min. It is directly obvious that the two Raman spectrum measured on top of the
metasurface area 5 (red) and in a neighboring flat area are way different for all the different z-
positions. Moreover, when focusing inside the TiO2 of the metasurface area (position -7300µm),
not only are the anatase peaks at 393cm−1, 518cm−1 and 638cm−1 distinguishable but also they are
much stronger compared to the flat area ones. Last but not least, the fused silica peaks measured
on the metasurface area appeared not only much more enhanced compared to the flat area, but
also compared to the amorphous TiO2 case (e.g. Fig.3.16b).
46
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 3.21. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots at different Raman
shifts of Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer) after annealing process at 490oC for 90min. It can bee seen
that the peak intensity for the metasurface is much higher than the flat area for -7290µm position.
Moreover, when the Raman shifts match the TiO2 ones (518cm−1 and around 640cm−1), the peak
intensity difference between the metasurface and flat area becomes even more pronounced.
47
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4
Discussion
In the previous chapter, the results were briefly discussed and presented to get a first
viewpoint of them. However, it is of primary importance to analyze and and connect
some results with the expected behavior of the fabricated metasurface.
Last but not
least, this chapter will gather all the findings of this work as well as introduce and discuss
possible future work and improvements.
4.1
Nanofabrication
To start with, the designed Master stamp is expected to transfer the pattern to the actual
nanofabricated wafer through an intermediate daughter stamp. The fabricated daughter
stamp inspection on the optical microscope reveals the good pattern transferring. However,
due to the high inversion of the nanoholes pattern of the master stamp to cylindrical
pillars in the daughter stamp, an inspection of the daughter stamp using AFM can not be
accomplished. The main reason is the aspect ratio and dimensions of the nanostructures
with respect to the tip dimensions of the AFM cantilever. Thus, a stylus profilometer
measurements has been done on the edge of the metastructured areas of the daughter
stamps to get a step profile of the height.
With respect to the fabricated metasurfaces, the spin coating and nanoimpirnt lithography
was uniform applied to all the different areas. However, the different hole diameters in the
areas lead to different residual layer thicknesses after NIL. As a result, the same initial
resist thickness may be not ideal for the pattern transferring and complete cavity filling
for all the different areas. This can cause some defects on the different areas with respect
to the perfect pattern transferring. Moreover, the exact expected nanohole dimensions are
not so easy to be developed. The underlying reason stems from the etch processes which
change not only the depth and diameter of the nanoholes, but also the etch rate itself can
slightly vary over time. The Master stamp (and so the daughter stamp) have been designed
and developed to transfer the nanofabricated patterns without taking into consideration
the detailed increase of the diameter via the AOE etching of fused silica substrate. Thus,
the nanoholes resulted in unexpected hole diameters compared to the stamp design. The
advanced oxide etching (AOE) of the substrate was optimized via different approaches,
(until the desired depth was achieved without merging the nanoholes):
• By using steps of 10s etching on the same wafer.
• By starting a direct of 30s etching and then steps of 10s on the same wafer.
• By using a direct 50s etching.
48
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
• By using different etch times on different wafers of the same batch process close the
to expected etch time.
It was revealed that the etch rate is different for very small etch times (10s or less) due to
the fact that the plasma needs some time to be stabilized. As a result, it is not efficient
and simultaneously extremely time consuming to use very small etch times to control as
much as possible the depth and diameter because the conditions of the AOE can change
significantly for so small etch times. The optimal etch time of the substrate was 44sec
which gives nanoholes of resulted approximate depth and final diameter of 330nm and
632nm correspondingly. This was achieved only for the area 5, where the initial nanoholes
diameter via pattern transfering was the smallest (555nm). For all the other areas, the
nanoholes start merging from very small (area 1,2 and 3) to little larger (area 4) etch time.
In Fig.3.10, an overview of the diameter increase with respect to the etch time is illustrated.
The accuracy of the linear model is low due to the fitting in different areas which result
in different diameter increase through etching process. In other words, the different hole
diameter (with the same pitch size) can show slightly different diameter increase. Thus,
the nanoimprint area which was supposed to have the smallest holes (DArea 5
i
= 555nm),
ended up with even higher diameter (DArea 5
f
= 632nm) compare to largest initial diameter
holes (DArea 1
i
= 615nm).
To gain an in depth analysis of the nanoholes, the SEM of the different fused silica substrate
wafers were investigated. It is known that, the fused silica samples are not conductive, thus
it is hard to image by SEM with a proper resolution. For a better inspection, a Variable
Pressure Secondary Electron (VPSE) detector was used with electron high tension (EHT)
of 15kV. Furthermore, the brightness and contrast settings of each SEM image have been
individually optimized to extract the best image as possible.
Last but not least, the
collector bias has been properly adjusted to make the image as clear as possible. Also,
the aperture alignment and stigmatization correction was fulfilled as precisely as possible
to avoid any distortions in the circular shape of the nanoholes. A 30o tilt of the wafer
can easier reveal the sidewall decrease between the holes due to over-etching in the larger
diameter nanohole areas, as illustrated in Fig.3.12c for area 4. Due to the amorphous
nature of the fused silica combined with the very small dimensions of each area (500µm x
500µm), it is very hard to cleave the sample and so extract a cross sectional SEM image
in order to measure the depth of the nanoholes. In this way, the AFM is widely utilized
to give a precise depth measurement of the nanoholes.
It is known that AFM is a very-high-resolution type of scanning probe technique which
can give nanometer resolution of the area of interest. The main disadvantages and so
errors of it stems from the tip convolution. The proper condition of the tip is necessary
in order to minimize systematic errors when scanning an area. Due to the high amount
of time needed to scan large areas (slow scan rate), it is not feasible to scan large areas.
In turn, the extracted information is given from a small part of the under studied area
(approximately 1-1.5µm out of the 500 µm). For the AFM measurements of this study,
a standard probe was used. Despite the fact that AFM probe can reach the bottom of
the holes, the information related to the sidewalls geometry is not accurate. Last but not
least, the cross sectional SEM images can actually reveal the exact sidewall straightness,
as aforementioned.
49
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
4.2
Optical characterization
In this work, a number of seven different deposited layer combinations are studied. These
combinations include not only different deposited materials, but also different thickness
of them. The starting point is the simulations where it is possible to visualize the field
distribution inside the nanohole area for different TiO2 thicknesses (Fig.3.14). Knowing
the Raman spectra of fused silica, amorphous and anatase TiO2 and Al2O3, it is possible to
investigate and connect the measured spectra and Raman peaks to the expexted ones from
theory. It is shown that, when no material is deposited on the wafer surface, there is no any
signal difference between the metasurface and flat area. In turn, the pure metasurface itself
can not provide an enhancement in the Raman signal. However, by depositing a specific
42nm layer of TiO2, the extracted signal measured on the metasurface (Fig.3.17b) appears
enhanced compared to the flat area measured. This enhancement takes place for a specific
z-position of the objective and so for focusing the beam inside the TiO2 layer. In order
to ensure the importance of the titanium dioxide layer in the field enhancement, a thin
(6nm) and thick (187nm) layer of Al2O3 is deposited not only on top of the 42nm TiO2,
but also directly on the pure fused silica wafer (flat & metasurface areas). By comparing
the Raman spectrum of the wafers containing 42nm TiO2, (42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3)
and (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3) (Fig.3.17, 3.18 and 3.19), it can be seen that the Al2O3
layer neither change the signal nor the Al2O3 peaks can be detected. The intensity scale
does not change between these three measurements/spectra and the intensity range of the
identical peaks are approximately the same between them. Taking into consideration the
identical Raman spectrum between the flat and metasurface areas of the wafers having
only 6nm Al2O3 and 187nm Al2O3, it is resulted that the Al2O3 effect on the intensity
gain is insignificant. It is important to point out that the Raman peaks of the Al2O3 are
not distinguished because they are located in the same Raman shift positions of the strong
fused silica signal.
Due to the amorphous phase of the TiO2, it is not possible to distinguish any peak, as
expected from theory (Fig.3.15b). As a result, an annealing process is accomplished in
order to get the anatase TiO2. In this way, the Raman peaks at 393cm−1, 518cm−1 and
638cm−1 appeared in the spectrum. The very interesting is the higher intensity signal not
only for all the spectrum range, but especially for the anatase TiO2 peaks. In particular,
the Raman spectrum ratio between the metasurface and flat area prior and after annealing
is illustrated in the Fig.4.1 below for the same z-position.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1. Metasurface over flat area intensity ratio spectrum (a) prior and (b) after annealing
process of Wafer 9.
50
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
It is clear that the annealing not only reveals the anatase TiO2 peaks, but also the en-
hancement is more predominant compare to the flat area.
Moreover, the pixel images of the amorphous and anatase TiO2 measurements, where the
Raman spectrum are extracted from, as well as the relative profile of the intensity as a
function of the pixel y at 640cm−1 are illustrated in (Fig.4.2 & Fig.4.3):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 4.2. Wafer 9 pixel y images at 640cm−1 Raman shift after annealing process measured at (a)
Flat and (b) Metasurface area at z=-7300µm and (c) Flat and (d) Metasurface area at an offset
position of z=-7350µm.
It can be seen that the intensity is spatially scattered at an offset of -50µm (z=-7350µm)
compare to focusing onto the anatase TiO2 layer position (at z=-7300µm). The same
scattering is applied for all the z-positions far from the highly concentrated intensity
at z=-7300µm. Furthermore, from the pixel y image (Fig.4.2b), it is obvious that the
intensity at the specific Raman shifts of anatase TiO2 is brighter, as expected. To visualize
the intensity profile with respect to the pixel y at 640cm−1, the scattered intensity as a
function of the pixel y at 640cm−1 is depicted in the next Fig.4.3.
The ratio of the two signals between the metasurface and flat area at 640cm−1 and position
of z=-7300µm (Fig.4.3a) can be quantified to extract the enhancement factor:
Imetasurface
Iflat area
=
Imax
metasurface −Imin
metasurface
Imax
flat −Imin
meflat
= (1900 −500)[a.u.]
(620 −500)[a.u.] ≈12
(4.1)
where Imax
metasurface, Imin
metasurface, Imax
flat and Imin
flat are the maximum and minimum intensities,
51
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
measured from the respective intensity profile (Fig.4.3a).
As a result, the intensity signal can be enhanced by an approximate factor of 12 using a
metasurface area with specific dimensions and adding a layer of anatase TiO2 of specific
thickness.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.3.
Intensity profile as a function of pixel y at 640cm−1 for (a) z= −7300µm and (b)
z= −7350µm (-50µm offset).
52
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this work, the main target is the fabrication of truncated waveguide metasurfaces which
can give an increase in the resonance of the electric field. At first place, numerical mod-
eling using COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS takes place in order to investigate the optimal
dimensions of the metasurface/meta-atom design as well as the deposited TiO2 thickness
on the surface. Thus, TiO2 metasurface templates were fabricated using a process flow
(containing NIL, DRIE etching etc.). Despite the fact that specific dimensions should have
been developed, limitations relative to the merging of the neighbouring nanoholes (due to
etching process in combination with the small pitch size) led to reconsidering the exact
resulted depth without breaking the sidewalls between the nanoholes. In this way, the
etching processes were carefully optimized as much as possible to get the highest depth of
nanoholes while keeping the uniformity, and complete separation of them. It is shown that,
using a pitch size of 660nm, only the area with nanoholes of initial diameter of 555nm can
be used. For all the other areas containing 570, 585, 600, and 615nm diameter of nanoholes,
the sidewalls which segregate the nanoholes fall apart (partially or completely) at rela-
tively low depth which is not efficient for an enhancement of the field. The diameter and
depth of the final fabricated nanoholes is 632nm and 330nm respectively. After depositing
the optimal 42nm of the TiO2, the optical characterization takes place. With respect to
the functionality of the truncated waveguide meta-atoms, they designed for enhancement
at an excitation wavelength of 785nm in Raman setup. Overall, the TiO2 deposited layer
seems to be the underlying reason for the field enhancement because when it is completely
absent from the metasurface, any difference between the flat and metasurface area mea-
surements can be detected. In order to ensure this, Al2O3 layer is conformally deposited
directly on the pure metasurface and flat area. In this case, the intensity is identical in
the two aforementioned areas. Finally, the TiO2 was annealed in order to investigate the
performance of the anatase TiO2 and its effect. It is concluded that the anatase TiO2 can
give a 12 factor of the intensity signal in the metasurface compare to the flat area. To
sum up, the metasurface area combined with the optimal TiO2 can enhance the Raman
signal compare to the flat area. In order to establish this research, future improvements
are needed mainly related to detailed numerical and modelling analysis.
53
==PAGE:60==
References
[1] Meta Materials Inc.
What are Metamaterials?
URL https://content.
metamaterial.com/blog/what-are-metamaterials.
[2] George V. Eleftheriades and K.G. Balmain. Negative-Refraction Metamaterials: Fun-
damental Principles and Applications. Wiley-IEEE Press, June 2005. ISBN ISBN:
978-0-471-60146-3.
[3] Andrei Laurynenka. Lecture notes in ”Nanosystems Engineering” course at Technical
University of Denmark, October 2020.
[4] Explaining metamaterials and metasurfaces – properties and applications.
URL
https://www.nanowerk.com/what-are-metamaterials.php.
[5] Hui-Hsin Hsiao, Cheng Hung Chu, and Din Ping Tsai. Fundamentals and applications
of metasurfaces. Small Methods, 1(4):1600064, 2017.
[6] Nanfang Yu, Patrice Genevet, Mikhail A Kats, Francesco Aieta, Jean-Philippe Teti-
enne, Federico Capasso, and Zeno Gaburro. Light propagation with phase discon-
tinuities: generalized laws of reflection and refraction. science, 334(6054):333–337,
2011.
[7] Vilson R Almeida, Qianfan Xu, Carlos A Barrios, and Michal Lipson. Guiding and
confining light in void nanostructure. Optics letters, 29(11):1209–1211, 2004.
[8] P Andrew Anderson, Bradley S Schmidt, and Michal Lipson. High confinement in
silicon slot waveguides with sharp bends. Optics Express, 14(20):9197–9202, 2006.
[9] Ning-Ning Feng, Jurgen Michel, and Lionel C Kimerling. Optical field concentration
in low-index waveguides. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 42(9):885–890, 2006.
[10] Rong Sun, Po Dong, Ning-ning Feng, Ching-yin Hong, Jurgen Michel, Michal Lip-
son, and Lionel Kimerling. Horizontal single and multiple slot waveguides: optical
transmission at λ= 1550 nm. Optics Express, 15(26):17967–17972, 2007.
[11] Vin-Cent Su, Cheng Hung Chu, Greg Sun, and Din Ping Tsai. Advances in optical
metasurfaces: fabrication and applications. Optics express, 26(10):13148–13182, 2018.
[12] Jun Ai, Qifeng Du, Zhongli Qin, Jianguo Liu, and Xiaoyan Zeng.
Laser direct-
writing lithography equipment system for rapid and m-precision fabrication on curved
surfaces with large sag heights. OPTICS EXPRESS 20965, Vol. 26, No. 16, 6 Aug
2018. doi: 10.1364/OE.26.020965.
54
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
[13] Crystran Ltd - World Wide Optics Source”, title = ”Rutile (TiO2). URL https:
//www.crystran.co.uk/optical-materials/rutile-tio2.
[14] LNF University of Michigan. Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition. URL https:
//lnf-wiki.eecs.umich.edu/wiki/Low_pressure_chemical_vapor_deposition.
[15] Technical University of Denmark. Manual for LPCVD polysilicon furnace (4). URL
https://labmanager.dtu.dk/d4Show.php?id=1582&mach=86.
[16] Thin film group (DTU). DTU Nanolab TPT: Thin Film. URL https://learn.
inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/56079/viewContent/259713/View.
[17] Spin Coating, . URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin_coating.
[18] Microresist Technology. mr-NIL200 series. URL https://www.microresist.de/en/
produkt/mr-nil200-series/.
[19] Nanoimprint Lithography, . URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanoimprint_
lithography.
[20] Hongbo Lan and Yucheng Ding. Nanoimprint Lithography. InTech Croatia, 2010.
[21] Dongxu Wu et al.
Nanoimprint Lithography - the past, the present and the fu-
ture.
URL https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/61093/1/Wu_Rajput_Luo_CN_
2016_Nanoimprint_lithography_the_past_the_present.pdf.
[22] AZO NANO, Sponsored by EV GroupJan 17 2011. UV-Nanoimprint Lithography
- Overview and Systems Available for UV-Nanoimprint Lithography. URL https:
//www.azonano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=2766.
[23] Helmut Schift and Anders Kristensen. Nanoimprint Lithography. volume Chapter 8.
Springer, 2nd edition, 2007. ISBN 3-540-29855-x.
[24] Wikipedia. Deep Reactive-Ion Etching, . URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Deep_reactive-ion_etching.
[25] James McVittie.
Stanford Nanofabrication Facility: Dry Etching Lectures.
URL
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMvRXF3ZZr4.
[26] Katarzyna Racka-Szmidt, Bart lomiej Stonio, Jaros law ˙Zelazko, Maciej Filipiak, and
Mariusz Sochacki. A review: Inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching of silicon
carbide. Materials, 15(1):123, 2021.
[27] Maksym M Plakhotnyuk, Maria Gaudig, Rasmus Schmidt Davidsen, Jonas Michael
Lindhard, Jens Hirsch, Dominik Lausch, Michael Stenbæk Schmidt, Eugen Stamate,
and Ole Hansen. Low surface damage dry etched black silicon. Journal of Applied
Physics, 122(14):143101, 2017.
[28] CORIAL,
A
Plasma-Therm.
Inductively
Coupled
Plasma
–
Reactive
Ion
Etching (ICP-RIE).
URL https://corial.plasmatherm.com/en/technologies/
icp-rie-inductively-coupled-plasma-reactive-ion-etching.
[29] Berit G. Herstrøm and Jonas Michael-Lindhard. ”Dry Etch Tool Package Training”
course at Technical University of Denmark. URL https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/
d2l/le/content/55195/viewContent/189053/View.
55
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
[30] LNF, Univercity of Michigan. Wet etching. URL https://lnf-wiki.eecs.umich.
edu/wiki/Wet_etching.
[31] Avinash P. Nayak, Logeeswaran VJ and M. Saif Islam.
Wet and Dry Etch-
ing. URL https://www.ece.ucdavis.edu/~anayakpr/Papers/Wet%20and%20Dry%
20Etching_submitted.pdf.
[32] EESemi semiconductor manufacturing. Wet etching. URL https://www.eesemi.
com/wetetch.htm.
[33] Lab Adviser DTU Nanolab.
Specific Process Knowledge/Etch/Wet Polysili-
con Etch, .
URL http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php/Specific_
Process_Knowledge/Etch/Wet_Polysilicon_Etch.
[34] Majken Becker. Manual for Isotropic Etch/Poly Etch. URL https://labmanager.
dtu.dk/d4Show.php?id=2746&mach=379.
[35] Wikipedia.
Plasma Ashing, .
URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plasma_
ashing.
[36] Thierry Pr¨azisionslackiertechnik GmbH.
What is Plasma Ashing?
URL https:
//www.thierry-corp.com/plasma-knowledgebase/what-is-plasma-ashing.
[37] Wikipedia.
Atomic Layer Deposition, .
URL https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Atomic_layer_deposition.
[38] Thin Film Group DTU.
”Thin Film Tool Package Training (TPT)” course
at DTU Nanolab. URL https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/56079/
viewContent/259694/View.
[39] Evgeniy Shkondin, DTU Danchip, 2014-2016.
Specific Process Knowledge/Thin
film
deposition/ALD
Picosun
R200/TiO2
deposition
using
ALD.
URL
http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php/Specific_Process_Knowledge/
Thin_film_deposition/ALD_Picosun_R200/TiO2_deposition_using_ALD.
[40] Bob Kyeyune. Atomic Force Microscopy. Research Gate, May 2017. doi: 10.13140/
RG.2.2.17356.10887.
[41] Stephan Sylvest Keller. Lecture notes in Cleanroom process characterization methods
topic of ”Advanced fabrication of micro and nano structures” course at Technical
University of Denmark, October 2022.
[42] J.A. Woollam.
What is Ellipsometry?
URL https://www.jawoollam.com/
resources/ellipsometry-tutorial/what-is-ellipsometry.
[43] JEOL Serving Advanced Technology. Scanning Electron Microscopy A to Z. URL
https://www.jeol.co.jp/en/applications/pdf/sm/sem_atoz_all.pdf.
[44] Purdue University. Scanning Electron Microscope. URL https://www.purdue.edu/
ehps/rem/laboratory/equipment%20safety/Research%20Equipment/sem.html.
[45] Laser Quantum. What is Raman Spectroscopy? URL https://www.laserquantum.
com/blog/what-is-raman-spectroscopy/.
[46] Peter Larkin. Infrared and Raman spectroscopy: principles and spectral interpretation.
Elsevier, 2017. ISBN 978-0-12-386984-5.
56
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
[47] HORIBA Manufacturer. What is Raman Spectroscopy? URL https://www.horiba.
com/usa/raman-imaging-and-spectroscopy/.
[48] Lab Adviser DTU Nanolab.
Specific Process Knowledge/Etch/Etching of Bulk
Glass/AOE etching of fused silica, . URL http://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/
index.php/Specific_Process_Knowledge/Etch/Etching_of_Bulk_Glass/AOE_
etching_of_fused_silica.
57
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
Results
A.1
Nanofabrication
In this section/appendix, all the images related to the metasurface nanofabrication are
gathered and depicted.
A.1.1
AFM Images
The AFM measurements which lead to the depth results of the fabricated holes analyzed
in Section 3.1 are shown nextly:
Fig. A.1. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 5
after NIL.
58
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.2. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 6
after NIL.
Fig. A.3. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 7
after NIL.
59
==PAGE:66==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.4. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 8
after NIL.
Fig. A.5. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 5
after DRIE of residual layer resist (32s etching), poly-Si (20s etching) and resist strip (1h plasma
ash).
60
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.6. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 6
after DRIE of residual layer resist (27s etching), poly-Si (20s etching) and resist strip (1h plasma
ash).
Fig. A.7. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 7
after DRIE of residual layer resist (27s etching), poly-Si (20s etching) and resist strip (1h plasma
ash).
61
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.8. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 8
after DRIE of residual layer resist (29s etching), poly-Si (20s etching) and resist strip (1h plasma
ash).
Fig. A.9. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 6
after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 10s. It can be seen that, on (e) area 5, there is
a defect on in some locations of the metasurface.
62
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.10. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
6 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 20s.
Fig. A.11. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
6 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 30s. As the AOE etching time increases, the
holes in the higher hole diameter areas (i.e. (a) area 1 and (b) area 2) start merging.
63
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.12. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
6 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 40s. For the higher hole diameter areas (i.e.
(a) area 1, (b) area 2 and (c) area 3), there is merging of the holes even for very small etching
time and so shallow depth. It is obvious that as the depth of the hole increases (and so the AOE
etching time), the small pitch size and high diameter of the area 1, 2 & will lead to significant
merging of neighboring holes.
Fig. A.13. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
6 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 50s. The merging has become so significant
that for some areas, the nanoholes can be hardly distinguished.
64
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.14. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
7 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 30s.
Fig. A.15. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
7 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 40s.
65
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.16. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
7 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 50s.
Fig. A.17.
AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of
Wafer 7 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 60s. The over-etching has lead to the
coalescence of the neighboring holes, as aforementioned.
66
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.18. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
8 after overall time of fused silica substrate AOE for 50s.
Fig. A.19. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer
10 after NIL.
67
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.20. AFM images of (a) area 1, (b) area 2, (c) area 3, (d) area 4 and (e) area 5 of Wafer 10
after DRIE of residual layer resist (29s etching), poly-Si (20s etching) and resist strip (1h plasma
ash).
Fig. A.21. AFM images of (a) Wafer 11 (42s AOE), (b) Wafer 9 (44s AOE), (c) Wafer 14 (46s
AOE) and (d) Wafer 12 (48s AOE) of areas 4.
68
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
Fig. A.22. AFM images of (a) Wafer 11 (42s AOE), (b) Wafer 9 (44s AOE), (c) Wafer 14 (46s
AOE) and (d) Wafer 12 (48s AOE) of areas 5.
69
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
A.2
Optical Characterization
In this section, all the additional Raman spectra of the different wafers (containing various
layers on the surface), at different z-position of the objective are depicted. Last but not
least, the z-scan peak intensity for supplemental Raman shift are shown.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.23.
Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of
-7250µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer).
70
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.24.
Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of
-7350µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer).
71
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.25.
Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of
-7400µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer).
72
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.26.
Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) Raman spectra at z-position of
-7450µm of (a) Wafer 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10
(42nm TiO2 + 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer
16 (+6nm of Al2O3 layer) and (f) Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer).
73
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.27. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots of (a) fused
silica 18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10 (42nm TiO2
+ 6nm Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer 16 (+6nm of
Al2O3 layer) and (f) and Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer) at Raman shift of 440cm−1.
74
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.28. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots of (a) Wafer
18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10 (42nm TiO2 + 6nm
Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer 16 (+6nm of Al2O3
layer) and (f) and Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer) at Raman shift of 820cm−1.
75
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. A.29. Metasurface (red color) and flat area (blue color) z scan scatter plots of (a) Wafer
18 (bare fused silica surface), (b) Wafer 9 (+42nm TiO2 layer), (c) Wafer 10 (42nm TiO2 + 6nm
Al2O3 layers), (d) Wafer 11 (42nm TiO2 + 187nm Al2O3 layers), (e) Wafer 16 (+6nm of Al2O3
layer) and (f) and Wafer 20 (+187nm of Al2O3 layer) at Raman shift of 1064cm−1.
76
