==PAGE:1==
Fingerprinting Schemes against a
Post-Quantum Cryptography
IPsec/IKEv2 Encryption appliance
Swetha Latha Meeranath
Master’s Thesis
Espoo, June 24, 2022
Supervisors:
Professor Christopher Brzuska, Aalto University
Professor Nicola Dragoni, Technical University of Denmark
Advisors:
Pihla Karanko, Doctoral researcher
Edlira Dushku, Post-Doctoral researcher
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Cryptographic protocols secure data transmission over an untrusted network.
Although the encryption mechanisms ensure confidentiality of the data, the
encrypted network traffic is prone to traffic analysis attacks. The aim of this
thesis is to determine the attack vectors of a post-quantum safe IPsec/IKEv2
encryption appliance called NQX, that acts as a Virtual Private Network
(VPN) device.
We study the characteristics of encrypted data packets, such as packet
length and timestamp and use them in fingerprinting methods to extract valu-
able information about the applications used at communication endpoints.
Existing works on fingerprinting encrypted network traffic have tested differ-
ent encryption appliances using different protocols, whereas in this thesis we
have, for the first time, analyzed the fingerprinting schemes against NQX,
which uses post-quantum cryptographic algorithms.
Results from our experiments, such as fingerprinting of websites, browsers,
SSH connection establishment and file transfers, show that the fingerprints
in the form of graphs are unique for every application. We further evaluate
the fingerprints using various statistical analyses such as cross-correlation,
mean squared error and compression analysis to classify which website was
accessed or which browser was used. Finally, we discuss some traffic flow
confidentiality mechanisms to overcome traffic analysis attacks.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration
with SSH Communications Security Corporation in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Espoo, June 24, 2022
Swetha Latha Meeranath
iv
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to SSH Communications Se-
curity Corporation, for giving me an opportunity to work on this interesting
research project for my Master’s thesis. This thesis would not have been pos-
sible without the expertise of my manager Samuli Lehti and my mentor Tero
Mononen. My warmest thanks to my colleagues, Tor-Edin Farstad for his
support throughout the work and Pauli Rikula for his insightful suggestions.
I sincerely thank my supervisors Professor Christopher Brzuska and Pro-
fessor Nicola Dragoni, and my advisors Pihla Karanko and Edlira Dushku
for their valuable guidance. A special thanks to Pihla Karanko who selflessly
contributed her time and ideas throughout the thesis.
Last but not the least, I’m immensely grateful to my family and friends
for their love, moral support, and constant motivation that kept me going.
Espoo, June 24, 2022
Swetha Latha Meeranath
v
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
IPsec
Internet Protocol security
IKE
Internet Key Exchange
VPN
Virtual Private Network
OSI
Open Systems Interconnection
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
HTTPS
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
ESP
Encapsulating Security Payload
SSH
Secure Shell
FTP
File Transfer Protocol
SMTP
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
MAC
Media Access Control
DNS
Domain Name System
NTP
Network Time Protocol
DHCP
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
LUKS
Linux Unified Key Setup
TPM
Trusted Platform Module
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Attack model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background and Related work
5
2.1
Networking concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The OSI Model and protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Virtual private network (VPN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
NQX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
IPsec . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
IKEv2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Laboratory setup
13
3.1
Network topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
NQX node configuration and installation . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
VPN Tunnel Establishment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Methods
21
4.1
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Experiments
24
5.1
Website Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.1
Google . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.2
Facebook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
vii
==PAGE:8==
5.1.3
Other websites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.4
Multiple websites simultaneously
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Browser fingerprinting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
SSH session establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
File transfers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Packet captures from different devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
Packet capture showing IKE exchange
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7
Effect of PQC algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Evaluation
36
6.1
Correlation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.1
Cross-correlation analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Mean squared error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Compression analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Discussion
43
7.1
Overcoming fingerprinting attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Conclusion and Future work
46
A NQX node configuration
51
viii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Network security is an important concern these days since highly confiden-
tial data are transferred over the internet. To secure the data and prevent
attackers from gaining access to it, many cryptographic algorithms and en-
cryption methods have been developed and used. In this thesis, we study
the effectiveness of a network encryption appliance called NQX, which uses
post-quantum secure cryptographic protocols. It aims to protect the data
in transit over both public and private networks using robust encryption al-
gorithms. While the data is encrypted, there might be other characteristics
or physical parameters of the network traffic that leak information about
the devices involved in the communication including the software and hard-
ware used. This method of identifying information about the target devices
is called Fingerprinting. We use fingerprinting schemes to analyze whether
NQX reveals any useful side information in the most common use cases, by
inspecting various features of the encrypted data packets being transferred.
Existing research on network traffic analysis is usually either specific to
the encryption software or the protocol used. The traffic analysis attacks have
targeted different applications such as website browsing, video streaming,
VoIP and instant messaging [19], [10], [32], [13], [26]. Specifically, website
fingerprinting in which the website visited by the user is identified has gained
a lot of popularity [17], [11], [3], [28], [21], [27].
Table 1.1 summarizes the research directions and Section 2.6 presents
them in more detail. Multiple features of the traffic are used for fingerprint-
ing, however, most of these works use the packet sizes and frequencies in
some form. Either unidirectional (sender to receiver) or bidirectional packets
can be analyzed.
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
Application
Classification
Method
Features used
Reference
Website fingerprinting
over Wi-Fi networks
Machine learning
Bandwidth, inter-arrival
time, average number of
packets per second, and
packet size
Kowsalya [17]
Website fingerprinting
in SafeWeb (web proxy)
Basic statistical
analysis
Packet size
Hintz[11]
Website fingerprinting
in encrypted HTTP
streams
Correlation analysis
Packet size and
inter-arrival time
Bissias et al. [3]
Triplet fingerprinting of
websites
Triplet networks for
N-shot learning
Traffic direction
(incoming or outgoing)
Sirinam et al. [28]
Adaptive website
fingerprinting
Embedded neural
network
IP address
Mavroudis et al. [21]
Fine-grained webpages
fingerprinting
Convolutional Neural
Networks
Length of unidirectional
packet sequences
Shen et al. [27]
Fingerprinting websites,
browsers, file transfers
Correlation and
compression analysis,
mean squared error
Packet size and
timestamp
Our work
Table 1.1: Comparison of related works
In our work, we use the packet lengths and timestamps of bidirectional
packets to define the fingerprints. We study numerous applications as op-
posed to the other works that focus on one single application (such as website
fingerprinting) or classification technique (such as machine learning). In ad-
dition to website fingerprinting, we performed browser fingerprinting and
tested SSH connection establishments and file transfers using NQX. Since
the prime objective of the thesis was to discover the vulnerabilities of NQX,
we chose to compare the fingerprints using simple correlation analysis meth-
ods, as in [3], rather than complex machine learning algorithms.
Above
all, NQX uses IPsec/IKEv2 protocols in combination with PQC algorithms,
which have not been tested before to the best of found knowledge.
1.1
Attack model
A typical use case of NQX is an encrypted communication between two
different branches of an office, belonging to different networks, as shown in
the following Figure 1.1.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
Figure 1.1: Setup overview
Our attack model in this thesis is a passive analysis of network traffic,
where the adversary observes the encrypted data traffic between the NQX
nodes but does not interfere with it.
1.2
Contributions
We studied the fingerprints of various websites, browsers and file transfers,
and found several analytical methods such as cross-correlation, mean squared
error and compression analysis efficient in classifying data.
Surprisingly,
we could distinguish the websites or browsers just by looking at the finger-
prints visually. Figure 1.2 shows an example of a comparison between the
fingerprints obtained by accessing Google and Facebook at three different
instances. The fingerprints are clearly distinct.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
Figure 1.2: Fingerprints of three different samples of Google and Facebook
Additionally, we show that irrespective of whether post-quantum secure
algorithms are used or not, the fingerprints do not change. The use of clas-
sical encryption algorithms or quantum-safe algorithms does not influence
fingerprinting. This is because the post-quantum cryptographic algorithms
only affect the key exchange part of the communication, whereas the finger-
prints that enable the classification mostly consist of the payload/actual data
that does not depend on the key exchange phase.
1.3
Structure of the Thesis
Chapter 2 introduces networking terminology and NQX which is the focus
of our study. Chapter 3 describes the laboratory setup including the con-
figuration and installation details.
Chapter 4 introduces the methods we
use for the experiments. Chapter 5, explains the experiments which we per-
formed. Chapter 6 evaluates the results of the experiments using statistical
data analysis methods. Chapter 7 discusses the results and possible coun-
termeasures for fingerprinting schemes. Finally, Chapter 8 summarizes the
work and outlines directions for possible future work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background and Related work
This chapter introduces the core concepts, terms, and definitions used in the
thesis. Section 2.1 reviews networking terminology and its relevance to our
work. Section 2.2 and Section 2.3 describe the OSI model and virtual pri-
vate network respectively. Then, Section 2.4 presents NQX and its features.
Finally, Section 2.5 and 2.6 explain fingerprinting and the related works.
2.1
Networking concepts
For our thesis work, we had to set up a lab environment with physical devices
and cables. The devices include servers, nodes, and switches, and these were
connected to each other using Ethernet cables. This section will explain each
of these components briefly.
A Server is a software or a hardware system that provides resources,
data, and services to other computers called Clients, that request the service
[22].
For the experiments, we have used two Lenovo host machines with
Ubuntu operating systems, which represent the client and server. The server
acts as a gateway to the internet. The requests sent from the client are routed
through the server to the internet. All the devices have a specific Internet
Protocol address called the IP address assigned to them. If there are no
explicit routes for a destination, the data passes through a default gateway,
which can be configured with an IP address. A node is a device in a network
that can either relay or receive data. We use the term node to indicate the
device on which the NQX software is installed. The data are broken into
smaller pieces called packets and the process of transferring them across
the networks is called packet switching. The devices are interconnected
using network switches, which are used to receive and forward data using
packet switching. A smaller network that covers homes or offices is called a
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
6
local area network (LAN) and the larger network spanning across the globe is
called the wide area network (WAN). Ethernet cables are used to physically
connect the devices to each other in LAN or WAN.
2.2
The OSI Model and protocols
To understand the protocols and features used in this work, we review the
different layers of computer networks. The Open Systems Interconnection
(OSI) model is a vertical set of seven communication layers, where each layer
performs specific functions and utilizes the services of the immediate lower
layer [18]. Figure 2.1 shows the seven layers of the model, followed by a short
description of each of the layers and the associated protocols [1].
Figure 2.1: The OSI Model, Figure from [18]
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
7
The physical layer L1 is the bottom-most layer which constitutes the
physical (optical fiber or copper cables) and electrical characteristics of the
network. The data is sent as strings of zeros and ones on the L1 wire. The
second layer L2 is the data link layer also called the Ethernet layer, which
provides reliable transmission of data as frames. The devices are accessed by
their Media Access Control (MAC) addresses on an Ethernet. The Network
layer L3 transfers data as packets of variable sizes, sequentially using logical
addresses from one network to another. The Internet Protocol (IP) of the
TCP/IP suite is responsible for transmitting the packets in the network layer.
The transport layer L4 is responsible for end-to-end reliable communication
in a network. Protocols such as TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) and
UDP (User Datagram Protocol) prevail in this layer. Session Layer L5 sets
up a session between the communicating parties and allows data to be ex-
changed as long as the session is active. The sixth layer, presentation layer
L6, transforms the data from and to a format understood by the application
layer. The topmost layer is the application layer hosting the end-user appli-
cations. The protocols used in this layer depend on the application running.
Some important application layer protocols are the following:
• HTTP/HTTPS - Hypertext Transfer Protocol, used for browsing web
pages. HTTPS provides security in addition, by encrypting the HTTPS
requests and responses using Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.
• Telnet - Telnet is a client-server type protocol, that provides text-based
communication to access a computer virtually using a terminal.
• SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, used for transmitting e-mails.
• FTP - File Transfer Protocol, used for transferring files over the internet
• SSH - Secure Shell protocol, used for secure remote login to a computer.
2.3
Virtual private network (VPN)
VPNs enable secure data access over the internet, by encrypting the data
that is being transmitted over public networks. It allows the user to securely
connect to a remote network from anywhere in the world. The IP address of
the user is disguised such that its location cannot be determined. Many or-
ganizations prefer connecting their multiple branches geographically located
across the globe using site-to-site VPNs. All the information is encrypted
and sent via a virtual tunnel that is established through a set of protocols,
such as Point to Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP), OpenVPN, IPsec, and
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
8
IKEv2. The virtualization can be either at the Data Link layer (L2 VPN)
or at the Network layer (L3 VPN). Most VPNs operate in Layer 3, where IP
packets are encrypted and sent across the networks. A Layer 2 VPN encrypts
and transmits Ethernet frames between two remote sites [2].
2.4
NQX
With quantum computers evolving, the public key cryptosystems are at risk.
Attacks against the key exchange mechanism can lead to recovery of the ses-
sion key, which in turn compromises the protected data. Thus, the need for
quantum resilient encryption appliances arises. NQX is a software solution of
SSH Communication Security Corporation, that provides quantum-safe en-
cryption of Ethernet and IP traffic over any private or public network [31]. It
provides a reliable transfer of data-in-motion, that aims to prevent any inter-
ference, leakage, or misuse of data. NQX supports hybrid key exchange, i.e.,
in addition to the standard key exchange mechanism, it uses quantum-safe
cryptography (QSC) algorithms, also known as post-quantum cryptography
(PQC) algorithms. These algorithms are believed to be safe against quan-
tum computing threats, but are not yet standardized, as the standardization
process by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is
still in progress. Some of the finalists of the NIST PQC competition such as
Crystals-Kyber, SABER, and NTRUEncrypt are used in NQX.
NQX acts as an in-line encryption device that encrypts/decrypts both
incoming and outgoing network traffic according to a security policy, as it
goes in and out of the device. The security policy can contain, for instance,
an IPsec VPN tunnel that makes the NQX node act as a VPN appliance.
It can support both Layer 2 and Layer 3 VPN simultaneously. The tunnel
handles Ethernet frames in Layer 2 and the IP packets in Layer 3. Besides,
NQX has several features that can be configured for additional security and
other purposes. The table 2.1 shows the list of features supported by the
NQX node that can be configured.
Other NQX features include general
logging, diagnostics, and statistics.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
9
Feature
Description
DHCP
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol - used to
acquire IP addresses for the network devices dy-
namically
DNS Servers
Domain Name System - used for matching web-
site hostnames to their corresponding addresses.
NTP Servers
Network Time Protocol - used for clock synchro-
nization between computer systems over differ-
ent networks.
HTTPS certificate/key
files
X.509 certificates - used to authenticate the
node with the maintenance web browser
LUKS Disk encryption
Linux Unified Key Setup - used for disk encryp-
tion, for enhanced security of the node itself
Client-side
certificate
authentication
Client side CA Certificate file - used to authen-
ticate clients
TPM options
Trusted Platform Module - used to secure the
LUKS key into the TPM hardware, if set
PSK
Pre-Shared Key - used for authenticating the
VPN tunnel
Table 2.1: NQX Features
The performance of NQX can be scaled up using different hardware based
on the size of the network system. It ranges from nano devices for small
offices to rack-mountable devices for large data centers. For the thesis, we
have tested the L3 VPN feature of the NQX nano device in a small office
setup.
2.4.1
IPsec
IPsec stands for Internet Protocol security and is a protocol suite standard-
ized by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) organization. It operates
at the network layer providing protection to the IP traffic [25]. IPsec is one
of the protocols primarily used in VPNs. It provides end-to-end security in
any communication by ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and authentication
through the following protocols:
• Authentication Header (AH)
The IP Authentication Header provides integrity using hash functions
and data origin authentication of IP packets. It also enables replay
protection by use of sequence numbers [15].
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
10
• Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
The Encapsulating Security Payload header ensures the confidential-
ity of the data packets in addition to authentication, integrity, and
anti-replay services. The confidentiality is provided through encryp-
tion algorithms [16].
Both AH and ESP protocols can be operated in one of the two modes:
transport mode and tunnel mode. In the tunnel mode, the original IP
packet along with the IP header is encrypted and encapsulated within
another IP header and the IPsec policy is applied based on the inner IP
header addresses. In the transport mode, only the payload is encrypted
while the IP header is not encrypted.
• Internet Key Exchange (IKE)
The IKE protocol builds on the Internet Security Association and Key
Management Protocol (ISAKMP) that provides a framework for deter-
mining the algorithms and keys to be used in protecting the commu-
nication. A security association (SA) is generated as result, with all
the security parameters to be used by the two communicating devices.
IKE is responsible for establishing the key material [4].
2.4.2
IKEv2
In version 2 of IKE, there are two sets of message exchanges.
The
first set is the IKE SA INIT and IKE AUTH, followed by the CRE-
ATE CHILD SA or INFORMATIONAL messages [14]. The IKE SA INIT
messages negotiate the security parameters such as the cryptographic
algorithms, nonces (random numbers used only once), and perform the
Diffie-Hellman key exchange. The IKE AUTH messages authenticate
the identities, previous messages, and certificates. They also set up the
first child SA for AH or ESP. The CREATE CHILD SA then creates
the child SA and is later used to re-key the IKE and child SAs. The
messages following the initial IKE SA INIT exchange are protected us-
ing the negotiated algorithms and keys.
2.5
Fingerprinting
Fingerprinting in cybersecurity refers to the method of finding any informa-
tion about target devices or applications, thereby exploiting their vulnerabil-
ities. Fingerprints can identify the operating systems, hardware, or software
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
11
[6]. A fingerprint is distinct and helps differentiate between similar things.
The use of fingerprints is legit for analytical purposes, in case of tracing any
attack, or as a defensive measure to study weaknesses in a system. On the
other hand, they can be misused by attackers to gain information about any
sensitive data or communication.
There can be two types of fingerprinting - active and passive. In active
fingerprinting, customized messages are sent to the target system and the
response is analyzed. Different targets may respond or behave differently to
the probe messages. If an attacker uses active fingerprinting, it involves a risk
of being detected. Passive techniques rely on observing and detecting unique
patterns in the data traffic over the network. It can be compared to sniffing
packets and is secretive compared to the active methods. The downside is
that it may be less accurate. In our thesis work, we have performed passive
fingerprinting of websites, file transfers, and other applications.
2.6
Related work
In the work done by Kowsalya, the traffic profiles of various websites were
captured over a WiFi network from an access point [17]. Though the data
packets are WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access) encrypted, they were still subject
to passive fingerprinting attacks. In this study, features such as bandwidth,
inter-arrival time of packets, the average number of packets received and
sent per second, and packet sizes were extracted and used to train the clas-
sifiers. Then, unknown samples were tested against the trained data and the
accuracy of the classification was determined.
In another similar work by Hintz, the vulnerability of a web proxy soft-
ware called SafeWeb was analyzed using website fingerprinting techniques
[11]. The prime feature used in this analysis is the packet size. The finger-
print for a particular website is determined by grouping the packets of the
same sizes together. The count of different packet lengths for one website
is compared against another website to find the similarity between two fin-
gerprints. Methods to improve the attack and defend the attack have been
discussed in this paper.
Bissias et al. performed a traffic analysis attack against real-time en-
crypted HTTP streams [3]. They used the packet sizes and inter-arrival time
to create profiles of popular websites and used them to train a classifier based
on correlation analysis. Later, they tested 25 unknown network traffic sam-
ples using the classifier and achieved an accuracy rate of 40%, which increases
with multiple guesses.
Sirinam et al. [28] proposed a new attack using Triplet networks for N-
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
12
shot learning, a machine learning technique, that achieves a higher prediction
accuracy with very few samples per website. This work ignores the packet
sizes and timestamps from the samples, instead, extracts only the traffic
direction (incoming or outgoing) of each packet to train the classifier.
A more recent work by Mavroudis et al. introduced an adaptive finger-
printing technique that accommodates changes in the content of the websites
[21]. The IP addresses from the packet captures were processed and then used
to train the machine learning classifier based on embedded neural networks.
Most of the existing solutions fingerprinted the homepage of the websites,
whereas, Shen et al. presented a finer fingerprinting method using Convolu-
tional Neural Networks to infer individual webpages of a monitored website,
that look more similar in content [27]. This method used the length of uni-
directional packet sequences as input to the classifier. Another recent survey
consolidates various works related to encrypted network traffic analysis for
the identification of websites, operating systems, and mobile applications
[23].
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Laboratory setup
The thesis work was carried out in an exclusive environment, dedicated only
to experiments relevant to the research.
We set up the laboratory from
scratch using devices configured for this purpose. Section 3.1 describes the
network topology of our experimental setup. Sections 3.2 and 3.3 explain the
NQX configuration process and VPN tunnel establishment in detail. The two
sections are not a required background for the other chapters but might be
useful for replicating the setup for other experiments in the future.
3.1
Network topology
We designed the lab in such a way that it simulates a typical VPN environ-
ment between two distinct local area networks. Minimal devices were used
in the setup as shown in Figure 3.1. Two Linux host machines are used
as the endpoints of the communication, representing the local area networks.
These are referred to as Device1 and Server. There are two NQX nodes
connected to the endpoints. These nodes have the NQX software installed
and configured in them, and they establish the tunnel to secure any commu-
nication.
Figure 3.1: Laboratory setup
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
14
The two NQX nodes were initially connected to each other through a
Cisco switch. Unfortunately, there were problems accessing the user interface
of this switch. Hence the switch was replaced with a newer HP switch. The
purpose of the switch is to simulate the internet and to capture the encrypted
traffic flow between the two nodes.
To access the user interface of NQX, the NQX nodes are also connected
to a Dell switch. Additionally, all other devices are also connected to the Dell
Switch. This is because all the aforementioned devices reside in a separate
server room, and the Dell switch enabled us to access all the devices in the
server room from the office.
3.2
NQX node configuration and installation
The first step in setting up the environment was to configure the NQX nodes,
which is explained in this section. We used the official NQX software installa-
tion image version 2.2.3 for the experiments initially. Later we used the PQC
version 2.3 and repeated the experiments. We first configured the node by
setting up the parameters such as hostname, IP address, password, and the
security features using a configuration tool. Since our thesis work required
a minimal configuration, only the basic mandatory parameters were set. We
then installed the software with the generated configuration files in a NANO
PC i3-7100 hardware. Please see appendix A for more details on the config-
uration and installation of the NQX software. Once the NQX installation is
complete, the hardware device combined with the NQX software is referred
to as an NQX node. This entire process is carried out for both NQX Node1
and Node2.
Each NQX node has six Ethernet ports as shown in Figure 3.2. The slot
and port mapping is static, where the slot number is 255 and the Ether-
net ports increase sequentially starting from 0, for example, 255/0, 255/1,
255/2, and so on. It is managed predominantly through a local web user
interface (UI), accessible post-installation. The UI uses the slot/port num-
ber combination to refer to the ports in the NQX node. The management
interface slot/port through which the UI is accessed is usually set to 255/0
while configuring the node. LAN1 port of the device corresponds to Port0
in the configuration. With reference to Figure 3.1, the Dell switch is con-
nected to Port 0 and the Cisco switch is connected to Port1 of both the NQX
nodes. Then, the Device1 is connected to Port2 of Node1 and the Server is
connected to Port2 of Node2.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
15
Figure 3.2: NANO PC i3-7100U - Slots/Ports
After the successful installation of NQX, the UI of the node can be ac-
cessed using the defined maintenance IP address. To access the interface via
a laptop, the laptop must have an IP address that is within the same subnet
range as the defined maintenance IP address range. The web user interface
is accessed by entering the maintenance IP into the web browser and pro-
viding the user credentials defined in the configuration files. The Home page
in figure 3.3 shows the status of the node, with graphs showing the traffic
on different interfaces. These graphs can be used to track live data that
is being sent across the tunnel. We used this feature while performing our
experiments to verify that the traffic was passing through the tunnel. The
initial security policy of the NQX node is named the Initial Configuration
and is found in the Policies tab.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
16
Figure 3.3: SSH NQX Homepage
3.3
VPN Tunnel Establishment
To assess for side-channel leaks in an L3 VPN IPsec/IKEv2 tunnel, an op-
erational tunnel needs to be in place. We did this by creating an L3 VPN
tunnel definition in the security policy of the NQX node. Before the tunnel
was established, the first step was to take a backup of the initial configu-
ration. This is to revert to an older version of the policy in case the user
gets locked out of the node due to unseen circumstances. After backing up
the initial configuration policy, we added a tunnel by defining the compo-
nents according to the planned network topology. This includes specifying
LAN interfaces, WAN interfaces, L3 tunnel configurations, and adding the
necessary flags for service usage.
There are two interfaces to the tunnel, the LAN side, connecting the
devices in the local area network, and the WAN side, ideally over the wider
area such as the internet. These two interfaces were created on both the
nodes with corresponding port numbers and IP addresses as shown in the
following screenshots 3.4 and 3.5 from the UI. Various service access options
can be set while creating the interface. For testing the connectivity of the
devices, the PING service is enabled on both LAN and WAN interfaces. To
establish the VPN tunnel between the nodes, WAN side interfaces serve as
the endpoints of the tunnel, hence the IKE service is enabled to allow IKEv2
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
17
negotiations between them.
Figure 3.4: Node1 interfaces
Figure 3.5: Node2 interfaces
In figures 3.4 and 3.5, the green symbol next to the slot/port number
indicate that the cable is connected. When there is no cable connected to
the port it is indicated in red color. The next step was to configure the
tunnel by creating a new one under the Tunnels tab for both the nodes. The
main components of the L3 VPN tunnel are the traffic selectors, L3 rules,
tunnel endpoints, and the encryption used on the traffic. The traffic selectors
specify the network range for source and destination packets which will be
encrypted by the NQX. They correspond to the respective LAN segments
found on both sides of the tunnel.
The L3 rules tell the NQX node what to do with incoming packets that
match the traffic selectors explicitly. If L3 rules are not defined for an L3
tunnel, incoming packets matching the traffic selectors will be dropped by
default. The tunnel endpoints refer to the IKEv2 endpoints which will nego-
tiate the tunnel between the nodes. These can be seen as WAN endpoints,
representing the packets leaving the LAN and going to some remote desti-
nation. The tunnel security parameters for the tunneled packets are defined
by specifying the encryption algorithm, pseudo-random function (PRF), and
Diffie-Hellman (DH) group.
As shown in figure 3.6, we set the local and remote network details.
The local network is the IP address range on the node’s end and the remote
network is the other end of the node under consideration. The authentication
methods can be one of the following: PSK, PSK ID, and Certificate.
If
PSK ID is selected, the selected PSK ID is a pointer to a PSK entry in the
generated PSK list that was generated during the system installation process.
We chose to use PSK for authenticating the tunnel. The method to identify
the local and remote interface is specified using the Ident Type field whose
values could be one of the following: FQDN, RFC822 ADDR, IPV4 ADDR,
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
18
IPV6 ADDR. We chose to use the Fully qualified domain names (FQDN)
method to identify the interfaces easily.
Figure 3.6: Tunnel configuration
The IP address of the local and remote IKE service is the address set on
the corresponding WAN interfaces. The security parameters can be chosen
from a list of options provided, depending on the requirements. The following
table shows the different parameters.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
19
Parameter
Description
Crypto
Sets the cryptographic method to be used for
the tunnel - AES CBC SHA2, AES GCM. All
AES encryption use 256-bit keys
PRF
Sets the Pseudo Random Function Family
for algorithm key material output size (bits)
(HMAC SHA2)
DH
Sets the Diffie Hellman group
IKE SA MAX lifetime
Sets the IKE SA maximum lifetime in seconds
for the tunnel. After the limit the key is re ne-
gotiated (default 24h).
IKE SA Transfer limit
Sets the maximum amount of data that may be
en/decrypted by IKE SAs for the tunnel. The
internal hard limit is 1GB
IPSEC SA Rekey interval
Time interval before IKEv2 rekeying. Default
value is 3600 seconds.
IPSEC SA Transfer limit
Sets the IKEv2 rekey interval using amount of
data transferred. The default value is 0.
Table 3.1: Tunnel Security parameters [30]
In order to keep the tunnel active and generate automatic routing rules,
we enabled the following options while creating the tunnel:
• Always active - If this option is checked the tunnel will always be
initialized whenever the policy it belongs to is committed
• Autogenerate rule to allow traffic in via the tunnel
• Autogenerate rule to allow traffic out via the tunnel
After all the required settings were configured, the changes were commit-
ted to the Policy. A successful establishment of the tunnel can be verified
under the Tunnel update logs in the UI, as shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Tunnel Establishment
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. LABORATORY SETUP
20
After the tunnel is established, a set of new L3 rules get generated under
the corresponding tab as shown in Figure 3.8. Similarly, the routes are also
established under the Routes tab in the UI.
Figure 3.8: L3 Rules
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Methods
In this chapter, we describe the methodology used for the experiments.
For website fingerprinting, various websites were accessed using differ-
ent browsers and Linux tools. The HTTPS requests were sent from Device1
via the tunnel through the Server that acts as the gateway to the internet.
The Server was configured to act as the gateway by adding routes that
redirected all requests from Device1 through the nodes to the Server.
For SSH sessions, a secure connection was established from Device1 to
Server using the ssh command, which is a program for connecting to remote
machines [20]. For file transfers, the files of varying sizes and types were
sent across the tunnel using the scp command. This command securely copies
data between hosts on a network using the ssh program for authentication
[20].
Three phases were involved in each kind of experiment: data collection,
feature extraction and data analysis.
4.1
Data collection
We collected the data from the WAN interface of NQX Node1 using the
tcpdump command. The tcpdump command can be used to print the de-
scription of packets from the specified network interface [20]. The output of
the tcpdump can be written into a file of pcap type (packet capture) using
the -w option. These packet captures are the data packet intercepts and we
used them for network traffic analysis.
Initially, we captured the packets from the HP switch in between the two
NQX nodes, as shown in Figure 3.1. We compared the packets from the HP
switch with the packets collected from the WAN side interface of the nodes.
It turned out that the contents of the pcap files were the same. Hence, for all
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. METHODS
22
the experiments we chose to capture data directly from the WAN interface
of Node1. For this purpose, a span port that mirrors the WAN port was
created in the node to capture the packets.
4.2
Feature extraction
The packet capture file was exported from the node to our local desktop to be
able to analyze the packets using Wireshark. Wireshark is a network protocol
analyzer, used for inspection of packets [34]. The pcap files are opened using
Wireshark and only those packets that are of interest to us are extracted.
Since we are capturing packets from a VPN tunnel, the data packets are all
encrypted and encapsulated using the ESP protocol, which is explained in
Section 2.4.1. Some of these packets could be from the Keep-alive messages,
since we had the always active flag enabled in our tunnel setup. But these
packets are relatively small-sized and consistent, hence they are negligible
compared to the size of other packets in our fingerprints. The packets with
bigger payloads are fragmented and classified under the IPV4 fragmented
IP protocol. In this thesis work, we are interested in only these two types
of packets- ESP and IPV4, because only those packets carry the payload
information. Thus, the ESP and IPV4 packets are filtered from the pcap file
and extracted into a CSV (comma-separated values) file. We refer to these
CSV files as samples in this thesis.
Each data packet in the output of the tcpdump has certain features. The
following table describes the packet features in short:
Feature
Description
No.
Packet number
Time
Timestamp at which the packet was sent
Source
Source IP address of the packet
Destination
Destination IP address of the packet
Length
Length of the packet in bytes
Protocol
The protocol used
Info
Any extra information regarding the packet, for
example, types of the packet such as Announce-
ment, Fragmented
Table 4.1: Packet features
For our work, we have considered only the packet number, length, and
the timestamp feature and these were sufficient to derive a unique fingerprint
for each application we tested.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. METHODS
23
4.3
Data analysis
We used data charts to visually represent the fingerprint of different websites
or files. From the extracted CSV files, we selected the packet time and length
values and created a line chart of them for each sample. Figure 4.1 shows
an example of a line chart derived from YouTube’s sample. The X-axis is
labeled with the packet number. We term these charts as the fingerprints
and use them for data analysis and comparison. Two or more fingerprints
can be compared for similarities and classified as belonging to a particular
website.
Figure 4.1: Line chart - Time in seconds, Length in bytes
We present different fingerprints and compare them visually in Chapter 5.
In Chapter 6, we analyze some of the samples numerically and present several
analytic methods to classify the samples based on the fingerprints.
The
methods include comparing correlation coefficients of the fingerprints, cross-
correlation, comparing the mean squared error of a sample to the average
fingerprint of a certain website, and compression analysis.
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5
Experiments
In this chapter, we discuss the different experiments performed and the re-
sults of the experiments.
5.1
Website Fingerprinting
In this series of experiments, we tested the following websites - Google, Face-
book, Reddit, BBC, CNN, Iltasanomat, and YLE. The homepages of these
websites were visited using links text-based browser. The tcpdump command
was started on NQX Node1’s WAN interface before accessing the website and
run for 10 to 20 seconds approximately, depending on the time taken to load
the homepage. For each of the websites, we repeated this procedure multiple
times to collect the data samples at different instances of time. We then
extracted the features from the output of tcpdump as explained in Chapter
4 and plotted two of those features - time and length using data charts. The
following sections illustrate the fingerprints of Google and Facebook.
5.1.1
Google
Google’s homepage has little graphic content and hence only a small number
of packets were transmitted across the tunnel. On average, there were 30
packets in 4 seconds, every time the homepage was accessed and the packets
were sent almost with the same time interval in between packets.
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
25
Figure 5.1: Google samples - Time in seconds, Length in bytes
In Figure 5.1, we can clearly see the similarities in the patterns. The
number of large packets, represented by the peaks are always the same and
are of the same length too.
We could observe some minor time lags in
the beginning and between two large packets. But this can be overlooked
because there might be some delays in executing the tcpdump and the HTTPS
requests. Also, depending on the network traffic there might be a certain
delay in the homepage files getting loaded in the browser.
5.1.2
Facebook
Facebook’s homepage has a lot of graphics and dynamic content. Thus, the
number of packets is significantly large compared to Google’s homepage. On
average, there were around 300 packets being sent in 7 seconds. The following
graphs were obtained from the packet captures at four different instances.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
26
Figure 5.2: Facebook samples - Time in seconds, Length in bytes
Figure 5.2 reiterates the fact that Facebook also has a unique finger-
print, that can be easily differentiated from the other websites. The vast
difference in the number of packets and the packet sizes contribute to this
distinction. We also observed that all the Facebook packets were smaller
than the maximum transmission unit (MTU) of 1514 bytes. Therefore, there
was no fragmentation of the packets at all. This was another noteworthy
characteristic of Facebook.
5.1.3
Other websites
In this section, we present the fingerprints of few more websites we tested,
that are different from the previous fingerprints. Figures 5.3 and 5.4 show the
fingerprints of the popular news websites BBC and Iltasanomat (a Finnish
news site).
Figure 5.3: BBC
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
27
Figure 5.4: Iltasanomat
Note that the number of packets is considerably higher compared to
Google’s sample and relatively small compared to Facebook’s sample. We
could observe some similarities in the number of packets in the samples from
different news websites. In general, the contents of a news website get up-
dated frequently and thus the fingerprints are subject to change too. This
might not be the case for websites with almost static content, for example,
Google’s homepage.
5.1.4
Multiple websites simultaneously
Another aspect of the tests was to check if we could identify the websites
even when multiple websites were accessed simultaneously.
For this test,
we considered two websites- Google and Facebook. A short python script
was used to send multiple HTTPS requests concurrently. Before executing
the multiple requests, the individual websites were accessed using the same
script, which produced the fingerprints depicted in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: Google
Figure 5.6: Facebook
Then, both Google and Facebook were accessed together, which produced
the following results, as shown in Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.8.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
28
Figure 5.7: Google + Facebook
Figure 5.8: Facebook + Google
The order in which the websites’ URLs were mentioned in the script had
some impact on the graphs. This might be due to the fact that Google with
lesser graphics loads quicker than Facebook. From the above fingerprints,
it is evident that the two websites accessed were Facebook and Google. In
Figure 5.8, we see that the packets of the two websites overlap, yet are
distinguishable.
5.2
Browser fingerprinting
We performed a few experiments by accessing the same website using dif-
ferent browsers, to verify if that made a difference in the fingerprint. These
experiments confirmed that the fingerprints were indeed different for every
browser. Since we were using Linux boxes as the endpoints of communica-
tion, we tested various text-based browsers such as Links, Elinks, Lynx, and
Linux tools like curl and Wget [20]. Figure 5.9 shows the fingerprints of
Google accessed using some of the text-based browsers and tools.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
29
Figure 5.9: Browser fingerprints - Time in seconds, Length in bytes
In order to use a GUI (Graphical User Interface) based browser, we had to
install an external display server like Xming to access the graphical content.
Figure 5.10: Mozilla firefox
Figure 5.10 shows the fingerprint of Google accessed using the Mozilla
Firefox browser. Remarkably, there was a vast difference in the number of
packets, when compared to the text-based browsers owing to the graphical
content. The huge gap in the graph indicates the time it took to load the
external display server. The difference in the fingerprints of various browsers
might be due to several factors such as the difference in their layout en-
gines, the way the pages are rendered and multiple requests are handled, and
optimization mechanisms used.
5.3
SSH session establishment
We tested the establishment of an SSH connection from Device1 to Server to
find any characteristic behavior in the network traffic. We found that every
time a secure remote connection was established using the ssh command, the
data packets had similar traits.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
30
Figure 5.11: SSH samples - Time in seconds, Length in bytes
Figure 5.11 shows the scatter plots where the packets and time interval
are alike in two different instances. We noticed that the pattern is the same
for every remote connection established, irrespective of the source and desti-
nation machines. In addition, the fingerprints were distinct from the website
fingerprints.
5.4
File transfers
In this set of experiments, different file types and file sizes were tested. The
files were transferred from Device1 to Server using scp secure copy command.
The scp command works as follows.
It establishes the secure connection
between the devices first, using the SSH protocol. Then, it copies the file
from the source to the destination folder. Hence, the first few packets in the
captured data indicate the establishment of the SSH session, which is always
the same. This is followed by a series of large packets, all of the MTU size
of 1514 bytes.
Figure 5.12: Text file
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
31
Figure 5.13: Random file
Figures 5.12 and 5.13 show the fingerprints of two types of files, a text
file in English and a random file generated using urandom [20] , of size 10
KB each. The first half of the fingerprint represents the SSH connection es-
tablishment, and the second half of high peaks are the packets that represent
the file content. It can be observed that the number of packets and pattern is
almost consistent in all four fingerprints. The small packets, that resembles a
gap between the two clusters of large packets in Figure 5.12, are the acknowl-
edgement packets from the destination. These acknowledgement packets are
distributed in a slightly different manner in the random file samples.
As the file size increases, irrespective of the file type being transferred,
the number of packets with MTU size increases. There is no other unique
pattern with respect to the file transfers. The fingerprints depicted in Figure
5.14 and Figure 5.15 are examples of large file transfers.
Figure 5.14: Text file 1 MB
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
32
Figure 5.15: Random file 1 MB
If the acknowledgement packets are filtered out and only the packets sent
from the source to the destination are plotted, there is a uniform distribution
of packets as shown in Figure 5.16:
Figure 5.16: Random file - Source to destination packets
As a result, the fingerprints of file transfers are easily distinguishable from
fingerprints of browsers, websites or an SSH connection. They reveal the file
size but do not leak any information about the content of the file.
5.5
Packet captures from different devices
Before beginning with the experiments mentioned above, the first thing we
tested was packet captures from all the devices involved in the communica-
tion. We analyzed how these captures differ from each other. For instance,
the captures from the endpoints of communication namely the Device1 and
Server had the data in plaintext. Figure 5.17 shows the plaintext request
sent from Device1. The packet capture from the LAN interface on Node1 is
similar to that of Device1.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
33
Figure 5.17: Packet capture from Device1
Likewise, the packet capture from the switch in between the nodes is
similar to the packet capture from the WAN interface of the nodes. There
were some extra announcement packets particular to the switch, that were
filtered out as they were not relevant to the payload. Figures 5.18 and 5.19
show the packet captures from Node1 and the switch respectively.
Figure 5.18: Node 1
Figure 5.19: Switch
Additionally, we tested an idle tunnel where there is no actual payload
from Device1 and only the NQX node generated keep-alive messages. Figure
5.20 shows the small packets that represent the keep-alive messages, captured
for 20 seconds in an idle tunnel. This is clearly distinguishable from an active
tunnel with payload, for example, the file transfer fingerprints as they have
large packets.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
34
Figure 5.20: Idle tunnel
We then compared short and long-duration packet captures while access-
ing a website. Most of the experiments were carried out only for a very short
duration, i.e., the time taken to load the homepage of a website or to transfer
a file. This was around 10 to 20 seconds. If the packets were captured using
tcpdump for a longer duration, it had just the small-sized keep-alive messages
after the actual payload. The long captures made a difference only when nav-
igating through the web pages since that would generate more packets.
5.6
Packet capture showing IKE exchange
Another interesting aspect we found was capturing the establishment of the
VPN tunnel. We could see the IKE negotiation in the captured packets. The
pcap file as shown in Figure 5.21 demonstrates the IKEV2 initial exchanges.
We noticed the IKE SA INIT and IKE AUTH messages, followed by the
CREATE CHILD SA messages. All the messages that follow, starting from
IKE AUTH messages, are encrypted.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTS
35
Figure 5.21: IKE Messages
This is rare because an IKE negotiation happens the first time a VPN
tunnel is established and then when the keys are re-negotiated at the specified
time interval, which is 3600 seconds (1 hour) in our setup. No other packet
capture from all our experiments had these IKE packets, as it was unlikely
that the tunnel was re-established during the experiment.
5.7
Effect of PQC algorithms
We performed the entire set of experiments using two different NQX versions,
with and without PQC algorithms. The results of the experiments were the
same, irrespective of the inclusion of PQC algorithms. This is because only
the key exchange phase makes use of extra PQC algorithms, and this does
not have any impact on the payload transfer. Thus, the fingerprints are not
affected and they do not change.
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 6
Evaluation
Overall, the fingerprinting schemes were efficient in identifying some useful
information about the network traffic. In all the experiments, just two of the
coarse features of the data packets, namely the packet length and timestamp,
were sufficient to form unique fingerprints. The fingerprints were so distinct
that we could easily distinguish them by just comparing them visually. dif-
ferences were prominent just by looking at the graphs. But to analyze and
verify this comparison more formally, we chose to perform some data anal-
ysis. The following sections explain each of the data analysis methods we
used.
6.1
Correlation analysis
Correlation analysis is one of the statistical methods used to determine how
closely two variables are related to each other [8]. The correlation between
two random variables is measured in terms of correlation coefficient.
There are several methods to calculate this value. Pearson’s correlation co-
efficient is the most commonly used and also most fitting for our work. The
Pearson’s correlation coefficient r is calculated as follows, where xi and yi
i ∈1, 2, ..n, are the values to be correlated, and ¯x and ¯y are the respective
averages of all the values in the sample:
r =
Pn
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
pPn
i=1(xi −¯x)2pPn
i=1(yi −¯y)2
The strength of the correlation is determined by the value of r which
ranges from -1 to 1, with 1 implying perfect correlation, 0 meaning no cor-
relation, and -1 meaning negative correlation.
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
37
We performed the correlation analysis using Microsoft Excel.
In this
section, we compare the fingerprints of three different samples of accessing
Google and one sample of accessing Facebook. Figure 6.1 shows the visual
representation of the three samples of Google:
Figure 6.1: Three samples of Google
Similarly, in Figure 6.2, one of the samples of Google and Facebook were
analyzed together. Facebook’s sample is truncated to the length of Google’s
sample, since Pearson’s correlation coefficient can only be compared for the
vectors of the same size.
Figure 6.2: Google vs Facebook
The correlation coefficient matrix of the four samples is shown in Table
6.1:
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
38
Google1
Google2
Google3
FB1
Google1
1
Google2
0.547008
1
Google3
-0.12107
-0.21041
1
FB1
0.053137
-0.08159
-0.15351
1
Table 6.1: Correlation matrix
Figure 6.3 shows a graphical visualization of the correlation matrix be-
tween two other samples of Google and Facebook. In Figure 6.3 it is evident
that the samples of same website are more correlated than samples of differ-
ent websites.
Figure 6.3:
Correlation matrix- Google vs Facebook (generated using
Python)
In Table 6.1, we clearly see that Facebook has almost zero correlation
with Google’s samples. Note that between the sample Google3 and the other
samples of the same website, there is a negative correlation, though the indi-
vidual graphs looked identical visually. This is because of the minor time lag
between the samples as shown in Figure 6.1. We see that the Google3 sample
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
39
has the peaks slightly before the other samples. The negative correlation is
naturally not as strong as the positive correlation within the other Google
samples, but it is still higher (in absolute value) than the correlations be-
tween Google3 and Facebook. Therefore, it still hints that Google3 belongs
to the same group as Google1 and Google2.
Clearly, the Pearson correlation coefficient as such is not the best way to
capture the relation between Google3 and the other Google samples. In order
to overcome this, we chose to perform cross-correlation, which is discussed
in the following section.
6.1.1
Cross-correlation analysis
Cross-correlation measures the similarity between two series, in which one of
them is displaced with respect to the other. As seen in Figure 6.1 with the
Google3 example, the time lag factor must be considered when calculating
the correlation coefficient. We did this by sliding one of the samples against
the other fixed sample in steps of one lag at a time and determined the time
lag with the maximum correlation coefficient.
Lag
correl(G2,G3)
correl(G1,G3)
correl(G1,FB)
-1
0.144051656
0.099008
0.079755
0
-0.210407762
-0.121069
0.053137
1
0.101675308
0.138412
0.041833
2
0.252010612
0.380259
0.029516
3
0.035627339
-0.145117
0.018639
4
0.594407855
0.710812
0.006507
5
-0.023168066
-0.00844
-0.00945
Table 6.2: Cross-correlation values, highest values highlighted
From the table 6.2, the highest correlation between Google’s samples was
found to be with a time lag of four. Also, the correlation between Google and
Facebook is almost zero even if cross-correlated. This proves that Google’s
fingerprint can be remarkably distinguished from Facebook’s fingerprints.
The following figures 6.4 and 6.5 show the Google’s samples before and after
cross-correlation.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
40
Figure 6.4: Correlation - Lag 0
Figure 6.5: Cross correlation - Lag 4
We analyzed samples from other websites too with the lag factor and
found satisfying results. Thus, cross-correlation proved to be more effective
than normal correlation analysis.
6.2
Mean squared error
The mean squared error (MSE) is a metric to measure the degree of similarity
or conversely the deviation between two signals [33]. It is one of the simple
and most commonly used loss functions to evaluate machine learning models.
There are also other loss functions [29] that can be used.
We used MSE to compare two samples of the same website and different
websites and compute the level of error between them. The MSE is calculated
as follows, where xi and yi are the individual ith values of the vectors X and
Y to be compared.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
41
MSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(xi −yi)2
(6.1)
MSE can take any non-negative value. The smaller the MSE value, the
higher the probability that the samples belong to the same group. MSE is 0
exactly when we compare a sample to itself or another identical sample.
We first analyzed the samples of Reddit and Iltasanomat. This time we
considered only the timestamp feature from these samples as the vectors
X and Y. The average timestamp of the three samples from Reddit was
calculated as vector X. Then, the timestamps from the unknown sample
(Iltasanomat’s sample in our example) were considered as vector Y. The MSE
was calculated as per the formula 6.1. The same procedure was repeated with
the average timestamp vector of known Iltasanomat’s samples as X and the
unknown sample as Y. The results are shown in Table 6.3.
SAMPLES
MSE
Reddit vs Unknown
28.751787
Iltasanomat vs Unknown
1.20389009
Table 6.3: MSE values
It was obvious from the MSE values that the error was significantly
smaller when the unknown sample was compared to Iltasanomat’s sample.
On the contrary, the MSE was very high when the unknown sample was com-
pared with Reddit’s sample. Thus, the unknown sample more likely belonged
to Iltasanomat. We then analyzed the samples of Facebook and Google and
obtained similar results, confirming that MSE helped in identifying the right
website.
6.3
Compression analysis
The compression analysis we performed is based on the principle of minimum
description length (MDL). The MDL states that the similarities or regulari-
ties in data compress substantially better than random data [9]. In our case,
this method of data analysis works on the logic that samples of the same
website when put together and compressed should compress better than the
samples from different websites. In general, similar data should have a better
compression ratio when compared to more diverse data. We applied lossless
compression techniques for the analysis, and thus chose the Gzip(GNU zip)
program that applies lossless compression to zip files.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6. EVALUATION
42
For the compression analysis, we used BBC and YLE samples. The two
sets of samples, known and unknown are denoted by A and B respectively.
The known learning material A is gathered by concatenating three samples
of the same website together, whereas the unknown material B is just one
sample of any website. The size of the compressed zip files is denoted as S(A)
and S(B), The size of the compressed concatenation of two files is represented
as S(A|B)). The compression ratio of S(A|B)/S(A)+S(B) is determined.
According to MDL, the smaller compression ratio implies higher closeness of
the data. We performed two types of analysis, with and without truncating
the data samples to be of the same length.
Truncated data
YLE (=A) with BBC (=B)
BBC (=A) with BBC (=B)
Size in bytes
Size in bytes
S(A)
1625
1786
S(B)
924
924
S(A)+S(B)
2549
2710
S(A|B)
2452
2578
Size difference
97
132
Compression ratio
0.961945861
0.951291513
Without truncating
YLE (=A) with BBC (=B)
BBC (=A) with BBC (=B)
Size in bytes
Size in bytes
S(A)
2699
1903
S(B)
924
924
S(A)+S(B)
3623
2827
S(A|B)
3534
2698
Size difference
89
129
Compression ratio
0.975434723
0.954368589
Table 6.4: Compression Analysis
In Table 6.4, we could observe a difference in the sizes of the compressed
files. The values do not differ greatly though, because the learning material
length is large compared to the unknown sample. Thus, the difference be-
tween the compression ratios is very small. This can probably be improved
by experimenting with various combinations of the samples and compressing
them.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Discussion
In the previous chapters, we introduced the various fingerprinting schemes we
performed in our thesis work and evaluated the closeness of the fingerprints
through different correlation analysis techniques and comparing the finger-
prints visually. The evaluation proved that the fingerprints were unique for
each of the experiments and revealed some valuable information regarding
the communication between two endpoints over a VPN tunnel. The websites
accessed, the browser used, and the size of the file being transferred can be
guessed with the help of existing fingerprint profiles and simple data analysis
methods.
However, the accuracy of the prediction depends on various factors.
Many websites have dynamic content on their web pages which is subject
to change very often. When the contents of a web page change, the number
of packets and the packet sizes also vary accordingly. This has an impact on
fingerprinting as the fingerprints change with the dynamic content. There-
fore, the fingerprint profiles of the websites need to be updated with the
latest fingerprints to achieve more accurate predictions. Moreover, the
fingerprints database must include the fingerprints of all those websites of
interest, to guess which one the user accesses. In addition, when multiple
websites (more than two) are being accessed simultaneously the fingerprints
overlap and are harder to identify. Especially when multiple users per-
form different actions over the same tunnel at the same time, fingerprinting
gets complicated. The chances of identifying the information correctly are
reduced in such a case. Additionally, all the fingerprinting attacks require
that the attacker or the eavesdropper has access to some of the endpoints of
the tunnel or the devices in between.
Though there are limitations to these traffic analysis attacks, they cannot
be overlooked. Especially state-of-the-art machine learning based techniques
might reveal confidential information even in a more complicated setting, see
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
44
Section 2.6 for related works in this field. In order to overcome such attacks,
there are many preventive measures in the literature that provide Traffic
Flow Confidentiality (TFC). We shall briefly discuss these countermeasures
in the following section.
7.1
Overcoming fingerprinting attacks
The traffic flow confidentiality mechanisms prevent statistical analysis of data
traffic over any network by hiding or masking the traffic patterns [5]. This
is done by altering the sent packets in some way.
This is referred to as
packet treatment. Some of the most common packet treatment methods
are presented next.
• Padding:
The most common method is to pad the packet size to a fixed length.
For example, padding the packets to the maximum transmission unit
size equalizes all the packets’ sizes. Thus, there will not be any unique
patterns in the data traffic, making fingerprinting difficult.
• Packet aggregation:
Multiple packets can be packed into one single large packet. This can
also be combined with padding to make the masking more effective.
Aggregating the packets increases the packet size by useful and rele-
vant information, whereas padding increases the packet size by adding
some irrelevant data. Hence, this is a more efficient method than just
padding.
• Packet fragmentation:
The converse of packet aggregation is packet fragmentation, where
larger packets are broken down into smaller packets to mask their
identity.
This method is more efficient as it does not add as much
bandwidth overhead as padding or aggregation does.
• Dummy packet generation:
In this method, a constant feed of packets is sent over the network
even if there is no actual communication or data being sent.
This
aims to hide whether there is communication between certain nodes.
Random packets sent in between the actual traffic also obfuscate the
traffic patterns.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
45
• Delayed packets:
An intentional delay in the packets can be induced to mask the time
interval between two packets. These delays can be either packet specific
or scheduled periodic delays.
Manipulating the time intervals with
random delays can significantly impact the fingerprinting techniques.
Protocols like ESP have optional TFC features [16] that can be used in the
tunnel mode. It also facilitates dummy packet generation. TLS 1.3 also has
padding options for payload length protection [24]. The internet-draft [12]
by Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) discusses TFC mechanisms such
as aggregation and fragmentation to enhance IPsec traffic flow security. All
the above techniques have been proven to be effective in some cases and not
so effective in others [7]. Padding only masks the packet lengths and this
alone might not be sufficient in preventing the traffic analysis attacks that
use other coarse features like overall time and bursts of packets. The main
disadvantage is that all these TFC techniques consume a lot of bandwidth
and/or time, thereby reducing the performance of the VPN itself.
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 8
Conclusion and Future work
In this thesis work, we have tested a line encryption device called NQX
that acts as a VPN. The Layer 3 data traffic was captured and analyzed
for any characteristic behavior that reveals information about the data or
the endpoints of the communication. The features of encapsulated packets
such as timestamp and length were extracted and plotted visually. Regular
patterns were observed in the packet captures for different websites, browsers,
and file transfers.
We found that the fingerprints were unique for every website that was
tested. This enabled us to differentiate between the websites and guess the
website accessed. Similarly, the browsers used to access the websites were also
distinguishable with specific patterns. We also observed that establishing a
secure connection to a remote device through ssh command had a distinctive
fingerprint. The experiments with file transfers revealed information on the
file size and the frequency at which the files were transferred. Furthermore,
we can classify the applications being used at a higher level and distinguish
between the type of applications.
The results of all the above experiments were further evaluated using
statistical data analysis methods. We performed correlation analysis on the
samples obtained for the same website or different websites, to find how
closely two samples were related to each other. Simple comparison of the
correlation coefficients turned out to be an effective classification method.
There were minor time lags between the samples, that impacted the correla-
tion coefficient value. In order to overcome this, we chose to perform cross-
correlation between the samples. This produced even better results and a
higher correlation value. In addition, we calculated the mean squared error
between two discrete samples to evaluate the deviation between them. This
reinforced the results from the correlation analysis. Finally, we conducted
compression analysis to gain some insights into how well similar samples com-
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
47
press when put together. The outcome of this analysis proved that samples
from the same website compressed better when compared to samples from
different websites. However, the difference was not as clear as in the other
methods tested. On the other hand, compression analysis is very simple to
perform, so this might still be a useful technique to consider when the accu-
racy is less important. Overall, all the data analysis methods were useful for
classification, and cross-correlation provided the most explicit classification
evidence.
Finally, we discuss the challenges and limitations of our fingerprint-
ing schemes. The dynamic contents of the websites cause the fingerprints
to change. Thus, the fingerprint profiles must be updated constantly in or-
der to classify or predict the content of the network traffic more accurately.
Multiple actions by multiple users simultaneously over the same VPN tunnel
complicate the fingerprints and make it harder to identify the underlying
information. We then presented some preventive measures such as padding,
packet fragmentation and aggregation, dummy packet generation, and packet
forwarding delay to evade fingerprinting threats.
For future work, other applications like video calling, voice messaging,
and texting can be experimented with. We could possibly identify the typing
pattern and keyboard strokes of a specific individual by analyzing the time
interval between the arrival of packets. Apart from website fingerprinting,
we could try other fingerprinting schemes to predict the underlying operating
system, the application layer protocols used, and so on. We can also extend
our work to classify the type of application used, such as video streaming,
browsing, and chatting based on the network traffic characteristics. In the
case of file transfers, we can identify the scheduled jobs by observing the
repetitive patterns in the fingerprints. In addition, it might be interesting
to consider other features of the packets, especially when analyzing some
other application that does not otherwise have a clear fingerprint. For better
prediction accuracy and advanced classification in a more complex setup,
machine learning algorithms can be explored.
To conclude, we would like to emphasize that the traffic analysis at-
tacks cannot be ignored, despite their limitations. Fingerprinting schemes
are highly effective and efficient in recognizing patterns in network traffic.
Valuable information could be at stake if the data packets are not properly
obfuscated. Even quantum-safe encryption algorithms are subject to traffic
analysis attacks. Appropriate traffic flow confidentiality techniques should
be implemented in the right way to prevent such attacks.
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1] Alani, M. M. Osi model. Guide to OSI and TCP/IP Models (2014),
5–17.
[2] Aung, S. T., and Thein, T.
Comparative analysis of site-to-site
layer 2 virtual private networks. IEEE Conference on Computer Appli-
cations(ICCA) (2020), 1–5.
[3] Bissias, G. D., Liberatore, M., Jensen, D., and Levine, B. N.
Privacy vulnerabilities in encrypted http streams. International Work-
shop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (2005), 1–11.
[4] Cremers, C. Key exchange in ipsec revisited: Formal analysis of ikev1
and ikev2. Computer Security – ESORICS (2011), 315–334.
[5] Csaba Kiraly, S. T., and Bianchiº, G. Traffic flow confidentiality
in ipsec: Protocol and implementation. The Future of Identity in the
Information Society: Proceedings of the Third IFIP WG 262 (2010),
311.
[6] Cyware
Social.
What
Is
Cybersecurity
Finger-
printing?
Webpage.
https://cyware.com/news/
what-is-cybersecurity-fingerprinting-de718f94 Accessed 18.5.2022.
[7] Dyer, K. P., Coull, S. E., Ristenpart, T., and Shrimpton, T.
Peek-a-boo, i still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures
fail. IEEE symposium on security and privacy (2012), 332–346.
[8] Gogtay, N. J., and Thatte, U. M. Principles of correlation anal-
ysis. Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 65, 3 (2017),
78–81.
[9] Gr¨unwald, P. D. The minimum description length principle. MIT
press (2007).
48
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
[10] Gu, J., Wang, J., Yu, Z., and Shen, K. Traffic-based side-channel
attack in video streaming. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 27,
3 (2019), 972–985.
[11] Hintz, A. Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis (2002).
[12] Hopps, C.
IP-TFS: Aggregation and Fragmentation Mode for ESP
and its Use for IP Traffic Flow Security.
Internet-Draft draft-ietf-
ipsecme-iptfs-13, Internet Engineering Task Force, June (2022). Work
in Progress.
[13] Islam, F. U., Liu, G., Zhai, J., and Liu, W. Voip traffic detection
in tunneled and anonymous networks using deep learning. IEEE Access
9 (2021), 59783–59799.
[14] Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P. E., Nir, Y., Eronen, P., and Kivi-
nen, T. Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2). RFC 7296,
Oct. (2014).
[15] Kent, S. IP Authentication Header. RFC 4302, Dec. (2005).
[16] Kent, S. IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). RFC 4303, Dec.
(2005).
[17] Kowsalya, S. S. Website fingerprinting using traffic analysis attacks
(2017).
[18] Kumar, S., Dalal, S., and Dixit, V. The osi model: Overview
on the seven layers of computer networks.
International Journal of
Computer Science and Information Technology Research 2, 3 (2014),
461–466.
[19] Leroux, S., Bohez, S., Maenhaut, P.-J., Meheus, N., Simoens,
P., and Dhoedt, B. Fingerprinting encrypted network traffic types
using machine learning, (2018). 1–5.
[20] Linux. Scp,ssh commands. Webpage. https://linux.die.net/man/1/
Accessed 22.5.2022.
[21] Mavroudis, V., and Hayes, J.
Adaptive traffic fingerprinting:
Large-scale inference under realistic assumptions. CoRR abs/2010.10294
(2020).
[22] Oluwatosin, H. S. Client-server model. IOSRJ Comput. Eng 16, 1
(2014), 2278–8727.
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
50
[23] Papadogiannaki, E., and Ioannidis, S.
A survey on encrypted
network traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures.
Association for Computing Machinery 54, 6 (2021).
[24] Rescorla, E. The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version
1.3. RFC 8446, Aug. (2018).
[25] Seo, K., and Kent, S. Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.
RFC 4301, Dec. (2005).
[26] Shafiq, M., Yu, X., and Wang, D. Robust feature selection for im
applications at early stage traffic classification using machine learning
algorithms. IEEE 19th International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Communications; (2017), 239–245.
[27] Shen, M., Gao, Z., Zhu, L., and Xu, K.
Efficient fine-grained
website fingerprinting via encrypted traffic analysis with deep learning.
In 2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of Service
(IWQOS) (2021), pp. 1–10.
[28] Sirinam, P., Mathews, N., Rahman, M. S., and Wright, M.
Triplet fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprint-
ing with n-shot learning. Association for Computing Machinery (2019).
[29] Sparsh
Gupta.
The 7 most common machine learning loss
functions.
Webpage.
https://builtin.com/machine-learning/
common-loss-functions Accessed 23.6.2022.
[30] SSH Communications Security. Node backpanel diagram. Web-
page.
https://192.168.93.22/static/help/vpn-tunnels-parameters.
html Accessed 15.2.2022.
[31] SSH Communications Security. NQX. Webpage. https://www.
ssh.com/products/nqx Accessed 15.2.2022.
[32] Wang, M., Tang, X., Chen, F., and Lu, Q. Encrypted live stream-
ing channel identification with time-sync comments. IEEE Access 10
(2022), 27630–27642.
[33] Wang, Z., and Bovik, A. C. Mean squared error: Love it or leave it?
a new look at signal fidelity measures. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine
26, 1 (2009), 98–117.
[34] Wireshark Org. Wireshark. Webpage. https://www.wireshark.org/
Accessed 25.5.2022.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
NQX node configuration
We installed the NQX software from a hybrid ISO-9660 installation image, in
which the ssh-fw-config tool is used to generate the mandatory initial NQX
configuration files required for the installation.The configuration tool can be
run only on a Linux machine. First, we burnt the supplied NQX installation
image to a USB stick. Burning to a USB stick refers to the image being made
bootable, such that the NQX hardware can boot from the USB stick. Various
tools exists that can be used for this operation, such as Rufus in Windows or
dd in Linux/Mac environments [20]. To use dd on a Linux machine to burn
the image on to a USB stick, the following command can be used (assuming
the USB stick is disk2):
sudo dd i f=nqx - i n s t a l l e r - 2 . 2 . 3 . i s o
of=/dev/ disk2 bs=1m
As a result of burning the image, multiple partitions were created on the
USB stick. The user-facing partition named SSH FW CONF contains the
ssh-fw-config tool. We then copied the tool from the partition and executed
locally on the machine the USB stick is connected to, or copied to some other
system. Initially the configuration tool is not executable and must have the
execution bit set. This can be done in Linux using the chmod [20] command:
chmod +x ssh - fw - config
When the tool is executed, various configuration options will appear on
the screen, asking for user input, as shown in A.1. The input is included in
the resulting configuration files after the script terminates.
51
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX A. NQX NODE CONFIGURATION
52
Figure A.1: ssh-fw-config tool
Parameter
Description
Requirement
Hostname
Name for the node
Mandatory
(Default- sshfw)
Maintenance
IP
Address
Maintenance IP address of the node
Mandatory
Management
in-
terface slot/port
Slot/port to connect the display for
accessing management UI
Manual/Auto-
detect
Default gateway
IP address of the default gateway
Optional
Password
Hashed administrator password for
the console and the web UI
Mandatory
Table A.1: Parameters
The table A.1 shows the parameters that must be configured using the
tool. Other optional features as discussed in 2.1 can also be set. The man-
agement interface slot/port is usually set to 255/0. LAN1 port of the device
corresponds to Port0 in the configuration. The password must be 12 charac-
ters long. If LUKS is enabled, it generates a .enc key file. The PSK file has
a default name that can be changed. The number of keys to be generated is
specified while configuring. A .json file will be created with the keys and the
given name. Once the tool has completed, a file named sshfw importcfg.json
and any PSK generated files are listed in the same directory where the tool
executed. A sample of sshfw importcfg.json is shown in Figure A.2
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A. NQX NODE CONFIGURATION
53
Figure A.2: Initial configuration file
All the files that were generated using the configuration tool were copied
back to the USB stick. The USB was then inserted into the NQX hardware
and the NQX node installation was performed. If the NQX hardware internal
hard disk is empty, an automatic installation is done. If not empty, a disk
wipe has to be performed before the installation can continue. When the
installation is complete, the NQX node will request a reboot into the new
main hard disk partitions created from the installation. During this boot, the
node reads from the USB stick the necessary configuration file and copy and
apply those settings to itself. To verify whether the installation succeeded,
the node console is logged into with the defined user credentials. After logging
in, the ip addr command can be used to verify that the defined IP addresses
from the configuration files has been taken into use.
