==PAGE:1==
Formalizing and proving accountability
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Formalizing and proving accountability
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Adam Jens Jóelsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. with a specialization in Com­
puter Security
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer security.
Adam Jens Jóelsson ­ s202094
Signature
Date
ii
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When it comes to security online today, most solutions depend on preventative approaches,
so to be able to perform an action, one must prove he has the authority to perform it. In
this thesis, we instead want to focus on accountability systems. Instead of preventing
crime, we want to deter it by showing that actors could get caught and punished for their
misbehavior, i.e., held accountable. We will formalize a legal system consisting of laws
defining what is illegal, a discovery process that can detect a dishonest action, and a ju­
dicial process where a dishonest action can be traced to the player who performed it and
punished for it. By having a legal system in place, which can ensure that illegal actions
can be detected and traced to a culprit for some set of laws, actors within that system are
inclined only to perform honest actions and thus abide by the law.
Formalizing and proving accountability
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
Thanks to my supervisor Sebastian Mödersheim for this project’s idea and all his guidance
and support. His previous work on a model to formalize accountability was the basis for
this thesis. I benefited greatly from his knowledge and ideas whenever I got stuck. I am
grateful for his motivation throughout this period which helped me get this project to where
it is today.
I want to thank my fellow students, most of all Jón Ágúst that spent countless hours with
me at the library during this semester and gave me some excellent advice when I had
tunnel vision throughout this project.
Last but not least, I want to thank my friends and family for their unconditional support,
especially my girlfriend, Karen, who was my rock through this process.
iv
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement, goals and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Preliminaries
3
2.1
Three branches of accountability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Optimistic Fair Exchange Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Legal System
8
3.1
Agent Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
The Legislative Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
The Executive Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
The Judicial Branch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Perfect Crime Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Final Statements
27
4.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Bibliography
29
A Python Code
31
A.1 Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
A.2 Laws as functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.3 Functions for judge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.4 Files for testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Formalizing and proving accountability
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the increasing use of the internet and information systems today, it is evident that
both misuse and cybercrime will also increase. For many years now, fundamental goals
of computer security have been Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability, also called the
CIA triad, introduced first by Bell­LaPadula, Biba, and Clarke Wilson respectively [1, 2,
3]. These approaches primarily focus on acquiring privacy and security online with a pre­
ventative approach. That is, before someone can take an action of any kind protected by
some policy, he will first have to prove that he has the authorization to do so. At the same
time, this works to a certain point, but it is not enough. The same could be said about bank
robbers, the fact that they have to break into a vault might get you some security, but most
people do not do it because of the negative consequences they might face getting caught.
In recent years, a growing faction within the cyber security world is calling for account­
ability systems that would mirror more the society we live in today[4, 5, 6]. Instead of
the preventative solutions, this would introduce a more deterrence approach. Although, a
general well­accepted definition of accountability has been debatable within the literature.
The NIST defines accountability as ”The security goal that generates the requirement for
actions of an entity to be traced uniquely to that entity”[7]. While this could be considered
somewhat correct, it can often be misunderstood as an infrastructure against anonymity
where people will have their privacy infringed upon. The working definition in this paper is
thus; Accountability is a measure that deters policy violations and misuse of information
by punishing those who get caught misbehaving.
1.1
Background
Accountability is increasingly relevant when working with semi­trusted third­party servers.
In many protocols, e.g., contract signing[8], voting[9], authentication services[10, 11], a
trusted third party is in place to act as a notary or authority within the protocol to ensure
fairness and same goes for certificate authorities(CA’s). For these protocols to work, one
needs to blindly trust that these third parties behave honestly but have no way of enforcing
it. It is thus essential to be able to trace dishonest behavior and hold the respective entity
accountable for their dishonest actions as a means for deterrence.
By having a system where accountability is achieved, trusted third parties will become
inclined to perform actions honestly since it could otherwise lead to being punished for
their actions. While having a system like this in place would put pressure on third­party
servers to behave, it would also do the same for all entities or actors within that system or
protocol. So by having a system where accountability is achieved, all entities within that
system are inclined only to perform honest actions.
1.2
Problem statement, goals and methods
Sebastian Mödersheim and Jorge Cuéllar present a new novel model in [12] on how to
formalize a system where accountability is achieved by defining a legal system that in
turn will deter entities from making violations. That work is the basis for this thesis. The
goal of this thesis will be to formalize a set of examples of accountability systems, mainly
how the accountability is achieved. To do this, the rules of such a system will be clearly
described; this includes setting rules on what constitutes as illegal behavior, what and
how this behavior will be detected within the system and how a judge should act in cases
Formalizing and proving accountability
1
==PAGE:10==
where violations have occurred, i.e. how the judge should correctly charge a non­innocent
actor and what kind of punishment a misbehaving actor should then face.
Next would be to prove, using the defined system, that accountability holds and what
security properties follow. A step­by­step walkthrough of a protocol will serve as a case
study to show how the system would work in a real scenario and how the accountability is
achieved. To do this, first would be to show that all violations have a chance of being de­
tected. Second, if detected, a judge can trace them to the misbehaving actor who caused
the violation. Lastly, given the assumption that players will not commit crimes if there is
a risk of getting caught, accountability holds. A simple program has also been written in
python to assist with the verification of the system and processes of the judge. Mainly it is
used to verify that, given a particular state, if an action has been performed that leads to
a policy violation, it is detectable using only information in said state. Similarly, assuming
the judge has some information about illegal behavior that violates a security goal, he can
trace it back to the misbehaving actor that caused it.
Some additional questions will also be discussed, like: how could one design a domain­
specific language to describe both syntax and semantics of these systems and their ac­
countability precisely? While this is not a core goal for this thesis, it would be interesting to
see its feasibility and how this would be implemented. Another non­core goal we want to
look at is how existing tools for protocol verification could be used to check accountability
in systems. The same applies here as for the language, we want to explore whether this
is feasible and, if so, how the best approach would work.
1.3
Contributions
This thesis has two contributions. First, it formalizes a legal system where accountability
is achieved. Second, it shows for an existing protocol how the accountability would be
achieved and proves that it would hold.
1.4
Structure
Chapter 2 introduces the preliminaries for this paper, introducing some of the background
material needed to understand this thesis’s work better. This includes a description of the
protocol used as a case study throughout this paper and some of the related work that
was the basis for this paper.
Chapter 3 defines, implements, and verifies the structure of the legal system. in Sec­
tion 3.1, The agent model is introduced where structural elements of the system and the
adversary model are defined. Section 3.2 defines the Legislative branch, where the legal
system and set of laws within the system are defined. Section 3.4 introduces the Judicial
branch of the system, where processes like discovery and conviction will be explained.
Lastly, Section 3.5 introduces the keystone idea behind achieving accountability, where
the perfect crime assumption is defined.
Chapter 4 will go over the final statements in this thesis. 4.1 will include a discussion
where the design approach and security properties will be analyzed. Section 4.2 will ex­
plore ideas and improvements to the system as­well as covering non­core goals of this
thesis. Section 4.3 will then conclude this paper with a summary of the thesis.
2
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:11==
2
Preliminaries
In this chapter, background material needed to further understand this thesis’s contribu­
tion will be introduced and summarized. This includes the work done by Sebastian Möder­
sheim and Jorge Cuéllar in [12] which was the starting point for this thesis. This chapter
will also introduce the Optimistic Fair Exchange Protocol for Contract Signing presented
by Asokan et al. in [13] which, with some modifications, will serve as a case study in this
thesis and as a proof of concept that the implementation works as intended.
2.1
Three branches of accountability
Jagadessan et al.[14] propose a formal definition for accountability systems where audi­
tors can audit processes to determine whether they are dishonest. It can then be traced
to where it originated from. Their design does not support cryptographic primitives but
can be considered a good base for future models of such systems.
Küsters, Truderung, and Vogt[15] give a new, general definition of accountability. Like
Jagadessan et al., a judge, instead of an auditor, can prosecute a dishonest agent, but
instead of regular audits, the judge can act on intel from other actors. Here an actor is con­
sidered honest if he only performs honest actions and dishonest if he performs at least
one dishonest action. The drawback with their design is that every action within every
possible protocol in the environment has to be defined.
In [12], Sebastian Mödersheim and Jorge Cuéllar propose a model for how to formalize
and analyze a system where accountability can be achieved. They use three branches
similar to the three government branches known worldwide today. To overcome the prob­
lem in [15], Mödersheim and Cuéllar first propose that all actors or players are to be
modeled the same; as a starting point, there is no distinction between honest or dishon­
est players, but rather all players are modeled as intruders, more on that later. Next, they
introduce a legal system, where the first part is the legislative branch. Instead of defin­
ing every process possible, they introduce laws that define what is not allowed within the
system and put certain restrictions on what messages players are allowed to compose,
similar to real­world legislation. Everything not expressly declared in the laws as illegal
has no legal meaning within the system and thus constitutes legal behavior. This way,
they can indirectly define protocols without restricting what message players can com­
pose and send outside of the normal process of the protocol.
Next, they model a ”police” representing the executive branch. The police may be able to
monitor some processes and detect and gather evidence of a particular crime being com­
mitted. To this end, it is not a guarantee that all crimes are detected but that all crimes
have a non­negligible chance of being detected. Detecting a crime is thus just one of
the reachable states in the system. Then given the assumption that all punishments for
a crime are significant, criminals can be deterred from committing crimes if they have a
chance of getting caught. After detecting a crime or gathering partial evidence, the police
can hand that over to a judge who will take over from there.
Now that formal laws are in place and a process of possibly detecting law breaks, and
evidence of that handed to a judge, a judicial system must be modeled. This model can
include various transactions that could further lead to more evidence and eventually a
Formalizing and proving accountability
3
==PAGE:12==
conviction of a dishonest player. This process must be fair, i.e., by design, the judicial
process cannot lead to a conviction of an innocent player. They also talk about reason­
able doubt when the judge decides on a case. This could include hackers getting ahold of
your private information and committing crimes that could make you liable for those crimes.
Since this could lead to a quantitively more complex model, the assumption is made that
hacking states are not reachable states in their example. One of the key processes for
the judge or judicial system that they model is a subpoena system. This is where the
judge can deploy a subpoena in the investigation into a crime to gather more evidence
and eventually find the culprit of a crime. By law, players might have to store particular
messages, and the judge could, in this process, ask for those messages to help him find
the culprit. The failure to answer a subpoena correctly would then lead to a conviction of
said player. Again, this process has to be fair in that all honest players can always answer
subpoenas correctly, i.e., the judge can never subpoena a player that is innocent unless
he can successfully answer that subpoena.
Lastly, they use the perfect crime assumption, i.e., criminals will only commit crimes if
they are sure there is no possibility of getting caught. So one only needs to show for all
the security goals of a particular system that breaking those goals has a non­zero chance
of being discovered and a player thus caught and convicted. With that and the perfect
crime assumption, no player will commit any crimes.
2.2
Optimistic Fair Exchange Protocol
While this thesis aims to formalize a system where accountability is achieved, as men­
tioned above, a crucial part is to see how the system would work and to do that, a step­
by­step walkthrough of a protocol will be used as a proof of concept. In [13], Asokan et
al. introduce an optimistic fair exchange protocol for contract signing, which will be used
as a running example throughout this thesis. This section will summarize their proposed
protocol which will be used as the running example throughout this paper, although some
modifications will be applied.
2.2.1
Requirements
The protocol aims to have a secure way of signing a contract asynchronously between
two players. The protocol begins with two players that have previously agreed upon some
contract text which will be the input to the protocol. For this to be a fair exchange, some
requirements are in order: Say there is a function desc() that maps an item, in our case,
a nonce, to a string describing it in detail e.g. a hash of said nonce. Player P then starts
with an item iP and a description of the item he expects from player Q; dQ along with the
contract text, and vice versa.
R1­Effectiveness:
If both player P and Q behave correctly and neither wants to aban­
don the protocol, then P will end up with iQ such that desc(iQ) = dQ and the same goes
for player Q, i.e., Q ends up with iP such that desc(iP ) = dP .
R2a­Strong Fairness:
Either both players have aquired iQ and iP such that desc(iQ) =
dQ and desc(iP ) = dP or neither player gains any information on the others item: iP and
iQ respectively.
R2b­Weak Fairness:
An addition to the strong fairness, to achieve weak fairness, a
player needs only to be able to prove to an arbiter or judge that the other player has
received or can still receive ix so that desc(ix) = dx.
4
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:13==
R3­Timliness:
At the beginning of the protocol, a player can be sure that the protocol
will be complete at some finite time. If the state of the exchange is not final at completion,
any changes to the state will not degrade the level of fairness achieved by the player so
far.
R4a­Non­repudiability of Origin:
After a successful exchange, Player P will be able
to prove that the secret iQ indeed originated from player Q and vice versa.
R4a­Non­repudiability of Receipt:
After a successful exchange, Player P will be able
to prove that player Q indeed received secret iP and vice versa.
R5­Verifiability of third party:
Given that the server T can be forced to answer all
requests, then if T misbehaves, resulting in the loss of fair exchange for either player,
said player can prove this to an arbiter or judge.
In this protocol, the two players are O and R, respectively, where O is the originator of the
protocol and R is the receiver. The protocol can then be divided into three ”sub­protocols”;
exchange, abort, and resolve. The default case is a run of the exchange sub­protocol seen
in Figure 2.1. Abort and resolve protocols seen in Figure 2.2 and 2.3 are then used in the
case of a forced completion of the protocol, presumable if a player suspects something
has gone wrong. Table 2.1 shows the necessary notations needed to understand the next
sections.
Notation
Explanation
h()
Collision reistant one­way
hash function
SigP (m)
Message m signed by
Player P
Table 2.1: Notations for Optimistic Fair Exchange Protocol
2.2.2
Exchange protocol
Step 1: The protocol will begin with player O generating a random nonce oO and comput­
ing the hash; h(oO). This will serve as O’s public commitment to the contract and cannot
be changed after it has been sent to R. O will then generate me1, sign it and send it to
R as shown below, where T is the server that will handle any disputes if the abort or the
resolve protocols are initiated, text is the pre­agreed contract and comO = h(oO).
Step 2: Here, player R can decide if he wants to continue or terminate the protocol. If me1
is malformed or invalid somehow, he will terminate by ignoring the message. Otherwise
R generates a random nonce oR and computes comR = h(oR). He then generates me2,
signs it, and sends it back to O. Here, the same applies to the public commitment comR as
for player O; after R has sent the messages to O, he cannot change his secret commitment
oR.
Step 3: O decides to give up here if he does not receive me2 within reasonable time1. If
so, he will run protocol abort, which invokes the server T, see Section 2.2.3. Otherwise,
he sends his secret commitment oO to R.
1Note that reasonable time can be interpreted by each player individually.
Formalizing and proving accountability
5
==PAGE:14==
Step 4: Here, R can decide to give up, this would be the case only if he does not receive
a nonce x so that h(x) = comO or if he does not receive anything within reasonable time.
If he decides to give up, he invokes T by starting a run of the protocol resolve, see Section
2.2.4. Otherwise, he sends his secret commitment oR to O.
Step 5: Here, O can decide to give up. This would only happen if he does not receive a
nonce y so that h(y) = comR or if he does not receive anything within a reasonable time.
If he decides to give up, he invokes T by starting a run of protocol resolve, as in step 4.
Otherwise, both players should now have a valid standard contract with non­repudiation
from each other where a valid standard contract is of the form: (me1, oO, me2, oR).
O
R
me2  = SigO (O,R,T,text,comO )
me2  = SigR (me1 ,comR )
OO
OR
Give up?: Quit
Give up?: Abort
Give up?: Resolve
Give up?: Resolve
Figure 2.1: Exchange sub­protocol
2.2.3
Abort protocol
Step 1: The abort protocol can only be initiated by player O when he sends the server T a
signed abort request which includes the signed me1 message from Step 1 of the exchange
protocol, which is the contract O wants to abort.
Step 2: After server T receives the abort request from O, he must first check if the contract
has already been resolved. If not, he signs the abort request, which will act as an abort
token for O, i.e., a promise from T that he will not resolve this contract in the future.
O
T
ma1  = SigO (abort,me1 )
ma2
if resolved then 
ma2  = SigT (me1 ,me2 )
else aborted = true 
ma2  = SigT (aborted,me1 )
Figure 2.2: Abort sub­protocol
6
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:15==
2.2.4
Resolve protocol
Step 1: This protocol can be initiated by either R after Step 3 in the exchange protocol
or by player O after Step 5 in the exchange protocol, where they send server T both me1
and me2.2
Step 2: If this contract has been aborted in the past, T returns the signed abort token.
Otherwise, he issues a replacement contract by signing the message from the respective
player. A valid replacement contract then gives players the same right as a valid standard
contract. A replacement contract is of the form: SigT (me1, me2).
O
T
mr1  = (me1 ,me2 )
mr2
if aborted then 
mr2  = SigT (aborted,me1 )
else resolved = true 
mr2  = SigT (me1 ,me2 )
Figure 2.3: Resolve sub­protocol
2since this message is unsigned, in practice, anybody who has possess both me1 and me2 could send it
to the server.
Formalizing and proving accountability
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Legal System
In the following chapters, this paper will define a formal legal system that aims to achieve
accountability where all dishonest actions performed within it can be traced to one or
more responsible players. The standard definition of a protocol usually includes explicit
definitions of the behavior of honest players. Any deviation from that behavior is then said
to be of a dishonest agent or intruder. This system’s goal will be to formalize a set of laws
that define what is not allowed within the system. While breaking these laws can result
in a conviction by a judge, anything not explicitly forbidden by the laws of the system is
entirely legal.
3.1
Agent Model
To start with, some necessary structural elements of the system are defined.
Definition 1. The system consists of the following items:
­ A set of players Player ,
• among them there are two distinguished players j, p representing the judge and
police respectively.
­ An initial state containing the initial knowledge of every player P and where nobody
is guilty.
­ A set S of states where each state contains:
• For every player P ∈Player , a set M(P) of all messages known by P, initially,
M0(P).
• A set of players who have been found guilty and convicted in that state, initially
the empty set: ∅.
• A set N of messages that have been sent out on the network but not yet re­
ceived, initially the empty set: ∅.
• A trace T which is a set of transactions representing the sequence of messages
leading to the current state, where each transaction is linked to the player per­
forming it, initially the empty set: ∅.
⋄There are several requirements on the transactions for the judge j that we
will introduce later.
­ A list of laws that characterize what action are illegal within the system and what
obligations the players have; this is discussed in the next section
Case Study 1 (Contract Signing(CS) Protocol). This paper will analyze the contract­signing
protocol described in detail in [13] and summarized in 2.2. In this example, we write from
now on O, R, T for variables of type player where O, R, T ∈Player and O represents
the Originator of the protocol and R represents the Receiver in the protocol. Next, let
LRS be a subset of Players called legally recognized servers which will be allowed to act
as server T in the protocol. Now T ∈LRS and T acts as a Trusted Third Party server,
used to resolve any problems that arise during a run of the Exchange sub­protocol seen
in 2.1. When referencing a player without a specification to whether he is the originator,
8
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:17==
receiver, or server, variable P will be used. For resolving issues during the Exchange
protocol run, players can initiate sub­protocols Abort and Resolve, which starts a new
protocol with server T, seen in 2.2 and 2.3. Additionally, the assumption is made that
all contracts(from here on noted: text) are ensured by some outside entity to be valid
legal contractual texts. Thus, all contracts that make it to the signing phase are valid. In
the Optimistic Fair Exchange Protocol from Section 2.2, comO represents the hash h(oO)
of nonce oO. In this case study, the hash h(oO) will simply be denoted as the term hO,
representing a hash value produced by player O.
To be able to prove that accountability holds within the protocol, some security require­
ments need to be identified. The requirements from the Fair Exchange (2.2.1) will be
used as a starting point, but only the ones needed to show that accountability holds will
be used: Say two players, O and R want to sign a contract on some pre­defined text.
When they have initiated the process, i.e., after the first two steps in the exchange sub­
protocol 2.1. Then the requirements are the following:
R1­Effectiveness:
If both player O and R behave correctly and neither wants to aban­
don the protocol, then O will end up with oR such that h(oR) = hR. Same goes for player
R, i.e., R ends up with oO such that h(oO) = hO.
R2­Fairness:
Either both players have acquired:
• a valid contract, that is, both players have gotten oR and oO such that h(oR) = hR
and h(oO) = hO or they have a replacement contract signed by server T ∈LRS
or
• an abort token signed by server T ∈LRS 1
R3­Verifiability of third party:
Given that the server T can be forced to answer all
requests, then if T misbehaves, resulting in the loss of fair exchange for either player,
said player can prove this to an arbiter or judge.
1A weaker version of this could be added so a player would only have to be able to prove that the com­
mitment oX, replacement contract or abort token has been received or can still be received in the future.
Since this paper aims not explicitly to model an asynchronous fair exchange but rather to use this protocol
as a case study to show that accountability holds, this requirement is sufficient. In general, states, where
messages are sent but not yet received, will not be looked at in this paper, although the accountability should
hold nevertheless.
Formalizing and proving accountability
9
==PAGE:18==
O
R
input: text,OO ,hR ,R,T
OR  so (h(OR )=hR ) or 
replacement contract
abort token
abort token
OO  so (h(OO )=hO ) or  
replacement contract
input: text,OR ,hO ,O,T
Fair Exchange
OR
Figure 3.1: Successful Fair Exchange
As mentioned, instead of the typical protocol definition where distinctions are made be­
tween honest and dishonest players, all players in this system are modeled like intrud­
ers. To do this, the standard Dolev­Yao model is used [16]. Thus, it is assumed that the
network is compromised and the intruder has complete control over it. The intruder can
eavesdrop, intercept, and synthesize any message he can compose from terms he knows.
The intruder is only limited by constraints of the cryptography used in messages.
Definition 2. For every player P ∈Player except for the judge j and police p we define
a transaction: P can update N and M(P) to be any set N′ and M(P)′ such that all
messages in sets N′ and M(P)′ can be derived from knowing N and M(P). Players
can thus receive, eavesdrop, intercept and store messages. They can also derive new
messages from their knowledge and send them out on the network and remove messages
from their knowledge.
The functions sign , verify , h and the set of format function Σf are public functions that
all players P can apply to any message from their respective knowledge M(P). Table
3.1 illustrates the different notations for functions used in the system. The function sign
represents a digital signature and all signatures include the clear text message m of the
signed message sign( inv(pk(P)), m). The function verify is to verify digital signatures
where verify( m, pk(P)) evaluates to true if m is signed by the private key that corresponds
to the public key pk(P). h is a collision resistant hash function and Σf is a set of format
functions that dictate how to structure messages.
10
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:19==
Notation
Explanation
h()
Collision resistant one­way
hash function
sign(kpriv, m)
Message m signed with
key kpriv
verify(m, kpub)
Signiture verification function
fexchangeI()
format function with arity 5
fexchangeR()
format function with arity 2
fabort()
format function with arity 1
faborted()
format function with arity 1
freplacement()
format function with arity 2
Table 3.1: Notations for functions in Case Study: Contract Signing
Definition 3. We define a relation M ⊢m where:
• M is a set of messages
• m is a message
expressing that a player can derive m if his knowledge is M.
One of the core things about the Dolev­Yao model is what the intruder can do with mes­
sages. As already stated, the intruder has full control over the network and can overhear,
intercept and synthesize messages. We define a proof calculus:
Premise
ConclusionSide −Condidtion
If both the premise and side­condition hold, then proof of the conclusion follows. Together
with Definition 3, the intruder in this system or rather player can thus perform the following
deductions using the public functions; sign , h , Σf:
M ⊢m M ⊢inv(pk(P))
M ⊢sign(inv(pk(P)), m)
M ⊢sign(inv(pk(P)), m)
M ⊢m
• A player can sign any message m from his knowledge with any key inv(pk(P)) from
his knowledge.
• A player can learn any message m signed with a private key inv(pk(P)).
M ⊢m
M ⊢h(m)
• A player can hash any message m from his knowledge with the hash function.
M ⊢
nP
i=1
mi
M ⊢f(m1, ..., mn) wheref ∈Σf and has n arguments
• A player can apply any function f ∈Σf to any terms he knows.
Formalizing and proving accountability
11
==PAGE:20==
M ⊢f(m1, ..., mn)
M ⊢
nP
i=1
mi
wheref ∈Σf and has n arguments
• A player can learn all the terms of a message where a function f ∈Σf
has been
applied, e.g. all functions in the set Σf
are transparent format function and only
limit how to structure a message.
Definition 4. For every player P ∈Player , we denote pk(P) to be the long­term fixed
public key of P and inv(pk(P)) the corresponding private key. Every player P has in its
initial knowledge their public­private key­pair: (pk(P), inv(pk(P))) which is bound to them
and also public keys of all other players within the system. The key bound to player P
will be the only one with a legal meaning when signing messages within the system. The
initial knowledge for all players P ∈Player is then:
M0(P) = {pk(X)|pk(X) ∈Player} ∪{pk(P), inv(pk(P))}
Remark. While it could be included that players are allowed to make new key pairs and
even have a whole system for accountable key distribution like Mödersheim and Cuéllar
propose in [12], for simplicity, players have a long­term fixed key that is bound to them,
and any keys they generate after that will have no legal meaning in the system. In future
works, allowing players to make new keys that would be legally bound to them and allow
them to be used in contract signing could be added to the system.
Case Study 2 (CS protocol cont.). In the original contract signing protocol[13], a secure
way for players to sign contracts asynchronously is modeled. In the case study of this
paper, this has some drawbacks. To start, say there exists a sequence of messages
representing a complete run of the exchange sub­protocol 2.1:
1. O →R : sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchaneI(O, R, T, text, hO)) (me1)
2. R →O : sign( inv(pk(R)), fexchaneR(me1, hR))
3. O →R : oO
4. R →O : oR
Now by Definition 2 and Definition 3, the intruder could intercept and even stop these mes­
sages from reaching its intended recipient. This is not a problem in the message sequence
above since stopping any of these messages can not break the security requirements of
the protocol.
• Stopping message 1. would abandon the protocol.
• Stopping message 2. Player O could invoke server T for an abort token.
• Stopping message 3. or 4. either player could invoke T for a replacement contract
This assumes that the messages always reach the server T and that he behaves honestly.
Say that any of the messages above would not reach the recipient, whether intercepted
by an intruder, not sent by a dishonest player or get lost on the network. This would cause
the recipient to invoke T for an abort or resolve. Say now that T is dishonest and chooses
to ignore the message and denies ever receiving it if asked. This could lead to violating
the security requirements, where one player ends up with a valid contract but not the other.
12
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:21==
Thus we define a public append­only bulletin board along with a special double transition
on all requests sent to the server T. Note that only an abstract definition of the bulletin
board is presented, and the assumption is made that its implementation is correct and
sound and works as intended2. The bulletin board will provide increased transparency in
server communication. However, this will mean that all aborted and replaced contracts
will be available publicly, but since most contracts are not private, this is not a concern.
Definition 5. A public bulletin board is defined as a sequence ⟨pbb1, ...pbbn⟩where each
message pbbi contains a special double message containing a request to the server and
an answer to said request. The contents of this bulletin board can not be altered or deleted,
and every new message is appended to the end of the sequence.
Next, a special double­transition is defined between servers T ∈LRS and all other players.
A request from P to server T is defined by req(M, m) where M is the message from player
P, which represents the request, and m is the message from server T, which corresponds
to an answer to said request. The process is as follows:
­ the first part of the request, M, is filled in by player P and posted on the bulletin
board.
­ second part of the request, m, is filled in by server T and posted on the bulletin
board.
This means that after a request from P to T, the next transition in the system will always
be from the server T to finish that request.
Some assumption about the bulletin board are needed. It is assumed that the bulletin
board will only accept message requests M from player P if they are valid abort or resolve
requests, i.e., of one of the forms:
­ sign( inv(pk(P)),fabort(me1))
­ (me1, me2)
where me1 and me2 or signed message of format fexchangeI and fexchangeR respectively. It
will also only accept signed message answers m from T.
It is also assumed that all players have a resilient communication channel with the bulletin
board. An intruder can overhear or delay messages by some finite time sent through the
channel, but all messages will eventually be delivered. Now, messages will always be
delivered and answered by players who can impact the fair exchange of the protocol and
all requests sent to servers and answers from servers are publicly available.
Remark. In the event of an illegal request M from player P, there is no message m
that server T can post to answer the request successfully. Later in this paper, it will be
proved that for all such dishonest behavior, a culprit can be traced, and thus with the later
introduced perfect crime assumption, no player will commit any crimes.
2For an in­depth construction of an append­only bulletin board, one could look at Heather et al. formaliza­
tion in [17]
Formalizing and proving accountability
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2
The Legislative Branch
Now there exists a model where players are free to do what they want, with the terms
they know. Next, a definition of the legislative branch is needed. This includes the set of
laws mentioned in Definition 1 and a function on states that returns all, if relevant, criminal
information about it. In the system, some actions have a particular legal meaning, and
some might be considered illegal and thus punishable. This section will detail what is
legal and illegal, whereas the following sections will define the discovery process and the
judicial process, which describes how crimes could be detected and how the dishonest
player could be traced and convicted.
Definition 6. The legal system is defined by a set of laws and a function crimes which
maps from states to a set of records where the records store all relevant information about
a crime that is necessarily not observable by others. So player P is a culprit in state S if
crimes (S) contains a record where player P is a culprit of a crime. The system must be
reasonable so that players can only become culprits of their own accord.
Note that there might be crimes that will never be discovered. This system aims not to
prevent all crimes within it but rather, the legal system defines what constitutes a crime
and some legal terms. It is then up to the judicial system to only convict guilty players,
i.e., who have committed a crime.
Definition 7. The Laws of the system can then be defined.
§1 The key pair (pk(P),inv(pk(P)) is legally bound to player P.
§2 If inv(pk(A)) is known to player B and A̸=B, then A is punishable.
§3 A list of legally recognized servers (LRS ) is fixed in the law. LRS is a subset of
Player .
§4 The term freshly generated means that it is illegal to use a known or existing value.
§5 There are 5 legally recognized formats and signing them has legal meaning:
fexchangeI For initiating an Exchange protocol; fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO), where O,R,T
∈Player , text is a contractual text and hO is the hash of a nonce.
fexchangeR For responding to an Exchange protocol request; fexchangeR(me1, hR), where
me1 is the initiation request and hR is a hash of a nonce.
fabort For requesting an abort token; fabort(me1), where me1 is the Exchange protocol
initiation request to be aborted.
faborted For issuing an abort token; faborted(ma1), where ma1 is the abort request.
freplacement For issuing a replacement contract; freplacement(me1, me2), where me1 is an
Exchange protocol initiation request and me2 is the corresponding response.
14
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:23==
§6 A contract between players O (originator) and R (recipient) where O, R ∈Player is
only valid if and only if it is of one of the two forms:
(a) A standard contract;
(me1, oO, me2, oR)
(b) A replacement contract;
sign( inv(pk(T)), freplacement(me1, me2))
where:
• me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchaneI(O, R, T, text, hO)) O,R ∈Player , T ∈LRS
• me2 = sign( inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(me1, hR))
• hO = h(oO) where oO is a freshly generated nonce by player O (O’s secret
commitment to the contract).
• hR = h(oR) where oR is a freshly generated nonce by player R (R’s secret
commitment to the contract).
• text is a contractual text which follows legal statutes on contracts outside of
the contract signing protocol. Each contract text has a unique identifier.
§7 If a private key inv(pk(P)) bound to player P is used to sign a message:
m = fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO)
then P is punishable if any of the following conditions fail to hold:
1 O is the correct originator of the message, i.e. O = P.
2 R is of variable type Player .
3 R is the recipient of the message, i.e. P sent the message to player R.
4 T is a legally recognized server by law, T ∈LRS as per §3.
5 text is the contractual text that P is agreeing to and has a unique identifier. P
has never signed a message with this text in the past.3
6 oO is a freshly generated nonce.
7 hO is the hash of oO.
§8 If a private key inv(pk(P)) bound to player P is used to sign a message:
m = fexchangeR(me1, hR)
where me1 is a signed exchange protocol initiation request:
me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)),
initiation request
z
}|
{
fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
then P is punishable if any of the following conditions fail to hold:
3We assume that players remember all contract texts they themselves have signed in the past. To ensure
proper uniqueness players would have to have in their memory every contract text ever signed but signing
contracts they have not been a part of before will yield no favorable result for them and therefore redundant.
Only when signing a contract text they have previously signed in the past will it have a legal meaning since
it could lead to the fair exchange of the contract signing being broken.
Formalizing and proving accountability
15
==PAGE:24==
1 me1 is a signed message of format fexchangeI
2 The signature on me1 matches the intended originator(O) from the initiation
request.
3 P is the intended receiver of me1, i.e. R = P.
4 T is a legally recognized server by law, T ∈LRS as per §3.
5 text is the contractual text that P is agreeing to and has a unique identifier. P
has never signed a message with this text in the past.
6 oR is a freshly generated nonce.
7 hR is the hash of oO.
§9 If a private key inv(pk(P)) bound to player P is used to sign a message of format:
fabort(me1) where
me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
then P is punishable if any of the following conditions fail to hold:
1 me1 is a signed message of format fexchangeI
2 me1 is signed by P and P is the originator in the fexchangeI message i.e. O =
P.
3 T is a legally recognized server by law, T ∈LRS as per §3.
4 hO is the hash of oO.
5 oO is secret and only known by P.
§10 If a private key inv(pk(P)) bound to player P is used to sign a message of format:
faborted(ma1) where
ma1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fabort(
me1
z
}|
{
sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO)
|
{z
}
initiation request
)))
then P is punishable if any of the following conditions fail to hold:
1 ma1 is a signed message of format fabort
2 the signature on ma1 and the signature on me1 both match the intended origi­
nator from the initiation request.
3 P is a legally recognized server by law, P ∈LRS .
4 P is the intended server to resolve issues in this protocol run, i.e. T = P.
5 text has a unique identifier and P has never issued a replacement contract for
players O and R on this text in the past.
§11 If a private key inv(pk(P)) bound to player P is used to sign a message of format:
freplacement(me1, me2) where
me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
16
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:25==
and
me2 = sign( inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(me1, hR))
then P is punishable if any of the following conditions fail to hold:
1 me1 is a signed message of format fexchangeI
2 me2 is a signed message of format fexchangeR
3 P is a legally recognized server by law, P ∈LRS .
4 P is the intended server to resolve issues in this protocol run, i.e. T = P.
5 The key used to sign me1 is bound to player O from fexchangeI
6 The key used to sign me2 is bound to player R from fexchangeI
7 text has a unique identifier and P has never issued an abort token: (faborted(ma1))
on this text in the past.
§12 If a double message req(M, m) is posted on the bulletin board where only M has
been filled in where M includes a request from player P to server T, the T is pun­
ishable if his answer m is not of one of the two forms:
1 sign( inv(pk(T)),faborted(ma1))
2 sign( inv(pk(T)),freplacement(me1, me2))
Now, crimes (S) can be defined based on these laws as a function that returns records
with all of the relevant information about a crime. That includes what laws have been
broken, who broke them, and what evidence there is of the crime. To test this function
and later validate the system. A simple python program was implemented(see Appendix
A for full python code). A class was made to represent the current state seen in Figure
3.2. Explanations of each class variable can be found in 3.2. Next, the laws above are
implemented in python with simple if­else statements, and every time there is a state
transition, a check is done to see if a crime has been committed and, if so, who the culprit
is.
State
- msgTrace  : list<Message>
- msgNetwork : list<Message>
- bulletinBoard : list<Contract>
- knownStdContracts : list<Contract>
- players : list<Players>
- playersKnowledge : list
- crimes : dictionary
- LRS : list<Player>
State(list<Player> players, list<Player> LRS)
Figure 3.2: State class representation in Python
Formalizing and proving accountability
17
==PAGE:26==
Variable
Explanation
msgTrace
A sequence of all messages leading to current state
msgNetwork
All message sent on the network, not yet received
bulletinBoard
All contracts publicly known, abort token
or replacement contract previously issued
knownStdContracts
All valid standard contracts of the system
players
All players within the system
playersKnowledge
Knowledge of every player within the syetem.
crimes
Class variable that acts as our crimes function described above
showing crimes committed, if any, for all players, intially ∅
LRS
All legally recognized servers.
Table 3.2: Variable explanations of state class in python
Say now there exists two states:S1 and S2:
1
msgTrace = [Messeage(X,R,'sign(inv(pk(X)),f_exchangeI(O,R,T1,text1,hO))')]
2
msgNetwork = []
3
bulletinBoard = []
4
knownStdContracts = []
5
players = [O, R, X]
6
playersKnowledge = {'O': [...], 'R':[...], 'X': [...]}
7
crimes : dict
8
LRS = [T1]
Listing 3.1: Representation of a state S1
1
msgTrace = [...,Messeage(T1,R,'sign(inv(pk(T1)),f_replacement(sign(inv(pk(O)),
f_exchangeI(O,R,T1,text1,hO)),me_2))')]
2
msgNetwork = []
3
bulletinBoard = [Message(T1,O,'sign(inv(pk(T1)),f_aborted(sign(inv(pk(O)),
f_abort(sign(inv(pk(O)),f_exchangeI(O,R,T1,text1,hO))))))')]
4
knownStdContracts = []
5
players = [O, R, X]
6
playersKnowledge = {'O': [...], 'R':[...], 'X': [...]}
7
crimes : dict
8
LRS = [T1]
Listing 3.2: Representation of a state S2
Now if crimes (S1) is called, then per Law §7.1 which says a player cannot sign a message
unless he is the originator(O) in the fexhangeI message, the function should return the
following::
­ (Law = §7.1, Perp = X, Evid = {sign( inv(pk(X)), (O, R, T, text1, hO))}):
if player R gets sent a message from player X asking to sign a contract between
players O and R. T ∈LRS , text1 is a valid contract and h0 is a hash value.
Where Law is the law that has been broken, Perp is the culprit who broke it and Evid is
the evidence of the crime.
18
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:27==
Similarly, here are the results of the crimes function in python given the state S1:
1
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': ['Law #7.1: incorrect
originator ', 'Evid: sign(inv(pk(X)),f_exchangeI(O,R,T1,text1,hO))'], 'Y':
[], 'intruder ': []}
Listing 3.3: Output of crimes function in python given state S1
Now the same can be done with state S2 where per law §11.7 it is illegal for a server T to
issue a replacement contract if an abort token on that contract already exists. Output of
crimes (S2) would the be:
­ (Law = §10 or §11, Perp = T1, Evid = {abort token, replacement contract}):
If there exists both an abort token and a valid replacement contract where text in
both cases has the same unique identifier, both signed by the server T1.
Similarly, here are the results of the crimes function in python given the state S2:
1
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': ['Law #11.7: abort token exists ', 'Evid: sign(inv(pk(
T1)),f_replacement(sign(inv(pk(O)),f_exchangeI(O,R,T1,text1,hO)),me_2))'],
'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ': []}
Listing 3.4: Output of crimes function in python given state S2
Remark. Note that the crimes function returns all crimes, regardless of whether a judge
can prove them. It is the ”All­Seeing Eye” of the system and knows every law break within
it. The aim of the system is not to be able to detect and convict players for every law break.
Instead, the system must be able with a non­zero possibility to detect all crimes that lead
to a violation of the security goal of the protocol. A violation of laws that do not lead to a
violation of the security goal is thus not relevant for security goals.
Next, it can be proved that the system is reasonable, that players can just become culprits
of their own accord. For player P to become a culprit of a crime, he must first have violated
any of the laws from Definition 7 by signing an illegal message. Now, let S be a state where
crimes (S) returns all records of crimes committed in that state or leading up to it. If P is
not a Perp in any of them, then P cannot have broken any laws and therefore cannot
become a culprit of a crime through actions of others.
Formalizing and proving accountability
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3
The Executive Branch
So far, the system has a definition of laws that dictate what is illegal, and thus everything
else constitutes legal behavior within the system. Also, a definition of what transactions
players can do and how they can construct messages. To this end, players are not hin­
dered from committing crimes. However, this section will introduce the fact that all crimes
have the possibility of being discovered.
In the model, there are two ways in which crimes can be detected or discovered. One
would be by the system’s players, and the other is by a ”police” that can monitor certain
processes, e.g., the bulletin board or by discovering crimes that may or may not be known
already. First, suppose a crime has been committed, leading to a violation of the security
goal. In that case, an honest player taking part in said protocol run should have sufficient
evidence of this crime in his knowledge and can bring it to the judge. This is with the as­
sumption that he knows that a crime occurred. For example, an honest player, who signed
a contract with a dishonest player, might not know that his contract has been aborted. The
second would be the police, which may discover crimes by chance or when monitoring
processes within the system. The main thing is that, when committing a crime, there is
always a risk that another player, whether the police or not, will be able to discover it and
give evidence of it to the judge.
Next, a definition is needed of a transaction representing the discovery or detection of
a particular crime and a model of an example of how a criminal ”could” be caught in the
system even though crimes could go undetected. A crime committed and discovered is
simply one of the reachable states in the model.
Definition 8. A discovery transaction is a transaction whose player is the observing player
P or the police p, which relays the knowledge of a crime to the judge j with a claim, i.e., a
record that defines the observations of that player and adds it to the judge’s knowledge.
A transaction like the defined above will enable or trigger a judicial proceeding where
the judge can now investigate the crime. Note that player P can lie about evidence and
the judge has to be fair so that only players who committed a crime will suffer the conse­
quences.
Remark. Note that it is not required for the discovering player P to participate in the pro­
tocol where a crime occurred. He can also monitor the public bulletin board where all
requests and answers from T are publicly available, e.g., a private investigator. Note that
to reach an attack state, at least one player must behave dishonestly and break some law
within the model.
Case Study 3 (CS protocol cont.). Now, a walkthrough of the transaction of discovering a
crime within the example. First, a definition of an attack state is needed. An attack state
is when two players signing a contract together end up with different results. This can
happen when player P1 has an abort token signed by server T and player P2 has a valid
standard contract or a replacement contract signed by server T. Additionally, this could
be where player P1 has a valid contract, but P2 does not have a valid contract nor an abort
token4.
4This could happen if, during a run of the exchange protocol 2.1, player O does not receive the nonce
from R in step 5. This would lead to him invoking T for a resolve, but a dishonest T might not answer him or
answer with an illegal message.
20
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:29==
Remark. Note that in practice, every state where there is at least one law break could be
considered an attack state but since only the states where two players signing a contract
together end up with different results would violate the security goal of the contract signing
protocol, focus will be on those states.
Definition 9. Evid is a record which contains all evidence of a crime found by discovering
player P or police p. This record is a claim of a crime and the the judge will only consider
it as sufficient evidence if it contains either:
1. An abort token of the form sign( inv(pk(T)), faborted(ma1)) where ma1 is the abort
request and T ∈LRS .
And one of the following:
• A standard contract of the form (me1, oO, me2, oR) where:
me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
me2 = sign( inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(me1, hR))
oO = freshly generated nonce by player O
oR = freshly generated nonce by player R
• A replacement contract of the form sign( inv(pk(T)), freplacement(me1, me2)) where:
me1 = sign( inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
me2 = sign( inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(me1, hR))
and T ∈LRS
2. or a req(M, m) message.
This claim is then added to the judges knowledge and triggers an judicial process.
Case Study 4 (CS protocol cont.). Now, the security goal of the CS protocol is that we
cannot reach a state where any of the Evid records from Definition 9 exists. Say, such a
state exist, then a valid Evid record could be:
(Evid = {
abort token
z
}|
{
(sign(inv(pk(T)), faborted(ma1))), (sign(inv(pk(T)), freplacement(me1, me2)))
|
{z
}
Replacement contract
})
This claim will then trigger the judge to investigate and make a ruling in the case. Note
that this claim does not accuse any specific player of committing a crime but rather informs
the judge that a possible crime has occurred. It is then for the judge to decide if a crime
indeed did occur and trace which player is the misbehaving party.
Formalizing and proving accountability
21
==PAGE:30==
3.4
The Judicial Branch
Now, the system has laws that define what is illegal and a process for possibly discovering
all illegal actions by players. Next, a definition of the process of the judge is needed. This
process would start with a claim by the discovering player P or the police where evidence
is brought forward. The key to this approach is that the judge must be fair and can only
convict players who have committed a crime. This process has also been formalized as
a python program.
Definition 10. A transaction for the judge, j: the judge can convict player P and thus
transition from state S to S′, where P is now in the set of convicted players in S′, but only
if there is a record R ∈crimes (S) where P is a culprit thus making it fair so an innocent
player can never be convicted of a crime.
Now a step­by­step walkthrough of the different kinds of law breaks that could happen
within the system leading to a violation of the security goal.
Case Study 5 (CS protocol cont.). In the contract signing protocol, only three cases of
evidence can be brought in front of a judge as valid evidence of a crime where the crime
committed would lead to a violation of the security goals of the protocol. They are:
1. Evid1={abort token, replacement contract}
2. Evid2={abort token, standard contract}
3. Evid3={req(M, m)}
Where the message {req(M, m)}, is a message posted on the bulletin board. This can be
used as evidence when players who post a request M on the bulletin board and T does
not answer legally.
Note that there is no distinction made about which player possesses which part of the
evidence, but rather the judge makes his judgment on the fact that these messages exist
but not on who had them in their respective knowledge.
Case Study 6 (CS protocol cont.). In the CS example, the judicial process is started when
a player or police makes a claim that a crime has been committed and hands the judge
the evidence they have by adding it to the judges knowledge in the form of a record:
(Evid1 = {
abort token
z
}|
{
(sign(inv(pk(T)), faborted(ma1))), (sign(inv(pk(T)), freplacement(me1, me2)))
|
{z
}
Replacement contract
})
Now look at the expanded form of the abort token:
abort token = (
T’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(T)), faborted(
abort request(ma1)
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(O)), fabort(me1)))
|
{z
}
abort confirmation
))
abort request =
O’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(O)), fabort(sign(inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO)))
|
{z
}
Contract signing initiation request(me1)
)
22
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:31==
The same can be done for the replacement contract:
replacement contract =
(3.1)
=
T’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(T)), freplacement(sign(inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
|
{z
}
Contract signing initiation request(me1)
, me2))
where
me2 =
R’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(
Contract signing initiation request(me1)
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO)), hR
|
{z
}
Contract signing recipient response
))
The judge can now examine the abort token and replacement contract and check for pos­
sible law breaks. The abort token and replacement contract are of faborted and freplacement
format and signed by player T. Within them are messages of format fabort, fexchangeR
and fexchangeI that are signed by players O and R respectively. Per law §5 signing any
of these formats can have a legal meaning and, if done incorrectly, becomes illegal and
thus has consequences. The judge would then go through each message with respect to
laws §7­§11 and check for any law breaks. Now assume that the judge has gone through
me1, me2, abort request and abort token and they are all valid messages where O, R, T ∈
Player and T ∈LRS . Next, the judge would check the replacement contract. Say that
text of both the abort token and the replacement contract are the same, then there is a
violation of the security goal of the protocol. Per §11.7, it is illegal for a player to sign a
message of faborted format if there exists an abort token where text has the same unique
identifier as well as having the same players involved in the contract signing. Thus, the
judge would convict the signer of the message; player T.
To validate this further, the python program for the function crimes is utilized(see Appendix
A for full python code). Similar if­else statements, along with some recursive processes,
are used to model the functionality of the judge but can only use the messages he learns
from the claim Evid to trace the misbehaving party. Given the record Evid1 from Case
Study 6 the judge.py program would return the crimes, if any, of all players:
1
checking abort token:
2
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ':
[]}
3
-------------------------------------
4
checking replacement contract:
5
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': ['Law #11.7: abort token exists '], 'T2': [], 'T3':
[], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ': []}
Listing 3.5: Output of judge representation in python given Evid1
Which yields the same result, that is, server T has broken Law §11.7 for issuing a replace­
ment contract when there existed an abort token for the same contract text.
Formalizing and proving accountability
23
==PAGE:32==
Note that for the Judaical system to be fair, the judge can only convict player T and make
a state transition from state S to S′ if there exists a record in crimes (S) where T is the
Perp of a crime. Looking at 3.4, it can be observed that for a case like in the example
above, which mirrors the state S∈(3.2), there does exist a record in crimes (S2) where T
is the Perp, and thus the judge and the judicial system are fair.
Case Study 7 (CS protocol cont.). Say a claim is made to judge j with the record:
(Evid2 = {
abort token
z
}|
{
(sign(inv(pk(T)), faborted(ma1))), (me1, oO, me2, oR)
|
{z
}
Standard contract
})
Same as before, the abort token can be expanded:
abort token = (
T’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(T)), faborted(
abort request(ma1)
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(O)), fabort(me1)))
|
{z
}
abort confirmation
))
And also the standard contract:
me1 = sign(inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO))
me2 =
R’s signiture
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(R)), fexchangeR(
Contract signing initiation request(me1)
z
}|
{
sign(inv(pk(O)), fexchangeI(O, R, T, text, hO)), hR
|
{z
}
Contract signing recipient response
))
The judge can now examine the abort token and check for possible law breaks. The abort
token is of faborted format and signed by player T. Within it are messages of format fabort
and fexchangeI that are both signed by player O. The judge would then go through each
message with respect to laws §7,§9 and §10 and check for any law breaks. Now assume
that the judge has gone through me1, abort request and abort token and they are all valid
messages where O, R, T ∈Player and T ∈LRS . A replacement contract does not exist
on text5, and hO is a hash value. Next, the judge would check the standard contract. Say
text from the abort token and text from me1 are the same contract. Say also, that the
hash of the nonce oO evaluates to hO i.e., h(oO) = hO. This would lead to a violation of
the security goal. Per §9.5, it is illegal to sign a message of fabort format if the hash oO is
not secret. Here this law has been broken, and thus the judge would convict the signer of
the message; player O.
5Note that even if the standard contract existed before T signed the abort token, he has not broken any
laws since its only illegal for him to sign an abort token if he has previously issued a replacement contract
upon the same contract text. Note also that in a normal protocol run of exchange protocol, a standard contract
is achieved without the help of server T and thus he has no knowledge of its existence.
24
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:33==
Similarly, here are the results of the judge.py given the record Evid2 from Example 8:
1
checking me_1 message of standard contract:
2
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ':
[]}
3
checking me_2 message of standard contract:
4
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ':
[]}
5
-------------------------------------
6
checking abort token:
7
{'O': ['Law #8.5: known nonce '], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X':
[], 'Y': [], 'intruder ': []}
Listing 3.6: Output of judge representation in python given Evid2
Case Study 8 (CS protocol cont.). The third kind of claim the judge could get is:(Evid3 =
req(M, m)); this can be a resolve request M and some illegal message m from server T
which can result in a violation of the security goal.
Here, the judge would start by checking the message M; if it is not a valid abort or resolve
request, the judge stops, and nothing is done. If it is valid, he then checks the message
m. Given that m is not empty, the judge would check if the server T answered the request
correctly. Say that
(Evid3 = req((me1, me2), sign( inv(pk(T)),m)))
where m is some illegal term(could be just a random string)
The judge would then examine the message and check for possible law breaks. If m is
not of the format faborted or freplacement the per Law §12, T has broken the law and thus
the judge would convict T.
Similarly, here are the results of the judge.py given the record Evid3 from Example 8:
1
checking request to server:
2
checking me_1 of resolve request:
3
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ':
[]}
4
checking me_2 of resolve request:
5
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ':
[]}
6
checking answer from T:
7
{'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': ['Law #11: Illegal answer from server '], 'T2': [], '
T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder ': []}
Listing 3.7: Output of judge representation in python given Evid3
Formalizing and proving accountability
25
==PAGE:34==
3.5
Perfect Crime Assumption
As stated in earlier sections, the aim of the system is not to be able to detect all crimes that
occur but rather to showcase that committing a crime carries the risk of getting caught and
punished. The aim is thus to achieve accountability by deterrence. Although in the Case
studies, all crimes that violate the security goals will be discovered and traced to a culprit,
given that the judge gets the evidence6, this might not be true for different protocols.
Perhaps the core idea behind the accountability being achieved by deterrence is the per­
fect crime assumption, i.e., the idea that no player will commit crimes if there is a chance
he will get caught. So players will only perform perfect crimes. Thus, similar to the defini­
tion in [12]:
Definition 11. For every player P, we perform a least fixed point computation on the state
space. We label every state S red if P is a culprit in S or if there exists a non­P transition
from S to a red state. If P can transition to a non­red state with an illegal action, it is a
perfect crime for P. Thus, a perfect crime is a crime that carries no risk of getting caught.
The perfect crime assumption is then defined as the assumption that a player P will only
perform an illegal action if it is a perfect crime.
Case Study 9 (CS protocol cont.). As mentioned, the security goal of the CS protocol is
that an attack state(3) is unreachable. This can happen when a player P1 has an abort
token signed by server T and player P2 has a standard contract or replacement contract
also signed by T both issued on the same contract text.
Then it is clear that no attack state is reachable given the perfect crime assumption. But
say an attack state S is reachable where O has an abort token and R has a replacement
contract both signed by T issued upon the same contract text. Then a discovery transition
can be made to the judge, which will lead to a conviction transition of T by the judge. The
state S must then be labeled red since a path exists from S to the conviction of T. S itself
is then the result of an imperfect crime which contradicts the perfect crime assumption.
6Note that in this example, we have contracts between two people. If ever there is a loss of fair exchange,
it can be assumed that when the contract’s contents are tested or debated, the evidence will come to light
and be handed to the judge by an honest player.
26
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:35==
4
Final Statements
This section will go over some of the main take­aways of this thesis, discuss the paper’s
primary results, the design and implementation approach, and what can be taken away
from this thesis. Next, some out­of­scope and possible next steps will be discussed in the
future works section, as well as some exciting side­questions mentioned in the introduc­
tion. Lastly, a summary of the contributions of this paper will conclude it.
4.1
Discussion
Looking back, this paper aimed to formalize a legal system where accountability is achieved
and prove that accountability holds with an independent protocol as a running example.
Even though the model was described to the extent that a proof of concept could be made
with regards to the running example, The writer thinks that to evaluate this system better,
a more in­depth approach would have to take place. A more accurate system verification
could occur by using not only one protocol example but multiple protocols. Also, the writer
feels that by using this single example, the design and implementation of the system itself
became pretty influenced by the example, and taking an even more abstract approach
could benefit this work.
4.2
Future Works
As stated above, further work on this system could be done, where instead of a single ex­
ample protocol, multiple protocols could be used. This would expand the implementation,
so the Contract Signing Protocol would not influence the design and implementation of
the system as much. This could also help optimize the system or even find something that
could be missing in the current system. By looking at this from a higher and more abstract
way, a more general explanation of the system could be made, and shared solutions from
different examples could be explored. Another approach would be to slowly add some
functionality to the existing system and adapt the system with regard to the fact that ac­
countability still holds. This could be done by, for example, adding some accountable key
management system like in [12] and could this be relatively easy by merging the two ex­
amples and taking the super­set of requirements of the system. Another thing that could
be added and adapted to the system would be; exploring the option of private contracts,
at least to the point where they are not public. This could be done with encryption but
would still have to be valid in the sense that accountability still holds.
An exciting add­on to these kinds of systems would be to design a domain­specific lan­
guage that would describe both the syntax and semantics with regard to accountability.
Since this does not exist and trying to develop this would be a project in itself; instead, we
will discuss the feasibility of this and what design choices could be implemented. When it
comes to semantics, we already have some base of what is needed. Like in this project,
we have some structural elements like; players, states, a set of laws, a judge, etc. So we
know that any syntax chosen would have to represent these things somehow. When it
comes to syntax, the choice of grammar could be arbitrary and could, for example, be a
subset or a combined subset of other languages. For example, the laws of the system
could be implemented similarly as done in this thesis with python. So the laws would
simply be functions that could take in some input, like a state, and return, if any, what
laws have been broken in that state and by whom. Defining some kind of language for
Formalizing and proving accountability
27
==PAGE:36==
accountability systems would be very interesting to research further and would help make
a formal definition of such systems even more valid and concrete.
Another exciting add­on that could greatly supplement this subject is formal verification.
That is, using existing protocol verification tools to verify that accountability holds in a
given protocol within a legal system. To achieve this, some modifications to these tools
would have to occur. For starters, the laws of the system would have to be implemented
into the tool’s functionality. Similarly, the functionality of the judge would have to be im­
plemented so that when running verification, the tool could both give rise to if a violation
occurs based on these predefined laws and point to a player that caused it. Accountability
fails to hold if a violation is found, but the culprit is unknown. Given that we have a tool
that could understand the system’s laws and correctly represent a judge, one could, in a
formal way, verify for a given system that accountability holds. Of course, a prerequisite
to this would be to ensure that the judge is fair and the legal system is reasonable. That is,
only guilty actors could get blamed by the judge for a crime, and actors could only become
culprits if they commit a dishonest action themselves but not for the actions of others.
4.3
Conclusions
The scope of this thesis was to formalize a system where accountability was achieved.
Next, if possible, we wanted to prove that accountability would hold in the given sys­
tem by demonstrating it in a real scenario using an example protocol and showing what
security properties would follow. The system must be unrestricting, fair, and reasonable.
With these requirements, an agent model was first defined, where players could compose
and send messages between them freely. Next, a legal system was defined where laws
were made, and only specific messages had restrictions on how they could be composed
when players signed them. This system was fair in that players of the system could only
incriminate themselves and could not become criminals by the actions of others. Next, an
executive branch was modeled here crimes committed could be discovered and evidence
of that handed to a judge. Then, a judicial branch, or a judge process was defined that
could investigate and convict players based on discovered evidence, and if they broke the
previously defined laws, they could be convicted. This process was reasonable because
only guilty players could be convicted of a crime. Lastly, accountability was achieved in
the system by introducing the perfect crime assumption that said players would not com­
mit crimes if there were a risk of getting caught. To conclude, the goals of this thesis have
been successfully achieved.
28
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
D Elliott Bell and Leonard J La Padula. Secure computer system: Unified exposition
and multics interpretation. Tech. rep. MITRE CORP BEDFORD MA, 1976.
[2]
Kenneth J Biba. Integrity considerations for secure computer systems. Tech. rep.
MITRE CORP BEDFORD MA, 1977.
[3]
David D. Clark and David R. Wilson. “A Comparison of Commercial and Military
Computer Security Policies”. In: 1987 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
1987, pp. 184–184. DOI: 10.1109/SP.1987.10001.
[4]
Daniel J. Weitzner et al. “Information Accountability”. In: Commun. ACM 51.6 (June
2008), pp. 82–87. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/1349026.1349043. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1349026.1349043.
[5]
Butler Lampson. “Privacy and Security Usable Security: How to Get It”. In: Com­
mun. ACM 52.11 (Nov. 2009), pp. 25–27. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10.1145/1592761.
1592773. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1592761.1592773.
[6]
Joan Feigenbaum. “Accountability as a driver of innovative privacy solutions”. In:
Privacy and Innovation Symposium. 2010.
[7]
Victoria Pillitteri (NIST) Michael Nieles (NIST) Kelley Dempsey (NIST). An Introduc­
tion to Information Security. Tech. rep. NIST Special Publication (SP) 800­12, Rev.
1, Includes updates as of June , 2017. National Institute of Standards and Technol­
ogy, 2017. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-12r1.
[8]
N. Asokan, Victor Shoup, and Michael Waidner. “Asynchronous Protocols for Opti­
mistic Fair Exchange”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Symposium
on Research in Security and Privacy (Jan. 1998).
[9]
Jens­matthias Bohli, Jörn Müller­quade, and Stefan Röhrich. Bingo Voting: Secure
and coercion­free voting using a trusted random number generator.
[10]
Jennifer G. Steiner, Clifford Neuman, and Jeffrey I. Schiller. “Kerberos: An Authen­
tication Service for Open Network Systems”. In: in Usenix Conference Proceedings.
1988, pp. 191–202.
[11]
B.C. Neuman and T. Ts’o. “Kerberos: an authentication service for computer net­
works”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 32.9 (1994), pp. 33–38. DOI: 10.1109/
35.312841.
[12]
Sebastian Mödersheim and Jorge Cuéllar. “Three Branches of Accountability”. In:
Protocols, Strands, and Logic ­ Essays Dedicated to Joshua Guttman on the Oc­
casion of his 66.66th Birthday. Ed. by Daniel Dougherty et al. Vol. 13066. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2021, pp. 293–311. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-
91631-2\_16. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-91631-2%5C_16.
[13]
N. Asokan and Michael Waidner. “Asynchronous Protocols for Optimistic Fair Ex­
change”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research
in Security and Privacy (Jan. 1998).
[14]
Radha Jagadeesan et al. “Towards a Theory of Accountability and Audit”. In: Com­
puter Security – ESORICS 2009. Ed. by Michael Backes and Peng Ning. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 152–167. ISBN: 978­3­642­04444­1.
[15]
Ralf Küsters, Tomasz Truderung, and Andreas Vogt. “Accountability: Definition and
relationship to verifiability”. In: Oct. 2010, pp. 526–535. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 1866307 .
1866366.
[16]
D. Dolev and A. Yao. “On the security of public key protocols”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory 29.2 (1983), pp. 198–208. DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1983.1056650.
Formalizing and proving accountability
29
==PAGE:38==
[17]
James Heather and David Lundin. “The Append­Only Web Bulletin Board”. In: For­
mal Aspects in Security and Trust. 2008.
30
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:39==
A
Python Code
https://github.com/ajj10/Thesis
A.1
Classes
1
class Abort:
2
def __init__(self, me1):
3
self.me1 = me1
4
self.type = "abort"
5
6
def pretty(self):
7
return "f_abort({})".format(self.me1.pretty())
1
class Aborted:
2
def __init__(self, ma1):
3
self.ma1 = ma1
4
self.type = "aborted"
5
6
def pretty(self):
7
return "f_aborted({})".format(self.ma1.pretty())
1
class Contract:
2
def __init__(self, id, originator , receiver , contractText):
3
self.id = id
4
self.originator = originator
5
self.receiver = receiver
6
self.contractText = contractText
7
self.aborted = False
8
self.replacement = False
9
self.type = "contract"
10
11
def abort(self):
12
self.aborted = True
13
14
def replace(self):
15
self.replacement = True
16
17
def pretty(self):
18
return self.contractText
1
from replacement import Replacement
2
from req import Req
3
from aborted import Aborted
4
from standardcontract import Standardcontract
5
class Evidence:
6
def __init__(self, id, evidence):
7
self.nonce = None
8
self.stdcontract = None
9
self.abortToken = None
10
self.replacementContract = None
11
self.id = id
Formalizing and proving accountability
31
==PAGE:40==
12
self.req = None
13
self.type = "evidence"
14
for n in evidence:
15
if(type(n) is Req):
16
self.req = n
17
break
18
try:
19
print(type(n.message))
20
if(type(n) is Standardcontract):
21
self.stdcontract = n
22
self.nonce = n.o_O
23
elif(type(n.message) is Aborted):
24
self.abortToken = n
25
elif(type(n.message) is Replacement):
26
self.replacementContract = n
27
else:
28
print("invalid evidence")
29
exit()
30
except:
31
print("invalid evidence")
32
exit()
33
34
if self.abortToken is None and self.req is None:
35
print("invalid evidence")
36
exit()
37
elif self.replacementContract is None and self.stdcontract is None and
self.req is None:
38
print("invalid evidence")
39
exit()
40
elif ((self.replacementContract is not None) and (self.stdcontract is
not None)):
41
print("invalid evidence")
42
exit()
43
44
def display(self):
45
if self.req is not None:
46
print("Evidence:\n request: {}".format(self.req.pretty()))
47
return
48
if self.stdcontract is not None:
49
print("Evidence:\n Abort token: {} \n Contract: {}".format(self.
abortToken.pretty(),self.stdcontract.pretty()))
50
else:
51
print("Evidence:\n Abort token: {} \n Contract: {}".format(self.
abortToken.pretty(),self.replacementContract.pretty()))
52
print("-------------------------------------------------------------")
1
class FexchangeI:
2
def __init__(self, originator , recevier , server , text, hash):
3
self.originator = originator
4
self.recevier = recevier
5
self.server = server
6
self.text = text
7
self.hash = hash
8
self.type = "exchangeI"
9
10
def pretty(self):
11
return "f_exchangeI({},{},{},{},{})".format(self.originator.pretty(),self.
recevier.pretty(),self.server.pretty(),self.text.pretty(),self.hash)
32
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:41==
1
class FexchangeR:
2
def __init__(self, me1, hash):
3
self.me1 = me1
4
self.hash = hash
5
self.type = "exchangeR"
6
7
def pretty(self):
8
return "f_exchangeR({},{})".format(self.me1.pretty(),self.hash)
1
class MyMessage:
2
def __init__(self, originator , recevier , message):
3
self.originator = originator
4
self.recevier = recevier
5
self.message = message
6
self.type = "message"
7
8
def pretty(self):
9
return self.message.pretty()
1
from myLaws import *
2
3
class MyState:
4
def __init__(self, players , LRS):
5
self.msgTrace = [] # message trace of the state
6
self.msgNetwork = [] # all messages on the network
7
self.bulletinBoard = [] # contracts known to server , bulletin board (
replaced or aborted)
8
self.knownStandardContracts = [] # standard contracts unknown to
server T
9
# contracts players have signed (Players should remeber contract they
have signed)
10
self.playerContracts = {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3':
[], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder': []}
11
self.players = players # all players in the system
12
# initial knowledge of all players
13
self.playersKnowledge = {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3':
[], 'X': [], 'Y': [], 'intruder': []}
14
# Record of players and the crimes they have commited if any
15
self.crimes = {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X':
[], 'Y': [], 'intruder': []}
16
self.LRS = LRS # List of legally recognized servers
17
self.type = "state"
18
19
# checking if a player has leaked his private key
20
law2(self)
21
22
# Adding players knowledge to the states players knowledge
23
for player in self.players:
24
self.playersKnowledge[player.name] = self.playersKnowledge[player.
name] + player.knowledge
25
26
# adding a message to the state, it adds the message to both players
knowledge , to the network ,
27
# adds it to the states message trace and checks if any laws are broken.
28
def addMsg(self, msg):
29
players = []
30
players.append(msg.originator)
Formalizing and proving accountability
33
==PAGE:42==
31
players.append(msg.recevier)
32
message = msg.message
33
self.msgTrace.append(msg)
34
# A standard contract is not a message but rather a set of messages
players can comppute
35
# after a round of the CS protocol , so no check of the messages is
needed here
36
# this just replicates a succsessfull run of the protocol
37
if(message.type=="standard_contract"):
38
# add the contract to the known standard contracts withing the
state
39
self.knownStandardContracts.append(message.me1.message.text)
40
tmp = []
41
# checks if message is valid
42
try:
43
tmp.append(message.o_O)
44
tmp.append(message.o_R)
45
tmp.append(msg)
46
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
47
except:
48
print("An exception occurred")
49
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
50
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
51
elif(message.message.type=="exchangeI"):
52
tmp = []
53
# checks if message is valid
54
try:
55
tmp.append(msg)
56
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
57
except:
58
addToCrimes(message.signer.name, self.crimes , "signing an
invalid message")
59
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
60
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
61
law6(self) # checking me_1
62
# add the contract to the players known contracts (illegal to sign
the same contract again)
63
self.playerContracts[message.signer.name].append(message.message.
text)
64
elif(message.message.type=="exchangeR"):
65
tmp = []
66
# checks if message is valid
67
try:
68
tmp.append(msg)
69
msg.message.message.me1.message.originator
70
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
71
except:
72
addToCrimes(message.signer.name, self.crimes , "Law 7.1:
signing an invalid message")
73
return
74
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
75
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
76
law7(self) # checking me_2
77
# add the contract to the players known contracts (illegal to sign
the same contract again)
78
self.playerContracts[message.signer.name].append(message.message.
me1.message.text)
79
elif(message.message.type=="abort"):
80
tmp = []
34
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:43==
81
# checks if message is valid
82
try:
83
tmp.append(msg)
84
msg.message.message.me1.message.originator
85
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
86
except:
87
addToCrimes(message.signer.name, self.crimes , "Law 8.1:
Signing an invalid message")
88
return
89
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
90
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
91
law8(self) # checking ma_1
92
elif(message.message.type=="aborted"):
93
tmp = []
94
# checks if message is valid
95
try:
96
tmp.append(msg)
97
message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text.aborted
98
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
99
except:
100
addToCrimes(message.signer.name, self.crimes , "Law 9.1:
Signing an invalid message")
101
return
102
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
103
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
104
# marking the contract as aborted , illegal to replace it after
that
105
message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text.aborted = True
106
# add the contract to the states known contracts (all contracts on
bulltin board, aborted or replaced)
107
self.bulletinBoard.append(message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.
text)
108
law9(self) # checking ma_2
109
elif(message.message.type=="replacement"):
110
tmp = []
111
# checks if message is valid
112
try:
113
tmp.append(msg)
114
message.message.me1.message.text.replacement
115
msg.message.message.me2.message
116
# Otherwise signing player becomes a culprit in the state
117
except:
118
addToCrimes(message.signer.name, self.crimes , "Law 10.1/10.2:
Signing an invalid message")
119
return
120
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of
message on the network
121
self.addPlayersKnowledge(tmp, players)
122
# marking the contract as replaced , illegal to abort it after that
123
message.message.me1.message.text.replacement = True
124
# add the contract to the states known contracts (all contracts on
bulltin board, aborted or replaced)
125
self.bulletinBoard.append(message.message.me1.message.text)
126
law10(self) # checking replacement contract
127
128
# add the new message to players knowledge and to the set of message on
the network
129
# (in theory , the sending player would already have this in his knowledge)
130
def addPlayersKnowledge(self, tmp, players):
131
for n in tmp:
Formalizing and proving accountability
35
==PAGE:44==
132
for player in players:
133
if n not in self.playersKnowledge[player.name]:
134
self.playersKnowledge[player.name].append(n)
135
player.addToKnowledge(n)
136
self.msgNetwork.append(n)
1
class Player:
2
def __init__(self, id, name, isServer):
3
self.id = id
4
self.name = name
5
self.isServer = isServer
6
self.key = "inv(pk({}))".format(name)
7
self.knowledge = [self.key]
8
9
def addToKnowledge(self,msg):
10
self.knowledge.append(msg)
11
12
def pretty(self):
13
return self.name
1
class Replacement:
2
def __init__(self, me1, me2):
3
self.me1 = me1
4
self.me2 = me2
5
self.type = "replacement"
6
7
def pretty(self):
8
return "f_replacement({},{})".format(self.me1.pretty(),self.me2.pretty())
1
from sign import Sign
2
class Req:
3
def __init__(self, request , answer):
4
self.request = request
5
self.answer = answer
6
self.type = "req"
7
8
def pretty(self):
9
if type(self.request) is not Sign:
10
return "req(({},{}) ,{})".format(self.request[0].pretty(),self.request
[1].pretty(), self.answer)
11
else:
12
return "req({},{})".format(self.request.pretty(), self.answer)
1
class Sign:
2
def __init__(self, signer, message):
3
self.signer = signer
4
self.message = message
5
self.type = "sign"
6
7
def pretty(self):
8
try:
9
return "sign(inv(pk({})),{})".format(self.signer.pretty(), self.message.
pretty())
36
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:45==
10
except:
11
return "invalid message"
1
class Standardcontract:
2
def __init__(self, me1, o_O, me2, o_R):
3
self.me1 = me1
4
self.me2 = me2
5
self.o_O = o_O
6
self.o_R = o_R
7
self.type = "standard_contract"
8
9
def pretty(self):
10
return "({}, {}, {}, {})".format(self.me1.pretty(), self.o_O, self.me2.
pretty(), self.o_R)
A.2
Laws as functions
1
from fexchangeI import FexchangeI
2
from fexchangeR import FexchangeR
3
from abort import Abort
4
from sign import Sign
5
from contract import Contract
6
7
# Hash function
8
def h(nonce):
9
return "h"+nonce[-1]
10
11
def addToCrimes(culprit ,crimes ,crime):
12
if crime not in crimes[culprit]:
13
crimes[culprit].append(crime)
14
15
# Leaked private key
16
def law2(state):
17
# for all players in the system
18
for player in state.players:
19
# for messages in respected players knowledge
20
for k in state.playersKnowledge:
21
# if the private key of a player is in another players knowledge
22
if player.key in state.playersKnowledge[k] and player.name != k:
23
addToCrimes(player.name, state.state.crimes , "Law #2: known
private key")
24
25
# CS protocol initiation request (me_1)
26
def law6(state):
27
# Take newest message of the trace
28
msg=state.msgTrace[-1]
29
# check if law 6.1 holds (O is correct originator)
30
if(msg.message.signer.id != msg.message.message.originator.id):
31
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.1:
incorrect originator")
32
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , msg.message.pretty
())
33
# check if law 6.2 holds (R in Players)
34
if(msg.message.message.recevier not in state.players):
35
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.2:
incorrect variable type for recipient")
36
# check if law 6.3 holds (R is correct recevier)
37
if(msg.recevier != msg.message.message.recevier):
Formalizing and proving accountability
37
==PAGE:46==
38
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.3:
incorrect recipient")
39
# check if law 6.4 holds (T in LRS)
40
if(msg.message.message.server not in state.LRS):
41
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.4: T not in
LRS")
42
# check if law 6.5 holds (text is a contract)
43
if(type(msg.message.message.text)!=Contract):
44
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.5: text is
not a contract")
45
# check if law 6.5 holds (text is unique)
46
if(msg.message.message.text in state.bulletinBoard):
47
if msg.message.message.text.aborted:
48
if msg.originator.name == msg.message.signer.name:
49
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law
#7.5: contract already aborted")
50
if(msg.message.message.text in state.playerContracts[msg.originator.name])
:
51
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.5: player
has singned contract before")
52
# check if law 6.6 holds (nonce is secret)
53
for p in state.players:
54
if p != msg.message.signer.name:
55
for messages in state.playersKnowledge[p.name]:
56
if(type(messages)==str and len(messages)>1):
57
if(msg.message.message.hash != messages and msg.message.
message.hash == h(messages)):
58
if msg.originator.name == msg.message.signer.name:
59
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes ,
"Law #7.6: known hash")
60
# check if law 6.7 holds (hash is a hash)
61
if(type(msg.message.message.hash)!=str):
62
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.7: h_O is
not a hash")
63
64
# CS protocol initiation response (me_2)
65
def law7(state):
66
# Take newest message of the trace
67
msg=state.msgTrace[-1]
68
# check if law 7.1 holds (Signed me_1)
69
if type(msg.message.message.me1) is not Sign:
70
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.1: me_1 is
not signed")
71
# check if law 7.1 holds (me_1 is message of format f_exchangeI)
72
if type(msg.message.message.me1.message) is not FexchangeI:
73
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.1: me_1 is
not of format f_exhangeI")
74
# check if law 7.2 holds (me_1 is signed by correct player(O))
75
if(msg.message.message.me1.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.
originator):
76
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.2:
incorrect originator")
77
# check if law 7.3 holds (R is the correct recipient)
78
if(msg.message.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.recevier):
79
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.3:
incorrect recipient")
80
# check if law 7.4 holds (T in LRS)
81
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.server not in state.LRS):
82
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.4: T not in
LRS")
83
# check if law 7.5 holds (text is a contract)
84
if(type(msg.message.message.me1.message.text)!=Contract):
38
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:47==
85
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.5: text is
not a contract")
86
# check if law 7.5 holds (text is a contract)
87
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.text in state.playerContracts[msg.
originator.name]):
88
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #7.5: player
has singned contract before")
89
# check if law 7.6 holds (nonce is secret when signing f_exchangeR message
)
90
crimeFound = []
91
for nonces in state.playersKnowledge[msg.message.signer.name]:
92
if(type(nonces)==str and len(nonces)>1 and h(nonces)==msg.message.
message.me1.message.hash):
93
crimeFound =[]
94
break
95
else:
96
for p in state.players:
97
if p != msg.originator:
98
for messages in state.playersKnowledge[p.name]:
99
if(type(messages)==str and len(messages)>1):
100
if msg.message.message.hash == h(messages):
101
crimeFound.append(True)
102
if len(crimeFound)>0:
103
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.6: known
hash")
104
# check if law 7.7 holds (hash is a hash)
105
if(type(msg.message.message.hash)!=str):
106
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #8.7: h_R is
not a hash")
107
108
# Abort request (ma_1)
109
def law8(state):
110
# Take newest message of the trace
111
msg=state.msgTrace[-1]
112
# check if law 8.1 holds (Signed me_1)
113
if type(msg.message.message.me1) is not Sign:
114
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.1: me_1 is
not signed")
115
# check if law 8.1 holds (me_1 is message of format f_exchangeI)
116
if type(msg.message.message.me1.message) is not FexchangeI:
117
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.1: me_1 is
not of format f_exhangeI")
118
# check if law 8.2 holds (signer of ma_1 is same as signer of me_! and
same as originator(O))
119
if(msg.message.message.me1.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.
originator and msg.message.signer!=msg.message.message.me1.signer):
120
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.2:
incorrect originator/signer of me_1")
121
# check if law 8.3 holds (T in LRS)
122
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.server not in state.LRS):
123
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.3: T not in
LRS")
124
# check if law 8.4 holds (text is a contract and O not signed it before
this protocol run)
125
if(type(msg.message.message.me1.message.text)!=Contract):
126
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.4: text is
not a contract")
127
# check if law 8.5 holds (contract is unique)
128
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.text in state.knownStandardContracts):
129
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #9.5: same
contract with same participants exists")
130
Formalizing and proving accountability
39
==PAGE:48==
131
# Abort token (ma_2)
132
def law9(state):
133
# Take newest message of the trace
134
msg=state.msgTrace[-1]
135
# check if law 9.1 holds (Signed ma_1)
136
if type(msg.message.message.ma1) is not Sign:
137
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.1: ma_1 is
not signed")
138
# check if law 9.1 holds (me_1 is message of format f_abort)
139
if type(msg.message.message.ma1.message) is not Abort:
140
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.1: me_1 is
not of format f_abort")
141
# check if law 9.2 holds (signiture on ma_1 and me_1 match O from
f_exchangeI)
142
if(msg.message.message.ma1.signer != msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.
signer and msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.signer!=msg.message.
message.ma1.message.me1.message.originator):
143
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.2:
incorrect originator/signer")
144
# check if law 9.3 holds (T in LRS)
145
if(msg.message.signer not in state.LRS):
146
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.3: T not
in LRS")
147
# check if law 9.4 holds (T in f_exchangeI request)
148
if(msg.message.signer != msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.
server):
149
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.4:
incorrect server")
150
# check if law 9.5 holds (text is a contract)
151
if(type(msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text)!=Contract):
152
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.5: text is
not a contract")
153
# check if law 9.5 holds (text is unique and no replacement contract for
it exists)
154
if(msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text in state.bulletinBoard
):
155
if(msg.message.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text.replacement):
156
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #10.5:
replacement contract exists")
157
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , msg.message.
pretty())
158
159
# Replacement Contract
160
def law10(state):
161
# Take newest message of the trace
162
msg=state.msgTrace[-1]
163
# check if law 10.1/10.2 holds (Signed me_1 and me2)
164
if(type(msg.message.message.me1) != Sign or type(msg.message.message.me2)
!= Sign):
165
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.1/11.2:
unsigned me_1/me_2")
166
# check if law 10.1/10.2 holds (me_1 is of format f_exchangeI and me2 is
of format f_exchangeR)
167
if(type(msg.message.message.me1.message) != FexchangeI or type(msg.message
.message.me2.message) != FexchangeR):
168
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.1/11.2:
me_1/me_2 is of wrong format")
169
# check if law 10.3 holds (T in LRS)
170
if(msg.message.signer not in state.LRS):
171
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.3: T not
in LRS")
172
# check if law 10.4 holds (T in f_exchangeI request)
40
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:49==
173
if(msg.message.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.server):
174
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.4:
incorrect server")
175
# check if law 10.5 holds (Signer of me_1 is O from f_exchangeI)
176
if(msg.message.message.me1.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.
originator):
177
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.5:
incorrect originator")
178
# check if law 10.6 holds (Signer of me_2 is R from f_exchangeI)
179
if(msg.message.message.me2.signer != msg.message.message.me1.message.
recevier):
180
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.6:
incorrect receiver")
181
# check if law 10.7 holds (text is a contract)
182
if(type(msg.message.message.me1.message.text)!=Contract):
183
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.7: text is
not a contract")
184
# check if law 10.7 holds (text is unique and no abort token for it exists
)
185
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.text in state.bulletinBoard):
186
if(msg.message.message.me1.message.text.aborted):
187
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Law #11.7:
abort token exists")
188
addToCrimes(msg.message.signer.name, state.crimes , "Evid:{}".
format(msg.message.pretty()))
189
190
def crimes(curr_state):
191
print(curr_state.crimes)
A.3
Functions for judge
1
from aborted import Aborted
2
from replacement import Replacement
3
from fexchangeI import FexchangeI
4
from fexchangeR import FexchangeR
5
from abort import Abort
6
from sign import Sign
7
from contract import Contract
8
9
# Hash function
10
def h(nonce):
11
return "h"+nonce[-1]
12
13
# function to check if a signiture on a message of f_exchangeI format is legal
14
def fexchangeIcheck(evidence , LRS, players):
15
#Start with an empty record where no one has broken any laws
16
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
17
# check if law 6.1 holds (Signiture on me_1 matches O)
18
if(evidence.signer != evidence.message.originator):
19
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #7.1: incorrect originator")
20
# check if law 6.2 holds (R in Players)
21
if((evidence.message.recevier not in players)):
22
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #7.2: incorrect variable type
for recipient")
23
# check if law 6.4 holds (T in LRS)
24
if(evidence.message.server not in LRS):
25
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #7.4: T not in LRS")
26
# check if law 6.5 holds (text is a contract)
27
if(type(evidence.message.text) is not Contract):
Formalizing and proving accountability
41
==PAGE:50==
28
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #7.5: text is not a contract"
)
29
# check if law 6.7 holds (ho is a hash)
30
if(type(evidence.message.hash) is not str):
31
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #7.7: ho is not a hash")
32
return crimes
33
34
# function to check if a signiture on a message of f_exchangeR format is legal
35
def fexchangeRcheck(evidence , LRS, players):
36
#Start with an empty record where no one has broken any laws
37
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
38
# check if law 7.1 holds (Signed me_1)
39
if(type(evidence.message.me1) is not Sign):
40
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.1: me_1 is not signed")
41
# check if law 7.1 holds (me_1 is message of format f_exchangeI)
42
try:
43
if type(evidence.message.me1.message) is not FexchangeI:
44
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.1: me_1 is not of
format f_exchangeI")
45
return crimes
46
except:
47
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.1: me_1 is not of format
f_exchangeI")
48
return crimes
49
crimes = fexchangeIcheck(evidence.message.me1, LRS, players)
50
# check if law 7.2 holds (signiture me_1 matches O from f_exchangeI)
51
if(evidence.message.me1.signer != evidence.message.me1.message.originator)
:
52
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.2: incorrect originator/
signer")
53
# check if law 7.3 holds (signer of me_2 matches R from me_1)
54
if(evidence.signer != evidence.message.me1.message.recevier):
55
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.3: incorrect recipient")
56
# check if law 7.4 holds (T in LRS)
57
if(evidence.message.me1.message.server not in LRS):
58
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.4: T not in LRS")
59
# check if law 7.5 holds (text is a contract)
60
if(type(evidence.message.me1.message.text) is not Contract):
61
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.5: text is not a contract"
)
62
# check if law 7.7 holds (hash is a hash)
63
if(type(evidence.message.me1.message.hash) is not str):
64
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #8.7: hash is not a hash")
65
return crimes
66
67
68
# function to check if a signiture on a message of f_abort format is legal
69
def abortcheck(evidence , nonces, knownContractsJudge , LRS, players):
70
#Start with an empty record where no one has broken any laws
71
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
72
# check if law 8.1 holds (Signed me_1)
73
if(type(evidence.message.me1) is not Sign):
74
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.1: me_1 is not signed")
75
# check if law 8.1 holds (me_1 is message of format f_exchangeI)
76
try:
77
if type(evidence.message.me1.message) is not FexchangeI:
78
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.1: me_1 is not of
format f_exchangeI")
79
return crimes
80
except:
42
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:51==
81
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.1: me_1 is not of format
f_exchangeI")
82
return crimes
83
crimes = fexchangeIcheck(evidence.message.me1, LRS, players)
84
# check if law 8.2 holds (signiture on ma_1 and me_1 match O from
f_exchangeI)
85
if(evidence.message.me1.signer != evidence.message.me1.message.originator
or evidence.signer != evidence.message.me1.signer):
86
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.2: incorrect originator/
signer")
87
# check if law 8.3 holds (T in LRS)
88
if(evidence.message.me1.message.server not in LRS):
89
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.3: T not in LRS")
90
# check if law 8.4 holds (text is a contract)
91
if(type(evidence.message.me1.message.text)!=Contract):
92
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.4: text is not a contract"
)
93
# check if law 8.4 holds (text is unique)
94
if(evidence.message.me1.message.text in knownContractsJudge):
95
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.4: standard contract
exists")
96
# check if law 8.5 holds (nonce is secret)
97
for nonce in nonces:
98
if(evidence.message.me1.message.hash == str(h(nonce))):
99
crimes[evidence.signer.name].append("Law #9.5: known nonce")
100
return crimes
101
102
# function to check if a signiture on a message of f_aborted format is legal
103
def abortedcheck(evidence , nonces , knownContractsJudge , knownContractsT , LRS,
players):
104
#Start with an empty record where no one has broken any laws
105
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
106
# check if law 9.1 holds (Signed ma_1)
107
if type(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1) is not Sign:
108
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.1: ma_1 is not
signed")
109
# check if law 9.1 holds (ma_1 is message of format f_abort)
110
try:
111
if type(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message) is not Abort:
112
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.1: ma_1 is
not of format f_abort")
113
return crimes
114
except:
115
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.1: ma_1 is not
of format f_abort")
116
return crimes
117
crimes = abortcheck(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1, nonces ,
knownContractsJudge , LRS, players)
118
# check if law 9.2 holds (signiture on ma_1 and me_1 match O from
f_exchangeI)
119
if(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.signer != evidence.abortToken.message.
ma1.message.me1.signer or evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.
signer!=evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.message.originator
):
120
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.2: incorrect
originator/signer")
121
# check if law 9.3 holds (T in LRS)
122
if(evidence.abortToken.signer not in LRS):
123
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.3: T not in
LRS")
124
# check if law 9.4 holds (T in f_exchangeI request)
Formalizing and proving accountability
43
==PAGE:52==
125
if(evidence.abortToken.signer != evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.
me1.message.server):
126
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.4: incorrect
server")
127
# check if law 9.5 holds (text is a contract)
128
if(type(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text)!=
Contract):
129
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.5: text is not
a contract")
130
# check if law 9.5 holds (text is unique and no replacement contract for
it exists)
131
if(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text in
knownContractsT):
132
if(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text.
replacement):
133
crimes[evidence.abortToken.signer.name].append("Law #10.5:
replacement contract exists")
134
else:
135
knownContractsT.append(evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.
message.text)
136
evidence.abortToken.message.ma1.message.me1.message.text.aborted =
True
137
return crimes
138
139
140
# function to check if a signiture on a message of f_replacement format is
legal
141
def replacementcheck(evidence , knownContractsT , LRS, players):
142
#Start with an empty record where no one has broken any laws
143
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
144
# check if law 10.1 holds (Signed me_1)
145
if type(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1) is not Sign:
146
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.1:
me_1 is not signed")
147
# check if law 10.2 holds (Signed me_2)
148
if type(evidence.replacementContract.message.me2) is not Sign:
149
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.2:
me_2 is not signed")
150
# check if law 10.1/10.2 holds (me_1/me_2 is of correct fomrat)
151
try:
152
if type(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.message) is not
FexchangeI:
153
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law
#11.1: me_1 is not of format f_exchangeI")
154
return crimes
155
if type(evidence.replacementContract.message.me2.message) is not
FexchangeR:
156
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law
#11.2: me_2 is not of format f_exchangeR")
157
return crimes
158
except:
159
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law
#11.1/10.2: me_1/me_2 is of wrong format")
160
return crimes
161
crimes = fexchangeRcheck(evidence.replacementContract.message.me2, LRS,
players)
162
# check if law 10.3 holds (T in LRS)
163
if(evidence.replacementContract.signer not in LRS):
164
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.3: T
not in LRS")
165
# check if law 10.4 holds (signer matches T from me_1)
44
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:53==
166
if(evidence.replacementContract.signer != evidence.replacementContract.
message.me1.message.server):
167
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.4:
incorrect server")
168
# check if law 10.5 holds (me_1 is signed by O from f_exchangeI)
169
if(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.signer != evidence.
replacementContract.message.me1.message.originator):
170
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.5:
incorrect originator")
171
# check if law 10.6 holds (me_2 is signed by R from fexchangeI)
172
if(evidence.replacementContract.message.me2.signer != evidence.
replacementContract.message.me1.message.recevier):
173
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.6:
incorrect recipient")
174
# check if law 10.7 holds (text is a contract)
175
if(type(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.message.text) is not
Contract):
176
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law #11.7:
text not a contract")
177
# check if law 10.7 holds (text is unique)
178
if(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.message.text in
knownContractsT):
179
if(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.message.text.aborted):
180
crimes[evidence.replacementContract.signer.name].append("Law
#11.7: contract already aborted")
181
else:
182
knownContractsT.append(evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.
message.text)
183
evidence.replacementContract.message.me1.message.text.replacement =
True
184
return crimes
185
186
# function that takes in evidence and checks what kind of evidence it is and
if any laws have been broken
187
def checkLawBreak(evidence , knownContractsJudge , knownContractsT , LRS, players
):
188
nonces = []
189
crimes= {'O': [], 'R': [], 'T1': [], 'T2': [], 'T3': [], 'X': [], 'Y': [],
'intruder': []}
190
if(evidence.req != None):
191
server = []
192
print("checking request to server:")
193
if type(evidence.req.request) is Sign:
194
print("checking abort request:")
195
server.append(evidence.req.request.message.me1.message.server)
196
crimes = abortcheck(evidence.req.request , [], knownContractsJudge ,
LRS, players)
197
print(crimes)
198
else:
199
server.append(evidence.req.request[0].message.server)
200
print("checking me_1 of resolve request:")
201
crimes = fexchangeIcheck(evidence.req.request[0], LRS, players)
202
print(crimes)
203
print("checking me_2 of resolve request:")
204
crimes = fexchangeRcheck(evidence.req.request[1], LRS, players)
205
print(crimes)
206
if evidence.req.answer is not None:
207
print("checking answer from T:")
208
if type(evidence.req.answer) is not Sign:
209
crimes[server[0].name].append("Law #11: Illegal answer from
server")
210
print(crimes)
Formalizing and proving accountability
45
==PAGE:54==
211
else:
212
if type(evidence.req.answer.message) is Aborted:
213
print("checking abort token:")
214
crimes = abortedcheck(evidence , nonces ,
knownContractsJudge , knownContractsT , LRS, players)
215
print(crimes)
216
print("-------------------------------------")
217
elif type(evidence.req.answer.message) is Replacement:
218
print("checking replacement contract:")
219
crimes = replacementcheck(evidence , knownContractsT , LRS,
players)
220
print(crimes)
221
print("-------------------------------------")
222
else:
223
crimes[evidence.req.answer.signer.name].append("Law #11:
Illegal answer from server")
224
return
225
226
if(evidence.stdcontract != None):
227
nonces.append(evidence.stdcontract.o_O)
228
nonces.append(evidence.stdcontract.o_R)
229
print("checking me_1 message of standard contract:")
230
crimes = fexchangeIcheck(evidence.stdcontract.me1,LRS,players)
231
print(crimes)
232
print("checking me_2 message of standard contract:")
233
fexchangeRcheck(evidence.stdcontract.me2,LRS, players)
234
print(crimes)
235
knownContractsJudge.append(evidence.stdcontract.me1.message.text)
236
print("-------------------------------------")
237
else:
238
print("checking replacement contract:")
239
crimes = replacementcheck(evidence , knownContractsT , LRS, players)
240
print(crimes)
241
print("-------------------------------------")
242
print("checking abort token:")
243
crimes = abortedcheck(evidence , nonces, knownContractsJudge ,
knownContractsT , LRS, players)
244
print(crimes)
245
print("-------------------------------------")
A.4
Files for testing
A.4.1
Testing crimes function
1
from fexchangeI import FexchangeI
2
from fexchangeR import FexchangeR
3
from abort import Abort
4
from aborted import Aborted
5
from replacement import Replacement
6
from sign import Sign
7
from player import Player
8
from contract import Contract
9
from standardcontract import Standardcontract
10
from myState import MyState
11
from myMessage import MyMessage
12
from myLaws import *
13
14
# Players
15
players = []
16
O = Player(1, "O", False)
46
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:55==
17
players.append(O)
18
R = Player(2, "R", False)
19
players.append(R)
20
T1 = Player(3, "T1", True)
21
players.append(T1)
22
T2 = Player(4, "T2", False)
23
players.append(T2)
24
T3 = Player(5, "T3", True)
25
players.append(T3)
26
X = Player(6, "X", False)
27
players.append(X)
28
Y = Player(7, "Y", False)
29
players.append(Y)
30
C = Player(8, "C", False)
31
intruder = Player(9, "intruder", False)
32
players.append(intruder)
33
34
# Legally Recognized Servers
35
LRS = []
36
for n in players:
37
if n.isServer:
38
LRS.append(n)
39
40
# Contracts
41
text1 = Contract(1, O, R, "text1")
42
text2 = Contract(2, O, R, "text2")
43
text3 = Contract(3, O, R, "text3")
44
45
# Contract "text2" has been issued as a replacement contract
46
text2.replacement = True
47
# Contract "text3" has been issued as an abort token
48
text3.aborted = True
49
50
# Nonces
51
o_O = "oO"
52
o_R = "oR"
53
54
# Hashes
55
h_O = h(o_O)
56
h_R = h(o_R)
57
58
#Law 6 - Possible law breaks
59
me1_a = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O)) # legal message
60
me1_b = Sign(X, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.1 (X
!= O)
61
me1_c = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, C, T1, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.2 (C
not in Player)
62
me1_d = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T2, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.3 (
T2 not in server)
63
me1_e = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, O, h_O))
# illegal , breaks law 6.4 (
text is not a valid contract)
64
me1_f = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, X)) # illegal , breaks law 6.6 (h_O
not a hash)
65
66
#Law 7 - Possible law breaks
67
me2_a = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R)) # legal in all ways
68
me2_b = Sign(R, FexchangeR(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O), h_R)) # illegal ,
breaks law 7.1 (unsigned me1)
69
me2_c = Sign(R, FexchangeR(Sign(O, "tmp"), h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.1 (
invalid me1)
70
me2_d = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_b, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.2 (invalid
originator)
Formalizing and proving accountability
47
==PAGE:56==
71
me2_e = Sign(X, FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.3 (invalid
reciever)
72
me2_f = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_d, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.4 (server not
in LRS)
73
me2_g = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_e, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.5 (text not a
contract)
74
me2_h = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_a, X)) # illegal , breaks law 7.7 (h_O not a
hash)
75
76
#Law 8 - Possible law breaks
77
ma1_a = Sign(O, Abort(me1_a)) # legal in all ways
78
ma1_b = Sign(O, Abort(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O))) # illegal , breaks law
8.1 (unsigned me1)
79
ma1_c = Sign(O, Abort(Sign(O, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 8.1 (invalid me1)
80
ma1_d = Sign(O, Abort(me1_b)) # illegal , breaks law 8.2 (invalid originator)
81
ma1_e = Sign(R, Abort(me1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 8.2 (invalid originator)
82
ma1_f = Sign(O, Abort(me1_d)) # illegal , breaks law 8.3 (server not in LRS)
83
ma1_g = Sign(O, Abort(me1_e)) # illegal , breaks law 8.4 (text not a contract)
84
85
#Law 9 - Possible law breaks
86
ma2_a = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_a)) # legal in all ways
87
ma2_b = Sign(T1, Aborted(Abort(me1_a))) # illegal , breaks law 9.1 (unsigned
ma1)
88
ma2_c = Sign(T1, Aborted(Sign(O, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 9.1 (invalid
ma1)
89
ma2_d = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_d)) # illegal , breaks law 9.2 (invalid originator
)
90
ma2_e = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_e)) # illegal , breaks law 9.2 (invalid originator
)
91
ma2_f = Sign(T2, Aborted(ma1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 9.3 (invalid server)
92
ma2_g = Sign(T3, Aborted(ma1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 9.4 (incorrect server)
93
ma2_h = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_g)) # illegal , breaks law 9.5 (text not a
contract)
94
ma2_i = Sign(T1, Aborted(Sign(O, Abort(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text2, o_O
)))))) # illegal , breaks law 9.5 (replacement contract exists)
95
96
#Law 10 - Possible law breaks
97
rep_a = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # legal in all ways
98
rep_b = Sign(T1, Replacement(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O),me2_a)) #
illegal , breaks law 10.1 (unsigned me1)
99
rep_c = Sign(T1, Replacement(Sign(O, "tmp"),me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.1
(invalid me1)
100
rep_d = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R))) # illegal , breaks
law 10.2 (unsigned me2)
101
rep_e = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,Sign(R, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 10.2
(invalid me2)
102
rep_f = Sign(T2, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.3 (T2 not
in LRS)
103
rep_g = Sign(T3, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.4 (
incorrcect server)
104
rep_h = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_b,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.5 (X != O)
105
rep_i = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,me2_e)) # illegal , breaks law 10.6 (X != R)
106
rep_j = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_e,me2_g)) # illegal , breaks law 10.7 (text is
not a contract)
107
rep_k = Sign(T1, Replacement(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text3, o_O)),Sign(R,
FexchangeR(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text3, h_O)), h_R)))) # illegal ,
breaks law 10.7 (abort token exists on this contract)
108
109
#Valid standar contract
110
validContract = Standardcontract(me1_b, o_O, me2_a, o_R)
111
112
#R.addToKnowledge(o_O)
48
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:57==
113
114
# Initilize a state
115
init_state = MyState(players , LRS)
116
117
# Messages
118
me1_1 = MyMessage(O,R,me1_a)
119
me1_2 = MyMessage(intruder ,R,me1_a)
120
me2_1 = MyMessage(R,O,me2_a)
121
me2_2 = MyMessage(intruder ,O,me2_a)
122
ma1_1 = MyMessage(O,T1,ma1_a)
123
ma2_1 = MyMessage(T1,O,ma2_a)
124
rep_1 = MyMessage(T1,O,rep_a)
125
val_1 = MyMessage(O,R,validContract)
126
127
# Add messages to state
128
init_state.addMsg(me1_1)
129
init_state.addMsg(me2_1)
130
init_state.addMsg(rep_1)
131
#init_state.addMsg(val_1)
132
init_state.addMsg(ma1_1)
133
init_state.addMsg(ma2_1)
134
#init_state.addMsg(me1_1)
135
#init_state.addMsg(rep_1)
136
#init_state.addMsg(ma2_1)
137
#init_state.addMsg(me1_1)
138
#init_state.addMsg(me2_1)
139
140
# call function crimes with the given state
141
crimes(init_state)
A.4.2
Testing judge functionality
1
from fexchangeI import FexchangeI
2
from fexchangeR import FexchangeR
3
from abort import Abort
4
from aborted import Aborted
5
from replacement import Replacement
6
from sign import Sign
7
from player import Player
8
from contract import Contract
9
from standardcontract import Standardcontract
10
from evidence import Evidence
11
from req import Req
12
from myFunctions import *
13
14
# Players
15
players = []
16
O = Player(1, "O", False)
17
players.append(O)
18
R = Player(2, "R", False)
19
players.append(R)
20
T1 = Player(3, "T1", True)
21
players.append(T1)
22
T2 = Player(4, "T2", False)
23
players.append(T2)
24
T3 = Player(5, "T3", True)
25
players.append(T3)
26
X = Player(6, "X", False)
27
players.append(X)
28
Y = Player(7, "Y", False)
29
players.append(Y)
Formalizing and proving accountability
49
==PAGE:58==
30
C = Player(8, "C", False)
31
32
# Legally Recognized Servers
33
LRS = []
34
for n in players:
35
if n.isServer:
36
LRS.append(n)
37
38
#contract , unique
39
text1 = Contract(1, O, R, "text1")
40
text2 = Contract(2, O, R, "text2")
41
text3 = Contract(3, O, R, "text3")
42
43
# Known contracts , all contracts become know when servers handles them(posted
on bulletin board)
44
# or when judge gets claim with the contract
45
knownContractsJudge = []
46
knownContractsT = []
47
text2.replacement = True
48
text3.aborted = True
49
knownContractsT.append(text2)
50
knownContractsT.append(text3)
51
52
# Nonces
53
o_O = "oO"
54
o_R = "oR"
55
56
# Hashes
57
h_O = h(o_O)
58
h_R = h(o_R)
59
60
#Law 6 - Possible messages of me_1
61
me1_a = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O)) # legal message
62
me1_b = Sign(X, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.1 (X
!= O)
63
me1_c = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, C, T1, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.2 (C
not in Player)
64
me1_d = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T2, text1, h_O)) # illegal , breaks law 6.3 (
T2 not in server)
65
me1_e = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, O, h_O))
# illegal , breaks law 6.4 (
text is not a valid contract)
66
me1_f = Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, X)) # illegal , breaks law 6.6 (h_O
not a hash)
67
68
#Law 7 - Possible messages of me_2
69
me2_a = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R)) # legal in all ways
70
me2_b = Sign(R, FexchangeR(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O), h_R)) # illegal ,
breaks law 7.1 (unsigned me1)
71
me2_c = Sign(R, FexchangeR(Sign(O, "tmp"), h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.1 (
invalid me1)
72
me2_d = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_b, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.2 (invalid
originator)
73
me2_e = Sign(X, FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.3 (invalid
reciever)
74
me2_f = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_d, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.4 (server not
in LRS)
75
me2_g = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_e, h_R)) # illegal , breaks law 7.5 (text not a
contract)
76
me2_h = Sign(R, FexchangeR(me1_a, X)) # illegal , breaks law 7.7 (h_O not a
hash)
77
78
#Law 8 - Possible messages of ma_1
50
Formalizing and proving accountability
==PAGE:59==
79
ma1_a = Sign(O, Abort(me1_a)) # legal in all ways
80
ma1_b = Sign(O, Abort(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O))) # illegal , breaks law
8.1 (unsigned me1)
81
ma1_c = Sign(O, Abort(Sign(O, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 8.1 (invalid me1)
82
ma1_d = Sign(O, Abort(me1_b)) # illegal , breaks law 8.2 (invalid originator)
83
ma1_e = Sign(R, Abort(me1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 8.2 (invalid originator)
84
ma1_f = Sign(O, Abort(me1_d)) # illegal , breaks law 8.3 (server not in LRS)
85
ma1_g = Sign(O, Abort(me1_e)) # illegal , breaks law 8.4 (text not a contract)
86
87
#Law 9 - Possible messages of ma_2
88
ma2_a = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_a)) # legal in all ways
89
ma2_b = Sign(T1, Aborted(Abort(me1_a))) # illegal , breaks law 9.1 (unsigned
ma1)
90
ma2_c = Sign(T1, Aborted(Sign(O, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 9.1 (invalid
ma1)
91
ma2_d = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_d)) # illegal , breaks law 9.2 (invalid originator
)
92
ma2_e = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_e)) # illegal , breaks law 9.2 (invalid originator
)
93
ma2_f = Sign(T2, Aborted(ma1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 9.3 (invalid server)
94
ma2_g = Sign(T3, Aborted(ma1_a)) # illegal , breaks law 9.4 (incorrect server)
95
ma2_h = Sign(T1, Aborted(ma1_g)) # illegal , breaks law 9.5 (text not a
contract)
96
ma2_i = Sign(T1, Aborted(Sign(O, Abort(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text2, o_O
)))))) # illegal , breaks law 9.5 (replacement contract exists)
97
98
#Law 10 - Possible law breaks
99
rep_a = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # legal in all ways
100
rep_b = Sign(T1, Replacement(FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text1, h_O),me2_a)) #
illegal , breaks law 10.1 (unsigned me1)
101
rep_c = Sign(T1, Replacement(Sign(O, "tmp"),me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.1
(invalid me1)
102
rep_d = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,FexchangeR(me1_a, h_R))) # illegal , breaks
law 10.2 (unsigned me2)
103
rep_e = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,Sign(O, "tmp"))) # illegal , breaks law 10.2
(invalid me2)
104
rep_f = Sign(T2, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.3 (T2 not
in LRS)
105
rep_g = Sign(T3, Replacement(me1_a,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.4 (
incorrcect server)
106
rep_h = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_b,me2_a)) # illegal , breaks law 10.5 (X != O)
107
rep_i = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_a,me2_e)) # illegal , breaks law 10.6 (X != R)
108
rep_j = Sign(T1, Replacement(me1_e,me2_g)) # illegal , breaks law 10.7 (text is
not a contract)
109
rep_k = Sign(T1, Replacement(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text3, o_O)),Sign(R,
FexchangeR(Sign(O, FexchangeI(O, R, T1, text3, h_O)), h_R)))) # illegal ,
breaks law 10.7 (abort token exists on this contract)
110
111
#Valid standar contract
112
validContract = Standardcontract(me1_a, o_O, me2_a, o_R)
113
request_1 = Req([me1_a, me2_a], "sorry")
114
115
# Judge will get evidence of valid contract and abort, or a signed format
message and possible a nonce
116
evid = Evidence(1, [request_1])
117
evid.display()
118
checkLawBreak(evid, knownContractsJudge , knownContractsT , LRS, players)
Formalizing and proving accountability
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
