==PAGE:1==
Application of LSTM models for anomaly de-
tection in flow data from Næstved sewer sys-
tem
Anvendelses af LSTM-modeller til detektering af
anomalier i flow målinger fra Næstveds afløb-
ssystemer
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer
system
Anvendelses af LSTM-modeller til detektering af anomalier i flow målinger fra Næstveds
afløbssystemer
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Zhaonian Zhuang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Department of Environ-
mental and Resource Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Zhaonian Zhuang - s202364
Signature
Date
ii
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The application of online sensors in the environmental field provides a lot of convenience
for environmental monitoring. How to effectively use the data collected by these sen-
sors is a topic worth exploring. For example, the sensors measuring sewage network
flow have been working in a relatively harsh environment for a long time, and we wonder
whether the measured results are trustworthy. Through the anomaly detection model,
we can achieve the purpose of monitoring the operation status of sensors in real time.
Supervised classification models are one way to solve such problems. However, due to
the sparse and variable anomalies, traditional supervised learning methods are difficult
to achieve a good result. In this study, an LSTM-based anomaly detection model is in-
vestigated, and an LSTM-based regression model is first built for real-time prediction of
pipeline flow. We use sensor historical flow, real-time rainfall intensity, temperature, and
time characteristics as inputs to predict the flow at the next moment. The presence of
anomalies in the sensor is determined by comparing the observed values with the pre-
dicted values. We compared the model using a single sensor flow with the model fusing
information from multiple flow meters and found that fusing multiple flow meters did not
provide an improvement in effectiveness, so the single-sensor model was chosen as the
prediction model. After tuning the model configurations such as as window length, batch
size and hidden layers and the removal of initial loss, the prediction model was used for
anomaly detection, and we used the relative error between observed and predicted values
as an indicator to adjust the threshold value to identify anomalies. The results demon-
strate that the anomaly detection model performs well in three of the five catchments and
can effectively identify sensor anomalies in real time. We further tested whether the model
could be used as a soft-sensor instead of a flow meter to monitor the pipe network flow
when a physical sensor fails. We then ran the model on manually added anomaly inter-
vals, and the model achieved satisfactory results on catchments 1, 2, and 5. This study
demonstrates that the LSTM-based anomaly detection model is feasible and achieved
very promising results. The model, after being deployed, can be used as an artificial intel-
ligence online monitoring tool for wastewater network flow meters, providing early warning
when anomalies occur. Operators can decide if sensor maintenance is necessary based
on the frequency of anomaly alerts. When the sensors are faulty, the model can con-
tinue to provide flow monitoring as a soft-sensor, providing decision support for network
scheduling. This study is a first try at adapting this method for sewer flow meters, and
it is the hope of the author that the findings can be used to further the development of
machine learning techniques in this field.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Zhaonian Zhuang, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
Luca Vezzaro, [Associate Professor], [Supervisor]
Roland Löwe, [Associate Professor], [Co-supervisor]
NK-Forsyning A/S, [Data provider]
iv
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine learning for anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Urban drainage system flow prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Artificial neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Datasets and Methods
9
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Experiments and Results
25
4.1
Preliminary data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
One-step predictive model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Working as a soft sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Modelling choices and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Ways forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
A Experiments and results
51
A.1 Relative residual histogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.2 Soft sensor performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.3 F1-score under different threshold
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Urban drainage systems (UDSs) handle the wastewater and rainwater falling on the built-
up area with the aim of managing the impact on human life and the environment [1]. In
recent years, an increasing number of online sensor networks have been installed in sew-
ers, and real-time data collected by the online sensors is used to monitor and predict the
flow rate in the pipe systems, thereby providing decision support for the system control.
In this way, water pumps, basins, and other physical structures in the UDSs can be used
effectively to reduce combined sewer overflows to prevent sludge escaping from wastew-
ater treatment plants and to avoid flooding of vulnerable urban areas. However, with the
increasing dependency on sensors in all stages of UDSs, from planning to monitoring,
new technical challenges arise[2].
These challenges are the uncertainties in discharge data from installed sensors and what
to do with the missing signal and anomalies. Sensors installed in drainage systems are
working in harsh circumstances and can be easily affected by sediments in the pipes.
Therefore, it is necessary to know whether the sensor data is reliable or not and when
it is time for maintenance. So, dedicated Anomaly Detection (AD) algorithms to ensure
high quality of data are required [3]. Anomaly detection refers to the detection of unseen
abnormalities in large volumes of non-anomalous data. With anomaly detection tools,
patterns in data that deviate from the normal behavior of a system can be identified, en-
suring that the data used for decision making is trustworthy. Much work has been done
on sensor anomaly detection[4], however compared to other research areas few have
focused on the sensors in drainage pipe systems [5]. In general, anomaly detection can
be dealt with as a classification or regression problem. The classification, however, relies
on the availability of labeled data for all the different types of abnormalities, and in most
cases, many instances of normal behavior are available, whereas the number of anoma-
lous samples is very limited with infrequent anomalies present in only 0.1–10% of the
total data [6]. Moreover, compared to the AD algorithm implementation in other domains,
most environmental data could have more complicated problems such as: (a) seasonality
at yearly, monthly, weekly, and daily scales, (b) non-stationarity and non-ergodicity, (c)
nonlinear system dynamics, (d) a variety of systematic and incipient sensor faults, such
as sensor drift [7, 8, 9]. This complicates the implementation of AD in an environmental
setting, as anomalies may not only be rare but also distinct from one another[10]. With the
regression approach, the model will give a prediction of the system with given input data,
the deviation between the two signals indicating the potential anomaly [5]. This approach
requires a precise model to predict the behavior of the system and an appropriate thresh-
old as an anomaly indicator. Therefore, the first step is to develop a precise predictive
model.
In the past few decades, many researchers have studied the forecasting of rainfall runoff
and natural stream flow. The Long Short-Term Memory Networks (LSTM) framework has
been successfully used in those systems and to solve these highly non-linear tasks [11,
12]. Compared to the open channel, the water flow in the pipe system is more complex
and different patterns will be present in the events of pressure flow and gravity flow, which
introduces more challenges in the flow predictions.
The aim of this thesis is to evaluate the performance of the LTSM in abnormal detection
of sewer flow meter measurements and test whether assembling data from sensors in
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
1
==PAGE:10==
neighboring catchments can improve the model performance. For this purpose, the LSTM
based AD model will be developed and tested in the catchments in Næstved. The specific
objectives are to:
1. Determine the optimum network configuration for predicting pipe flow and compare the
performance of single-sensor model and multi-sensor model (Section 4.2).
2. Asses the use of prediction errors as anomaly indicators to indicate normal or abnormal
sensor behavior and find the optimal threshold (Section 4.3).
3. investigate whether the LSTM model can function as a “soft sensor” to replace the
faulty physical sensor (Section 4.4).
The results of this study will provide an artificial intelligence tool for monitoring the op-
erational status of sensors in urban wastewater networks. Through this tool, operators
can be remotely informed of the working status of sensors in real time and make an initial
judgment on whether they need maintenance or not. In emergency situations, the model
can temporarily replace the physical sensors when they fail, providing decision support
for network scheduling.
2
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Anomaly detection
Over the past decade, online meters have been increasingly deployed throughout envi-
ronmental monitoring in both engineered and natural systems. The collected data was
used to monitor the system’s condition or support decision making. With anomaly de-
tection tools, patterns in data that deviate from the normal behavior of a system can be
identified, ensuring that the data used for decision making is trustworthy.
Anomalies can be classified into three categories according to their context [3]: a point
anomaly is a single measurement that is considered anomalous, regardless of the time or
place of the measurement. A collective Anomaly, if there is a collection of related points
that are normal on their own but abnormal when combined. A contextual anomaly is a
single data point that is considered abnormal due to the time or location of the observa-
tion. For example, a data point may be acceptable within the sensor measurement range
but be uncommon for the considered location, time of day, or season. Typically, point
anomalies can be identified automatically through the use of some fundamental quality
control procedures known as out-of-range checks [13]. While other anomalies rely on
manual inspection by a domain expert or need application-specific rules [3], which can
be a challenge when dealing with massive real-time data. In recent years, with massive
data sets having been collected, a rich data environment makes it possible to implement
data-driven machine learning methods in automated anomaly detection.
2.2
Machine learning for anomaly detection
ML models can be generally divided in supervised and unsupervised models. For super-
vised models, they require large and representative labeled datasets. Techniques such
as support vector machines [14] and artificial neural networks [15] have been used for
wind speed sensors data streams. In practice, it is time-consuming to label the anoma-
lous data, and anomalies in temporal data are usually contextual anomalies, with time
providing the context, which makes them difficult to identify. As a result, unsupervised
models without labels are commonly considered as an alternative for supervised models.
In [16], unsupervised deep neural networks together with a oneclass Support Vector Ma-
chine were evaluated. In [15], the authors build a one-step-ahead prediction model. If a
data point falls outside a prediction interval obtained using the standard deviation of the
prediction errors, it is considered an anomaly. Indeed, forecasting time series is closely
associated with detecting time series anomalies. Although different prediction models
such as ARIMA, support vector regression, single-layer linear networks, and RNNs have
been used, the basic method has not changed; that is, the prediction model is trained
on the normal datasets and anomalies are points or sequences that differ from predicted
values.
2.3
Urban drainage system flow prediction
Urban drainage systems convey stormwater, intercept of groundwater (infiltration) and
wastewater out of cities. Infiltration refers to extraneous waters that enter the sewer sys-
tem from the surrounding soil [1]. During wet weather conditions, elevated groundwater
levels can be relieved as the water slowly leaks into the sewer [17],which is also known
as base flow in the sewer system. The base flow normally follows a seasonal pattern due
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
3
==PAGE:12==
to its relationship to the moisture of the soil, temperature, and ground water level [18].
The wastewater flow in the UDS has a strong correlation to human living patterns with a
first peak in the morning and a second peak in the afternoon/evening and almost no dis-
charge during midnight. In this study we assume these two parts make up the daily flow
in the UDS during the dry weather. To differentiate rain and dry weather, a rain intensity
threshold of 0.01 mm/min was used to identify the start and stop times of specific rain
events [19]. In the wet weather, rain fall runoff contributes most to the sewer flows, and
the run off response (lag time, intensity) to the precipitation intensity is different among
the catchments due to their unique physical attributes. In physical runoff model,
To address the challenges in the simulation of such complex systems, numerous data-
driven techniques have been developed. Zhang et al [20] developed a time series analysis
model (i.e., the autoregressive integrated moving average, ARIMA) and an ANN model
(i.e., the multilayer perceptron neural network, MLPNN) for sewer flow forecasting. Sufi
Karimi et al [21] showed that, while the ANN provides acceptable flow predictions, LSTM
outperforms ANN in terms of accuracy of prediction in wastewater flow prediction.
2.4
Artificial neural networks
The following section will introduces the basic theory of artificial neural networks.
2.4.1
Nodes
A neural network is composed of simple computational units known as nodes or neurons.
A neuron accepts inputs along incoming edges, multiplies them by edge weights, and then
applies an activation function to the weighted total to generate an output. The process
can be represented as
y(x) = f(w ⊙x + b)
(2.1)
where x, w, b, ⊙, f, y represent input vector, weight vector, neuron bias, element-wise
multiplication, activation function, and neuron output respectively [22].
Figure 2.1: Functioning of a neuron. The output of a single neuron is a non-linear function
of the weighted sum of its inputs. The non-linearity is introduced by the activation function
[22].
2.4.2
Layers
By introducing one or more hidden layers, we can overcome the constraints of linear
models and deal with a broader class of functions. Stacking numerous fully-connected
layers atop one another is the simplest method for achieving this goal. Each layer feeds
the layer above it until outputs are generated. The initial L-1 layers can be thought of as
our representation, and the last layer as our linear predictor. This architecture is usually
4
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:13==
referred to as a multilayer perceptron, or MLP for short. An example can be seen in Figure
2.2.
Figure 2.2: An MLP with a hidden layer of 5 hidden units [23].
This MLP has 4 inputs and 3 outputs. It also has 5 hidden units in its hidden layer. Since
there are no calculations on the input layer, this network needs to do calculations on both
the hidden and output layers to produce outputs. This means that this MLP has two layers.
Notice that these two layers are fully linked. Every input affects each neuron in the hidden
layer, and each neuron in the hidden layer affects each neuron in the output layer [23].
2.4.3
Activation function
The activation function is used to turn the linear weighted summation into a nonlinear
output. Without this activation function, or if the activation function was linear, the output
of multiple layers would still be a simple linear combination of the original inputs. Here
are the activation functions that were used for this work (Table 2.1).
Table 2.1: Activation functions used in this thesis, detailed explanation can be found in
[23].
Linear
f(x) = x
Sigmoid
f(x) =
1
1+e−1
Tanh
f(x) = tanh(x)
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit)
f(x) = max(0, x)
2.4.4
Dropout layer
Dropout involves adding noise while each internal layer is being computed during forward
propagation. It has become a standard way to train neural networks so they don’t get
too good at what they’re supposed to do. The method is called ”dropout” because during
training, we get rid of some neurons. During training, standard dropout is done on each
iteration by setting some of the nodes in each layer to zero before calculating the next
layer. When dropout is used on a hidden layer, each hidden unit is zeroed out with a
certain chance. The result is a network with only a subset of the original neurons[23] as
shown in Figure 2.3.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: MLP before and after dropout [23].
2.5
Training
The parameters w and b in each layer’s weights and bias are trainable. Every connection
and every node in an MLP will have one trainable parameter. The network in Figure 2.2
would then have 4 × 5 + 5 + 5 × 3 + 3 = 43 parameters that could be trained. This is a
very simple network, but it’s easy to see how more complicated ones could have many
thousands of trainable parameters.
2.5.1
Loss functions
The network’s parameters are calibrated using a collection of training data. The input and
output data are included in the training set. Forward propagation describes the trans-
mission of input data via a network to generate an output. This returns the network’s
predictions based on the input data. During network training, these predictions are uti-
lized to calculate a prediction error, also known as a loss, using a loss function. The loss
function used in the thesis is square root of error mean (MSE). Where y is observations
and ˆy is predictions.
1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(2.2)
2.5.2
Optimization
Gradient descent is the optimization algorithm used to train neural networks. Gradient
descent entails calculating the gradients of the loss function with respect to the network
parameters, namely the weights and biases. The method used to compute gradients is
known as back-propagation and is based on the chain rule of derivatives [23]. According
to equation 2.3, the learning rate γ updates the parameters θ in the opposite direction of
the gradient. Iteratively going over training data. After each epoch, the parameters get
closer to their optimal values, minimizing the loss function.
θ = θ −γ ∂L(θ)
∂θ
(2.3)
If the size of the dataset is large, computing the loss and gradient throughout the full
dataset may be prohibitively time-consuming and computationally impossible. Thus, stochas-
tic gradient descent (SGD), a form of gradient descent, is commonly used in practice. In
SGD, data is separated into subsets known as batches, and the parameters are updated
when the loss function is calculated across one batch. A number of such algorithms have
6
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:15==
been developed [24]. In this study the Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam [25]) has been
used as it is a commonly used and well-performing algorithm. As the loss function ap-
proaches zero, the optimization algorithm’s step size should decrease with each epoch.
This project’s learning rate degradation has an exponential decay timeline. The train-
ing algorithm learns network weights and biases. On the other hand, The user must set
learning algorithm parameters like learning rate, dropout, training batch size, decay, etc.
These are called hyper-parameters.
2.6
Recurrent neural networks
Figure 2.4: A standard RNN. The left hand side of the figure is a standard RNN. The state
vector in the hidden units is denoted by s. On the right hand side is the same network
unfolded in time to depict how the state is built over time. Figure from [26]
RNNs are a special type of neural networks that are capable of pattern recognition in
temporal sequences. The main attribute of an RNN is a state vector (in the hidden units)
which stores the sequence’s previous elements. The RNN’s input includes an additional
dimension in that it is a sequence of time steps as an additional input for the next time
step [26]. This characteristic makes the RNN ideally suited for learning data sequences,
or time series. The standard RNN is shown in figure 2.4. As shown in the figure, an
RNN has a feedback connection which connects the hidden neurons across time. At time
t, RNN receives the sequence element xt as the input and also its own output hidden
state from the previous time step st−1. Then the hidden state is updated to st and ht, the
output of the network is calculated. Here the U is the input weights, As shown in Equation
2.4,2.5, the input, X, is multiplied by the input weights, U, while the recurrent input, h,
from the previous time step is multiplied by the recurrent weights, W. Lastly the bias, b,
is added. Then the activation function receives the result and updates the hidden state,
and h is passed to the next step, while V is the weight matrix for the hidden to output
transition.
st = σ (Uxt + Wst−1 + bs)
(2.4)
ht = tanh (V st + bh)
(2.5)
The tanh in 2.4 represents the hyperbolic tangent function which is a commonly used
activation functions. The depth of RNN can be cosidered equivalent to the nember of
time stepes in the input sequence. At each time step new input is received and due to the
way the hidden state st is updated (equation 2.4), the information can flow in the RNN for
an arbitrary number of time steps, allowing the RNN to maintain a memory of all the past
information.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
7
==PAGE:16==
2.6.1
LSTM
There are various architectures of RNNs that result from different connections between
the units. However, if the units exhibit long-term correlation with the past, standard RNNs
perform poorly [26]. This is due to training an RNN with BPTT (back propogation through
time) requires back-propagating the error gradients across several time steps. In standard
RNN (figure 2.4), the weights matrix is the same in each time step. back-propagating the
error involves multiplying the error gradient with the same value over and over again.
Consequently, the gradients tend to become either too large or decay to zero. These
problems are referred to as exploding gradients and vanishing gradients respectively. To
address this problem, Hochreiter and Schmidhuber introduced LSTM neural networks
[27], which inherently store long-term system states.
Figure 2.5: Structure of an LSTM unit. Figure from [23].
A typical LSTM unit consists of a memory cell, forget gate, input gate and output gate. The
memory cell keeps track of the relationship between the elements in the input data. The
forget gate determines whether a piece of information in the cell should be maintained or
forgotten and learn to reset the LSTM memory when starting new sequences. The input
gate determines the amount of new information that enters the cell. And the output gate
regulates the information output from the cell, which in turn determines the output of the
LSTM unit. Figure 2.5 shows a unit of LSTM for time t-1 and t, where xt ∈Rd is the input
vertor to the LSTM unit, ht ∈Rh is the output vector of the LSTM unit, and ct ∈Rh is the
cell state vector. Also, ft ∈Rh, it ∈Rh and ot ∈Rh denote forget gate’s activation vector,
input gate’s activation vector and output gate’s activation vector respectively. The model
consists of the following equations:
ft = σg (Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
(2.6)
it = σg (Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(2.7)
ot = σg (W0xt + U0ht−1 + bo)
(2.8)
ct = ft ◦ct−1 + it ◦σc (Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
(2.9)
ht = ot ◦σh (ct)
(2.10)
Here, σg, σc and σh denote activation functions.
The LSTM commonly uses the Sig-
moid activation for recurrent connections and the Tanh activation for output.
◦denotes
Hadamard product (element-wise product). W, U and b are weight matrices and bias vec-
tors that should be optimized during the training process.
8
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:17==
3
Datasets and Methods
3.1
Datasets
In this study, LSTM based anomaly detection models were trained and evaluated using
flow data from five distinct catchments in Næstved, including: Kuhlausvej, Herlufholm,
Meding, Kontorforsynigen, and Vadestedet (Figure 3.1). The flow data are owned by NK
forsyning, and Krüger A/S collect the data for them. Aside from flow data, rainfall inten-
sity data was available in the form of historical rainfall events from rain stations located in
Maglegårdsvej and Parkvej. The rain data are collected by the he Water Pollution Com-
mittee of The Society of Danish Engineers [28]. The distribution of the flow meters and
rain stations is shown in the Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The five flow meters are located in the different catchments in Næstved. The
left panel illustrates precipitation (blue) and flow (green) in the five catchments during the
study period (from 2015-03-13 to 2016-10-04). The right panel shows the location of flow
meters and rain stations. Rainfall data in the figures was obtained from the nearest rain
station to each catchment.
The sensors are located at the subcatchment outlets, and two rain stations is located
in the top and bottom of the map. Due to the fact that rain falls spatially varyingly, all
subcatchments should get the rain fall series that is closest to them. Sensor 1 and 2 were
assigned to the rain station located in Maglegårdsvej, while Sensors 3 to 5 were assigned
to the rain station located in Parkvej. The base flow of the 5 catchments in dry weather is
independent of rainfall and is more directly dependent on the time of day, time of year and
whether it is a weekday or weekend. To differentiate rain and dry weather, a rain intensity
threshold of 0.01 mm/min was used to identify the start and stop times of specific rain
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
9
==PAGE:18==
events [19]. Use data from sensor 1 as an example. As shown in Figure 3.2, the dry
weather flow is much lower compared to wet days.
(a) Flow during the dry weather.
(b) Flow during the rain events.
Figure 3.2: (a) Daily pattern of dry weather flow from sensor 1. As can be seen, the dry
weather flow is significantly lower than the flow values observed during rain occurrences
in (b).
10
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:19==
3.1.1
Data cleaning
The flow chart of data processing is shown in figure 3.3. Flow meter measurements had
a 2-min resolution, while rainfall data had a 1-min resolution. To synchronize the tempo-
ral resolutions the rainfall data were averaged to 2-min resolution. Due to the fact that
certain sensors were fixed in place while others were mobile, the date range covered by
their collection differed (table 3.1), and only overlapped periods were aligned in the study.
Besides, considering the sensors are at their best after they have just undergone main-
tenance, it would be better if the study period started with a new working cycle. Based
on these considerations, we decided the study period ranged from March 13th, 2015 to
October 4th, 2016. Both datasets should be corrected for daylight savings and synchro-
nized to UTC+1.
Figure 3.3: Data processing flow chart
Table 3.1: Datasets information
Name
Location
Start time
End time
Recorded readings
Resolution
Sensor 1
Kuhlausvej
20-02-2014
04-10-2016
686017
2-min
Sensor 2
Herlufholm
13-05-2013
04-10-2016
888716
2-min
Sensor 3
Meding
20-06-2014
04-10-2016
599583
2-min
Sensor 4
Kontorforsynigen
16-05-2013
04-10-2016
872710
2-min
Sensor 5
Vadestedet
15-05-2013
04-10-2016
857207
2-min
Rain station
Parkvej
06-08-2013
01-11-2016
1703450
1-min
Rain station
Maglegårdsvej
06-08-2013
01-11-2016
1703450
1-min
The original datasets were unlabeled and existing missing values. The first step in this
study was to label the anomalous behavior (Section2.1). To begin with, some dubious data
points, such as rain without flow and excessive flow in dry weather (figure 3.4), should be
investigated, which could be an example of a contextual anomaly.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: The scatter plot of accumulated rain and runoff in a 30 minute window (consid-
ered concentration time). Those points without rain but with excessive runoff are suspect
and need to be checked manually.The red circle labelled suspicious data in sensor 3.
Another common occurrence is a sudden drop and dramatic fluctuation. By comparing
the current value to the moving average centered on the current value, a difference can
be derived. A substantial divergence could indicate that there has been a sudden change
and that the data is suspect. This strategy requires information from future observations.
As a result, it can only be used for data cleaning in offline data sets and is not ideal for real-
time anomaly detection. This approach can detect the vast majority of unusual events,
but not all of them. Some non-significant anomalies may be missed during this process.
To avoid errors, all abnormalities must be verified manually using Label Studio [29] . As
12
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:21==
normal data dominates the data sets, undetected anomalies provide little impact on the
model pattern. Apart from anomaly data, there are also some missing values in the data
sets as a result of maintenance or malfunction; those NAN values have been replaced
with 0 and labeled (figure 3.5b). The results of data cleaning are shown in Table 3.2.
It can be seen that data sets are unevenly distributed; around 96% to 99% of the data
are normal data. After cleaning the data, it can be assumed that the data sets show the
normal pattern of water in the pipes.
(a) Point anomaly
(b) Signal missing
(c) Collective Anomalies
(d) Contextual anomaly
Figure 3.5: The figures demonstrate the typical abnormal data including point anomaly,
collective anomaly, contextual anomaly and missing signal (Section2.1) in the data sets.
The red cross means the data is anomaly. Examples from Sensor 1 data set.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.2: Normal, anomaly and missing signal in the datasets (from March 13th, 2015 to
October 4th, 2016, including 411377 recorded points).
Missing data
Anomaly data
Normal data
Anomalies percentage
Sensor 1
2974
134
408269
99.2%
Sensor 2
466
54
410857
99.9%
Sensor 3
2981
36
408360
99.3%
Sensor 4
19492
929
390956
95.0%
Sensor 5
22562
52
388763
94.5%
3.1.2
Feature engineering
In dry weather, the water in the pipes is mainly from waste water, which has a strong
correlation to human living patterns with a first peak in the morning and a second peak
in the afternoon/evening and almost no discharge during midnight. In this case, the hour
of the day should be chosen as an input feature. The month of the year and whether or
not it’s a weekend can also provide useful information for the forecast model. However,
these kinds of features need to be encoded for the ML model. Two Approaches have
been used.
Dummy variables (one-hot encoding)
First, ‘day of week’ is extracted from the time label, then the feature ‘is_weekend’ is cre-
ated, which contains information on whether the observation comes from the weekend (0
indicates weekdays while 1 indicates weekends)
Cyclical encoding with sine/cosine transformation
Figure 3.6: Sine/cosine transformation based on daily and monthly frequencies. Y-axis
represent encoded time information.
Aside from the most popular dummy-encoding, there are approaches that are better suited
for encoding the cyclical nature of time. When we include the month of the observed flow, it
makes sense that there is a stronger correlation between two consecutive months. Using
this logic, the link between December and January, as well as January and February, is
strong. The link between January and July, on the other hand, is not as significant. The
same applies to other time-related information as well. The month is encoded based on
14
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:23==
daily frequencies, while the hour is encoded based on second frequencies (Figure 3.6).
With the two curves, sine and cosine, represent non-repetitive points, and a user can
identify every single time point.
3.2
Methodology
The project’s anomaly detection algorithm has three basic steps. To predict future time
series, a summary prediction model trained by normal data is created first. Then the pre-
diction errors are used to compute anomaly scores. If the observed signal is determined
to be an anomaly, the predicted value will be substituted for it and fed into the model for
following prediction. The flow chart is shown in figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Study flow chart
3.2.1
Predictive model design
In theory, LSTM networks can capture the short-term delay between rainfall and water
depth in an urban drainage network and infer the catchment’s long-term properties [12].
The models consists of four layers: input, LSTM, dropout and output. Dropout layer is
added to avoid overfitting. The purpose of this study is not to optimize the network archi-
tecture but to explore the feasibility of LSTM in sewer sensor anomaly detection, so we
will only focus on limited hyperparameters such as window length, batch size and hidden
layers and leave other parameters as default.
Single sensor model
The model consists of two hidden recurrent layers, a dense output layer with 1 neuron for
Single Sensor Model (SSM), a lookback (inpurt length) chosen from 15 to 60, a lookahead
(prediction) of 1, and two dropouts of 0.2 after each LSTM layer. LSTM state was not
maintained between batches. We trained the LSTM using Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.1, a decay of 0.99. The weights will be updated at the end of each training
period (batch learning), meaning that the batch size will be equal to the number of training
observations. The flow dataset has a repeating pattern of roughly 720 time steps (24 h),
though the actual length of the pattern varies slightly. To ensure the model can receive the
entire daily sequence pattern, the batch size should be greater than 720, so we test batch
size from 1024 to 4096 to find the best setting. The model was trained for 50 epochs with
early stopping.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.8: LSTM model with multiple layers. The model structure shows a graphical
representation of the model parts, and the data structure shows how the dimensions of
the input data change as it is passed between the different layers. Input dimensions of
LSTM(1) are noted as (batch size, time steps, number of input attributes), while output
dimensions are noted as (batch size, time steps, number of neurons). The output of
LSTM(2) only has two dimensions (batch size, number of neurons) because the ‘return
sequence’ is set to be false in this layer and the Dense layer only receives the output
from the last hidden state. A dropout layer is added after each of the LSTM layers when
training to reduce overfitting. ( *Time info. including Daily cos, Daily sin, monthly cos,
monthly sin and dummy variable of whether it is a weekday or weekend).
Table 3.3: Table of Single Sensor Models (SSMs) for 1 step ahead prediction. The models
were constructed and trained both with normal data. The bold model represent base
model. (R: rainfall series, T: temperature, t: time variations, Q: flow observation, IR: initial
loss removal.)
No.
LSTM Cells
Attributes
Input length
Batch
Additional attributes
1
64
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
2
64
R+t+Q
15
1024
-
3
64
R+T+Q
15
1024
-
4
64
R+T+t
15
1024
-
5
64
T+t+Q
15
1024
-
6
32
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
7
128
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
8
256
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
9
64
R+T+t+Q
15
2048
-
10
64
R+T+t+Q
15
4096
-
11
64
R+T+t+Q
30
2048
-
12
64
R+T+t+Q
60
2048
-
13
64
R+T+t+Q
15
2048
IR
14
64
R+T+t+Q
30
2048
IR
The model with different input combinations and the impact of pretreatment on those input
data such as initial loss removal (IR), will also be part of the model tuning study. The fol-
16
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:25==
lowing section describes the different model architectures tested, and table 3.3 illustrates
all the different versions.
Multi-sensors model
The models tested for this work are many to one architecture but use five sensors’ obser-
vations together with time features, temperature and rainfall data as model input. So the
output dense layer should have 5 hidden nodes to get a prediction for each sensor. We’ll
keep the optimized hyperparameters after SSM tuning. The MSM is expected to be able
to put together the information from catchments that are close to each other and make a
better prediction, especially when one sensor is during maintenance.
Figure 3.9: LSTM model with multiple layers. With the addition of all sensor data, the
attribute dimension has increased to 11, and the output features dimension of the Dense
layer has also been expanded to 5. The batch size, time steps, and cell units of the two
LSTM layers did not change. A dropout layer is added after each of the LSTM layers
when training to reduce overfitting. ( *Time info. including Daily cos, Daily sin, monthly
cos, monthly sin and dummy variable of whether it is a weekday or weekend).
3.2.2
Model training setups
Input data formatting
The training and testing setup is dependent on the model design and the data used. After
cleaning up the data, a data indicator has been made in which 0 is used for missing or
abnormal data and 1 is used for normal data. To capture the normal flow pattern, the
prediction model requires all input values to be normal data. As a result, those windows,
including abnormal data, should be discarded. A diagram of the data formatting can be
seen in Figure 3.10.
For the input data set of the anomaly detection model, the abnormal data will not be
discarded but also be included in the windows. The windows then split into a training
set and a test set. The training set is used for training, while the testing set is laid aside
until training is completed. The model is then evaluated on the test set to evaluate its
performance on unseen data. This work utilizes a 90/10 train/test split. Note the data is
not being randomly shuffled before splitting. This is for two reasons:
1. It ensures that chopping the data into windows of consecutive samples is still possible.
2. It ensures that the validation/test results are more realistic, being evaluated on the data
collected after the model was trained.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.10: This diagram doesn’t show the features axis of the data. As shown in the
figure, windows including abnormal data will be discarded. (input window = 15 as an
example).
k-fold cross validation
For models intended for one-step flow prediction, the entire data set is used, and models
are trained and evaluated using data from all five sensors. The training and testing are
conducted as a k-fold cross validation with k equal to 10. For each fold, the model is
trained using data from 9 of the 10 periods and tested using data from the last period.
In this way, each model version is trained 10 times and tested 10 times using data from
a period not seen during training. This provides an results for analyzing the robust each
model. It also enables early training stop. With an early stopping included in callback with
patience 5, indicating the training will be terminated if the performance on the validation
set does not improve for 5 consecutive epochs. This expedites model training by skipping
unneeded epochs and reduces overfitting.
Figure 3.11: Diagram of k-fold cross validation, here with k = 10.
18
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:27==
Artificially added anomalies
In order to test how the soft-sensor model works after anomalies are detected, we added
some anomaly periods into the raw data and ran the model on these periods to test
whether or not the soft-sensor can provide an accurate prediction. In this case, we need
to know the true value of the anomaly period.
Four kinds of common situations were tested. Below we use sensor 1 data as an exam-
ple. Same operations will also be repeated on other sensors’ data. The first case is when
the sensor overestimates the flow rate. To simulate this type of anomaly, we double the
raw signal’s amplitude as shown in Figure 3.12
Figure 3.12: Overestimate (2016-08-28 03:00:00 to 2016-08-28 08:00:00)
The corresponding case is the sensor under measuring the flow rate. The original value
is reduced by two times to simulate this error (Figure 3.13).
Figure 3.13: Underestimate (2016-09-29 13:30:00 to 2016-09-29 17:30:00)
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
19
==PAGE:28==
Sometimes the sensor may suddenly go offline due to a failed signal connection or other
malfunction. In this case, we use 0 to replace the raw data as shown in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Signal missing (2016-09-04 09:00:00 to 2016-09-04 16:00:00)
Another situation is when a sensor was fault but still returns some meaningless signal.
We use randomly generated values to replace the raw data to simulate this case (Figure
3.15).
Figure 3.15: Return messy noise (2016-10-03 00:00:00 to 2016-10-03 04:00:00)
3.2.3
Model performance criteria
Predictive model
The accuracy of prediction models is measured in the following methods:
1. Nash-Sutcliffe coefficient of Efficiency
NSE is generally used to verify the quality of the hydrological model simulation results.
NSE values range from [−∞, 1], where 1 indicates a perfect fit, 0 denotes a model fit
20
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:29==
that is as good as the mean of the data. Values less than 0 show that the model fits the
data worse than the mean, indicating that the model is untrustworthy. The calculation
formula of NSE is as follows:
NSE = 1 −
PN
i=1
 yobs
i
−ypre
i
2
PN
i=1
 yobs
i
−¯yobs2
(3.1)
2. Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
Because the RMSE is particularly sensitive to the reflection of very large or very small
errors in a set of prediction results, it can accurately indicate the precision of the model
prediction. When the RMSE value is greater, the error between the model’s predicted
and measured values is greater.The calculation formula of RMSE is as follows:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
 yobs
i
−ypre
i
2
(3.2)
3. Mean squared logarithmic erro (MSLE)
Mean squared logarithmic error (MSLE) can be interpreted as a measure of the ratio
between the true and predicted values. Because the flow in wet weather is much larger
than that in dry weather, we don’t want large errors in wet weather to be significantly
more penalized than small ones in dry weather.
MSLE = 1
N
N
X
i=0

log

yobs
i
+ 1

−log (ypre
i
+ 1)
2
(3.3)
where yobs
i
is the ith ground true, ypre
i
represents the ith predict value, ¯y pre is the mean
of forecast value, ¯y obs is the mean of ground true, and N is the total number of test
samples.
Anomaly detection model
In section 3.1.1, we labeled the anomalies as positive sample (y=1) and normal data as
negative (y=0). The normal data and anomaly samples are unbalanced (Table 3.2), so,
intuitive detection accuracy metrics, such as the ratio of correctly identified data samples
to the total number of data samples, are not recommended as performance metrics [10].
We will call the number of correctly found anomalies (y = 1, ˆy = 1) true positives (tp).
True negatives (tn) are the number of normal data that were correctly labeled (y = 0, ˆy =
0). Lastly, false positives (fp) and false negatives (fn) are the number of normal data
(y = 0, ˆy = 1) and anomalies (y = 1, ˆy = 0) that were misclassified. Using the above
definitions, you can figure out the following measurements:
precision =
tp
tp + fp
recall =
tp
tp + fn
(3.4)
Recall is proportion of actual anomalies was identified correctly. Precision is a measure
of how many of the data points the model classifies as anomalies are actually real. For
example, a model that doesn’t produce any false positives has a precision of 1. Most of
the time, these two measures go in the opposite direction: as precision goes up, recall
goes down. This is called the tradeoff between precision and recall. Because of this, the
F1 score (equation 3.5) is often used to measure how well a model works for unbalanced
classification problems.
F1 = 2 precision × recall
precision + recall
(3.5)
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2.4
Anomaly detection
The relative prediction errors are used to compute anomaly scores. If the observed signal
is determined to be an anomaly, the predicted value will be substituted for it and fed into
the model for following prediction. The flow chart is shown in figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Anomaly detection flow chart
1. At time t, flow rate ypre
t
was predicted by model using input window from t-w to t-1
(w represents input window length).
2. When the model receives the observation yobs
t
from the flow meter, the discrepancy
between ypre
t
and yobs
t
will be calculated as the anomaly score.
3. If the anomaly score is higher than the threshold, the observation will be seen as an
anomaly signal, and the prediction value will be used to represent the current flow
rate in the sewer pipe, replacing the observation value in the next step prediction.
4. If the anomaly score is below the threshold, it indicates that the sensor is trustworthy,
and the observation value will be used to predict the next step flow rate.
5. When the sensor is offline due to maintenance or malfunction, the predicted value
will be used as a soft-sensor to monitor the flow rate in the sewer system.
Anomaly indicator
Anomaly detection is done by using the prediction errors as anomaly indicators. Prediction
error is the difference between prediction made at time t−1 and the input value received
at time t. The difference can be evaluate in many ways. Due to the unpredictability of the
rainfall’s response, the error is typically greater during wet weather, whereas it is smaller
during dry weather, when the measurements fall within a relatively narrow range. In order
to account for the state dependency of the error, the absolute value of the residual was
divided by the predicted value to obtain the relative residual (equation 3.6) [5]. A small
constant ε was added to the denominator to keep the indicator from reaching infinity as
the prediction approached zero.
22
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:31==
score =

 yobs
i
−ypre
i

(ypre
i
+ ε)

(3.6)
This is the simplest case, but it is also what happens in real cases where people use
relative residual as an indicator to determine whether the flow meter needs maintenance.
Detection threshold
The quantile of absolute relative prediction errors from training data is calculated and
can be used as the threshold. On new data, the absolute relative difference between
predicted data and observed data is calculated as anomaly scores. If the score is above
the threshold, that point will be labeled as an anomaly. Based on the performance of
the confusion matrix and F1-score (equation 3.5), we select a threshold for anomalous
behavior on test dataset. In this way, the threshold can be set above the ”noise level” so
that false positives are not triggered.
Detection of continuous anomalies
Since the predictive model relies on the input of the sensor’s history observations, the
anomaly signal could mislead the model and fail to further work. So, when an anomaly
observation is detected, the observed value will be replaced by the predicted value and
fed back to the input window for next step prediction. By doing this, the model can detect
both point errors and collective errors. .
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:33==
4
Experiments and Results
4.1
Preliminary data analysis
4.1.1
Rainfall-runoff cross-correlations
Considering rainfall is unevenly distributed and the correlation between rainfall and runoff
is different in the five subcatchments, the subcatchments receive the precipitation inten-
sity from the closest rain station as input. Sensors 1 and 2 were assigned to the rain
station located in Maglegårdsvej, while Sensors 3 to 5 were assigned to the rain station
located in Parkvej, which corresponds to the saptial distribution that the rain station is
closer to these sensors. The catchments have different physical attributes, which results
in the various concentration times (the time needed for water to flow from the most re-
mote point in a watershed to the watershed outlet). The charts illustrate the magnitude of
the cross-correlation between the two data series at various time delays, i.e., when the
rainfall series is displaced by a specific number of time steps relative to the runoff series.
This information provides an inference range for window size selection that is the window
should cover the peak (an initial guess of look-back steps).
Figure 4.1: Cross-correlation plots of rainfall and flow for the five sensors. The correlation
at lag time is the correlation between the two series when the rainfall series is moved k
minutes forward with respect to the flow series. Sensors 1 and 2 were assigned to the rain
station located in Maglegårdsvej, while Sensors 3 to 5 were assigned to the rain station
located in Parkvej.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
25
==PAGE:34==
4.2
One-step predictive model
4.2.1
Single-Sensor Model
SSMs are tuned using Sensor 1 data in this section to find the optimized configuration.
Then, the SSMs with the same configuration are trained on other sensors’ data and eval-
uated to check if the configuration is generalizable and performs well on different catch-
ments.
Input features
Feature selection and configuration are important for machine learning model training and
validation. To predict runoff in a rain event, the models with physical attributes added to the
input such as soil moisture and impervious area are expected to have better performance.
However, due to the limitation of data sources, only temperature (T), rainfall intensity (R),
Time features (t), and observed runoff data (Q) are available. The results of combinations
of available attributes are shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Evaluation of LSTM models on sensor1 (hidden cells:64, input window: 15,
bacth size:1024). The x-axis indicates the combination of model input features. Each
distribution consists of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation and
mean relative error grouped by weather conditions was calculated for each model. Results
presented are quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum and
maximum value or 1.5 times the inter quantile range. All values outside the whiskers
range are marked as outliers (diamonds).
The results show that the rainfall and temperature provide useful information for the model.
However, it seems the additional time features only make the performance worse, and it
would be better if they were simply ignored or left out. A likely cause could be that the
model architecture is too simple and it failed to learn the pattern. A bigger model might
allow the data to be properly utilized.
The model (R+T+Q) has the best performance with an NSE reach of 0.962, but it actually
tends to use the observed value of the previous moment as the prediction value of the next
moment, resulting in a lag in the two curves. This is because the input window is relatively
short, which can not include a full loop of the daily pattern, and without time features input,
the predicted value in dry weather is meaningless. In this case, the model may fail to
26
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:35==
detect the anomaly value. Consequently, the model (R+T+Q) will not be considered in
the anomaly detection.
The Figure 4.3 demonstrates that compared to the model (R+T+t+Q) (Figure 4.3a), even
without recent flow observations as input, the model (R+T+t) (Figure 4.3b) can learn the
runoff response to rainfall intensity and the median NSE of model is greater than 0.5,
which is acceptable in hydrologic modeling [30]. These results show that the model isn’t
just repeating the last step, and the rainfall intensity provides enough information to predict
wet weather flow.
(a) LSTM(64,R+T+t+Q)
(b) LSTM(64,R+T+t)
Figure 4.3: A rain events started from 2016-08-22, simulated by LSTM(64,R+T+t+Q) and
LSTM(64,R+T+t) with and without flow observation. The blue line Rainfall intensity, green
is observation from flow meter, grey lines consists of 10 prediction series, 1 for each
fold in the 10-fold cross-validation prediction on test data and black is mean prediction.
Predictions are from sensor 1
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
27
==PAGE:36==
Hidden layer
Figure 4.4: Evaluation of layer cells number on sensor1 (batch size:1024, input window:
15, features:R+T+t+Q). The x-axis indicates the cells of each LSTM layer. Each distribu-
tion consists of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation and mean
relative error grouped by weather conditions was calculated for each model. Results pre-
sented are quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum and max-
imum value or 1.5 times the inter quantile range. All values outside the whiskers range
are marked as outliers (diamonds).
The parameters for LSTM should be tuned to achieve an acceptable performance. In this
study, we apply an LSTM with two hidden layer. Numbers of hidden neurons, however,
can be varied. The number of hidden neurons are varied from 32 to 256. The results
for Sensor 1 are shown in Figure 4.4. Our simulation shows that increasing the hidden
layer neurons improves the results, and with the hidden neurons of two LSTM layers
equal to 64, the models perform best and return the lowest median test RMSE(0.00436)
and highest median NSE(0.957). Increasing cells greater to 128 reduced the MSLE to
9.17 × 10−6. However, such an increase has some drawbacks. First, it considerably
increases training time. Second, increasing the hidden neurons prevents generalization
of the LSTM implementation. So we should consider a lower number of neurons in the
hidden layer and achieve an acceptable result at the same time. As a result, we chose
neurons with a value of 64 as the configuration. Thus, the rest of the tests used a hidden
cells of 64.
Bacth size
In this analysis, the batch size was adjusted from 1024 to 4096 and tested on sensor 1.
Results (Figure 4.5) show that when the batch size eauql to 2048 the model have the best
performence. For the selected batch size, each batch contains around 68h of data, which
is a range of 3 days. This means each batch may include daily patterns and varieties
of data (i.e., wet hours, dry hours, rising limbs and falling limbs) in the training data set,
which can provide sufficient variances for calculation gradient descent in batches [31].
Thus, the rest of the tests used a batch size of 2048.
28
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: Evaluation of batch size on sensor1 model (hidden cells:64, input window:
15, features:R+T+t+Q). The x-axis indicates the batch size. Each distribution consists
of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation and mean relative error
grouped by weather conditions was calculated for each model. Results presented are
quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum and maximum value or
1.5 times the inter quantile range. All values outside the whiskers range are marked as
outliers (diamonds).
Input time steps
Figure 4.6: Evaluation of input window length on sensor1 model (hidden cells:64, input
batch size:1024, features:R+T+t+Q). The x-axis indicates input window length. Each dis-
tribution consists of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation and
mean relative error grouped by weather conditions was calculated for each model. Re-
sults presented are quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum
and maximum value or 1.5 times the inter quantile range. All values outside the whiskers
range are marked as outliers (diamonds).
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
29
==PAGE:38==
The rainfall and runoff observations from the last 15 to 60 steps (30 to 120 min) were
tested. The results in Figure 4.6 shows that when input length is equal to 15 (30min),
the model has the lowest median RMSE and MSLE, which means that even though the
daily flow had a long pattern, the relevant temporal relations were present only in a few
recent time steps. Therefore, we do not need to consider a large moving window. On the
other hand, very small input windows may lead to poor performances because of the lag
between runoff and rainfall. Based on our simulations, the model with 15 steps of input
has the lowest median RMSE(0.0389), MSLE(7.14 × 10−6) and highest NSE (0.969), but
it is not much better than other models. And, considering the model with 30 steps of input
has a more balanced performance (smaller variance) on 10-fold validation. In our case
study, the input steps of 30 (60 min) was selected.
Removal of initial loss
(a) LSTM(64) IR
(b) LSTM(64) IR with initial loss removal
Figure 4.7: A rain events started from 2016-08-20, simulated by LSTM(64,R+T+t+Q) mod-
els with and without initial loss removal. The blue line Rainfall intensity, green is obser-
vation from flow meter, grey lines consists of 10 prediction series, 1 for each fold in the
10-fold cross-validation prediction on test data and black is mean prediction. Predictions
are from sensor 1 model.
The Figure 4.7a shows that the models so far have problem with the initial loss. 1) Some
minor rainfall events almost produce no runoff. 2) At the start of rain events, predicted
runoff is sometimes exaggerated. It may be because the model failed to learn the initial
loos in the rain events. Initial loss is the amount of rainfall required to wet up a catch-
ment before runoff starts. Some small rain events that are not big enough to create extra
30
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:39==
runoff should be ignored in the predictive model. And for heavy rainfall and extreme rain
events, the runoff response should be delayed. Thus, the initial loss equal to 0.6mm is
removed manually from the rain series and tested. The Figure 4.7b shows that the model
fit much better with the initial loss removed. The test on two model The results (Figure
4.8) show that after the initial loss is removed, there is a significant improvement in model
performance for both configurations. And the variation on the test data set has been re-
duced, which means the model is more generalized and robust. However, the initial loss
cannot be a fixed value in practice, it is related to the soil moisture, duration and inten-
sity of rainfall. Subtracting the same initial loss from all rainfall events introduces some
errors, e.g. for two rainfall events with a short interval, the initial loss of the latter may
be much smaller than that of the former (soil absorption capacity may be saturated after
the previous rainfall event). In this case, if we remove the same initial loss, the second
rainfall runoff prediction will be delayed and underestimated. In the end we chose to keep
this change since removing the initial loss in general would lead to better results for the
model.
Figure 4.8: A graph displaying the performance of a model with varying input lengths
before and after the initial loss. The x-axis indicates the input length of the model; IR:
Initial loss removed; Raw: Raw rainfall series. Each distribution consists of 10 data points,
1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation and mean relative error grouped by weather
conditions was calculated for each model. Results presented are quartiles (box) and
median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum and maximum value or 1.5 times the inter
quantile range. All values outside the whiskers range are marked as outliers (diamonds).
Comparative performance analysis
The summary of model tuning are shown in the Table 4.1. Model No.14 performed best
among all the settings.
We chose LSTM cells equal to 64, 2048 as the batch size,
R+T+t+Q as model input with a 30 step window length, and removed the initial loss in
the rain series. The same model configuration will then be used and test on other catch-
ment datasets. The SSM performance on each sensor is shown in Figure 4.9. The SSMs
overall have good performance, and this indicates that the configuration tuned on the
Sensor 1 dataset is generalizable. Sensor 3 and sensor 4 have a much lower NSE and
some outliers. One reason could be that it includes a lot of back water (negative flow
rate) in these two catchments, and without the water level upstream and downstream, it
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
31
==PAGE:40==
is impossible to predict the back water, and the model fails to work when it happens.
Table 4.1: Results of Single Sensor Models (SSMs) for 1 step ahead prediction. The
models were constructed and trained both with normal data. (R: rainfall series, T: tem-
perature, t: time variations, Q: flow observation, IR: initial loss removal.
No.
LSTM Cells
Attributes
Input length
Batch
Additional attributes
RMSE
NSE
MSLE
1
64
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00436
0.957
1.03E-05
2
64
R+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00650
0.893
1.94E-05
3
64
R+T+Q
15
1024
-
0.00434
0.962
9.35E-06
4
64
R+T+t
15
1024
-
0.00921
0.654
3.98E-05
5
64
T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00472
0.952
4.56E-05
6
32
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00631
0.870
1.87E-05
1
64
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00436
0.957
1.04E-05
7
128
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00446
0.948
9.17E-06
8
256
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00662
0.864
2.40E-05
1
64
R+T+t+Q
15
1024
-
0.00436
0.957
1.04E-05
9
64
R+T+t+Q
15
2048
-
0.00384
0.965
7.14E-06
10
64
R+T+t+Q
15
4096
-
0.00633
0.892
2.22E-05
9
64
R+T+t+Q
15
2048
-
0.00384
0.965
7.14E-06
11
64
R+T+t+Q
30
2048
-
0.00427
0.954
8.89E-06
12
64
R+T+t+Q
60
2048
-
0.00509
0.933
1.26E-05
13
64
R+T+t+Q
15
2048
IR
0.00396
0.967
7.41E-06
14
64
R+T+t+Q
30
2048
IR
0.00389
0.968
7.41E-06
Figure 4.9: Performance of single sensor models. The x-axis indicates the sensor ID.
Each distribution consists of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the 10-fold cross-validation
and mean relative error grouped by weather conditions was calculated for each model.
Results presented are quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers extend to the mini mum
and maximum value or 1.5 times the inter quantile range. All values outside the whiskers
range are marked as outliers (diamonds).
4.2.2
Multi-Sensor Model
Compared to the SSMs, the multi-sensor model has more input features and the out-
put is a sequence which represents the predicted next step flow for each sensor 3.9.
32
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:41==
The main goal of this section is to determine whether the model can assemble data from
sensors in neighboring catchments to improve prediction performance, so we’ll keep the
optimized hyperparameter in the previous section and only change the model input and
output shape. We chose LSTM cells equal to 64, 2048 as the batch size, R+T+t+Q as
model input with a 30 step window length, and removed the initial loss in the rain series.
The results are shown in Figure 4.10, apparently, the MSM perform much worse than the
SSM on all sensors. One reason could be that with more input and output data, a bigger
model is needed to learn the complicated relationship. However, from some results, we
can see it is not about model tuning but a theoretical fault.
Figure 4.10: Performance of single sensor model and multi sensor model. The x-axis
indicates the sensor ID. Each distribution consists of 10 data points, 1 for each fold in the
10-fold cross-validation and mean relative error grouped by weather conditions was cal-
culated for each model. Results presented are quartiles (box) and median. The whiskers
extend to the mini mum and maximum value or 1.5 times the inter quantile range. All
values outside the whiskers range are marked as outliers (diamonds).
As shown in Figure 4.11, the prediction on sensor 2 has greatly impacted by input data
from sensor 1 and result a relative high bias between predicted and observed value on
sensor 2. In this case, the input from sensor 1 actually introduced noise. Since the rainfall
is spatially unevenly distributed, rainfall over each catchment is not synchronized. For
instance, when runoff is generated at catchment A, precipitation may not have started at
catchment B, and using runoff from A as an input does not make sense in this case. The
runoff in other catchments can be a reference when the rain station is also offline, but this
is not what we are going to study in this project. Based on these consideration, the MSM
will not be used as an anomaly detection model in the following study.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.11: Failed prediction on sensor 2 due to the redundant information input from
sensor 1.
4.3
Anomaly detection
In the previous section, we tested different configurations and found the best SSM model
configuration considering both effectiveness and efficiency. The model was trained on
normal training dataset and absolute relative residual were calculated from normal test
dataset. Then a test dataset including anomaly points was used to check for anomalies.
4.3.1
Absolute relative residual on normal dataset
Figure 4.12: Absolute relative error on a normal dataset from Sensor 1. The red line
indicate 95%, 96 %, 97%, 98% and 99% quantile (left to right).
34
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:43==
The Figure 4.12 shows the histogram of abusolute relative error calculated using Equation
3.6, and 95% quantile to 99% quantile were then calculated. It shows that the majority
(over 99%) of relative errors fall between 0 and 0.5. The point with an extremely great
relative residual can be determined to be a rare event and regarded as an anomaly signal.
The histogram for the rest of the sensors can be found in Appendix A.1.
The Figure 4.14 show that due to the uncertain response to precipitation, some predicted
wet weather flow rates are biased from the observations, which leads to a high relative
residual. This is an inevitable flaw in the model because using such limited information
to predicted runoff in the wet weather itself is a challenge work. The errors mainly come
from the early or delay response to the rainfall. That could because the concentration
time and the initial loss are uncertain, which could differ among different rainfall events
even if they have the same rainfall intensity. The model is unable to know this change
because of the lack of input information. For instance, soil moisture, which has a great
impact on the initial loss and runoff generation, is not included in the model. This biased
predication in the wet weather could false trigger the threshold in the anomaly detection,
but it is inevitable. The only way is to tune the threshold to avoid false trigger as much as
possible.
4.3.2
Threshold tuning
Table 4.2: Confusion Matrix of anomaly detection on each sensor. Actual represents
labeled anomalies in raw data set, predict represents detected anomalies by model.
Sensor1
Predict
F-1 score
Normal data
Anomalies
Actural
Normal data
40104
86
0.879
Anomalies
130
785
Sensor2
Predict
F-1 score
Normal data
Anomalies
Actural
Normal data
40390
98
0.837
Anomalies
102
515
Sensor3
Predict
F-1 score
Normal data
Anomalies
Actural
Normal data
39972
336
0.688
Anomalies
203
594
Sensor4
Predict
F-1 score
Normal data
Anomalies
Actural
Normal data
40248
285
0.640
Anomalies
169
403
Sensor5
Predict
F-1 score
Normal data
Anomalies
Actural
Normal data
40688
16
0.889
Anomalies
67
334
In this section different quantiles were used as thresholds in anomaly detection and F1-
score was calculated to find the optimal threshold. The Confusion Matrix of anomaly
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
35
==PAGE:44==
detection using optimized threshold on each sensor is shown in Table 4.2. The table
recording F-1 scores at different thresholds can be found in the Appendix A.1. Models on
sensors 1, 2, and 5 performed better than sensors 3 and 4 with a higher F-1 score, which
considered both recall and precision. The overall F1-score is not very high because, in
some cases, as shown in Figure 4.13, the entire time period is marked as anomalous
during data preprocessing while there are still some observations within the interval that
are close to the true value. The majority of true negatives come from these points, while
the false positives mainly happen in wet weather.
Figure 4.13: An example of anomaly detection on sensor 2 test dataset using 99% quantile
as threshold. The red background indicates this period is an anomaly period. The black
line represents predictions, the green line is observations, the blue line shows the rainfall,
the red horizontal dash line is the threshold, and the red spots are detected anomalies.
The gray box marks the true negative predictions.
The Figure 4.14 illustrates the anomaly detection performance with the optimal threshold
using sensor 1 as an example. It can be seen that, although there still exist false triggered
anomalies, most true anomaly period are detected. The false triggered anomalies can be
downplayed by averaging the residual error over a 10 minute moving window. That means
only long-lasting anomalies will be labeled, thus reducing false positives, but the cost is
that some single outliers may be ignored. Those ignored anomalies are mostly single
outliers, which may be caused by fluctuations in water flow in the pipe. Such episodic
anomalies are not under our consideration. We are more concerned with those that are
of longer duration, which may indicate that the sensor needs to be maintained. Besides,
in reality, we cannot decide to maintain a sensor just because of an occasional abnor-
mal alarm. A more reasonable approach would be to set a time scale, e.g., more than
36
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:45==
20 alarms in an hour (up to 40 minutes of error reporting) would indicate that the sensor
is working abnormally and needs to be serviced. Another way is to set a threshold and
trigger an alarm when the accumulated error exceeds the threshold.
Figure 4.14: An example of anomaly detection on sensor 1 test dataset using 99% quantile
as threshold. a) Anomalies on full time series. b) Anomalies during dry weather. c)
Anomalies during wet weather. The red background indicates the labeled anomaly period.
The red dots represent detected anomalies.
4.4
Working as a soft sensor
When the anomalies are detected, the model will use the predicted value to replace the
observed value as the next step input. In this way, the model can still work as a soft
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
37
==PAGE:46==
sensor to replace the faulted flow meter. However, errors will also accumulate during this
process and in this section we will evaluate the performance of this soft sensor.
4.4.1
Soft sensor performance
(a) Overestimate
(b) Underestimate
(c) Signal missing
(d) Signal missing (return messy noise)
Figure 4.15: The figures demonstrate the manually added anomalies (Sensor 1 as an
example). a) represents the case where the sensor overestimated the flow rate. b) rep-
resents the case when the sensor underestimated the flow rate. c) represents the case
when the sensor is offline and the signal is missing. d) represents the case when the sen-
sor is actually faulty but returns some noise signal.The dashed green line indicates the
true flow rate. The solid green line represents the observed flow rate when the sensor is
abnormal. The blue line represents rainfall. The dark line represents the predicted value.
To evaluate the performance of a soft sensor, we need to know the true value of the
anomaly period and then compare it with the predicted value. Four possible errors in
reality are artificially added to the test dataset (Section 3.2.2) and run on the anomaly de-
38
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:47==
tection model. The soft sensor function on sensor 1 dataset is illustrated as an example
in the Figure 4.15, the figures for rest sensors can be found in Appendix A.2. It demon-
strates that when a sensor fails, the anomaly detection model can detect anomalies and
take control. The soft sensor on sensor 1 gives relatively good predictions with NSE all
greater than 0.5 in different anomaly situations, which is acceptable in hydrologic model-
ing [30] and can be used to replace the pyhsical flow meter in some emergency events.
Similar work has been done on other sensors and the results are summarised in Table
4.3.
Table 4.3: NSE of soft-sensors working on artificially added anomalies.
Anomaly type
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Sensor 3
Sensor 4
Sensor 5
Overestimate
0.933
0.922
0.580
0.659
0.969
Underestimate
0.771
0.709
-
0.311
0.933
Signal missing
0.864
0.901
0.241
0.506
0.836
Signal missing (return messy noise)
0.557
0.719
-
0.524
0.888
The models for Sensor 2 and 5 generally have the good performance with all NSE greater
than 0.7 which corresponds to a perfect match of the predictions to the true flow data.
Catchment 2 is a neighbor of catchment 1, while catchment 5 is a long distance from
catchment 1. The excellent performance of SSM in catchments 2 and 5 further illustrates
the generalizability of the model configuration. Sensor 3 has some missing NSE values
because the raw data of sensor3 is missing in these two periods, so it cannot be evaluated.
The Sensor 3, and Sensor 4 models all have a NSE value below 0.5, and one possible
reason could be the backwater in these two catchments, which introduced the noise in
training. A series of evaluations illustrates that the models on sensors 1,2,5 are relatively
reliable and sensors 3,4 cannot achieve satisfactory results due to the deficiencies in the
training data.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:49==
5
Discussion
5.1
Modelling choices and results
5.1.1
Data set
In our study we train the prediction model using datasets without outliers and then test the
anomaly detection model with datasets with outliers. therefore the key step is to pre-label
the outlier datasets. This is one of the most time consuming parts of this study. How-
ever, since outliers are generally small probability events, even if they are not completely
excluded from the training set of the prediction model, they do not significantly affect the
generation of the model, so we only perform a cursory flagging, marking all suspicious
consecutive windows as outliers. This caused some trouble for subsequent anomaly de-
tection, resulting in low F1-scores.
To verify the feasibility of the soft sensor we manually added some outliers and the re-
sults showed that the model worked as expected. However, we only tested a very limited
sample without verifying the reliability. More samples should be set up for validation as
time allows.
Another problem is that the low resolution of sensor compared to daily flow. As shown in
the figure, daily flow are typicaly around 0.002 m3/s to 0.006 m3/s while the resolution of
sensor is 0.001 m3/s. The model learns the trend of the daily pattern but cannot capture
the jitter of the signal. Because sensors are not sensitive enough to respond to changes
in daily sewer flow, the changes near the critical point are amplified while some slight
changes are ignored. During wet weather, however, the flow in sewers is orders of mag-
nitude greater than the daily flow, and the single becomes more smooth with less noise.
So a sensor with higher resolution is needed in order to give a better prediction during the
dry weather, or we should prolong the time resolution (e.g., 30 min subsampling).
5.1.2
Modelling setup
We tested single-sensor models and multi-sensor models. Aggregating information from
multiple adjacent catchments does not improve the accuracy of the model predictions but
introduces redundant information. The information from each sensor affects the predic-
tion model even though the flows in each catchment are actually independent. One rea-
son is that, because the spatial distribution of rainfall is heterogeneous and time-shifted,
the runoff relationship between catchments is fraught with uncertainty. When we have
rainfall data from rainfall stations, runoff from other catchments becomes redundant and
sometimes even introduces noise to give biased predictions. Most importantly, we have
data from the nodes where flow from different catchments converged, and these different
catchments are functionally disjoint, so there is no reason to put these data into the same
model. As an example, when people in catchment A turn on a party late at night, causing
a high flow in the network may mislead the prediction of flow in catchment B.
The multi-sensor model becomes meaningful when the sensors are distributed not in sep-
arate catchments but along the upstream and downstream, because the continuous flow
principle dictates that the upstream flow will eventually converge to the downstream, and
therefore they are closely related in time and space. Another suitable scenario for MSM is
when the real-time rainfall series is not available. Not all cities have such a great network
as in Næstved, in this situation, the flow from other catchments can supplement rainfall
information. In our case, the single-sensor model is more suitable than the multi-sensor
model, so we use the single-sensor model to make predictions.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
41
==PAGE:50==
5.1.3
Model training
Data plays a crucial role in generating well-trained models. In the majority of applications,
we are often primarily concerned in predicting/classifying infrequent events. However,
these uncommon occurrences may be represented sparsely in the training data set. In
turn, this causes the created models to lack essential properties of the underlying systems.
The undersampling and synthetic minority oversampling methodology is one method for
addressing the issue of unbalanced data (SMOTE) [21]. Rainfall events are unevenly
distributed and relatively rare in our dataset. In the k-fold cross-validation, we can observe
that some of the fold fits are poor, mainly because there are too few rainfall events in the
corresponding training set, and the rainfall runoff cannot be accurately predicted when
they are hit in the test set. SMOTE is a method that can improve model performance and
is worth further exploration.
5.1.4
Attributes selection
During the study, we found that a deceptive mistake of one-step-ahead models is to take
the observation of the previous moment as the output of the next moment, which always
results in a lagging and invalid model. Such models often have good evaluation scores
but have no practical meaning. Therefore, we have to take this into account when se-
lecting features; otherwise, the model will strictly fit the observed data even if that data is
wrong.
The input of temporal characteristics is intended to provide sufficient information to predict
flows with an input window of less than one cycle, since the generation of wastewater flows
is extremely dependent on human activity, which usually has a time pattern. Tempera-
ture, on the other hand, responds to seasonal changes to some extent, and groundwater
seepage is strongly correlated with season [18].
We did some preprocessing of the rainfall series to remove the fixed value of initial loss
(0.6 mm.) This operation may introduce errors due to our lack of data on soil moisture.
Because the initial loss is highly dependent on the moisture state of the soil (infiltration
capacity), the soil’s infiltration capacity decreases with water intake, but gradually recov-
ers with the end of the rainfall, whereas when two rainfall events are temporarily close,
the soil’s water absorption capacity may not recover in time, resulting in a small initial
loss. Since we subtracted a fixed initial loss for each rainfall event, some runoff was un-
derestimated after subtracting the fixed value of the initial loss. Whether the initial loss
is removed or not introduces errors, but we find that the benefit of removing it is more
pronounced, so removing the initial loss when soil moisture is lacking is an appropriate
choice. A more logical approach would be to include an integrator-like module in the
model, with the magnitude of the initial loss determined by the time since the last rainfall.
5.1.5
Anomaly indicator
Due to the limited data and the rainfall runoff model itself is a complex domain, the pre-
dicted flow of rain days will always be somewhat delayed or advanced at the beginning
and end, resulting in some points where the relative error is always high. This is inevitable
without increasing the model input information. But it is possible to set different thresh-
olds for dry weather and wet weather to reduce the misjudgment. The further research
can focus on setting more flexible thresholds or even combining different indicators (e.g.
logPD) to improve detection results. In addition, we should set different levels of alarms.
When occasional anomalies occur, they may be due to fluctuations in the flow in the pipe
or debris affecting the sensor measurement, and these anomalies can be ignored. How-
ever, when anomalies occur repeatedly over a period of time, the operator needs to be
alerted and a higher level alarm needs to be set. For example, if there are 20 outliers in
an hour, this means that nearly forty minutes of data is suspect and the engineer needs
42
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:51==
to be alerted to further determine if the sensor needs maintenance.
5.2
Ways forward
There are many ways to improve on the models and data sets used for this study, many of
which have been suggested in the sections above. Other ways forward are more broad,
these are discussed below.
5.2.1
Additional model structure
The one-step prediction model is the most basic model, and future research can consider
more complex models, such as Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks
(Autoregressive model). One clear advantage to this style of model is that it can be set
up to produce output with a varying length. The soft sensor model is only run in an au-
toregressive feedback loop, but in the future we can focus on building a model that’s been
explicitly trained to do that. In this way, we can extend the soft-sensor’s working time, or
the model will deter with the accumulation of predicted error.
5.2.2
Fusion of information from multi-sensors
In this study, we tried to fuse the information from sewer flow meters and rain gauges
and successfully built an anomaly detection model. We also tried to fuse the flow meter
in different catchments, although the results were not as good as we expected and may
not suitable in our case. We cannot deny that as more and more sensors are deployed,
it is believed that the fusion of information between multiple sensors can provide more
valuable information. Some research has already led to great results, like combining water
quality sensors with flow rate sensors to predict the quality of water in sewage networks
or combining air quality sensors with wind sensors to predict air pollution concentration
and spatial distribution in cities [32]. One possible study could be combining the sensors
that are distributed upstream and downstream of the main pipes, and thus try to apply
the multi-sensor model, where we can introduce the attention mechanism to explore the
spatial-temporal correlation of sensors [32].
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusion
For this study, the main purpose was to construct and evaluate an LSTM recurrent neural
network model for sewer system anomaly detection. The work is meant as a first step to
apply this method in real time and identify the feasibility and potential pitfalls for further de-
velopment. The following conclusions were drawn in response to the research questions
formulated in Section 1.
1. We have constructed a modelling setup and series of rainfall and flow data for pre-
dictive models and anomaly detection models. Single-sensor model and Multi-sensor
model were tested and tuned. The Single-sensor models were found to have better
performance and be more suitable for sensors located in different subcathments. The
optimized Single-sensor model is generalizable and has been chosen as the predictive
model.
2. We assessed the use of prediction errors as anomaly indicators to indicate normal
or abnormal sensor behavior and found the optimal threshold for each sensor model.
The absolute relative error is used as the indicator, and the relative error quantile on
the test dataset is used as the threshold to detect the anomalies. Although it always
has some false detection, it can detect most anomalies. Adjusting the threshold value
can effectively reduce false positives. Models on sensors 1, 2, and 5 can perform the
task of anomaly detection excellently, while models on sensors 3, and 4 are unreliable
because of the existence of backwater in the pipes, and the model cannot differentiate
it due to a lack of information.
3. Soft-sensor model was run and evaluated on a data set with artificially introduced
anomalies. The model can successfully detected an anomaly point and worked in
an auto-regressive feed back loop to replace the fault sensor. The results show that it
is feasible to use LTSM as a soft sensor in a drainage system with limited information.
This study demonstrates that the LSTM-based anomaly detection model is feasible and
achieved very promising results in three of the five catchments in the study area. The
model, after being deployed, can be used as an artificial intelligence online monitoring
tool for wastewater network flow meters, providing early warning when anomalies oc-
cur. Operators can decide if sensor maintenance is necessary based on the frequency
of anomaly alerts. When the sensors are faulty, the model can continue to provide flow
monitoring as a soft-sensor, providing decision support for network scheduling, which is
very meaningful during rainfall periods. Of course the reliability of the model needs further
validation, and this study is only a preliminary attempt in this area.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
David Butler et al. Urban Drainage, Fourth Edition.
[2]
C. Makropoulos and D. A. Savić. “Urban Hydroinformatics: Past, Present and Fu-
ture”. In: Water 11.10 (10 Oct. 2019), p. 1959. ISSN: 2073-4441. DOI: 10.3390/
w11101959.
[3]
Stefania Russo et al. “The Value of Human Data Annotation for Machine Learn-
ing Based Anomaly Detection in Environmental Systems”. In: Water Research 206
(Nov. 2021), p. 117695. ISSN: 00431354. DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2021.117695.
[4]
“Smart Anomaly Detection in Sensor Systems: A Multi-Perspective Review | Else-
vier Enhanced Reader”. In: (). DOI: 10.1016/j.inffus.2020.10.001.
[5]
Rocco Palmitessa. “From Soft Sensing to Anomaly Detection in Combined Sewer
Systems”. Nanyang Technological University, 2021. DOI: 10.32657/10356/152424.
[6]
Jan Paul Assendorp. “Deep learning for anomaly detectionin multivariate time series
data”. In: (), p. 90.
[7]
Catherine Leigh et al. “A Framework for Automated Anomaly Detection in High Fre-
quency Water-Quality Data from in Situ Sensors”. In: Science of The Total Environ-
ment 664 (May 10, 2019), pp. 885–898. ISSN: 0048-9697. DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2019.02.085.
[8]
Sven Eggimann et al. “The Potential of Knowing More: A Review of Data-Driven
Urban Water Management”. In: Environmental Science & Technology 51.5 (Mar. 7,
2017), pp. 2538–2553. ISSN: 0013-936X, 1520-5851. DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.6b04267.
[9]
V. Cherkassky et al. “Computational Intelligence in Earth Sciences and Environmen-
tal Applications: Issues and Challenges”. In: Neural Networks 19.2 (2006), pp. 113–
121. ISSN: 0893-6080. DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2006.01.001.
[10]
Stefania Russo et al. “Active Learning for Anomaly Detection in Environmental
Data”. In: Environmental Modelling & Software 134 (Dec. 1, 2020), p. 104869. ISSN:
1364-8152. DOI: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2020.104869.
[11]
Duo Zhang, Geir Lindholm, and Harsha Ratnaweera. “Use long short-term memory
to enhance Internet of Things for combined sewer overflow monitoring”. In: Journal
of Hydrology 556 (2018), pp. 409–418. ISSN: 0022-1694. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jhydrol.2017.11.018.
[12]
Rocco Palmitessa et al. “Soft Sensing of Water Depth in Combined Sewers Using
LSTM Neural Networks with Missing Observations”. In: Journal of Hydro-environment
Research 38 (Sept. 2021), pp. 106–116. ISSN: 15706443. DOI: 10.1016/j.jher.2021.
01.006.
[13]
Varun Chandola, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. “Anomaly Detection: A Sur-
vey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 41.3 (July 30, 2009), 15:1–15:58. ISSN: 0360-
0300. DOI: 10.1145/1541880.1541882.
[14]
Jianjun Ni et al. “Abrupt Event Monitoring for Water Environment System Based on
KPCA and SVM”. In: IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 61.4
(Apr. 2012), pp. 980–989. ISSN: 1557-9662. DOI: 10.1109/TIM.2011.2173000.
[15]
David J. Hill and Barbara S. Minsker. “Anomaly Detection in Streaming Environmen-
tal Sensor Data: A Data-Driven Modeling Approach”. In: Environmental Modelling
& Software 25.9 (Sept. 2010), pp. 1014–1022. ISSN: 13648152. DOI: 10.1016/j.
envsoft.2009.08.010.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
47
==PAGE:56==
[16]
Jun Inoue et al. “Anomaly Detection for a Water Treatment System Using Unsuper-
vised Machine Learning”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
Workshops (ICDMW). 2017, pp. 1058–1065. DOI: 10.1109/ICDMW.2017.149.
[17]
Lanning Adam and W. Peterson Eric. “Evaluating Subdivisions for Identifying Extra-
neous Flow in Separate Sanitary Sewer Systems”. In: Journal of Water Resource
and Protection 2012 (June 20, 2012). ISSN: 1945-3108. DOI: 10.4236/jwarp.2012.
46037.
[18]
Rachel A. Esralew and Jason M. Lewis. Trends in Base Flow, Total Flow, and Base-
Flow Index of Selected Streams in and near Oklahoma through 2008. USGS Num-
bered Series 2010-5104. U.S. Geological Survey, 2010. DOI: 10.3133/sir20105104.
[19]
Ari Jóhannesson et al. “Approaches for unsupervised identification of data-driven
models for flow forecasting in urban drainage systems”. In: Journal of Hydroinfor-
matics 23.6 (Oct. 2021), pp. 1368–1381. ISSN: 1464-7141. DOI: 10.2166/hydro.
2021.020.
[20]
Qianqian Zhang et al. “Predictive Models for Wastewater Flow Forecasting Based
on Time Series Analysis and Artificial Neural Network”. In: Water Science and Tech-
nology 80.2 (July 15, 2019), pp. 243–253. ISSN: 0273-1223, 1996-9732. DOI: 10.
2166/wst.2019.263.
[21]
Hazhar Sufi Karimi et al. “Comparison of Learning-Based Wastewater Flow Predic-
tion Methodologies for Smart Sewer Management”. In: Journal of Hydrology 577
(Oct. 2019), p. 123977. ISSN: 00221694. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2019.123977.
[22]
Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks - Part 1. URL: https://www.theprojectspot.
com/tutorial- post/introduction- to- artificial- neural- networks- part- 1/7 (visited on
06/13/2022).
[23]
Aston Zhang et al. “Dive into Deep Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11342
(2021).
[24]
An Overview of Gradient Descent Optimization Algorithms. Sebastian Ruder. Jan. 19,
2016. (Visited on 06/13/2022).
[25]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”.
Jan. 29, 2017. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs].
[26]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep Learning”. In: Nature
521.7553 (May 28, 2015), pp. 436–444. ISSN: 0028-0836, 1476-4687. DOI: 10.
1038/nature14539.
[27]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neural
Computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[28]
H. K. Jørgensen et al. “Quality Control of Rain Data Used for Urban Runoff Sys-
tems”. In: Water Science and Technology. Use of Historical Rainfall Series for Hy-
drological Modelling 37.11 (Jan. 1, 1998), pp. 113–120. ISSN: 0273-1223. DOI:
10.1016/S0273-1223(98)00323-0.
[29]
Maxim Tkachenko et al. Label Studio: Data labeling software. Open source software
available from https://github.com/heartexlabs/label-studio. 2020-2022. URL: https:
//github.com/heartexlabs/label-studio.
[30]
Model Evaluation Guidelines for Systematic Quantification of Accuracy in Water-
shed Simulations. URL: https://doi.org/10.13031/2013.23153 (visited on 05/31/2022).
[31]
Zhongrun Xiang, Jun Yan, and Ibrahim Demir. “A Rainfall-Runoff Model With LSTM-
Based Sequence-to-Sequence Learning”. In: Water Resources Research 56.1 (2020),
e2019WR025326. ISSN: 1944-7973. DOI: 10.1029/2019WR025326.
[32]
Yuxuan Liang et al. “GeoMAN: Multi-level Attention Networks for Geo-sensory Time
Series Prediction”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence. Stockholm, Sweden: International Joint Confer-
48
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:57==
ences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, July 2018, pp. 3428–3434. DOI: 10.
24963/ijcai.2018/476.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:59==
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
51
==PAGE:60==
A
Experiments and results
A.1
Relative residual histogram
(a) Sensor 2
(b) Sensor 3
(c) Sensor 4
52
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:61==
(d) Sensor 5
Figure A.1: Absolute relative error on the normal dataset from sensor 2 to sensor 5. The
red line indicate 95%, 96 %, 97%, 98% and 99% quantile (left to right).
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
53
==PAGE:62==
A.2
Soft sensor performance
(a) Overestimate
(b) Underestimate
(c) Signal missing
(d) Signal missing (return messy noise)
Figure A.2: The figures demonstrate the manually added anomalies on sensor 2 data
set. a) represents the case where the sensor overestimated the flow rate. b) represents
the case when the sensor underestimated the flow rate. c) represents the case when the
sensor is offline and the signal is missing. d) represents the case when the sensor is
actually faulty but returns some noise signal.The dashed green line indicates the true flow
rate. The solid green line represents the observed flow rate when the sensor is abnormal.
The blue line represents rainfall. The dark line represents the predicted value.
54
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:63==
(a) Overestimate
(b) Signal missing
Figure A.3: The figures demonstrate the manually added anomalies on sensor 3 data set.
a) represents the case where the sensor overestimated the flow rate. b) represents the
case when the sensor is offline and the signal is missing. The dashed green line indicates
the true flow rate. The solid green line represents the observed flow rate when the sensor
is abnormal. The blue line represents rainfall. The dark line represents the predicted
value.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Overestimate
(b) Underestimate
(c) Signal missing
(d) Signal missing (return messy noise)
Figure A.4: The figures demonstrate the manually added anomalies on sensor 4 data
set. a) represents the case where the sensor overestimated the flow rate. b) represents
the case when the sensor underestimated the flow rate. c) represents the case when the
sensor is offline and the signal is missing. d) represents the case when the sensor is
actually faulty but returns some noise signal.The dashed green line indicates the true flow
rate. The solid green line represents the observed flow rate when the sensor is abnormal.
The blue line represents rainfall. The dark line represents the predicted value.
56
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:65==
(a) Overestimate
(b) Underestimate
(c) Signal missing
(d) Signal missing (return messy noise)
Figure A.5: The figures demonstrate the manually added anomalies on sensor 5 data
set. a) represents the case where the sensor overestimated the flow rate. b) represents
the case when the sensor underestimated the flow rate. c) represents the case when the
sensor is offline and the signal is missing. d) represents the case when the sensor is
actually faulty but returns some noise signal.The dashed green line indicates the true flow
rate. The solid green line represents the observed flow rate when the sensor is abnormal.
The blue line represents rainfall. The dark line represents the predicted value.
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
57
==PAGE:66==
A.3
F1-score under different threshold
Table A.1: F1-score under different threshold
Quantile
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Sensor 3
Sensor 4
Sensor 5
95%
0.669
0.558
0.456
0.369
0.504
96%
0.752
0.635
0.568
0.493
0.742
97%
0.831
0.734
0.601
0.560
0.863
98%
0.857
0.769
0.647
0.640
0.889
99%
0.879
0.837
0.688
0.592
0.824
58
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
==PAGE:67==
Application of LSTM models for anomaly detection in flow data from Næstved sewer system
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
