==PAGE:1==
Development of a framework to support the
design of female sanitation solutions for
women in developing countries.
Master Thesis
January 03rd 2022 ­ July 03rd 2022
Manon Chloé Villers (s202934)
DTU ­ Design and Innovation
==PAGE:2==
Development of a framework to support the design of female sanitation solutions
for women in developing countries.
Danish Title:
Udvikling af en ramme til støtte for design af kvindelige sanitetsløs­
ninger for kvinder i udviklingslande.
Starting Date:
03rd January 2022
Submitted:
03rd July 2022
ECTS Points:
35 points
Field of Study:
Design and Innovation
Supervisors:
Tim C. McAloone, DTU Mechanical Engineering
Co­supervisors:
Daniela Cristina Antelmi Pigosso, DTU Mechanical Engineering
Marie Louise Møllebæk Pollmann­Larsen, DTU Skylab
Cover illustration
Lifewater International.
(2019, December 23).
Sanitation for
Women: The Problem and Solution. [Online; accessed June 2022].
https://lifewater.org/blog/sanitation­for­women/.
Copyright
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared in the period January 03rd 2022 ­ July 03rd 2022 at the De­
partment of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. This
thesis represents the final fulfilment for the degree in Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng. in Design and Innovation.
Except where states otherwise by reference or acknowledgement, the work presented is
entirely my own.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of problem solving and
design methods.
Manon Chloé Villers ­ s202934
Signature
Date
03 / 07 / 2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Keywords: sanitation, shared sanitation, female sanitation, female urinal, design toolkit,
sociotechnical design, product design
Background: Access to appropriate and safe sanitation facilities is still a challenge in a
lot of low and middle­income countries. This problem directly affects the health of people
but also their dignity because they often need to resort to open­defecation and risky sit­
uations. Women are especially vulnerable to this problem and unequally affected. They
face extra difficulties with the risk of sexual harassment, strong cultural taboos, managing
their menstruation, etc. This thesis aims to tackle the problem of gender inequalities within
sanitation in low and middle­income countries by understanding how to create sanitation
facilities that are more suitable for women. More specifically, the research focuses on
shared female urinals.
Methods: The process uses a user­centred approach and confronts the theory of design
methods to practical and concrete examples directly expressed by local stakeholders.
The users and their needs are at the heart of the research process.
Outcome: The analysis shows that user behaviours and needs are often driven and
influenced by complex sociocultural contexts. That is why the investigation results in the
creation of three conceptual methods to facilitate the incorporation of the sociocultural
context in the design of shared female urinals. The final concept presents a systematic
approach to create more inclusive shared sanitation facilities.
Discussion: To genuinely address women’s needs in sanitation, the facilities also need
to last in time and appropriately incorporate themselves into the industry and whole soci­
ety. This research lays the groundwork for future studies to validate the developed tools
impacts and establish trade­offs between the users needs and the other stakeholders
requirements.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Nøgleord: sanitet, fælles sanitet, kvindelig sanitet, kvindeligt urinal, designværktøjssæt,
socioteknisk design, produktdesign
Baggrund: Adgang til passende og sikre sanitære faciliteter er stadig en udfordring i
mange lav­ og mellemindkomstlande. Dette problem påvirker direkte menneskers hel­
bred, men også deres værdighed, fordi de ofte er nødt til at ty til åben afføring og risikable
situationer. Kvinder er særligt sårbare over for dette problem og ulige påvirket. De står
over for ekstra vanskeligheder med risikoen for seksuel chikane, stærke kulturelle tabuer,
håndtering af deres menstruation osv. Denne afhandling har til formål at tackle prob­
lemet med kønsmæssige uligheder inden for sanitet i lav­ og mellemindkomstlande ved
at forstå, hvordan man kan skabe sanitære faciliteter, der er mere velegnet til kvinder.
Mere specifikt fokuserer forskningen på kvindelige urinaler.
Metoder: Processen bruger en brugercentreret tilgang og konfronterer teorien om de­
signmetoder med praktiske og konkrete eksempler direkte udtrykt af lokale interessenter.
Brugerne og deres behov er kernen i forskningsprocessen.
Resultat: Analysen viser, at brugeradfærd og behov ofte er drevet og påvirket af kom­
plekse sociokulturelle kontekster. Det er derfor, undersøgelsen resulterer i skabelsen af
tre konceptuelle metoder til at lette inkorporeringen af den sociokulturelle kontekst i de­
sign af kvindelige urinaler. Det endelige koncept præsenterer en systematisk tilgang til at
skabe mere inkluderende sanitetsprodukter.
Diskussion: For virkelig at imødekomme kvinders behov inden for sanitet, skal faciliteterne
også holde (i tide ­ på længere sigt) og på (en) passende måde integrere sig i industrien
og hele samfundet. Denne forskning danner grundlaget for fremtidige undersøgelser for
at validere virkningen af de udviklede værktøjer og etablere afvejninger mellem brugernes
behov og de andre interessenters krav.
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The master thesis opportunity I had in collaboration between DTU and Lapee was a great
chance for learning and professional development.
I would like to express my special thanks to my great team of supervisors, Tim C. McAloone,
Daniela Cristina Antelmi Pigosso and Marie Louise Møllebæk PollmannLarsen, who agreed
to support me on this project. They took the time to hear, guide and keep me on the correct
path and allowed me to carry out my project during the master thesis.
I hereby express my deepest thanks as well to Gina Périer and Alexander Egebjerg for
their welcome into Lapee and for their kind help throughout the project.
I also want to express my warm thanks to Björgvin Hjartarson for all his precious advice
and support throughout the entire project and his enjoyable company at the office.
In no particular order, I want to acknowledge all the persons of my entourage for making
my master thesis time so gratifying:
• Juan for his positive mindset
• Helena for her companionship during our thesis experience
• Danilo for his creative ideas and emotional support
• Camille for her listening from the dawn to the end of the project
• All the persons with whom, thanks to this project, I created interesting and unex­
pected conversations on sanitation and toilets ­ exchanges that fed my reflection
I finally want to thank my family, who always knows how to support me.
Sincerely,
Manon VILLERS
vi
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations and acronyms list
DL Design Lens
DSL Design Sub­Lens
DST Design Support Tool
ET Evaluation Tool
LLMICs Lower and Lower­Middle Income Countries
MHM Menstrual Hygiene Management
NIT Needs Identification Tool
NGO Non­governmental Organisation
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
UN United Nations
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WHO World Health Organisation
vii
==PAGE:8==
Definitions
Design Lens: Sociocultural design consideration identified during the project and chosen
to be the core of the analysis. They are numbered six: Privacy, Safety, Inclusivity, Beliefs,
Cleanliness and Hygiene and Menstrual Hygiene Management.
Design Sub­Lens: Sociocultural design consideration belonging to a Design Lens. Each
design lens is broken down into several sub­categories called design sub­lens.
Design Support Tool: The second part of the Support developed in the master thesis
to design shared female urinals. This tool aims to help the designer incorporate the so­
ciocultural context and needs in the design of female urinals. It includes essential and
desirable features to tackle as well as concrete examples and morphologies on how to do
it.
Developing Countries: Countries with relatively low income per capita, low standard of
living, undeveloped industrial base, and moderate to low Human Development Index (IGI
Global, 2022).
Evaluation Tool: The third part of the Support developed in the master thesis to design
shared female urinals. This tool aims to help the designer evaluate and select the design
proposal of female urinals generated.
Female Sanitation: Sanitation for women. It includes the facilities and services that are
specifically addressed to women.
Lower and Lower­Middle Income Countries: Countries with a gross national income
per capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method, of $4,095 or less in 2020 (World
Bank Data, 2020).
Needs Identification Tool: The first part of the Support developed in the master thesis
to design shared female urinals. This tool has two objectives. First, it aims to help the de­
signer understand the sociocultural context and the needs of the end­users of the female
urinal. Then, it facilitates the classification of those needs according to their importance
for the end­user.
Open defecation: Defecating in open spaces rather than in dedicated sanitation facilities,
for instance, in bushes, beaches, streets, fields, bodies of water, etc. To some extent,
open defecation can also include urinating in the open and/or managing menstruation in
the open.
Sanitation: The disposal of sewage and human waste. It also refers to all the services
and facilities that allow to dispose or recycle human excreta safely.
Shared female urinal: Sanitation facility shared by several women that can only collect
viii
==PAGE:9==
liquid human waste (urine, menstrual blood, etc.) and water. The facility can be shared in
a public, semi­private or private context, the concept does not embody this level of detail.
Women: Large spectrum of human beings identifying themselves as female gender. To
simplify, the master thesis uses the words ’women’ or ’female’ and does not enter the
details of the identify spectrum.
ix
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface
iv
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Resume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
Abbreviations and acronyms list
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Introduction to the problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Introduction to the thesis project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Research Clarification ­ Scope definition
10
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Sanitation challenges in developing countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Sanitation cycle and technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Sanitation in emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6
Needs within female sanitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.7
Reflection and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
x
==PAGE:11==
3
Descriptive Study 1 ­ Sanitation challenges analysis
24
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2
Interviews methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Sanitation challenges and their roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Study cases of specific contexts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
Focus on female urinals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.6
Reflection and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Prescriptive Study ­ Support development
40
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3
Preliminary research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.4
Needs and specifications of a urinal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.5
Core of the Support
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.6
A three­step tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.7
Company case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.8
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.9
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5
Descriptive Study 2 ­ Support evaluation
66
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.2
Methodology to assess the developed Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.3
Completeness of the Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.4
Usability of the Support
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.5
Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
6
Discussion
76
6.1
Reflection on female urinals development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6.2
Discussion on the developed Support
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
xi
==PAGE:12==
6.3
Discussion on the company case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6.4
Discussion on the process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
7
Conclusion
90
7.1
Future work on the Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
7.2
Go beyond the project delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
7.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
7.4
Annotated bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
8
References
95
Appendices
102
xii
==PAGE:13==
xiii
==PAGE:14==
1
Introduction
Identify the problems,  research 
questions and methodology
1.1 
Introduction to the problem 
1.2 
Introduction to the thesis project
1.3
Learning Objectives
© Frédéric Soltan/Corbis
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
This chapter aims to introduce the reader to the thesis and its scope. It starts by present­
ing the problem space of the thesis. Then, it introduces the company case that the project
is focusing on. Finally, the chapter presents the general methodology, the research ques­
tions and the learning objectives of the thesis project.
1.1
Introduction to the problem
This section introduces the double problem tackled in the thesis, the one raised by sani­
tation worldwide and the one faced by the case company.
1.1.1
Sanitation challenges worldwide
Exploring how to provide better sanitation for all is the aim of this master thesis. Access to
sanitation is a need shared by every human being, but the availability of proper sanitation
solutions is still very unequal and lacking in many countries. It is not because sanitation
facilities are implemented that they are safe to use. Thus, in 2020, it was estimated
that more than half of the world’s population, 4.2 billion people, did not have facilities
where waste is safely treated, and around 2 billion people lacked basic sanitation services
(UNICEF & WHO, 2020). It is also estimated that 673 million people have no facilities at
all and have to practise open defecation (UNICEF & WHO, 2020). Strong geographical
inequalities mark these disparities because 9 persons out of 10 practising open defecation
live in two regions: Central and Southern Asia and SubSaharan Africa (Sweetman and
Medland, 2019).
Lack of education, high­density living areas, complex geographic environment, sanitation
challenges are created by many interdependent causes (Ecoflo­WASH, 2022). First of all,
they engender severe health issues. Poor sanitation intensifies illnesses like diarrhoea or
cholera, and increases the spread of pathogens and parasites, such as intestinal worms
(WHO, 2022a). However, it is not only raising health concerns, unimproved sanitation
also directly impacts the social and economic life of people. For instance, it can decrease
2
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
school and work attendance because of illness or inadequate sanitation facilities (Ecoflo­
WASH, 2022). Finally, poor sanitation also harm the environment by polluting water and
ground.
For women, the challenges of inadequate sanitation are even more difficult because of
gender and sex­related differences Wendland et al. (2019). Gender concerns cultural and
social factors such as the need for more privacy and the risk of gender­based violence.
Sex refers to physiological elements as the supplementary needs required by menstrua­
tion or pregnancy (Burt et al., 2016).
Decent sanitation is thus vital to both human and environmental health. It was even recog­
nised as a human right in 2016 by the General Assembly of the United Nations (Assembly,
2016). Sanitation challenges are tackled by the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
6, Clean Water and Sanitation and especially the target 6.2 that aims, ”by 2030, to achieve
access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation,
paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable sit­
uations” (UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2016). Howerver, sanitation
actions field of impact is not only one SDGs and Parikh et al. (2021) has shown that
improved sanitation for all could benefit 83 out of 169 targets within the 17 SDGs.
Therefore, improving sanitation can have direct socio­economic benefits. It can improve
the economy of countries, the safety of people and the happiness of communities. Gen­
der mainstreaming can also play a crucial role in improving sanitation. Thus resolving
sanitation challenges is a key to better development and inequalities reduction.
1.1.2
Case company
The thesis is written in collaboration with the Danish Start­up Lapee, which has developed
an outdoor shared female urinal. This startup will be used as a case study throughout the
thesis. First, this collaboration allows to take the example of an actual female sanitation
facility and to challenge the product to the findings made in the thesis. Secondly, the
development of tools is directly built in collaboration with the designers of Lapee, which
brings validity to the study’s usefulness.
Lapee is one of the first shared outdoor female urinals that was created. Designed by
Gina and Alexander in 2018, it aims to reduce women’s uneven access to toilets. The
urinal can be seen in Figure 1.1. Observations of people’s behaviours in public toilets
have encouraged the designers to create Lapee’s concept. In public spaces, they have
noticed that the queue to access the toilets is usually much longer for women than men.
It is mainly due to the existence of male urinals ­ facilities that give men a fast way of
urinating. The female equivalent did not exist. Thus, Lapee has been designed as the
female equivalent of the male urinal KROS (Patent7000, 2022), as shown in Figure 2.5.
3
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Invented in the Netherlands in the early nineties, this urinal allows four men to urinate at
the same time. It has the same size as a portable toilet and has been a revolution for
public hygiene ­ especially in music festivals context.
Figure 1.1: Lapee’s urinal and user’s position
Lapee aims to give women better access to sanitation facilities. It also intends to include
a larger community by promoting Lapee as a ”squat” toilet ­ available for everyone willing
to squat to urinate. Lapee encourages people to change their views on sanitation with an
innovative toilet. The main revolutionary feature of Lapee, compared with conventional
toilets, is that it is opened without a roof or doors. The designers have considered that
openness gives more safety to women when they urinate ­ they can see what is around
them and don’t feel the vulnerability of being hidden behind a door. It also helps normalise
the taboo around women sanitation needs.
Figure 1.2: Lapee’s urinal and its male equivalent KROS
Right now, Lapee’s field of impact is limited to developed countries. Lapee exists in 11
countries in Europe and Australia (Lapee, 2022). It is mainly implemented in music fes­
tivals and sports events and sometimes cities. Gina and Alexander have been offered
some opportunities to use Lapee in refugee camps or Indian cities, but their product can
not meet some limitations due to cultural differences. They have developed a prototype
4
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
for a new toilet for India in collaboration with an Indian partner. This new product called
LP3X can be seen in Figure 1.3. It has the same shape as Lapee’s urinal with some extra
features. It particularly contains swing doors and a faeces/urine separation system. Two
versions exist, for men and women, in two different colours, blue and orange.
Lapee has the will to reach new emerging markets in developing countries and has started
to design a new product. That is why Lapee’s case consists of a relevant example to study
throughout the master thesis. During the thesis, the term “Lapee” will refer to either the
startup or the urinal itself.
Figure 1.3: LP3X, product developed for an Indian context
1.2
Introduction to the thesis project
1.2.1
Problem space of the thesis
The thesis aims to focus more specifically on shared female sanitation. Indeed, as de­
scribed previously, women face extra sanitation challenges, and their needs are not taken
enough into account. Shared sanitation refers to facilities that are used by several per­
sons. The facility can be shared in a public, semi­private or private context, the concept
does not embody this level of detail. The project aim to understand to which extent shared
female sanitation facilities can answer sanitation challenges in developing countries and
humanitarian emergencies. To do so, the current sanitation issues faced by developing
countries and emergency areas will have to be identified in order to understand what and
where are the challenges. The potential impacts of female sanitation solutions could be
evaluated by being put in perspective with the sanitation challenges identified. Then, it
would be interesting to identify in which socio­economic contexts female sanitation facili­
ties could be impactful and what should be the main characteristics of these facilities.
Understanding these elements could thereafter enable to support companies, designers
or startups that design sanitation solutions for developing countries. Indeed, the research
5
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
could give a better vision of the socio­economic context in which female sanitation facil­
ities could be implemented as well as key design elements to embody women needs in
sanitation facilities. Helping companies with the design of female sanitation facilities for
emerging markets in developing countries by taking specific examples and focusing on
the socio­cultural context is also a goal of the thesis.
Thus, the core objective of the thesis is: Understand how to support the design of female
sanitation solutions for emerging markets in developing countries.
1.2.2
Research Questions
Several Research Questions (RQ) have been defined to tackle the problem statement.
The secondary research questions bring key information to answer the main research
question, and they will guide each chapter of the report.
Main RQ: How to support the design of female sanitation solutions for emerging markets
in developing countries?
Secondary RQ:
• RQ1: What are the current sanitation challenges and needs faced by developing
countries and emergency areas? And to what extent can female sanitation solutions
solve these challenges?
• RQ2: Where do the sanitation challenges come from? In which socio­economic
spaces are female sanitation solutions relevant to implement? And what are their
main characteristics to solve the sanitation challenges identified?
• RQ3: How to support the design of female urinals, including the specifications and
selection of appropriate features tackling the specific sociotechnical challenges?
• RQ4: How successful is the developed support in designing appropriate female
urinal solutions?
1.2.3
Methodology and work packages
The project planning has been inspired by the approach of Design Research Methodol­
ogy (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009). The process is divided into four sections that will
consist of the four main chapters of the thesis: Explore, Analyse, Create and Assess. The
Research Clarification is an exploration, and it aims to formulate a realistic research goal
and plan. The first Descriptive Study aims to obtain a better understanding of the situa­
tion through an in­depth analysis. The third step is the Prescriptive Study which aims to
create an intervention and test different scenarios. Finally, the second Descriptive Study
will allow to assess and reflect on the results of the prescriptive study. Before the conclu­
sion, the thesis will present a discussion part reflecting on both the outcome, the process
6
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
and personal learning. However, it is important to point out that specific reflection and
discussion elements will be presented during and at the end of each chapter.
The overall overview of the sections, work packages and timeline, are represented in
Figure 1.4. There are five work packages (WP).
• The first WP corresponds to the research clarification. It includes the project plan,
the goals definition, and an initial literature review to identify the sanitation chal­
lenges. An initial assessment of Lapee will also be conducted.
• The second WP corresponds to the descriptive study 1. It is an in­depth context
study with literature review and interviews in order to understand better the context
in which female sanitation facilities could be implemented. An in­depth assessment
of Lapee will also be conducted.
• The third WP is part of the prescriptive study. It will focus on the translation of
users needs in design requirements to develop a female urinal. It will also include
a morphological analysis of the existing solutions.
• The fourth WP is also part of the prescriptive study. It consists of developing a
support method to help companies, such as Lapee, understand and include the
social needs in the design of the urinal.
• The fifth WP corresponds to the descriptive study 2 and discussion chapter. It
includes testing the Support during workshops with Lapee and designers and as­
sessing the results. It will also include a reflection on the overall process and on the
methods applied that could be replicated to other products or fields.
Figure 1.4: Project Plan inspired by DRM Process and brief timeline.
A detailed Gantt chart can be found in Appendix :A.1.
7
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Learning objectives
The following Learning Objectives aim to be completed during the project. They are di­
vided into three groups, analysis, design and overall project. These specific learning
objectives are in addition to the general DTU competencies that need to be fulfilled by all
masters of science. They can be found in Appendix A.2.
Analysis
1. Understand and assess the sanitary situations and the needs of the population in
different areas – especially in developing countries and emergency areas.
2. Evaluate the impacts of, and the drivers necessary for the deployment of sanitary
solutions.
3. Identify relevant scientific literature through a literature review and use it for further
empirical work.
4. Evaluate the needs of a given population, the context of an area and the relevance
of solutions by collaborating with local stakeholders.
Design
5. Synthesise different perspectives in proposing sanitary solutions for developing coun­
tries or emergency areas.
6. Combine and adapt design theories and methods to form relevant models and tools
for the analysis of complex problems.
7. Analyse, evaluate and critically reflect on trade­offs between social needs, cultural
barriers, technical feasibility, economic requirements and sustainable product de­
velopment.
Overall project
8. Adapt reflections, considerations and tools to different socio­economic contexts.
9. Suitably present technical and scientific knowledge according to the recipient and
context, using visual, oral and written language.
10. Independently conduct a long­term project, implement project management skills
and reflect on learning and academic development.
8
==PAGE:22==
Research 
Clarification
Understand the worldwide sanitation situation
2.1 
Introduction 
2.2 
Methodology
2.3 
Sanitation challenges in developing countries 
2.4 
Sanitation cycle and technologies 
2.5 
Sanitation in emergencies 
2.6 
Needs within female 
2.7 
Conclusion and reflection 
2
© UNICEF / Schermbrucker
==PAGE:23==
2
Research Clarification ­ Scope
definition
2.1
Introduction
This chapter deals with the initial context study that aims to provide some basic knowl­
edge about the master thesis context and problem. The goal is to better understand the
sanitation challenges worldwide ­ especially in developing countries and emergency ar­
eas. Once the challenges are identified, they will be put in perspective to understand
how female sanitation solutions could play a role in solving some of them. This focus
clarification is the opportunity to draw an initial assessment of Lapee’s urinal.
As described in Chapter 1, the research questions to be answered in the thesis and that
will guide this chapter are “What are the current sanitation challenges and needs faced
by developing countries and emergency areas? And to what extent can female sanitation
solutions solve these challenges?”.
This chapter consists of an initial literature review that will be the foundation of the research
work. It is important for three reasons, to have a better understanding of the sanitation
problem, to identify the research gaps and to narrow down the research scope.
Indeed, the research question is quite broad and tackles the vast space of ”developing
countries and humanitarian emergencies”. That is why the insights gained in this part will
eventually help to specify the scope. The research clarification also aims to understand
to which extent Lapee’s urinal could fit in the contexts of developing countries and hu­
manitarian emergencies. Even if the thesis focuses on female sanitation, sanitation for
both women and men will be analysed in the chapter in order to understand the overall
challenges.
10
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
2.2
Methodology
The literature review process follows the three­step framework: gather, filter and combine.
First, studies are searched and screened. Then, information is extracted from the studies
and analysed. Finally, the evidence are synthesised and written down in this chapter
(Biolchini and Mian, 2005). A detailed explanation of the research protocol is available in
Appendix B.1.
The literature review topics are organised in different parts and gradually narrowed down.
Figure 2.1 shows the general approach. The sanitation situation worldwide and the chal­
lenges in developing countries are tackled first. The aim is to get more knowledge on
the access to sanitation in developing countries, the inequalities toward sanitation ac­
cess, and the cultural differences. A second part focuses on the technical aspects of the
sanitation cycle, the waste treated and the specific vocabulary used. Then, the specific
context of humanitarian emergencies is explored. Gender­based inequalities and female
sanitation will be more especially analysed for every topic. Finally, using this exploratory
work, an initial assessment of Lapee’s urinal will be drawn to evaluate its assets and limits.
Figure 2.1: Organisation of the Literature Review.
2.3
Sanitation challenges in developing countries
This section presents a general overview of the worldwide sanitation challenges, espe­
cially the inequalities faced in developing countries. It also tackles the specific challenges
met by women and the cultural differences existing within sanitation habits.
2.3.1
Sanitation issues and inequalities
Poor sanitation results in two main issues, a contaminated environment and a threat to
human health (WHO/UNICEF, 2021). Human wastes spread diseases that can cause
illness and death. It also contaminates the environment and especially land, soil and wa­
ter. This can foster the transmission of diseases between human beings. Thus, unsafe
sanitation is responsible for 775,000 deaths each year (Ritchie and Roser, 2021). That is
11
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
why safe excreta disposal is a key to better human health (Brown et al., 2012). The waste
treatment itself is not the only lever to improve sanitation and stop transmission of dis­
eases. Contamination can happen at different stages identified as the 5s ­ faeces, fluids,
fingers, flies and food by The Sphere (2018). For instance, hand washing, fly control and
food peeling are also important actions to stop transmission of diseases. A complete dia­
gram showing all the barriers that have to be considered to implement efficient sanitation
solutions can be seen in Appendix B.2.
The quality of sanitation services is often evaluated thanks to a sanitation ladder de­
veloped by United Nations (UN) (UNICEF & WHO, 2020). Figure 2.2 distinguishes five
service levels of sanitation from open defecation to safely managed sanitation facilities.
This tool allows to classify and compare the places between each other thanks to a stan­
dard reference. Worldwide, open­defecation is still practised by 8.5% of the population
(UNICEF & WHO, 2020). In 2020, it was also estimated that around 25% of the world
population lacks basic sanitation services (UNICEF & WHO, 2020) and 54% of the world
do not have facilities where waste is safely managed (Ritchie and Roser, 2021). However,
the ladder is sometimes criticised because it can be too general and does not always rep­
resent the complexity of specific places. For instance, Rheinländer et al. (2015) argues
that shared sanitation should not automatically be considered unimproved. Indeed, in
some communities, household toilets are not possible to implement, and a shared toilet
for a small group of persons can be the better option. Thus it is important to consider
the ladder but also take into account the complexity of the context in which the sanitation
facilities are implemented.
Figure 2.2: Sanitation Ladder from Ritchie and Roser (2021)
Access to safe sanitation is unequal. It is especially a problem in low and lower­middle­
income countries as seen in Figure 2.3 where an important part of the population does not
have access to toilets or only to unimproved facilities. While poor sanitation represents
1,4% of global death, it accounts for 5% of the deaths in low­income countries (Ritchie
and Roser, 2021). Poor sanitation is also concentrated in specific geographical areas.
For instance, nine persons out of 10 practising open defecation live in two regions, Sub­
Saharan Africa and Central and Southern Asia (Sweetman and Medland, 2019). As seen
12
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
in Figure 2.3, it respectively represents 18% and 12% of the population in those countries.
Figure 2.3: Share of the population with access to sanitation facilities from Ritchie and
Roser (2021)
These inequalities exist between countries and continents, but they also exist within coun­
tries. Different factors are behind, such as the economic gap between wealthy and poor
populations, and how suitable the facilities are for children, disabled persons, or women.
Sanitation for women meets specific issues that are described in the next section.
2.3.2
Gender inequalities within sanitation
Men and women are not equal in the access to and use of sanitation facilities. Female
sanitation meets extra challenges. For instance, in Sub­Saharan Africa, one in ten girls
miss school during their menstruation. It represents 20% of the school year. This is due
to a lack of menstrual products, proper education and suitable sanitation facilities (UN­
ESCO, 2014). Another example raised in some studies is the fact that taboos around
defecation and menstruation are so strong that some women delay drinking and eating to
be able to only relieve themselves at night, under cover of the dark (Inter­Agency Standing
Committee, 2015). These inequalities are due to several factors linked to sex and gen­
der differences between men and women Wendland et al. (2019). First there are more
taboos around urination, defecation and menstruation for women and girls. Then, they
are more vulnerable to sexual assault and violence while going to or coming back from the
toilets. Finally, they meet specific hygiene needs when they are menstruated, pregnant
13
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
or with young children (202, 2022; Inter­Agency Standing Committee, 2015). These el­
ements make women more exposed to gender­based violence and suggest that specific
measures must be taken when designing sanitation facilities.
An essential element to reduce gender inequalities in sanitation is to design single­sex toi­
lets (Agerholm, 2018). Wheter in schools, public or emergency sanitation, it helps women
feel safer and give them more privacy while using the latrines. Concerning Menstrual
Hygiene Management (MHM), three key elements need to be taken into account as de­
scribed by Naughton et al. (2017). First, girls and women need to use clean material to
absorb blood. Then, access to water and soap for cleaning is necessary and proper dis­
posal or cleaning methods for menstrual protection. Finally, women and girls must have
access to basic information about menstruation to manage them correctly. Education
plays a crucial role in better sanitation.
2.3.3
Cultural differences
The last element important to highlight is that the use of toilets is subject to cultural dif­
ferences. It mainly concerns the perianal cleansing and the defecation position (Othman,
2017). These elements need to be considered when designing sanitation solutions be­
cause they directly influence the use of latrines. In Western countries, toilet paper is the
most common method for perianal cleansing. Whereas in many other cultures across
the globe, water is considered the most common practice ­ especially in Asia, the Middle
East and some parts of Africa. In Europe, the use of bidets ­ still very common in Italy,
for instance ­ also shows preferences for water toward toilet paper. The use of water is
also widespread in the Muslim community (Othman, 2017). Regarding vocabulary, it is
common to call those using toilet paper for perianal cleansing, wipers, and those using
water, washers.
Another cultural distinction can be made with the defecation position. Some toilets require
sitting while others squatting. It especially exists with the difference between Western
and Indian toilets. Studies have shown that the use of squatting latrines allows a better
defecation. Indeed, when squatting, the anorectal angle is higher, resulting in a terminal
rectum without folding and no toxic waste created. The figure 2.4 shows the differences
in anorectal angle.
14
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
Figure 2.4: Anorectal angle differences between sitting and squatting (Othman, 2017)
2.4
Sanitation cycle and technologies
This section aims to understand how sanitation systems are made and the properties of
the waste they deal with.
2.4.1
Sanitation Cycle
Sanitation systems have to be seen as cycles to be designed and implemented ade­
quately. Human waste is collected, handled by sanitation facilities, treated and poten­
tially recycled or disposed of. Then, it goes back to the environment in different forms ­
for instance as fertilisers ­ and can, later on, re­enter the cycle ­ for instance as food.
Sanitation facilities can be broken down into five functional groups: the user interface, the
collection and storage, the transport, the treatment and the use and/or disposal. Every
sanitation facility does not need to have an element of each functional group when being
designed, but all of them should be considered to implement an efficient solution (Tilley
et al., 2014). For each of the functional groups, different technologies are available. Tilley
et al. (2014) have developed a Compendium of sanitation technologies that shows the
wide range of existing possibilities. One of the most common solutions implemented in
developing countries and humanitarian emergencies is the pit latrine. The principle is a
hole dug in the ground ­ potentially strengthened with lining to prevent collapsing (German
WASH Network and Eawag Aquatic Research, 2021).
2.4.2
Human waste
Urine and faeces are the two types of human wastes generally treated. When they are
mixed, they are called excreta. When flush water and perianal cleansing material (water
or dry material) are added to the excreta, it is called black water. In the case where urine
is source­separated, the faeces and flush water are called brown water. Each of this type
15
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
of waste has different properties and requires specific treatment (Sanitation Systems &
Technologies, 2016).
By year, a human being produced 50 L of faeces and 500 L of urine (Sanitation Systems
& Technologies, 2016). Figure 2.5 shows the average composition of urine and faeces.
It can be seen that urine has high levels of nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium, and
for a healthy human being, no pathogens. On the other side, faeces have a high level of
faecal coliforms and a lower level of nutrients. The process of getting secondary products
out of human wastes depends on the composition of the waste. For urine, time allows
having a useful product. For faeces, heat is necessary to eliminate pathogens. The
more wastes are mixed (excreta or black water), the more complicated the processes
become. However, even if recycling urine and faeces can have interesting properties and
applications, legislation and cultural barriers do not allow yet to spread these practices
(Wey, 2022).
Figure 2.5: Characteristics of faeces and urine from (Sanitation Systems & Technologies,
2016)
Some sanitation challenges have no answer yet and consist in key research areas. Treat­
ment and disposal of wastewater and faecal sludge, as well as sanitation under challeng­
ing conditions, are important challenges that need improvements. Moreover, driving down
the cost of sanitation facilities and increasing available options are also key elements
(Brown et al., 2012).
2.5
Sanitation in emergencies
Definition: A humanitarian emergency is an event or series of events that represents a
critical threat to the health, safety, security or wellbeing of a community or other large
group of people, usually over a wide area (?).
Different causes create humanitarian emergencies. It can be due to natural hazards (such
as floods or earthquakes), technological hazards (such as nuclear accidents), or complex
16
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
situations produced by conflicts or disease outbreaks (WHO, 2022b). Once it has started,
an emergency situation can be split into different stages, the immediate emergency phase,
the stabilisation phase and the recovery phase (Harvey, 2007). Each of these phases
requires specific sanitation answers that are described below.
• The immediate emergency where there is no access to reliable sanitation facilities.
Solutions for short­term use need to be designed rapidly. The goal is to provide
basic facilities to contain excreta and avoid epidemics spreading. Good practice in
this phase is one toilet for 50 persons. This phase can last from several weeks up
to three months.
• Sanitation answer is similar for the stabilisation and recovery phases which are usu­
ally gathered. The situation usually stabilises, and long­term solutions can be im­
plemented. The goal is to reach one toilet for 20 persons with a usual ratio of three
female facilities for one male facility. It can last from several months to several years
for complex emergencies.
2.5.1
Female sanitation in emergencies
Emergency context brings a lot of new challenges and issues when implementing sanita­
tion solutions. One of the main issues is the weak use of latrines by women. Research
has shown that 40% of the women do not use the latrines provided in camps (Oxfam,
2018). This is due to different reasons, including inappropriate location for latrines, lack
of privacy, fear of sexual harassment, lack of lights, lack of proper lock or fear of vermin.
Moreover, sanitation facilities are often lacking, and they degrade very fast. Several hu­
manitarian non­governmental organisations have developed guidelines to help implement
better humanitarian sanitation responses. The two main ones are the Sphere Handbook
written by a group of Non­governmental Organisation (NGO) (The Sphere, 2018) and
Sani Tweaks developed by the NGO Oxfam (Oxfam, 2018). Both guides highlight the im­
portant criteria that should be considered when implementing sanitation solutions. They
recommend paying attention to safety, privacy, accessibility, menstrual hygiene manage­
ment and hand washing. For each criterion, specific recommendations are given by Ox­
fam (2018). A summary of them can be found in Table 2.1. Moreover, specific attention
should be paid to lighting. Oxfam has published an entire report focused on the role of
lights in sanitation (Gilbert, 2012). The main findings show that good lights make both
women and men feel safer and more prone to use the latrines. Lighting also benefits the
community itself.
2.5.2
Sanitation in challenging ground­conditions
In the context of emergencies, all the facilities are usually also affected. It makes more
difficult faecal sludge disposal and managing wastewater. Innovative and decentralised
17
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
Table 2.1: Recommendations for sanitation facilities from Oxfam (2018)
Criteria
Recommendations and element of interests
Safety
Proper lighting
Internal locks
Safe location and clear access
Safe surroundings without vermins
Privacy
Wall height
Wall material (transparency and resistance)
Doors without gaps
Male/female segregation
Discreet entrance (potential use of screens)
Accessibility
Interior space and door width
Considered disabled, elderly, children
MHM
Reuse or Disposal
wastewater treatment options need to be developed (Brown et al., 2012). The environ­
mental conditions can also consist of important challenges. Indeed, if it is an urban setting,
an area with high­water tables, where flooding occurs, where the soil is unstable or rocky,
it is not possible to dig pit latrines (Brown et al., 2012). Other solutions, such as raised
latrines or container­based sanitation, need to be found, but they are generally longer to
implement and more expensive. The next section will explore Container­based sanitation
as it is a relevant solution for the research project.
2.5.3
Container­based sanitation
Container­based sanitation consists of a toilet where human excreta is collected in a re­
movable container that can be transported to treatment facilities. This area is especially
of interest as the company case urinal is basically a container­based facility.
The most common container­based facility is the portable toilet. It has the great asset of
being a ready­to­use solution. However, in an emergency context, it raises some logistics
and cost problems. A study case has been analysed by Eyrard and ACF­France (2011)
during an earthquake in Haiti. It was impossible to dig pit latrines, and they decided to use
portable toilets. The main pros and cons of the solution are described in Table 2.6. From a
user point of view, the conclusions are positive. Users appreciate portable toilets because
it is a comfortable, user­friendly and safe solution. However, the main inconvenience is the
high price of the solution. It is mainly due to the necessity of a daily service to empty the
waste of each portable toilet. Another limit is the logistics. Renting the cubicles locally is
a requirement without which the implementation will be too expensive and too long. Apart
18
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
from challenging ground conditions, portable toilets can be a good solution when large
quantities of latrines are needed in a short period or in case of frequent displacements of
the population (Eyrard and ACF­France, 2011).
Figure 2.6: Pros and Cons Analysis of Portable Toilets from Eyrard and ACF­France
(2011)
2.6
Needs within female sanitation
This preliminary understanding of sanitation has shown that women in developing coun­
tries and humanitarian emergencies still face difficulties with sanitation. They meet extra
challenges, and usually the facilities are unsuitable for their needs. Moreover, the lit­
erature shows that there is few research studies made on the specific topic of female
sanitation. In this regard, female sanitation solutions would help an important part of the
population and thus reduce sanitation inequalities worldwide. It is now worth discussing
the specific example of our case company and understanding to what extent Lapee could
solve sanitation challenges in developing countries and humanitarian emergencies.
2.6.1
Company case: initial assessment of Lapee’s urinal
The innovative features of Lapee have raised some interest in developing countries. How­
ever, as seen previously, the needs and cultural habits can be very different from where
Lapee is currently implemented to developing countries and humanitarian emergencies.
That is why it is interesting to understand to which extent Lapee could fit the needs of these
places. To do so, the assets and limits of Lapee are evaluated from the perspectives of
the different challenges identified in the literature review. Table 2.2 shows the assets and
limits of the urinal as well as its potentials and threats. The potentials correspond to the
potential assets that could be developed with Lapee, and the threats refer to the potential
limits that could appear if they are not thought of. The assessment is made for Lapee’s
19
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
urinal, a similar one has been drawn for LP3X, but at this stage, the differences are minor,
which is why only one table is presented here.
Table 2.2: Initial assessment of Lapee and LP3X
Assets
Limits
Open Toilet: hygienic, less odour, touchless
Open toilets: privacy, taboos and acceptation
Safety: better vision
Safety: more exposed
Stackability
Difficulty of transportation and installation
Portability
Price
Easy to clean
Inclusivity
Potentials
Threats
Developing an ecosystem around Lapee
Collection and Treatment
Urine and faeces separation
Maintenance / Reparability
Lighting
Open toilet: suitable for every kind of weather?
Hand­washing
MHM: lack of privacy
MHM: clean facility with bin/hand­washing
The assessment shows that Lapee’s urinal has interesting features for hygiene and clean­
liness. However, some key issues are raised from the examination of Lapee with the
lenses of both the Sphere Handbook (The Sphere, 2018) and Sani Tweaks (Oxfam, 2018).
The potential problems are linked to a lack of safety and privacy as well as logistics is­
sues. Lapee’s urinal does not entirely fulfil the recommendations described for sanitation
facilities in emergency contexts. This preliminary assessment suggests that the product,
as it is, might not fit some contexts of developing countries and especially of humanitarian
emergencies.
2.7
Reflection and conclusion
This section discusses the result of the research clarification. Then it presents a small
conclusion of the key learning identified and explains what will be the challenges of the
next chapter.
2.7.1
Discussion and research scope
The chosen scope of developing countries and humanitarian emergencies is very broad.
It has been shown that the sanitation situations are very different within the group of ’devel­
oping countries’. They include thousands of different socioeconomic contexts with their
proper needs and cultural habits. Sanitation is especially critical for Lower and Lower­
Middle Income Countries (LLMICs) where there are less sanitation access, higher death
rate because of poor sanitation, higher open defecation practice and higher unimproved
sanitation facilities (Our world in data, 2022). That is why, from now on, the master thesis
20
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
will focus on the specific group of LLMICs. To give a more visual representation of which
country are included in this group, the map in Figure 2.7 gives an overview of the countries
considered.
Figure 2.7: Overview of the low and lower­income countries in 2021 (The World Bank,
2021)
To be even more accurate, it would be interesting to categorise the different contexts
existing within LLMICs. To do so, each context could be described by a combination of
several contextual criteria, including the type of sanitation implemented in the context.
These contextual criteria are presented below, illustrated with some examples.
• The level of sanitation: Institutional (as schools, stations, market), semi­private (as
the workplace) or private sanitation (for households).
• The space morphology: urban or rural area, the population density.
• The economic context: the income levels, the purchasing power.
• The social context: cultural characteristics, religious influence.
• The humanitarian emergency degree of the situation
• The geographical context: continent, country or specific geographical areas
So far, the research question and literature review have been quite broad and have cov­
ered areas across all these criteria. The goal of the next part will be to understand in which
specific context female sanitation solutions could be developed. Moreover, the type of fa­
cilities that could be relevant to develop should also be investigated. It depends on the
21
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. RESEARCH CLARIFICATION ­ SCOPE DEFINITION
function of the facility, the part of the sanitation cycle tackled, the type of waste handled,
etc.
Concerning the case company, the results described in this chapter are based on a gen­
eral literature review. That is why it is essential to deepen the understanding of its assets
and limits with more precise research and in more specific contexts. It will be one of the
goals of the next chapter.
2.7.2
Summary
The initial literature study has allowed building knowledge in different sanitation fields,
highlighting both social and technical challenges. It has also identified the critical ele­
ments that need to be taken into account to implement sanitation solutions in developing
countries and, more specifically, in LLMICs ­ which will be the geographical scope of the
future research. The research clarification has shown that there is a need to tackle more
efficiently sanitation challenges especially female sanitation. Indeed, important gender
inequalities remain, both in the access and the suitability of sanitation facilities.
22
==PAGE:36==
Descriptive Study 1
Map the issues of shared sanitation and the 
role of female facilities
3
3.1 
Introduction 
3.2 
Interviews methodology 
3.3 
Sanitation challenges and their roots 
3.4 
Study cases of specific contexts
3.5 
Focus on female urinals
3.6 
Reflection and conclusion
© Peter Turnley/Corbis/VCG
==PAGE:37==
3
Descriptive Study 1 ­ Sanitation
challenges analysis
3.1
Introduction
This chapter is the Descriptive Study 1 and consists in refining the different contexts in
which shared female sanitation facilities could solve sanitation issues. In the previous
chapter, it has been shown that there are a lot of challenges within female sanitation in
developing countries and humanitarian emergencies and that a combination of several
contextual criteria could define these areas.
The chapter goal is to understand better the different contexts existing in LLMICs and
humanitarian emergencies with the lenses of the contextual criteria defined in the previ­
ous chapter. It will help map the specific type of sanitation problems met in the differ­
ent contexts and thus understand where female sanitation solutions would be relevant
to implement. It will also help identify what kind of sanitation solutions correspond to
which socio­economic and geographical context. The finding will also allow to make an
in­depth assessment of the company case urinal. The research questions guiding this
part is ”Where do the sanitation challenges come from? In which socio­economic spaces
are female sanitation solutions relevant to implement? And what are their main charac­
teristics to solve the sanitation challenges identified?”
Interviews of locals and sanitation professionals are the main activity of the chapter. They
aim to give an in­depth and accurate understanding of the sanitation situation in LLMICs
and humanitarian emergencies. Even if the research is focused on female sanitation,
sanitation for both women and men is explored in the chapter in order to understand the
complexity of the challenges.
24
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
3.2
Interviews methodology
3.2.1
Interviewees selection
The core activity of the Descriptive Study is to collect relevant data by carrying out in­
terviews. Twelve interviewees have been carefully sought and chosen. Their contacts
come from the literature review made in the Research Clarification, the startup Lapee,
the project supervisors, and the ”snowball effect”. The main criteria for selecting the in­
terviewees is ”having worked or is working within areas related to sanitation in LLMICs
and humanitarian contexts”. Specific attention is made to select persons from different
geographical contexts and organisations such as private companies, researchers, NGO,
etc. This diversity allows gathering different visions on sanitation challenges and socioe­
conomic perspectives. It is also tried, as much as possible, to have at least two intervie­
wees from a similar area in order to compare the insights collected. An overview of the
persons interviewed is available in Appendix C.1. Slightly fortuitously, the interviewees
have mainly experience with two regions: Asia and Africa.
3.2.2
Research diary
Two main target groups have been identified among the interviewees: humanitarian ac­
tors or NGO and private companies working in sanitation.
The interviews are semi­
structured (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009). Two research diaries have been made for
each target group. They allow asking standardised questions, which is helpful to compare
the insights collected (M. Larsen and Flensborg, 2011). However, the end of the interviews
is left open, giving freedom to the interviewees to express themselves on topics they found
important. The research diaries are both composed of three research topics:
• Research Topic 1: Understand the interviewee’s background and their company/or­
ganisation objectives and context
• Research Topic 2: Explore the sanitation needs and challenges of the specific
context in which the interviewee has worked or evolved.
• Research Topic 3: Collect feedback on Lapee’s urinal. This feedback needs to be
considered within the environment known by the interviewee.
Detailed versions of both research diaries with the key questions and sub­questions are
available in Appendix C.2.
3.2.3
Methods used to synthesise
Once insights are collected, the findings need to be gathered and analysed. Different
methods have been used according to the research topic tackled. For the research topic
1, the goal is to understand more precisely what is the context in which the interviewees
have worked and thus what their experience relates to. To do so, it has been tried to map
25
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
their knowledge context with the contextual criteria previously defined in part 2.7.1 and
summarised in Figure 3.1.
For the research topic two, concerning the issues and needs of each context, the method
used is inspired by the KJ Method (Scupin, 1997) with its four steps, label making, la­
bel grouping, chart­making and written / oral explanation. Each interesting argument of
the interviews is isolated on post­its. Common topics are identified, and the ideas are
grouped, creating patterns. Some steps of this process can be seen in Appendix C.3.
For the research topic three, concerning the assessment of Lapee, a more systematic
approach is conducted. Pictures of the urinal are shown to each interviewee, and two
main questions are asked, ”do you think the product could fit [the environment in which
you are working]?” And ”what are the main assets and limits?” The findings are then
gathered in a table that counts the assessment criteria. It allows to classify and weight
the criteria that are either Lapee’s limits or Lapee’s strengths. The table is available in
Appendix C.4.
All the findings of the research are described in the following sections. First, results of the
research topics one and two are presented and then the conclusion of the third research
topic about the company case.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the contextual criteria that allows to categorise a context and the
type of sanitation that could be or is implemented in this context
3.2.4
Specific literature review
The activities carried out during the Descriptive Study 1 are mainly interviews, as men­
tioned before. However, the discussions led to discover very specific issues or contexts.
It induced the research of some literature on very specific topics. However, it has not
been carried out systematically for all the themes presented hereinafter. This literature
mainly come from suggestions that the interviewees or individual research has pointed
out to clarify some elements. That is why the findings presented in this chapter gather
both the interview results and of this partial specialised literature review.
26
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
3.3
Sanitation challenges and their roots
The interviews and specialised literature review have allowed to highlight the most com­
mon challenges that are met within sanitation in LLMICs as well as in humanitarian emer­
gencies. Two consequences result from these challenges. First, it decreases the users’
use and acceptance of sanitation facilities and then, makes the implementation of sani­
tation facilities difficult. Women also meet additional challenges that will be discussed in
this section.
3.3.1
Sociocultural challenges
Some of the problems are due to sociocultural reasons, and they result in people not
using the toilets and preferring open­defecation or using the toilets wrongly. The majority
of the sociocultural challenges often relates to four main areas: hygiene and cleanliness,
cultural beliefs, safety and especially for women, MHM taboos. This section presents in
detail these four elements.
Hygiene and Cleanliness
One main challenge that often prevents people from using the toilets is the poor clean­
liness and hygiene state of the facilities. Shared toilets are depicted by almost all the
interviewees as ”unpleasant” (Kher, 2022) to use, ”dirty” (Gupta, 2022) or ”disgusting”
(Jensen, 2022). This situation leads to people not using them and choosing other op­
tions. For instance, some prefer urinating and defecating outside, others use plastic bags
at home that they dump somewhere out of sight (Geest, 1998).
The literature also reports sanitation facilities in poor conditions. In Ningo­Prampram dis­
trict in Kenya, girls are often reluctant to use the school toilets because of their dirtiness
(Rheinländer et al., 2019). Most of the latrines are often out of service because of over­
flowing pits. The few toilets still in use smell bad and are littered with used toilet pa­
per. Similarly, Geest (1998) depicts the poor conditions of shared public toilets in the
low­income rural village of Kwahu Tafo in Ghana. In this village, cleanliness and being
cleaned play a central role in the population vision of individual moral values. Getting
close to human waste is considered shameful. For instance, emptying the buckets of the
shared households toilets is performed by specific workers called Krufoo, meaning liter­
ally ’people of the night’. They achieve this shameful work only at night, with the utmost
discretion and usually live excluded from society (Geest, 1998).
Another important issue that plays a crucial role in the perception of hygiene and the use
of toilets is the smell of human waste (Rheinländer et al., 2013). It often consists of a
barrier to sanitation adoption for almost all continents. Indeed, the human waste smell is
often seen as a danger to health, and people fear to be contaminated by pathogens when
exposed to bad smells. For instance, in Ghana, some women believe that the ”hot air”
27
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
emanating from the pit latrine can cause fungal infection of the vagina characterised by
a white and sick vaginal flux (Rheinländer et al., 2013). Smell also influences the social
and moral dimensions of people culture. While ”pleasant, positive and healthy smells”
are often associated with good morals, people can feel strongly intimidated by the smell
of other people and shared latrines. They try to avoid them with different stratagems. For
instance, people remove their clothes before entering shared latrines in Ghana or Kenya
(Sustainable Sanitation Alliance, 2010), or pay attention to the wind direction in Vietnam
(Rheinländer et al., 2013). Human waste smell carries strong negative connotations and
is often associated with social humiliation.
Thus, dirtiness and bad smell consist in significant barriers to sanitation facilities adoption.
This is intensified by behaviours that carry on perceptions fixed in the culture.
Cultural beliefs
Cultural beliefs and taboos play a crucial role in accepting and adopting sanitation facili­
ties. For instance, the understanding of hygiene is strongly impacted by cultural beliefs.
Indeed, one main element that should drive the implementation of toilets is improving
public health. As described in section 2.3, proper sanitation has strong positive impact
on health, especially since some vectors of disease linked to sanitation are not easy to
identify. For instance, flies or worms can be important vectors of disease transmission
or diseases themselves (Jensen, 2022). However, the link between good sanitation and
health benefits is often not understood by people from low and lower­middle­income areas
(Wey, 2022). That is why using dedicated sanitation facilities is often not seen as essen­
tial. ”There is usually 100 other reasons for people to build a toilet than hygiene” (Spit,
2022). Spit (2022) has witnessed some of these behaviours usually driven by practical
concerns. For instance, people can build toilets because they do not want to be harmed
by the vermin leaving in the bushes or be wet when it is raining, they want to provide
toilets to their guests and make good impressions or assure the security of women and
girls. Spit (2022) has also mentioned the example of a Beninese village where the only
person with a proper latrine was a disabled man who could not walk until the bushes.
The interviews and literature review have also allowed identifying good reasons that peo­
ple have for not going to the toilets. For instance, in Kenya, being seen entering a latrine
can be shameful (Rehema, 2022). It is especially true for girls and women who often face
stronger cultural taboos. For example, exposing themselves too much can be seen as
encouraging men to have sexual relations (Vildekilde, 2022). If the latrines are not sex­
segregated, women using the same toilets as men can also be seen as an affront. Some
people could even argue that there are good reasons for not thinking about the toilet prob­
lem itself. Indeed, Geest (1998) describes in his paper the ’peculiar paradox’ of the Akan
community in Ghana, who is extremely concerned about removing the dirt from their body
28
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
but, in the meantime, has a very inefficient way of getting rid of human waste. One of his
hypotheses to explain this paradox is that they completely removed the problem from their
mind by delegating the task of getting rid of the human waste to people living outside the
society as explained in the paragraph 3.3.1. They basically found a mental solution for a
physical problem, and this trick is produced by strong cultural beliefs.
Other reasons for installing toilets are more driven by religious or ritual beliefs. For in­
stance, in Tanzania, the people of a specific community change place each time they
need to defecate to avoid getting bewitched by ”bad spirits” that could find their faeces
(Spit, 2022). In this cultural context, the concept of building a latrine and constantly defe­
cating in the same place appears foolish. All these elements show that cultural beliefs
play a crucial role in people behaviour toward sanitation and are usually barriers to sani­
tation adoption. Even if a solution can technically be very suitable for a given context, the
cultural influences need to be taken into account for a solution to work. Cultural beliefs
are intrinsically linked to a lack of education and awareness about sanitation and thus
could become a lever to provide better sanitation. Spit (2022) even argues that ”it is not
about technology, but all about social and cultural issues”.
Safety
Concerning safety, women are more exposed to these difficulties than men, as mentioned
in section 2.3.2. Going to a latrine is often a moment where they are more vulnerable to
gender­based violence. According to several interviewees, the violence usually does not
happen inside the toilets but more often on the way to go and to come back (Rehema,
2022; Jensen, 2022; Klu, 2022). Going to the bathroom is often perceived as shameful,
so people prefer to go there at night. However, the lack of light and the dark increase the
feeling of insecurity and the potential violence. This risk is primarily feared and experi­
enced by women, but men are also concerned (UNICEF & WHO, 2020). For men, the
taboos of talking about it can also be very strong ”Boys are also being raped, but this is
rarely discussed openly” (UNICEF & WHO, 2020).
MHM taboos
Taboos about MHM are numerous and influence a lot of the behaviours of girls and women
toward sanitation. In some countries, it is not common to dispose menstrual pads or to lose
menstrual blood in shared toilets. It has, for instance, been pointed out by Rehema (2022)
in Kenya or by Rheinländer et al. (2019) in Ghana. In a Ghanaian school, girls reported
developing stratagems to avoid using the shared latrines when they menstruate. Some
sneak off the school to relieve themselves in the bushes where they can hide the blood with
sand (Rheinländer et al., 2019). These taboos exist particularly because menstruation is
associated with dirtiness and shamefulness. Thus, girls try to stay as discreet as possible
when they menstruate.
29
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
The strength of cultural beliefs and taboos on menstrual hygiene also vary according to
the region. In some places, it can be strongly associated with rituals and shamanistic
beliefs (Vildekilde, 2022), and in others, like Bangladesh, cultural beliefs about MHM are
less strong (Sultana, 2022). However, in most contexts, there is a lack of consideration
for the needs of menstruated girls and women. For instance, almost all the interviewees
have reported a recurrent lack of water access and disposal options for pads. It consists
of extra difficulty for women and girls to handle their menstruation.
3.3.2
Technical challenges
One important problem that has also been highlighted during the interviews concerns
the handling of urine and faeces. In low and lower­middle­income settings, the usual
technique implemented is to dig a hole in the ground, use it as a pit and when it is full, dig
another one (Spit, 2022). This can induce long­term issues when there is no space left to
dig new holes, like in this school in Kenya from Sustainable Sanitation Alliance (2010).
Another technical challenge concern the treatment of human waste. This is particularly
true for faeces that require extra care and dedicated infrastructure for safe treatment be­
cause of their high level of pathogens. In section 2.4, it has been shown that it is easier
to separate urine and faeces for treatment and potentially recycling. McSorley (2022)
also argued that implementing urine­diverting dry toilet can have benefits as the faeces
remain dried. It results in a reduction of pathogens and a limitation of the smell (Carter
et al., 2019). However, Jensen (2022) explained that mixing urine and faeces can also
sometimes have benefits. Indeed, mixing both reduce the lifespan of parasitic worms ­
especially the schistosomes responsible for a disease infecting 200 million people world­
wide (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020). Thus, different opinion exists
regarding the urine/faeces separation according to what factors are prioritised and the
geographical region.
3.4
Study cases of specific contexts
The challenges mentioned in the previous section were general. When taking a specific
context into account, the problems can be more precisely depicted, and patterns of issues
can be drawn. The objective of this section is to describe the specific contexts highlighted
during the interviews. Each example will be precisely identified thanks to the contextual
criteria defined in Figure 3.1 with the level of sanitation, the space morphology, the so­
cioeconomic context, the emergency level and the geographical place.
3.4.1
Slum areas
Contextual criteria of slum areas in Kenya: shared households and semi­private toilets, ur­
ban area with high population density, low­income level and almost no purchasing power,
30
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
no emergency
Klu (2022) and Wey (2022) have worked in the slum context and identified important
requirements that sanitation facilities should include. It is important to mention that most
of these insights have been thought for Korogocho slum in Kenya.
First, the slums are environments marked by important poverty. In Korogocho slum in
Nairobi, people live with less than 2$ per day. There is also a very high level of crime
that implies implementing anti­theft mechanisms in the sanitation facilities. Anything with
a high value will tend to disappear or be vandalised. Space is also very scarce, the
streets are tight, and there is not much room for sanitation facilities. This also impacts
the desludging methods. Indeed, desludging trucks usually cannot drive into the narrow
streets of slums. The pit latrines have to be emptied manually and transported to collection
places ­ if they even exist. This situation can lead to over­flooding pit latrines or pits
emptied directly in the street, threatening the health of inhabitants (Mobile Alert Toilets,
2020). The space scarcity also creates an environment where privacy is very scarce
(Vildekilde, 2022). The toilets result in being the only private space away from prying
eyes, favouring certain behaviours. That is why it is common to find shameful or forbidden
objects in the pits, such as condoms, syringes or menstrual protections (Spit, 2022). This
can lead to clogged pits and make desludging difficult.
3.4.2
Schools
Contextual criteria of schools in Kenya and Ghana: semi­private sanitation, both rural and
urban areas, low­income settings with a very limited purchasing power, no emergency
Klu (2022), Jensen (2022) and Wey (2022) have worked with schools and underlined
key elements to understand the sanitation requirements and issues in this context. It
has often been pointed out that schools latrines are dirty and unpleasant to use. Peer
pressure can also be stronger, especially concerning the smell and the MHM. Girls report
extra difficulties managing their menstruation that sometimes lead them not to go to school
at all (Rheinländer et al., 2019). Schools are interesting places to help bring awareness
about sanitation, especially through workshops and access to proper sanitation facilities
(Jensen, 2022; Wey, 2022). It can consist of an entry point to slowly change cultural
beliefs.
3.4.3
Workplaces
Sanitation is also an important topic within the context of workplaces where it can play a
crucial role, especially for women and their menstruation management (Vildekilde, 2022).
Two specific contexts have been described during the interviews, female outdoor workers
in India and garment factories in Bangladesh.
31
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
Contextual criteria of outdoor working places in India: public sanitation, urban setting with
high population density, middle­income level with small purchasing power, emergency can
happen during the monsoon. Kher (2022) gave the example of female outdoor workers, as
policewomen or vendors, working in the streets of crowded cities in India. He highlighted
the fact that there were very few public sanitation facilities, and they were often very dirty.
That is why women were often forced to urinate or defecate in the streets. The problem
could even be more important during the monsoon, where the few sanitation facilities are
often destroyed.
Contextual criteria of garment factories in Bangladesh: Semi­private sanitation, urban set­
ting with high population density, low­income level and small purchasing power, no emer­
gency. The other example depicted by Sultana (2022) is garment factories in Bangladesh.
In these factories, women usually work from 8 to 14 hours a day. The factory is really pop­
ulated, and there are usually not a lot of sanitation facilities. It is common for the women
workers to delay the moment of drinking and eating to postpone the moment when they
need to go to the bathroom. This environment is usually subject to space scarcity and
strong price constraints. The solution should be able to be implemented without distort­
ing the space.
3.4.4
Areas with challenging ground conditions
Contextual criteria of areas with challenging ground conditions: the criteria for this case
are multiple and challenging ground conditions can exist in a multitude of places both in
emergency and non­emergency settings
Additional technical difficulties can be faced with challenging ground conditions. As men­
tioned in the section 2.5, it is difficult to dig pit latrines in areas prone to flooding or near
rivers. The latrines tend to collapse or get flooded. The waste is then spread in the envi­
ronment, creating pollution and health risks (Klu, 2022). A solution to face these difficulties
is to implement raised latrines. However, they are not really appreciated by people who
are too exposed when entering the toilets (Spit, 2022).
3.4.5
Humanitarian Emergencies
Contextual criteria of humanitarian emergencies: semi­private sanitation, both rural and
urban area with usually high population density, low­income level and no purchasing
power, various emergency stages, no specific geographical area
The elements relative to safety and privacy have already been tackled in the section 2.5
and will not be further developed here. Though, it is important to mention that all the
interviewees who have worked in emergency contexts have mentioned these issues. An­
other important challenge met in emergency contexts is the logistics of the humanitarian
answers. The goal is to bring the material to the proper places in the fastest and cheap­
32
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
est way possible (McSorley, 2022). But in the meantime, the field is subject to important
money constraints (Zwart, 2022). That is why it is tried as much as possible to use prod­
ucts manufactured locally (McSorley, 2022; Zwart, 2022). It also makes a lot of sense
from a sustainable perspective to avoid extra transport (Schneidt, 2022). When materials
cannot be found locally, they are brought from the NGO warehouses to the emergency
areas by flights or trucks. Thus, it is important to have a compact and lightweight material.
Another challenge that needs to be taken into account is the emergency state of the people
experiencing humanitarian emergencies. Indeed, they are usually living or have lived
traumatic experiences. They need to access simple and efficient solutions that do not
add complex layers to their daily life (Jensen, 2022). Refugee camps can also be a place
mixing an important diversity of people and cultures. All the cultural differences mentioned
in section 2.3.3 are mixed in this context, and it can make the implementation of sanitation
solutions more difficult (Spit, 2022).
3.5
Focus on female urinals
Female urinals are the product developed by the company case, and it is a specific female
sanitation facility because it only collects urine. This section aims to understand first
the current situation of female urinals in LLMICs. Then, it presents the results of the
Research Topic three of the interviews and the confrontation between Lapee’s product
and the interviewees.
3.5.1
Current situation of female urinals
During the research work, few literature studies or interviewees mention the existence of
female urinals. Sultana (2022) declared that as far as she knew, no initiatives were carried
out in Bangladesh concerning the implementation of female urinals. The only mention of
a urinal has been made by Vildekilde (2022). She pointed out a female urinal facility in
Ghana made of trenches where women were urinating together.
Despite this lack of existence, all the interviewees were unanimous on the fact that such a
facility would be very interesting to implement and that there is a need for it. Female san­
itation is, in general, left behind and not enough means and money are usually allocated
for it (Sultana, 2022). It has been mentioned that urinals could be relevant to implement in
crowded places with important turnover where many people need to find a bathroom. For
instance, Vildekilde (2022) mentioned the example of marketplaces in Ghana gathering
many people and lacking female sanitation facilities. Moreover, a more practical element
has been highlighted, urinals only treat urine, which is much easier than faeces manage­
ment. Urine also has potential financial value if it is recycled and reused as fertiliser for
instance (McSorley, 2022; Kher, 2022).
33
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
3.5.2
In­depth assessment of Lapee’s urinal
Assessment based on specialists view
The feedback collected on Lapee’s urinal gave interesting information on what the assets
and limits of the product are. An overview of the results can be found in Appendix C.4. It
is important to mention that only one out of the 12 persons interviewed could have been
direct users. Thus, the feedback reflects more the opinion of sanitation professionals and
specialists rather than the end­users point of view. Moreover, even if Lapee is a temporary
sanitation facility, it has been analysed both in temporary and permanent contexts.
Assets
The first element underlined during the interviews is the very nature of Lapee. There
is room for improvements within female sanitation and female urinals could be a relevant
solution. It has been mentioned several times that a financial ecosystem could be created
around the urinal thanks to its capacity to store the urine in a large tank. Moreover, it
could also be the source of job creation for cleaners or warders. Concerning its technical
characteristics, its robustness has been pointed out as a good asset, especially in slum
contexts where the vandalism rate is high (Klu, 2022). Finally, the playful structure of
Lapee has been highlighted as being an interesting feature in the context of schools.
It could participate in bringing awareness to sanitation and hygiene by the game Wey
(2022).
Table 3.1: Limits and issues that Lapee’s urinal could meet if it was implemented in low
and lower­middle income settings
India
Humanitarian Emergencies
Kenya
Researchers
Foundation
#N
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Issue with
Rajeev
Kher
Ashish
Gupta
Agnes
Schneidt
Brian
McSorley
Marij
Zwart
Emmanuel
Klu
Jan Spit
Zaituni Rehema
Peter Kjær
Mackie Jensen
Thilde
Vildekilde
Rebeca
Sultana
Reto
Wey
TOT
Privacy
(Openness)
1
1
1
1
1
1
6
Safety
(Openness)
1
1
1
1
1
1
6
MHM
1
1
1
1
1
5
Weight
(too heavy)
1
1
2
Size (too big)
1
1
Colour
1
1
Weather
(Openness)
1
1
2
Plastic material
1
1
2
Importation
(prices very high)
1
1
2
Manufacturing
(should be local)
1
1
1
1
1
5
Price
1
1
1
3
Limits
The interviews have also highlighted the limits of Lapee. An overview can be seen in
Table 3.1. The main problems are linked to privacy, safety, MHM, Lapee’s manufacturing
34
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
place and dimensions. It seems that many of these issues relate to the challenge of social
acceptance. More than half of the interviewees have stated that the urinal might not be
accepted by girls and women because of its openness. Indeed, the openness directly
affects the privacy and the safety of women using it, and they could feel too exposed
inside. This issue also induces difficulty in handling menstruation because of the lack
of privacy. It has also been mentioned that water should be available inside the urinal.
Finally, the openness of Lapee has also been pointed out because it could create an
unsafe environment for the users.
Additionally, logistics issues have been raised. As Lapee’s urinal is heavy and large, it
is expensive to transport. Therefore, local manufacturing would be an important crite­
rion. Klu (2022) and Wey (2022) have also mentioned that for some countries, expensive
importation taxes make the product not affordable to transport for LLMICs.
In conclusion, the feedback suggests that Lapee urinal can answer an urgent need in
LLMICs, tackling female sanitation. However, some features of the urinal should be mod­
ified to fit the local cultural context. These elements are very much depending on the type
of area analysed.
3.6
Reflection and conclusion
This part presents a reflection on the process and the outcome of the descriptive study 1.
Then it describes how the scope of the research is narrowed down to female urinals. And
finally, it concludes the research work carried out in this chapter.
3.6.1
Discussion
A first element that can be reflected upon is the fact that festivals have not been treated
as an example of contexts in section 3.4. They have been briefly mentioned by a few
interviewees as being an interesting context where female urinals could be relevant to
implement. Indeed, big festivals are present in India and Kenya for instance, and they
also have unequal sanitation access for women. As for festivals in developed countries,
female urinals could be relevant to deploy in festivals of LLMICs. However, this study
case will not be explored in this research project because of a lack of information and
also the will to broaden the current use scope of female urinals.
The company case analysis has suggested that some modifications should be operated
to Lapee’s urinals in order to implement them in the context of LLMICs. The main criteria
pointed out as a potential problem is its openness. However, finding a solution to this
problem might end up in creating opposite design features to the ones that have been
initially thought of. That is why these findings could suggest that in places where Lapee
would be too disruptive to be used and accepted, a new product should potentially be
35
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
designed.
The initial mindset of the master thesis was more oriented toward developing a technical
solution to provide better sanitation for women. However, the findings discovered in this
chapter suggest that sanitation challenges are very linked to social barriers instead of
technical difficulties. Indeed, beliefs, taboos, sociocultural context have a great influence
on how people perceive and deal with sanitation. That is why sanitation facilities must take
into account these elements in their design and implementation in order to be relevant
solutions. This is even more pertinent for female facilities, as women needs are often left
behind.
3.6.2
Research scope
The findings of this chapter allow having a better understanding of the current sanitation
challenges faced in specific contexts of LLMICs and in humanitarian emergencies. They
have highlighted the existing gap in the research on female urinals and in their use. How­
ever, the interviewees pointed out the potential benefits of this specific sanitation facility.
That is why, from now on, the research will focus only on shared female urinals.
Additionally, this chapter has explored in a more systematic way different socio­economic
spaces thanks to the contextual criteria. It would be interesting to identify which of these
spaces would be more suitable for the implementation of female urinals. Places with a
lot of people and high turnover can be primary areas of interest. Each of the contextual
criteria is specified below as being the new spatial scope of the research.
• The level of sanitation: Institutional ­ as schools, stations, market ­ and semi­private ­
as workplaces. Share private sanitation is excluded from the scope, such as house­
hold sanitation.
• The space morphology: urban and dense areas.
• The economic context: low and middle­income level with a small purchasing power
­ to potentially make the use of the urinal a service.
• The social context: it will depend on the specific context chosen
• The geographical context: Sub­Saharan Africa and Central and Southern Asia with
a potential focus on Kenya, Ghana India and Bangladesh.
Finally, humanitarian emergencies require specific, complex and extra challenges from
non­emergency contexts ­ such as strong constraints on weight, logistics or prices. That
is why they will be excluded from further research.
36
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
3.6.3
Summary
The descriptive study 1 has provided interesting insights concerning the roots of sanitation
challenges in LLMICs. The population often do not use or does not like to use the existing
sanitation facilities, and this is mainly due to a lack of cleanliness, a misunderstanding
of hygiene, safety risks and strong cultural beliefs. The chapter has also shown that
there is a great diversity of situations existing with their own context and challenges. The
sociocultural context and beliefs play a crucial role in the acceptance and use of sanitation
solutions and should be included in the design of sanitation facilities ­ and more especially
in the design of female urinals. How to reach this objective consist of the heart of the next
chapter, the Prescriptive Study.
37
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1 ­ SANITATION CHALLENGES ANALYSIS
TEST
38
==PAGE:52==
Prescriptive Study
Develop a Support to facilitate the 
design of female urinals
4
4.1 
Introduction 
4.2 
Methodology
4.3 
Preliminary research
4.4 
Needs and specifications of a urinal
4.5 
Core of the Support
4.6 
A three-step tool
4.7 
Company case
4.8 
Reflection
4.9 
Conclusion
© AKDN / Christopher Wilton-Steer
==PAGE:53==
4
Prescriptive Study ­ Support
development
4.1
Introduction
This chapter is the Prescriptive Study and consists in developing a Support to facilitate
the design of female urinals. It starts by introducing the methodology used to build the
Support, then it describes the core of the developed Support and finally, it explains how
the Support is used in practice.
In the previous chapters, it has been shown that the cultural context and social behaviours
play an important role in the implementation of sanitation solutions. Identifying the social
dynamics is then a crucial step to designing a urinal that fits the context and will be used by
the women of local communities. That is why the Support focuses on how to integrate the
sociocultural context into the design process. Female urinals also seem to face specific
challenges due to the novelty of a product that is not well spread yet. The research
question guiding this part is ”How to support the design of female urinals, including the
specifications and selection of appropriate features tackling the specific sociotechnical
challenges?”
As female sanitation is often left behind and the facilities are incorrectly designed for
women needs, the goal of the Support is to help the persons and/or companies who want
to design female urinals navigating better the needs and cultural context. The developed
Support does not focus on a specific place or region. It is intended to be versatile and
universal to be compatible with the contexts chosen by the designers. However, specific
study cases have been taken as examples during the development process to facilitate
the creation of the Support.
The Support development is based first on the analysis of design frameworks to under­
stand what is the overall design process of a female urinal. Then, it consists of the creation
of tools to facilitate specific stages of the design process.
40
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
4.2
Methodology
4.2.1
Choice of a design framework
The core activity of the prescriptive study is to develop a Support to design urinals. This
can only be done by having a design method to work with. This method will be the skele­
ton of the design process. Several existing methods have been sought and compared.
They usually have the same structure and changes can be observed in the names and
design activities recommended. Four design methods have been compared from Baxter
(2018), Ulrich et al. (2020), Cross (2000) and Pahl et al. (2007). The comparison has
been focused on the concept development stages, as they are the ones focusing on the
needs identification and incorporation in the design, which is the aim of the Support. An
overall comparison of the different methods is available in Appendix D.1. One structure
has been chosen for the thesis and is inspired from Ulrich et al. (2020). This method has
been chosen because it is the most appropriate for the design of female urinals and has
a relevant level of detail. The method and the steps that are relevant to the project can be
seen in Figure 4.1. A detailed diagram of all the steps is available in Appendix D.2. The
design activities carried out during the process are inspired by a wide variety of sources
and are referenced throughout the chapter.
41
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.1: Design Method used for the Support development inspired from Ulrich et al.
(2020)
4.2.2
Study cases
The development of the Support is also helped by several real­life study cases from
LLMICs that come from the interviews conducted during the Chapter 3. They have been
chosen for two reasons. They are contexts in which the implementation of urinals is rel­
evant, and a point of contact has been established within the specific area. The study
cases selected are a garment factory in a middle­income setting in Bangladesh, a school
in Nairobi Korogocho slum, a marketplace in a middle­income setting in Ghana and a
school in a low­income setting next to Accra in Ghana. The study cases are not all pre­
sented in detail in this part mainly because it was difficult to find specific information for
all of them, and therefore there is a lack of precise knowledge. However, the few learn­
ing about the study cases gathered from the interviewees, and complementary literature
review have been used during the creation of the Support to guide its development and
to adjust it.
42
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Case of a Ghanaian school
The study case of the Ghanaian school is the only one applied in detail to test the Support.
It will be used both in this chapter as an example and in the next chapter for the evaluation
of the developed Support. The case described hereinafter is inspired from a real case
from Rheinländer et al. (2019), but as it was difficult to find all the information, some data
has been assumed or taken from similar cases of Anyarayor et al. (2019) and Vildekilde
(2022).
The research suggests that urinals have not been implemented in the schools of this
specific area, so the study of the context focuses more on the toilets in general to grasp
the local sanitation challenges. The school is located in a peri­urban coastal community
in Ghana next to the city of Accra (Rheinländer et al., 2019). It receives students between
15 and 23 years old. 45% of the population relies on open defecation in bushes or on
the beach, and only 12% of the population has access to single­households latrines. The
current sanitation facilities are pit latrines, but few of them are working properly, and they
are often blocked (Rheinländer et al., 2019). The current sanitation experience for girls
is far from being enjoyable, toilets are not appreciated by the students, and they try to
avoid them. There is usually a bad smell and a ”heat” emanating from the pit. There are
no lights apart from holes in the walls. There are no waste management systems, and
the toilet paper is usually thrown in the pit or next to the slab (Rheinländer et al., 2019).
This situation results in girls sneaking off from school to go to the toilets in the bushes.
It usually causes fear of public insults, shaming and assaults because the girls can be
seen, and open defecation is usually more performed at night.
This problem is accentuated when girls need to manage their menstrual cycles. Toilets
are not the preferred option for changing menstrual pads and cleaning. This is due to all
the reasons mentioned above but also because of the symbols associated with menstrual
blood. A girl who menstruates is often seen as dirty and shameful by others ­ especially
by boys. Thus, the girls fear that somebody will see the menstrual blood in the toilet or
the menstrual pads. Thus they develop stratagem as trying to not stain the toilets with
menstrual blood, going in the bushes and recovering the blood with sand, hiding their
menstrual pads, etc. (Rheinländer et al., 2019). It also directly influences their attendance
at school, and some of them do not come at all when menstruating (Anyarayor et al.,
2019). Finally, another problem that girls often meet is the recurrent rationing and shortage
of water. Thus they are responsible for finding and bringing the water they need for self­
cleaning inside the toilets.
4.2.3
Urinal architecture
The last methodological element that has been defined in order to design urinals is a
schematic representation of the structure of a urinal. Indeed, this representation allows
43
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.2: Diagrammatically representation of a urinal
to have a systematic approach when designing a urinal and will be used in the Support.
This structure aims to be abstract to avoid nudging the designer toward a solution but to
only see the functions of the urinal. It has been created thanks to the research made in
Chapters 2 and 3.
A urinal can be diagrammatically divided into three main parts.
• The superstructure gives privacy and safety to the user. It can be composed of
walls, a door, a roof, a corridor, handles, hooks, shelves, etc.
• The bowl or the slab is where the user urinates. It can be a slab on the floor, a
bowl attached to a wall and can have a lot of different shapes and be made of very
different materials. The slab/bowl can be divided into two kinds of surfaces, the fluid
waste surfaces, in contact with urine, menstrual blood or cleansing water, and the
touching surfaces, the contact points with the users.
• The storage or collection unit either collects the urine or sends it to the sewage
system. It can be a tank, a network of pipes, etc. It could also be an advanced
system that treats directly on­site fluid waste.
4.3
Preliminary research
This section provides a review of two topics necessary to investigate to develop the Sup­
port. First, it presents an analysis of the existing female urinals around the world in order
to understand how they are designed. Then, it introduces a review of existing toolkits that
are inspirations to create the Support.
44
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
4.3.1
Market analysis of female urinals
The female urinal market has been analysed in order to evaluate what kind of products
exist already and their characteristics. The initial scope of the research aims to tackle
female urinals on all continents with a focus on public and shared facilities. The research
canals are mainly online exploration as well as recommendations from the case company
Lapee. Nine urinals have been identified. An overview of their appearance and origins is
available in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Analysis of the existing female urinals in Europe and Africa
First, it can be observed that the female urinals have mainly been created in Europe,
except for one that comes from South Africa. Despite intense research, it was difficult to
find other public shared female urinals on other continents. Then, a second observation
to highlight is the diversity of shapes leading to different urination positions. Some bowls
require to squat, others to crouch, sometimes facing the wall or turning away. An overview
of the morphology and solutions of each urinal is available in Appendix D.3.
The last element that can be noticed is the fact that all these initiatives are not very spread.
They seem to be only developed within their country and meet difficulties in crossing
the borders, regardless of their design. All of them are also quite recent, and some of
them have already disappeared, like Lady P from the Netherlands (Piccoli, 2013) or Polee
from Denmark (Laylin, 2011). These observations raise the question, ”why are these
45
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
initiatives not more spread?” Given that they all have different kinds of design, it could be
because of the female urinal lack of social acceptance. These observations will be kept
in mind to develop the Support, and answers will be elaborated throughout the research
and discussed in Chapter 6.
4.3.2
Toolkits review
The objective of the Prescriptive Study is to develop a Support to facilitate the integration
of the sociocultural needs in the design of a female urinal. Before starting to develop the
Support, a review of existing supports and toolkits has been done in order to understand
what already exists, where the potential gaps are and what the characteristics of the de­
veloped supports are. The guides and toolkits presented below are not an exhaustive list,
but they have been chosen because they have relevant characteristics for the Support de­
veloped further. They either tackle topics from the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)
sector or methods to design products.
Identifying the gaps
A lot of guides and toolkits have been developed to tackle topics related to gender and
sanitation, especially to reduce the inequalities that women face regarding sanitation.
• The inclusion of women in sanitation and in WASH in general is respectively tackled
by the guide from Oxfam (2018) and WHO/UNICEF (2017). Both of them highlight
key questions and elements to consider when implementing sanitation and WASH
facilities for women.
• Some guides also focus on the implementation of sanitation solutions. For instance,
Unicef et al. (2018) gives recommendations to planners and decision­makers for
implementing female­friendly toilets.
• Then, some guides tackle more specific topics. WHO/UNICEF (2019) and Research
for Health in Humanitarian Crises (2017) address the problem of MHM. House et al.
(2014) gives recommendation on how to reduce gender­based violence. Gilbert
(2012) focuses on the role of the lights in female sanitation and safety. All of them
try to give recommendations and examples on how to face and reduce the problem.
In conclusion, no guide tackles the topic of female urinals, and few guides deal with the
design of female sanitation facilities. They are usually more focused on the implementa­
tion.
Getting inspiration for the Support layout
Some guides are also useful for understanding which interactions are created between
the designer and the tools. For instance, M. Larsen and Flensborg (2011) proposes a tool
similar to a modular instruction manual with steps to follow and concrete example that
46
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
aims to support companies reaching developing markets. Lockton and Stanton (2010)
presents patterns to influence behaviour through design. The toolkit is a set of very visual
cards illustrated by examples. They give the designer an efficient and fast overview of
solution morphology. In the same way, ? also use individual cards to help the designer
question the inclusivity of their design proposal and the abilities that might be affected. All
of these supports have been inspirations to iterate on the layout and the usability of the
Support.
4.4
Needs and specifications of a urinal
Before developing a Support to facilitate the design of sociocultural requirements of a
female urinal, it is important to understand the overall design process ­ based on the
design method chosen. This intermediate step helps to understand what part of the design
process could be optimised.
4.4.1
Methods
The two first steps of the design process are carried out, identifying the users needs and
establishing target specifications (Ulrich et al., 2020). A detailed list of the tasks that have
been conducted can be seen in Figure 4.4. They resulted in the creation of a universal bill
of specifications to design a female urinal in developing countries. All the requirements
are taken into account at this stage and not only the sociocultural needs. The tasks have
been completed for the general case of a female urinal, and the study cases described in
section 4.2.2 helped to guide the process.
Figure 4.4: Design steps conducted in the beginning of PS. Inspired from Ulrich et al.
(2020)
4.4.2
General specifications
The raw data collected to identify the user needs primary comes from the interviews and
the literature review conducted in Chapter 3. The needs are translated into specifications
precisely expressing what the product has to do (Ulrich et al., 2020). The specifications
are determined to be SMART, i.e. Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time­
47
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
bound Goran (1981). The aim is also to choose them within the same level of abstraction
in order to compare them.
Once the list of specifications is complete, they are organised into a hierarchy, and their
relative importance is established. To do so, the specifications are categorised in require­
ments that the product must have and in criteria that are nice to have. Additionally, a
priority is given to each specification between 3, high priority, 2, medium priority and 1,
low priority. It is also specified for each specification if it refers to a feature of the product
itself or of business that will be implemented around the product. Finally, an indicator is
assigned to each specification corresponding to the metric that will need to be evaluated
to know if the specification is fulfilled. The overview of the design focus areas and the
specific focus of the specifications can be seen in Table 4.5, and the detailed Table is
available in Appendix D.4.
The specifications identified are for the case of a universal urinal. However, a lot of them
actually depend on the specific context chosen, for example, ”Is the urinal a temporary or
permanent structure?” or ”Is the urinal going to be implemented outside or inside?”, etc.
That is why, for each specification, it is specified if they are basic, i.e. common to every
context, or specific, i.e. depending on the context chosen. The specific dimension of the
specifications does not only deal with logistics questions. It can also refer to sociocultural
elements. For instance, ”How to make a urinal where users feel safe?” refers to what is
feeling safe in a specific context, what is the security level, what are the current habits
toward safety, etc. The basic/specific parameter also allows highlighting what per cent
of the urinal depends on the context. Out of 45 specifications, 15 of them are basic. So
two­thirds of the urinal design depends on the characteristics of the local context for which
it is designed for.
48
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.5: Overview of the design focus areas and the specific focus of the female urinal
specifications
4.4.3
Problems with the bill of specifications
A first observation that can be made on the bill of specifications is that it highlights seven
design focus areas and 45 different criteria. It is a lot of elements to incorporate and
manage in the design process. As a designer, it is difficult to understand which ones
should be tackled first in the process and how.
Concerning the sociocultural needs, they are split into different categories, and it is difficult
to grasp their importance. Eleven specifications refer to sociocultural needs, and a lot of
them cannot be quantified with metrics as the technical specifications. It can make difficult
the evaluation of these design criteria. With such a bill of specification, it is challenging to
identify and understand the social needs, thus difficult to incorporate them into the design
process.
4.4.4
Clustering the specifications
The bill of specifications, as it is, is difficult to use to navigate the requirements ­ especially
the sociocultural needs. That is why all the specifications are clustered in different cate­
gories, called design considerations that facilitate the identification of the needs. Eleven
design considerations classified in four groups are identified and can be seen in Table 4.1.
The groups are created according to the type of specifications that they embody. There
are the specifications related to the implementation context, functional elements, socio­
cultural lenses and technical and environmental considerations. The sociocultural lenses
have been selected thanks to the needs identification and the findings of the interviews.
49
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Each specification impacts one or several design considerations. The Table in Appendix
D.5 shows which specifications impact which design considerations.
Table 4.1: Overview of the design considerations with definition and example
Implementation Context
1
Time Frame
The duration of the urinal in the implementation space.
Example: temporary or permanent structure
2
Economic
Sustainability
The business model and value creation in terms of jobs and revenues associated with the urinal.
Example: Recycle the urine and sell it
Functional Element
3
Urine Collection
The way urine is collected.
Example: a tank or connected to the sewage system
4
MHM
The services required by women to handle their menstrual cycles.
Example: type of menstrual pads used influenced the type of disposal
Socio­cultural lenses
5
Safety
Being safe and feeling safe when using the urinal and on the way to and back from the urinal.
Example: what parameters could make the user unsafe
6
Privacy
Sufficient level of privacy when using the urinal
Example: A user who is seen entering the urinal can feel uncomfortable and not use the urinal anymore
7
Inclusivity
Possibility to a wide range of users to access and use the urinal
Example: elderly, children, pregnant women, etc.
8
Beliefs
Harmony between the urinal and the local beliefs, rituals and cults of the population
Example: are there colours that shouldn’t be used in the urinal because they have specific meanings
9
Cleanliness
and Hygiene
The quality, state or habit of being and staying clean and hygienic.
Example: urinal disposition that nudges the user to keep it clean
Technical Considerations
10
Technical Features
All the characteristics that make the urinal holds and functionally works
Example: The robustness, the resistance to fluid,
11
Environmental
Sustainability
All the elements that make the manufacture, transport, and lifespan of the urinal sustainable
Example: manufactured locally, sustainable material, etc.
4.4.5
Ordering the specifications
To facilitate the integration of the needs in the design, the design considerations should
not be only classified but also hierarchised. It is done by identifying which design consid­
erations have the most impact on the other ones. It is also important to identify the degree
of freedom for each of them, such as the ones related to unchangeable contextual ele­
ments (like the sewage system) or allowing to choose between several options (like the
material of the walls). These elements led to drawing the preference tree in Figure 4.6.
The tree suggests a preferable order in which the design considerations could be tackled
by the designers both for the needs identification stage and the design stage.
50
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.6: Preference tree depicting the design considerations and the order in which
they should be investigated.
This classification and hierarchy make the design process easier. As there are fewer
groups, it can facilitate the needs investigation, the needs incorporation in the design and
the evaluation of the generated designs.
4.5
Core of the Support
The Support aims to facilitate the integration of the sociocultural context into the design
process. That is why the design considerations will not be all integrated into the Support. A
focus is made on the sociocultural lenses with the addition of one functional consideration,
the MHM. Indeed, MHM involves a lot of elements depending on the sociocultural context,
and it is relevant to treat it as a sociocultural lens.
4.5.1
Six key design lenses
The core of the Support is six key Design Lens (DL): Safety, Privacy, Inclusivity, Beliefs,
Cleanliness and Hygiene and MHM. These DL have several purposes, they intend to
facilitate the identification of the sociocultural needs in the context, the comprehension of
the needs, the incorporation of the needs in the design and the evaluation of the design
proposal. Each of the DL is split in Design Sub­Lens (DSL) that are more specific and
give essential elements to consider within each category. An overview of the DL and DSL
is available in Table 4.2.
51
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Table 4.2: Design lenses and sub­lenses that constitute the core of the support
A
Safety
B
Privacy
C
Inclusivity
D
Beliefs
E
Cleanliness
and Hygiene
F
MHM
A1
No harmful
elements
B1
Women­only
space
C1
Clothes
D1
Symbols
E1
Urine­only
facility
F1
Disposal of
menstrual products
A2
Robust
superstructure
B2
Discreet
entrance
C2
Anatomy
D2
Values
and rituals
E2
Hygienic
F2
Access to water
and soap
A3
Good Lighting
B3
Private inner
space
C3
Urination
Position
D3
Hygiene
understanding
E3
Intuitive interfaces
F3
Off­floor surfaces
A4
Safe Location
and Surroudings
C4
Disabled
and elderly
E4
Cleansing material
F4
Taboos within
MHM
C5
Children
4.5.2
Interactions between the design lenses
The different DL influence each other even if they have been presented as independent
until here. For instance, the DSL A3­Good Lighting in Safety, can directly influence how
discreet the entrance is or how private the inner space is. A very strong light inside the
urinal can bring safety because there is no more darkness at night, but at the same time, it
can make the silhouette of the user appears and thus decreases privacy. When designing,
the goal is to find trade­offs between the design requirements to make sure that none of
them is favoured at the cost of another one.
In order to have an overview of the relations between the needs, a matrix is built, inspired
by the design structure matrix. This tool helps modelling systems by representing the
relationships between components in a visual way (Browning, 2001). Table 4.7 represents
the design structure matrix for the sociocultural needs of the female urinal.
Two elements can be observed on the matrix, the totals of the raw and columns and the
clusters. The totals of the rows correspond to how much a DSL depends on the other
one. When the number is high, it means that a lot of other DSL are going to affect the
design of a specific one. It can be seen that B2­Discreet entrance, B3­Private inner space,
E2­Hygienic and E3­Intuitive interfaces are considerations that involves a lot of others.
The totals of the columns correspond to how much one DL influences the others. The
higher the number, the more influence a DL have. A3­Good Lighting, A4­Safe Location
and Surroudings and Clear Access and D2­Values and rituals have the highest numbers.
Thus they can consist of strong levers in the design process.
Table 4.7 also shows clusters, i.e. groups of design considerations that have a lot of
influence on each other. Two main groups can be seen, one linking the considerations
about Safety and Privacy and more specifically A3­Good Lighting, A4­Safe Location and
Surroudings and Clear Access, B1­Women­only space, B2­Discreet entrance and B3­
Private inner space. And another group linking considerations about Hygiene, Cleanliness
and MHM. When designing, specific attention will have to be carried to these groups.
52
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.7: Design structure matrix of the interactions between the DSL
Two essential trade­offs require specific attention when designing female urinals because
they are challenging and will appear in any context.
• The first one is between B2­Discreet entrance and A4­Safe Location and Surroud­
ings and Clear Access. Indeed, the urinal has to be in a space that is not too isolated
to guarantee women safety. And in the meantime, it should give a sufficient level of
privacy for women to feel comfortable.
• The second trade­offs is between B3­Private inner space and E1­Urine­only facility.
It needs to give privacy without creating a space where the user would feel comfort­
able enough to defecate. However, the level of privacy still has to be sufficient for
women to keep using the urinal, especially in LLMICs.
The DL and their interdependence have been highlighted to tackle the sociocultural con­
text of female urinals. They consist of the core of the developed Support presented below.
4.6
A three­step tool
The Support consists of a three­step tool. Each part of the tool aims to tackle a differ­
ent part of the initial goal, i.e. facilitating the integration of the sociocultural context in
the design process. In this section, each tool is introduced within the overall design pro­
cess, and the key activities associated are presented. The person using the tool will be
called ”the designer” even if other types of persons could use the Support as engineers,
53
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
project managers, decision makers, etc. The tools have been inspired by several sources
and especially Oxfam (2018), Lockton and Stanton (2010) and Unicef et al. (2018). Two
complete versions of the Support are available in Appendix, an Excel document that is in­
teractive in Appendix Villers (2022) and a laid­out version in Appendix D.6. It is important
to notice that the laid­out version is the result of several iterations explained throughout
both this chapter and the next one.
4.6.1
How does the Support work?
Who is it for?
The Support is intended for designers who want to create shared female urinals in a
public or semi­private context in developing countries. Beforehand, it is useful to have
both identified a specific context in which the urinal will be implemented and created a
primary contact with the customers and/or end­users.
What is it for?
The Support aims to help the designer navigate within the user requirements and the
sociocultural context of the specific design space. The focus of the Support is made
on these elements because they can be difficult to identify and are crucial to designing
and implementing solutions that would be accepted and used by the women locally. The
Support provides guidance on how to make a urinal accessible to women, girls, older
women and women with disabilities. It helps the designer understand the sociocultural
context, incorporate the users’ needs in the design process and evaluate the created
designs in light of the users’ needs.
The Support is composed of three tools that help the designer achieve specific stages of
the design process. An overview of where the tools need to be used in the design process
can be seen in Figure 4.8
• The Needs Identification Tool aims to facilitate the user needs identification and the
establishment of urinal specifications.
• The Design Support Tool intends to help the designer during the generation of urinal
concepts.
• The Evaluation Tool proposes a method to facilitate the selection of the different
design concepts created
What is it not?
This Support does not give recommendations for the entire design process of a urinal. It
should be used as a complementary tool to a usual design process. Figure 4.1 gives an
overview of one design process that could be followed.
54
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.8: 3 Tools of the Support within the overall design process
4.6.2
Needs Identification Tool
Introduction
The Needs Identification Tool (NIT) has two goals. First, it aims to facilitate the identifi­
cation of the needs of the users within the specific sociocultural context chosen. Then,
it intends to evaluate the relative importance of those needs. The NIT is applied at the
beginning of the concept development stage.
Identifying the needs
The first part of the NIT allows identifying the needs. It consists of a set of DL and DSL
described in part 4.5 that allow analysing a specific design space. For each of the DSL,
questions are raised, and they lead the designer to wonder about the sociocultural con­
text in which they design. The questions associated with the DL MHM are available in
Figure 4.9. The rest of the questions for all the DL can be seen in Appendix D.7. Ex­
amples of requirements or morphology are also given to illustrate the DSL and to guide
the designer in the search. To collect these data, the designer is encouraged to carry
out two kind of activities, off­site research and on­site research. They need to be imple­
mented in collaboration with both the end­user and the customer (if they are different).
Support from anthropologists can also be helpful in understanding better the dynamics of
the sociocultural context.
The off­site research can be literature reviews of written supports but also video sup­
ports, online interviews with the users or customers. During on­site research, a lot of
activities can be executed to gather the data as interviews, focus groups, and observa­
tions. M. Larsen and Flensborg (2011) describes relevant activities that can be carried
out to produce valuable information and knowledge, for instance, activities such as deep
dialogue with the users or self­documentation to let individuals map their daily activities.
These elements will not be detailed here.
55
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.9: Needs Identification Tool ­ Questions to examine to identify sociocultural needs
Rating the needs
The second part of the NIT allows to do a preliminary assessment of the needs and weigh
their importance. This is done by grading each of the DSL on a discrete scale from 1 to 5,
1 for low importance and 5 for high importance. The grading method is inspired by Ulrich
et al. (2020). The rating needs to be done in collaboration with the users to understand
among all their needs which ones are more important. In order to point out the users
needs importance, interviews, focus group, or hands­on experience can be carried out
with the end­users.
The rating of the NIT can be visualised on a spider chart for more clarity. As seen in Figure
4.10, a diagram is made for the overall DL by taking the average of the DSL. Diagrams
are also drawn for each DSL within their DL if the designer wants to have a specific view
on one criterion. The standard deviation is also calculated to understand the distance
between the DSL. The higher the standard deviation is, the more difference there is
between the DSL within each DL. The diagrams in Figure 4.10 represent the rating of the
needs for the study case of the Ghanaian school. A detailed version of the calculation
and diagram can be seen in Appendix D.8.
56
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.10: Importance of the Design lenses for the case of a Ghanaian school
4.6.3
Design Support Tool
The goal of the Design Support Tool (DST) is to facilitate the incorporation of the socio­
cultural requirements in the design during the concept generation stage. Before using the
DST, it is required to have clearly identified the sociocultural needs. The tool highlights
several elements that help the designer to incorporate each DSL in their design. The DST
presents:
• The field of the DSL: The field can be product­related (the DSL only concerns the
urinal itself) or context­related (the DSL concerns the entire area in which the urinal
is implemented) or both.
• Essential Features: Elements that are necessary to consider in the design and the
implementation of the urinal.
• Desirable Features: Elements that are nice to think of and to potentially include in
the design and implementation of the urinal.
• Morphology: Examples of how to tackle the different features and translate them
57
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
into design features.
• Influences: The other DSL that influence the specific DSL.
• Impacts: The specific part of the urinal that is impacted by the DSL, it can be the
superstructure, the bowl/slab, the storage/collection or everything.
The DST is composed of cards that give all the information to the designer. An exam­
ple of the card can be seen in Figure 4.11 for the DL Privacy. The other DL can be
seen in Appendix D.9. The morphology collection is inspired by morphological charts that
helps designers generate solutions in an analytical and systematic way. It deconstructs
the product in sub­functions related to the needs (Boeijen et al., 2014). The morphol­
ogy collection is just a beginning and has not been completely covered during the tool
development. It will have to be dealt with in­depth in future work.
The elements of the DST give the designer an overview of the characteristics of each
DSL. Thus the tool can accelerate the design process, and the designer can be more
aware of the trade­offs. The designer can also add some features to the ones proposed
in the DST. They would come from the data collection done with the NIT.
Figure 4.11: Design Support Tool card for the design sub­lens Women­only space
4.6.4
Evaluation Tool
The goal of the Evaluation Tool (ET) is to assist the designer in the evaluation of the
different designs generated. It is used during the concept selection stage and requires to
have several created solutions that are ready to be assessed.
The ET has to be used in collaboration with the users thanks to interviews, focus groups
or workshops. Activities like creating scenarios or concept assessment from M. Larsen
and Flensborg (2011) can help the designer gather the relevant data for the evaluation.
The ET consists in grading each of the DSL by giving a grade to each feature presented
58
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
in the DST. The grade is between one and five, one if the feature is not tackled, three
if it is partially tackled, and five if it is totally tackled. Then, for each DL a weighted av­
erage is calculated with the importance of the needs defined in the NIT. The results are
represented and compared on a spider diagram. The evaluation grid is available in the
Excel document in Appendix Villers (2022). Thus, the tool facilitates the comparison of
the design proposals between each other and to the initial requirements. It also identifies
the strengths and weaknesses of each solution and points out the parameters that could
be improved. An example of the ET results is given in section 4.7 with the evaluation of
the company case products.
4.6.5
Layout of the tool
The approach and layout of the Support have been inspired by several other supports.
M. Larsen and Flensborg (2011) influences the approach of the content, focusing on de­
sign methods. Lockton and Stanton (2010) and DTU Skylab (2021) inspired the card
format of the DST. The goal is to create a playful and interactive support that can be used
by the designer individually but also during workshops with several people.
4.7
Company case
The Support is tried on the two products of the company case, Lapee and LP3X, and is
applied to the study case of the Ghanaian school described in section 4.2.2. Only the
Needs Identification and Evaluation Tools are used here in order to confront the products
of the company case to a real scenario from LLMICs.
The NIT has already been applied to the study case of the Ghanaian school, and the result
can be seen in Figure 4.10. This analysis is necessary to assess the requirements of the
Ghanaian school. The results show that the DL of Privacy, Beliefs and MHM are the most
important. Inclusivity is not as important as the others DL because the target group is not
so mixed, mainly students between 15 and 23 years old.
Then, both Lapee and LP3X are assessed thanks to the ET and the result can be seen in
Figure 4.12. The rest of the figures are available in Appendix D.10. The diagram shows
that Lapee and LP3X design scores are under the initial requirements for almost all the
DL with specifically lacks with Privacy, Beliefs and MHM. When looking in detail at each
DL and for the product­related DSL, it can be observed that some elements are lacking.
For instance, in MHM, there is no access to water and soap or appropriate disposal of
menstrual products. Concerning privacy, the fact that the urinal is opened and without
doors makes the inner space very exposed and the entrance very abrupt. Some DL like
beliefs are difficult to evaluate because of a lack of information. To improve Lapee and
LP3X’s design, it would be interesting to work on the features highlighted as weak by the
Evaluation Tool.
59
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4.12: Assessment of Lapee and LP3X for the case of a Ghanaian school
In the previous chapters, Lapee has already been assessed thanks to the findings of the
literature review and the interviews. In this part, the assessment is more systematic and
relies on a more objective approach. This assessment is also conducted for a specific
case, while the other ones were more general. However, it can still be observed that
some evaluation elements are similar, especially for the lenses MHM and privacy.
4.8
Reflection
The developed Support is a specific toolkit. It tackles one aspect of the design process, the
concept development stage, and one outlook of the design specifications set, the socio­
cultural requirements. This choice is relevant because by narrowing down the research
scope, it allows to deal with one topic in­depth and have more impacts. However, this
choice can also raise some questions, and this chapter aims to discuss some of them.
First, the chapter examines how the Support should be used as a thinking toolkit and,
therefore can be adapted. Then, the chapter discusses the outcome of the developed
Support and how it should be confronted with the rest of the design specifications.
60
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
4.8.1
A thinking toolkit
The developed Support should be seen as a thinking toolkit, and to some extent, it can
be adapted. However, there are immutable rules and elements that consist in the power
of the tool. The core of the Support is the DL, focusing on the sociocultural context and
on the needs of the users. They bring key design considerations to incorporate into the
design process. They should be the main focus of the designer. Additionally, designing
for women and with women is also a necessity to create significant urinals that would be
accepted and used. This two elements cannot be put aside.
Other elements can be adapted. For instance, some DL could be added or slightly mod­
ified to fit the specific design context. The grading system from the Needs Identification
and Evaluation Tool can also be completely adapted to the specific situation. Moreover,
for the Support to be relevant to use, the three tools do not all need to be completed, but
they can be used more or less independently. Some of them are still necessary to com­
plete before using another one. For instance, to use the Evaluation Tool, it is necessary
to have completed the Needs Identification Tool, to compare the solutions to the initial
needs.
Finally, the Support could be seen as a thinking toolkit beyond sanitation in developing
countries. Initially, it was created to be used within the context of developing countries
where sanitation can face strong taboos, cultural rituals and habits. However, the majority
of the design considerations identified could also be used in all the contexts where female
urinals and sanitation facilities need to be designed. More broadly, the Support could
be interesting for projects with multiple stakeholders and for products that need to be
customised according to the place.
4.8.2
Confront the toolkit to the rest of the design process
The Support focuses on sociocultural requirements. These types of needs have been
chosen because they are the most difficult to comprehend and identify. However, to design
a complete urinal, they need to be confronted with the other design considerations and
especially the technical features, the economic aspects and the sustainability. A small
analysis has been carried out to understand the interactions between these elements.
The non­sociocultural requirements mainly bring the design of the urinal to a very practical
level. The technical feasibility influences the materials and shapes chosen, and therefore
it directly impacts the way to design privacy, inclusivity and cleanliness. The economic
dimension can also play a crucial role, especially in the context of emerging markets
where the price constraint can be very strong. It results in directly influencing the type of
materials, processes and the manufacturing place. Sustainability should also be taken
into account early in the process because it has impacts on both the product itself, for
materials or resources, but also on its context, type of transportation, manufacturing place,
61
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
etc.
Additionally, the Support only focuses on the needs of one stakeholder, the end­users
of the urinal. However, other stakeholders exist with different needs, for instance the
cleaners, the customers, etc. These stakeholders can sometimes all be embodied by the
same persons, but they can also be different with various needs. Taking into account
the other stakeholders has major importance in the development of sanitation solutions
because it can play a decisive role in the development of these solutions. This is one of
the topics that will be explored in the 5.
4.8.3
Difficulties with the study cases
A last reflection that is worthy of attention is the difficulty that has been met in finding
precise information on the study cases. Initially, the study cases presented in 4.2.2 were
all supposed to be developed further. A garment factory in a middle­income setting in
Bangladesh, a school in Nairobi Korogocho slum and a marketplace in a middle­income
setting in Ghana were chosen in addition to the Ghanaian school. All of them have been
chosen because it is relevant to implement urinals in these contexts, and it seemed that
the sources to know more about them were available. However, it turned out that it was
very difficult to gather precise and specific information on the cases. Additionally, the
collaboration with the stakeholders interviewed in the Chapter 3 did not go as well as
foreseen.
The consequences of this difficulty are multiple. First, it took some time to find a case
with enough information to be relevant to study. Even the one that has been chosen,
the Ghanaian school, still lacks some information. Then, it impacted the type of support
that has been developed. For instance, an initial idea was to create a decision tree that
mapped all the different design possibilities depending on the design context chosen. But
with little information available, it was difficult to have an accurate and relevant mapping.
4.9
Conclusion
Thanks to the research carried out in the Research Clarification and Descriptive Study 1, a
three­tool Support has been developed. It aims to help the designer with the incorporation
of the sociocultural requirements in the concept development stage thanks to sociocultural
design lenses. It is composed of a first part facilitating the identification of the needs in a
given context and the evaluation of those needs. Then design cards facilitate the concept
generation stage by making the designer aware of the key elements to address in the
design. And finally, a features checklist allows the designer to evaluate the design created
to the initial requirements, directly helping them with the concept selection.
The tool only focuses on the sociocultural design considerations because they are the
62
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
ones difficult to understand, often forget and not embody in the design of sanitation fa­
cilities. However, it is important to mention that all the other considerations have to be
taken into account to develop a successful product. The development of the Support has
mainly been theoretical with a few trials. It would be now interesting to confront the tool
to reality to understand to which extent it is solid and legitimate. This is the aim of the last
part of the master thesis.
63
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 4. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY ­ SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT
TEST
64
==PAGE:78==
Descriptive Study 2
Evaluate the developed Support
5
5.1 
Introduction 
5.2 
Methodology to assess the developed Support
5.3 
Completeness of the Support
5.4 
Usability of the Support
5.5 
Discussion and conclusion
© GPE / Livia Barton
==PAGE:79==
5
Descriptive Study 2 ­ Support
evaluation
5.1
Introduction
This chapter is the Descriptive Study 2 and consists of testing and reflecting on the de­
veloped Support. It presents the different parameters that want to be tested, the stake­
holders that should be involved in the testing, the verification experiments that have been
implemented and the ones that would be interesting to carry out.
The Support developed in the previous chapter aims to help designers incorporate the
sociocultural requirements in the design process. It has only been developed theoretically
and confronted with few study cases. Additionally, it has not been used by anyone external
to its author. Thus, the goal of this chapter is to evaluate this Support. The research
question guiding the chapter is ”How successful is the developed Support in designing
appropriate female urinal solutions?”
Understanding the validity of the developed Support is necessary to give the toolkit rele­
vance. Indeed, the evaluation will highlight the toolkit strengths and the areas requiring
improvements. It will bring solidity to the results of the Support, for instance, it will make
the evaluation of the company case products more reliable. Evaluating the Support also
makes it valuable for its potential users such as sanitation companies or urinals design­
ers. The assessment of the developed Support is done by applying it to real study cases
and testing it with designers that could use it. Trying the tool is done during workshops,
i.e. simulation exercises where designers are confronted with a problem and need to use
the tool to solve the problem.
5.2
Methodology to assess the developed Support
Two elements need to be assessed during the evaluation of the Support, its completeness
and its usability. The experiences envisioned aim to test these two components and to
66
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
verify the different hypotheses made during the development of the tools. The complete­
ness is the veracity of the information used in the tool, for instance, the reliability of the DL,
the design approach, the domain knowledge, the relevance of the tools results etc. The
usability represents the interaction between the tool and its users, for instance how is the
tool used?, how understandable and easy is it to manipulate? etc. These two elements
should be assessed for the Support in general and for the three tools, the NIT, the DST
and the ET. The conclusions of the Support assessment will be used to iterate on the tool
and make it more complete and usable.
The main hypotheses that aim to be tested are the harmony between the DL created and
the reality of the women needs in LLMICs, the veracity of the grading system of the NIT
and ET, the rightness of the features described in the DST. Additionally, a lot of elements
have been assumed concerning the way designers work. Their interactions with the tool
need to be tested in order to understand if it can actually be used.
A testing protocol is imagined for each part of the Support to test both the completeness
and the usability. However, all the elements envisioned to assess the Support have not
been implemented due to a lack of resources and time. An overview of the implemented
tests is available in Figure 5.1 and detailed in the next chapters. For each tool, three
elements are described.
• An ideal testing protocol scenario that could be implemented to have a deep under­
standing of the completeness and usability of the Support. These ideal conditions
would be gathered if all the resources were available as well as more time.
• The testing activities that have actually been carried out.
• And the first results of these activities that have been analysed and sometimes al­
ready implemented in a new version of the Support.
Table 5.1: Overview of the support tests that have been implemented during the master
thesis period.
General
Needs Identification Tool
Design Support Tool
Evaluation Tool
Completeness
Partially tested
by the support author
Partially tested
with one study case
by the support author
Tested twice during workshops
with different stakeholders
Not tested
Usability
Not tested
Partially tested
with one study case
by the support author
Tested three times with
different stakeholders.
Two iterations of changes
have been implemented.
Tested with several solutions
by the support author
67
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
5.3
Completeness of the Support
The first step to test the completeness of the Support is to evaluate the reliability of the
DL. This can be done by cross­referencing the DL with literature and other toolkits or by
confronting them to the knowledge of specialists, as anthropologists specialised in female
sanitation.
The DL are cross­referenced with the existing toolkits presented in part 4.3.2. It allows
to have more precise DL and DSL, and it also brought extra features to the DST. To
confront the Support to specialists, two kinds of profiles are thought of. First, an anthro­
pologist could assist in the verification of the domain knowledge and the accuracy of the
DL. Then, a consultancy or a specialist in businesses for emerging markets could assess
the design approach chosen and the framework of the tool. For instance, the company
Access2Innovation (Access2Innovation, nd), that is specialised in supporting sustainable
business in African emerging markets, could be interesting to present the tool to. Both
an anthropologist specialised in WASH and a specialised company have been contacted,
but it, unfortunately, did not follow up.
For each tool, the completeness assessment has been envisioned in detail and is pre­
sented in the following paragraphs.
5.3.1
Needs Identification Tool
To test the NIT, several real cases should be investigated on­site with collaboration from
the users. The goal would be to understand if the DSL and the questions associated are
reliable and if some are missing. The on­site observations and interviews with users could
lead to the discovery of criteria that have not been identified initially. Moreover, testing
on several cases from different places and different sociocultural contexts is necessary to
assure the versatility of the tool.
For this part of the evaluation, collaboration with the users is crucial. It is difficult to im­
plement that from Denmark, so a simplified version of the test is carried out. The NIT is
applied to the case of the Ghanaian school but only with off­site research made by the
Support author. The activities carried out are mainly literature review and online research.
The results are gathered to build a brief on the case and can be seen in Appendix E.1.
The brief will be given to designers to test the Support during the workshops. It is high­
lighted that the NIT brings a systematic and fast way of identifying and treating the needs.
It also covers all the sociocultural that have been identified during the off­site research.
5.3.2
Design Support Tool
Two kinds of tests involving different kinds of stakeholders can be implemented to assess
the DST. First, testings aim to create a female urinal from scratch and then testings intend
68
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
Figure 5.1: Evaluation of the concept designed during the workshop with the external
designer
to adapt an existing female urinal.
Create a female urinal
In the first testing, a group of three designers would work on a specific study case and try,
with the help of the NIT and DST to design a female urinal for this context. At the same
time, a control group of designers would do the same exercise but without the Support. It
would allow comparing the speed, the process followed and the results with and without
the utilisation of the tool.
A simplified version of this workshop is implemented. One designer outside of the WASH
sector is asked to design a female urinal for the specific study case of the Ghanaian
school. The study case brief of the Appendix E.1 is given to the designer. There is no
control group for this testing. The designer who participated has a background in Product
Design with four years of experience but none in sanitation projects. The first iteration of
the created concept is made without the use of the DST. For the second iteration, the
DST is introduced. In the end, both designs are evaluated with the ET and the result can
be seen Figure 5.1. A complete version is available in Appendix E.2. The second design
has a better evaluation, especially in Safety, Privacy and MHM. Indeed, the changes
consider more especially the discreetness of the entrance, a lighting system at night and
the taboos around MHM.
69
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
Figure 5.2: Evaluation of the adaptation of Lapee’s urinal designed during the workshop
with Lapee
Adapt a female urinal
The second testing of the DST consists in adapting an existing female urinal to the scope
of LLMICs. It was implemented during a workshop with one designer from Lapee in order
to redesign Lapee’s urinal for the case of the Ghanaian school. The designer has a back­
ground in Architecture with seven years of experience. As for the workshop described in
the previous section, a briefcase is given to the designer. The design output of the work­
shop is available in Figure 5.2 A complete version is available in Appendix E.3. It can be
observed that a lot of parameters have been improved. For instance, to tackle the fear of
girls leaving menstrual blood on the urinal bowl, the bowl could be black. Additionally, a
bucket of water should be available inside the urinal as well as a closed bin. The privacy
is improved by installing a screen all around the urinal. This would create a women­only
space and a discreet entrance because girls would not be seen entering the urinal directly.
Results
After both workshops, a set of questions was asked to the designers concerning their
interaction and impression of the tool. Similar results are observed for both workshops,
the DST allows to fasten the process of requirements identification and embodiment in
the design. It also makes the reflection much more structured. And it raises awareness of
specific sociocultural requirements that are not easy to understand. Moreover, both the
evaluation of the produced designs show improvements in the DL as seen in Figure 5.1
and 5.2. However, it is important to highlight that both workshops were relatively short
and that the ideas of modification have only been conceptualised but not elaborated on
in detail.
70
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
Some elements have also been pointed out as missing or improvable. For instance, the
scope of the tool is limited as it is only considering the user needs. Moreover, it has
been highlighted that the ET takes into account a lot of elements that are context and
implementation related, so it makes the assessment of the design proposals complicated.
That is why the diagrams only show a tendency and not a vision completely realistic.
5.3.3
Evaluation Tool
Finally, to assess the completeness of the ET, it would be interesting to evaluate the
reliability and exhaustiveness of the criteria that allow drawing the assessment. To do so,
the criteria should be confronted with the opinion of an appropriate external person, such
as a urinal user. Then, the evaluation results of this external person should be compared
to the results of the ET. This testing has not been implemented because of a lack of
resources.
5.4
Usability of the Support
The second part of the assessment aims to test the usability of the Support. This is mainly
done by testing the interaction between the Support and its users. A first step could be to
give the entire Support to a designer without any explanation and see if they understand
the concept and are able to use it without external help. This has not been implemented,
but it is part of the future work for the Support evaluation.
Then, the usability should be tested independently for each part of the Support. Observing
the interactions and questioning the tool users would allow gathering data on the usabil­
ity. The testing should also be done with different stakeholders, designers of sanitation
companies, designers who have never worked in the sanitation field, etc. This would help
understand how accessible is the tool. Below, only the tests that have been carried out
are presented. If more time and resources were available, similar testing should be done
with more designers and different study cases.
5.4.1
Needs Identification Tool
Within the scope of the thesis, this aspect has not been tested with external tool users
but only by the Support author. It has mainly been done with the case of the Ghanaian
school and only with off­site research. The conclusion is that the questions used in the
NIT allow to take a step back on the study case and to quickly be reflective. The testing
also allowed to iterate on the layout of the tool to make it more usable. Initially, the NIT
was just a table with questions, and it became cards with icons to make it more visual and
usable. As an example, cards can be seen in Figure 5.3.
71
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
Figure 5.3: Cards of the Needs Identification Tool
5.4.2
Design Support Tool
The usability of the DST is tested during workshops to understand how easy the elements
are appropriated by the designer in the design process. This test has been done three
times by the Support author and during the two workshops described in part 5.3. They
resulted in several iterations on the layout of the DST. It evolved from a large table that
was difficult to manipulate to individual tables that still contained a lot of information, and
it resulted in design cards that are more practical. An example can be seen in Figure
4.11. The workshops showed that the cards allowed better incorporation of and discus­
sion around the DL. The tool has been thought to be printable. A playful digital version
would be interesting to design as well. The usability is globally validated by these tests,
especially since several iterations have been implemented already.
5.4.3
Evaluation Tool
The usability of the ET has only been tested by the Support author. It should be tested
further with external designers. However, the results of the ET have been used by the
designers during the workshops. And it has been highlighted that they are quite interesting
to easily communicate the results of the ET.
5.5
Discussion and conclusion
This chapter presents reflection elements elaborated during and after the Descriptive
Study 2. And it concludes the section with a summary of the key findings.
72
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
5.5.1
Reflection
Room for improvements
The workshops and tests showed that some elements of the current Support could be
improved to be more complete. First, the Support mixes elements that belong to both the
design of the product and the implementation context. The workshops showed that this
could bring confusion to the tool user who is only designing a urinal without taking into
account the implementation of the urinal. It would be interesting to separate these two
elements more explicitly within the DL. Another element that could be interesting to reflect
on for a future version of the tool is to increase its adaptability. Indeed, the elements of
the DST should be adaptable to the findings of the NIT.
Reflection on the process
The methods implemented during the workshops have evolved during the descriptive
study 2. For instance, the initial idea was to work independently on the DL to design
a female urinal. It has been tried once, and it did not work very well. That is why it has
been decided to work with all the DL, and the results were much more interesting. The ap­
proach and the layout of the tool also evolved between the two workshops, and it allowed
to make the second one more relevant.
The workshops were good formats to test the completeness and usability of the tools.
The usability of the tool showed more validity than the completeness. Indeed, several
iterations have been made with the layout. And the focus has been made on ”how do
the designers design and what is their process” in order to create an interactive and play­
ful tool. Nevertheless, it would have been interesting to carry out workshops with more
designers to collect more feedback.
The completeness verification would have required more resources. Indeed, some as­
sessment elements were not possible to implement to test without specific stakeholders.
For instance, it would have been interesting to exchange with local contacts in the areas
of interest to have deeper insights into the needs. This lack is mainly due to geographical
distance barriers, and it has been amplified by a lack of time. Even if some contacts have
been established during the Descriptive Study 1, it did not follow up as well as expected.
Finally, the testing time allocated to validate the tool was very short. Similarly, the work­
shops were short and involved few people. That is why the conclusion stays only partial,
and further tests should be implemented, especially to assure the completeness of the
tool.
5.5.2
Summary
The Support developed during the thesis has shown interesting impacts on the design
process. These results have been observed thanks to workshops with external designers
73
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2 ­ SUPPORT EVALUATION
­ who did not design the toolkit. The Support emphasises and speeds up the incorporation
of the sociocultural needs in the design solutions. It also allows having structured discus­
sions on those needs. The assessment of the solutions created during the workshops
shows that more sociocultural needs are incorporated, and the urinal is more likely to be
accepted by the local users.
However, further testing should be performed, especially with local users, to confront the
theory developed in the Support to real­life cases and people. Indeed, the completeness
of the Support has not been validated yet. To conclude, the testings show that the devel­
oped Support has good usability due to a lot of iterations, but the completeness should
be more investigated.
74
==PAGE:88==
6
Discussion
Reflect on the developed Support and 
on the process
6.1 
Reflection on female urinals development 
6.2 
Discussion on the developed Support
6.3 
Discussion on the company case
6.4 
Discussion on the process
© UNICEF/PAKA2014-00289/Zaidi
==PAGE:89==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results of the thesis and its delimitation. The overall process
and methodology applied during the thesis will also be reflected upon. Reflections have
already been presented in the previous chapters, but it was only on specific elements of
each chapter.
6.1
Reflection on female urinals development
When looking at the analysis of the female urinals market in the world, and mainly in
Europe, conducted in section 4.3.1, it can be observed that they are not very developed
geographically. Missoir stays in Germany, MadamePee in France, Peequal in the UK,
etc. A question has been pointed out, ”why the female urinals developed in Europe do
not expand and mainly stay local initiatives?”
A first answer has been raised from a discussion with Lapee, that is one of the only female
urinals that spread beyond the borders of its natal country, in Europe and outside. Lapee’s
urinal has been thought for the need of the users but also those of the industry. No in­depth
analysis of how the other urinals have been designed was carried out, so it is difficult to
compare completely. However, these reflection elements are relevant because it shows
that the distribution and acceptance of a female urinal by the users and society might not
only be linked to how well­accepted they are by the end­users but also how suitable they
are for the industry.
Another element can be pointed out. Female urinals are not any other sanitation facilities,
they are products that question social norms. Therefore the acceptance and the diffusion
of such a product ­ regardless of the company it comes from ­ is facing bigger challenges
than any other sanitation facilities, such as male urinal or normal toilets. To understand
how female urinals could flourish, it can be interesting to find out how do social norms
change? It has been shown that for individuals to change their norms, it requires a pro­
portion of persons around them who have changed them (Andreoni et al., 2021). This
76
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
theory is called the threshold model. The tipping or critical threshold is reached when a
proportion of people who have deviated from the norm is big enough to make everyone
potentially deviate (Andreoni et al., 2021). Thus, it does not necessarily need a majority
to make flip a social norm, but it just takes a certain critical threshold. It has been shown
in Centola et al. (2018), that the tipping threshold was passed when roughly around 25%
of the population was part of the ”minority” changing a norm. Figure 6.1 illustrates this
mechanism. These elements show that more than the product, time and societal changes
are also necessary to make female urinal the norm. These considerations can be very
significant in LLMICs where taboos and cultural barriers to female sanitation are even
stronger.
Figure 6.1: Predicted tipping points depending on size of the committed minority and
memory length (Centola et al., 2018)
An interview carried out with Louise Raguet the creator of Urinoir Marcelle (Louise Raguet,
2021) highlighted that female urinals could be more widely accepted thanks to education
and for its environmental aspects. Indeed, almost all the female urinals presented in the
thesis project were water­less and allowed to collect urine, a recyclable resource.
6.2
Discussion on the developed Support
Elements below are discussion of possible uses and impacts of the developed toolkit and
on the method used. All these elements are discussed and briefly explored, but they also
consist of future possible further work.
6.2.1
Questioning the impact of the toolkit
The developed Support focused on the sociocultural context, but this focus can be ques­
tioned. This reflection arose during the workshops with Lapee. It is important to take the
77
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
sociocultural needs into account, but the tool effects might be limited as it only tackles
one stakeholder of the system, the user. As described in Section 6.1, when designing
Lapee, the designers have also taken into account the needs of the industry, and it can
play a role in the acceptance of the product. Including several stakeholders in the design,
development can help to create more complete products.
That is why an evolution of the tool could be to include in the design process all the
stakeholders that will interact with the urinal. Three levels have been identified as being
relevant. All of these levels can be decomposed into design considerations and design
sub­considerations. Figure 6.2 shows an overview of the levels, and the complete de­
composition can be seen in Appendix F.1.
• The user­level: it considers only the end­user and their needs. It is basically what
the Support currently includes.
• The urinal as a service: it considers one urinal and all the persons who interact with
it and who are not end­users, for instance, for cleaning, maintenance, transport, etc.
• The network of several urinals: it considers several urinals that would be produced
and implemented and includes the issues related to the price, lifespan, manufactur­
ing, etc.
Figure 6.2: Three level of interaction to consider to tackle all the design process of a urinal
6.2.2
Potential significance of the toolkit
The toolkit only focused on female urinals in LLMICs. However, during the Support devel­
opment, the boundaries and potential significance have been questioned. A step further
could be envisioned, and the Support and methods developed could potentially be ap­
plied to other products. The embodiment of women’s needs and sociocultural context
in the design of products could completely benefit other fields in the WASH sector and
outside. It could also potentially be applied outside of LLMICs as mentioned in Part 4.8.
78
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
In order to do that, the first step is to map the method that has been developed for the
case of shared female urinals in LLMICs.
• First, an overview of the current problems met in the specific sector is drawn up.
The goal is to understand what the challenges and existing solutions are and how
these solutions are designed. In this step, a key activity is to talk with local people
who face and know well the problems.
• Then, the goal is to focus on the sociocultural context in order to identify the needs
that come out of it.
• Finally, once the problems and needs are identified, DL can be created. They are
design considerations that embody specific sociocultural needs.
To see how feasible the process is, an example is implemented with the case of a hand­
water pump in low­income settings, potentially in humanitarian emergencies, in remote
places and where water is scarce. It has been done with a limited amount of resources
in a very short time and follows the method above. First, it is important to underline that
water is a crucial resource both for drinking and domestic needs, and its access should be
equitable for all (UNHCR, 2021). Implementing functional hand­water pumps can have a
real impact when water is very scarce (ICRC, 2021). However, the water facilities can of­
ten fall into disrepair because of conflicts, natural disasters and lack of maintenance (The
Sphere, 2018). The interview with Jensen (2022) highlighted that sometimes the facilities
are not suitable for women. For instance, he gave the example of a hand­water pump
with a platform accessible by three steps. This architecture made women uncomfortable
using the pump or even not using it because they would feel too exposed.
This fast overview of the situation with a hand­water pump allows drawing the DL in Table
6.1. A lot of the DL from the female urinal can be reused for the case of a water pump.
It seems that very easily, a part of the urinal DL are reusable for similar topics from the
WASH sector and where the sociocultural context plays a strong role.
It could be interesting to look even further and reflect on the possibility of creating universal
design lenses that could facilitate the incorporation of sociocultural context in designing
products for women ­ and why not any other part of the population who could be wronged.
79
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
Table 6.1: Design considerations for a hand­water pump for low­income settings
Design Lens
Design Sub­Lens
Safety
No harmful elements
Robust structure
Good Lighting
Safe Location and Surroundings and Clear Access
Inclusivity
Equitable access to water
Integration of women
Accessible strength to pump
Inclusivity of Disabled and elderly
Inclusivity of Children
Beliefs
Symbols
Values and rituals
Hygiene understanding
Cleanliness
and Hygiene
Hygienic and clean
6.2.3
Feeding the tool
The last reflection concerning the developed Support concerned a potential use that could
be made of the Needs Identification Tool. Indeed, this tool offers a systematic way of
collecting the sociocultural needs in specific places and classifying them into DL and DSL.
Interesting use of this could be to use the NIT as a systematic approach to mapping the
sociocultural characteristics of each place.
This could have several interests. It could be relevant to map clusters of areas with similar
characteristics, develop systematic sanitation facilities ­ not only useful for urinals but for
sanitation facilities in general ­, create facilities that are more appropriate to the context,
facilitate the research and understanding, follow the evolution and improvement of the
WASH sector. Additionally, mapping a large number of sociocultural contexts could also
allow to improve the current tool and make it more accurate.
This reflection appeared quite early in the process. It was actually the initial vision of the
thesis, ordering the geographical contexts in different clusters and developing appropriate
female urinals for each of these clusters. However, there are so many different contexts
that it was extremely difficult to do. With systematic data collection and time, it could now
be possible to implement.
80
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
6.3
Discussion on the company case
6.3.1
Reflection
The approach developed in the thesis brings Lapee a systematic design method to facili­
tate the design of urinals. On the contrary, it seems that their product had been envisioned
and wanted to be disruptive. The developed Support is bringing a systematic approach
to their methods that are more creative, and this combination can result in interesting
products.
Lapee’s urinal has been difficult to evaluate. And the conclusions have changed through­
out the project. In the beginning, the first impression was that the urinal could fit some
contexts ­ an idea supported by meetings that Lapee had with an Indian stakeholder inter­
ested in bringing some urinals to India. Then, it has been highlighted that some changes
would be necessary to reach the majority of the regions considered in Sub­Saharan Africa
and Central and Southern Asia. However, the aspects of Lapee that are often pointed out
as problems are the exact opposite of what Lapee has been envisioned for ­ for instance,
its openness. This can lead to the conclusion that a new urinal should be designed. But
these considerations are very much dependent on the place considered. For instance, in
schools in some areas, minor changes could potentially make Lapee usable.
The final workshop conducted with Lapee was focused on adapting the urinal to the spe­
cific case of a Ghanaian school. This choice of adapting Lapee and not creating a new
urinal has been made to simplify the process and because the timing was tight. Thus, the
conclusions of the workshop should not be seen as the conclusion of the company case.
The results could lead to the impression that the urinal, with the modifications suggested
during the workshop, would fit the context. However, it was a short workshop, with a case
not completely realistic due to the lack of local persons to talk with. That is why it is diffi­
cult to completely evaluate the potential of Lapee without confronting it with several local
end­users. And these elements have been difficult to reach during the thesis. Only one
direct end­user has been interviewed in the descriptive study 1.
6.3.2
Recommendations
In order to reach the market of LLMICs, the main recommendations that can be given to
Lapee are described below. It can also consist of recommendations for any female urinals
or sanitation companies that want to go to emerging markets in LLMICs.
• The first step is to choose a specific place to work with. The choice of the place
should respect several criteria. It should potentially be within the contextual crite­
ria described in section 3 namely an urban place with a high population density,
high turnover, and where public or semi­private sanitation is implemented. Then,
local contacts should be created, and the reliability and availability of these con­
81
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
tacts should be assured. Moreover, the accessibility of the place should also be
considered for logistics reasons.
• Once a specific place is identified, in­depth dialogues with end­users should be de­
veloped in order to understand what their needs are and how the sanitation situation
is in the given place.
• To understand if Lapee is relevant for the specific place, activities with the end­users
should be implemented as creating discussions around pictures, doing role­playing,
etc.
• If it seems that Lapee could fit with no or implementable changes, bringing a Lapee
locally would consist of a very useful test.
• If the feedback is not encouraging, bringing Lapee locally might not be relevant as
it might be very costly in resources.
Concerning the areas to choose, the research has shown that the product would be
implementable in humanitarian emergencies with great difficulties. It is comparable to
container­based sanitation, which raises important problems with logistics as well as eco­
nomic limitations. Indeed, for a humanitarian emergency, the material needs to be sent
fast. If it comes from far, it is sent by plane, so it needs to be light. Then, local materials
are usually opted for first, and the economic resources are very limited. All these elements
make Lapee difficult to be imagined in this kind of setting. Unless the urinals are for only
one specific region and the local stakeholders own a pool of Lapee, that can be quickly
deployable.
For non­emergency situations, spaces with specific characteristics have been identified
as interesting areas to implement urinals. Then to know if Lapee would be suitable, as
mentioned before, collaboration with local end­users is necessary.
Apart from the barriers that can exist within the sociocultural context, other obstacles
exist with the manufacturing places and the transport that comes out of it as well as the
cost. These elements need to be taken into account if the emerging markets want to be
reachable.
If the company case wants to design a new female urinal, an interesting process to follow
would be the three levels of design presented in part 6.2. Indeed, they gather all the
elements that need to be considered to design a complete solution. However, trade­offs
would have to be found within these considerations, and they need to be chosen according
to the needs that want to be prioritised by the different local stakeholders.
Finally, the last recommendation would be that the translation of a product and a design
process from developed countries to LLMICs, requires the deconstruction of all the pre­
82
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
conceived ideas. It is important to be more aware of the power of the taboos and cultural
barriers that are not easy to overcome and drive a lot of the behaviours.
6.4
Discussion on the process
The reflection on the process followed during the master thesis is organised by a reflection
on each learning objective introduced in Chapter 1. The overview of the chapters in which
each learning objective is tackled is available in Table 6.2. The learning objectives 8, 9 and
10 are tackled across all the master thesis. As a reminder, the overall process followed for
the master thesis is the Design Research Methodology (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009)
composed of the research clarification, the descriptive study 1, the prescriptive study and
the descriptive study 2.
Table 6.2: Which learning objectives are tackled in which chapter?
Chapter
Learning Objectives
Research Clarification
1, 2, 3
Descriptive Study 1
1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Prescriptive Study
1, 3, 5, 6, 7
Descriptive Study 2
1, 2
Discussion
7
General DTU competencies
The thesis project led me to deep dive into the topic of sanitation and to understand what
issues exist within this field. It was especially challenging to disentangle the various fac­
tors that create sanitation problems and especially issues for women. This variety of
problems conducted the project in a lot of directions, and an important part of the research
aimed to identify the scope where it was relevant to narrow down. Taking a holistic view
on the problem helped me to move forward in the problem­solving process. Finally, while
in my education in Design and Innovation I have more worked on developing products
or services, this project was more about creating a process method, and it has been the
source of relevant learning.
1. Understand and assess the sanitary situations and the needs of the population
in different areas – especially in developing countries and emergency areas.
The sanitary situation has been assessed by a two­step process, including a literature
review and interviews. These two methods were very complementary to have an overall
vision of the situation. They also brought a lot of examples that could be related to during
the prescriptive study. However, the scope of research that I chose was maybe too broad.
A lot of geographical places were examined at the same time, as well as a lot of different
83
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
topics, such as urination, defecation, technological solutions, cultural barriers, etc. This
approach is interesting to create a global understanding of the topic, but I should have
narrowed it down earlier in the process, for instance, after the research clarification. It
would have allowed me to carry out more specific interviews and collect more relevant
data from them.
2. Evaluate the impacts of, and the drivers necessary for the deployment of
sanitary solutions.
The theoretical research and the support development allowed me to identify the impacts
and the drivers for the deployment of sanitary solutions. Identifying these elements has
been a key to understanding how to design sanitation facilities. This analysis highlighted,
for instance, the considerable influence of the sociocultural needs as a driver. However,
the evaluation and comparison of the impacts and drivers could have been investigated
more in­depth. Indeed, the drivers are numerous, and the sociocultural context is only
one facet. These reflections are linked to learning objectives 7 and 8, and are expressed
more in­depth in those paragraphs.
3. Identify relevant scientific literature through a literature review and use it for
further empirical work.
Different themes have been investigated during the literature review and at different stages
of the thesis. The findings have been used to improve my understanding of the topic,
enrich the reflection and highlight the research gaps. The organisation of the literature
review could have been improved and more especially its scope. Focusing on women
in sanitation and urinals has been done late in the process, and it could have brought
relevant elements earlier.
4. Evaluate the needs of a given population, the context of an area and the
relevance of solutions by collaborating with local stakeholders.
The evaluation of the needs of a given population has mainly been done through the inter­
views of local stakeholders and specialists during the descriptive study 1. The interviews
were extremely valuable and allowed me to grasp the complexity and the plurality of the
different contexts. However, it has been difficult to keep in contact with the persons inter­
viewed at the beginning of the project and their insights could have been very valuable
at the end of the project during the evaluation phase. Keeping contact could have been
better managed with follow­up emails and a sharper organisation.
The type of persons interviewed also influenced the direction of the master thesis. Indeed,
they were mainly coming from similar geographic areas, Sub­Saharan Africa and Central
and Southern Asia. The findings presented in the thesis are thus more relevant for these
specific zones and cannot claim to be true for all LLMICs.
Finally, the evaluation of the sanitary needs of specific regions was supposed to guide me
84
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
in choosing specific study cases to take as examples. But it has been extremely difficult
to pick one and identify its characteristics because of the lack of precise data online and
the difficulty of reaching out to local persons. The study cases have first been chosen for
their relevance to the research topic, but it would have been interesting to select them
according to the availability of the information from the beginning.
5. Synthesise different perspectives in proposing sanitary solutions for
developing countries or emergency areas.
The synthesis of different elements has been done at two levels. During the descriptive
study 1, I summarise the research elements in order to identify the problems existing
around sanitation. Then, during the prescriptive study, the different perspectives were
synthesised to create the Support. The synthesis process was long to implement. It is
mainly due to a long time to identify which methods to follow and what to focus on. Initially,
the vision was imprecise, should I focus on urinals or toilets in general? Should it be in
the all world or just in one region? etc. If the focus had been made on female urinals
directly, it would have been easier. A lot of choices have been driven by research but
also by the company case Lapee. Even if the master thesis has been presented as a
research taking the example of one company case, Lapee had an important influence on
the choices made, and the toolkit developed.
6. Combine and adapt design theories and methods to form relevant models and
tools for the analysis of complex problems.
In the prescriptive study, several design methods have been identified, analysed and com­
bined in order to define the framework of the developed Support. It allowed structuring
the toolkit. The methods have been adapted to a specific goal, the incorporation of the
sociocultural needs in the design.
The Support developed is very systematic and consists of user­centred design. This vi­
sion can be a bit in opposition to how the company case designed their products. Indeed,
Lapee seemed to have been envisioned as a disruptive product that also aimed to break
the sociocultural codes. The user­centred design approach can be more difficult to im­
plement. It requires close collaborations with the users and more trade­offs to find. It can
also be a long process, more expensive, with a resulted product not as beautiful as if it
had been envisioned. These considerations have been taken into account when choosing
the design methods and applying the Support to Lapee.
7. Analyse, evaluate and critically reflect on trade­offs between social needs,
cultural barriers, technical feasibility, economic requirements and sustainable
product development.
The trade­offs have been reflected upon during the prescriptive study. Before choosing to
focus on the users and the sociocultural context, all the specifications have been identified
85
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
and compared to each other. Some trade­offs between social needs and cultural barriers
have also been explored during the development of the Support. However, the developed
Support itself does not confront the design lenses to some specific design considerations
such as the technical feasibility, the economic requirements, etc. The reflection on the
three levels presented in section 6.2 would be a better way to incorporate these trade­offs
in the design. Integrating them partially into the toolkit could have allowed creating more
efficient sanitation solutions.
8. Adapt reflections, considerations and tools to different socio­economic
contexts.
The entire master thesis encouraged me to adapt my thoughts and reflection to socio­
economic contexts that are different from the ones I have usually worked with. It also
pushes me to break some cultural reflexes that come from the culture I grew up in. This
mindset flexibility is necessary to understand the problems and needs of women toward
sanitation in low and middle­income settings. The project also encouraged me to switch
between different socio­economic contexts, such as during the market analysis of the
existing female urinals in 4.3.1.
The process of the master thesis went along with different thoughts toward the solutions
that could improve the sanitation situation in the area of LLMICs. In the beginning, I
thought that developing relevant technical solutions could solve the sanitation issues.
Then, after the interviews, I realised that the sociocultural context had a crucial role and
that maybe it was the main lever. Hence the in­depth research on this topic and the Sup­
port development. Finally, the evaluation part in descriptive study 2 highlighted that the
implementation of the solutions within their sociocultural context and the long­term dura­
bility were often the most challenging. Thus a trade­off between those three elements is
certainly the proper way to see an efficient sanitation solution. It is only by challenging the
preconceived ideas and trying to understand more the complex socio­economic contexts
studied that this reflection moved forward in this manner.
Finally, during the beginning of the project, I had a tendency to generalise the situation.
It can especially be seen with the term ’Developing countries’ employed at the beginning,
and that was the starting point of the reflection. However, there are millions of sanitation
contexts behind the term developing countries. Even an organisation by ’countries’ is
a too broad lens that cannot represent the complexity of the sociocultural contexts. This
misconception was carried until the interview with Thilde Vildekilde (Vildekilde, 2022), and
I tried to be much more specific in the research for the rest of the thesis.
86
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
9. Suitably present technical and scientific knowledge according to the recipient
and context, using visual, oral and written language
The meetings, presentations and present reports carried out throughout the project al­
lowed me to practice the presentation of my process, results and thoughts. Developing
the Support during the prescriptive study was also a very interesting exercise to practice
these skills. Especially that, in that case, the aim was to translate research results into a
usable design tool that the designer could easily manipulate. Finally, the implementation
of workshops during the descriptive study 2 also made use of communication skills in a
slightly different manner because the goal was also to engage an external stakeholder.
10. Independently conduct a long­term project, implement project management
skills and reflect on learning and academic development.
The Design Research Methodology (Blessing and Chakrabarti, 2009) used to organise the
entire thesis process has been very useful and relevant. The work packages, Gantt chart
and activities organisation come out from this process. I also managed to adapt through­
out the project the elements that had been envisioned at the beginning, but that changed
during the thesis because of the new findings. However, this vision was sometimes not
very clear and very diverse. Therefore it slowed down the overall process several times.
6.4.1
Personal learning
Working on the project has provided me with an opportunity to discover the WASH sector
and its challenges. I had never researched on or designed sanitation facilities before, and
it is a topic that I found enthralling both because of the inspiring discussions that emerged
from it and the meaningfulness of solving sanitation challenges ­ especially for women.
Doing the thesis with a case company also provided great insights into the functioning and
challenges that a startup can face. Lapee was an excellent collaborator who provided
support to the project. It was also very enriching to see all the extra challenges raised
by the creation of a norm­breaking product like Lapee. Finally, I feel that this experience
gave me a taste of what research looks like, and I believe it has helped me to be a bit
more prepared for life after the thesis.
87
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
TEST
88
==PAGE:102==
7.1 
Further work on the Support 
7.2 
Go beyond the project delimitations
7.3 
Conclusion
7.4 
Annotated bibliography
© UNICEF/Nigeria/2021/Adzape
7
Conclusion
Conclude the project and open further 
possible work
==PAGE:103==
7
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the master thesis. It presents the future work that could be done
on the project as well as the work that could be done outside the chosen delimitation of
the thesis scope. Then it gives a conclusion to the master thesis, and it ends with an
annotated bibliography.
7.1
Future work on the Support
Future work is needed because some important elements have not been achieved during
the project. It mainly concerns the assessment of the Support that is therefore not yet
validated. The results of a complete evaluation would affect the way the Support can be
used and its content.
The Support misses some assessments on its completeness. The crucial element that
needs to be tested is to try it with several concrete study cases and with the collaboration
of local people. These elements are decisive to evaluate the effectiveness of the Support.
Involving more stakeholders and using on­site research would especially be necessary.
An overview of the assessment activities that are missing and could be implemented is
available in Table 7.1 and are exposed in detail in the sections 5.3 and 5.4.
Table 7.1: Elements from the Support assessment that should be carried out
General
Needs Identification Tool
Design Support Tool
Evaluation Tool
Completeness
Testing with specialist who
can bring their view on
the developed support
Testing on­site by
external designers
Implement the workshop
with more designers and
with control groups
Compare the evaluation
of the tool to an evaluation
made by a user and
interpret the differences
Usability
Giving the support to
a group of designers
and observe their
understanding and interaction
without any external help
Test each tool with several designers and several study cases.
90
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
7.2
Go beyond the project delimitations
The master thesis focused on a specific product, context and users. It tackled the socio­
cultural context of shared urinals for women in LLMICs. It also only focused on the user
interface elements of the urinal and not so much the waste handling and more techno­
logical topics. Narrowing down the scope to these elements was needed for the project.
However, it could be interesting to open up the outlooks for future needs, and work could
be done by bringing the developed Support and the research scope beyond this delimita­
tion. It can make the Support evolve and be more impactful.
As described in section 6.2, instead of tackling only the sociocultural needs, the design
considerations have to be incorporated to create appropriate solutions. Thus, designing
a female urinal could be organised on three levels, designing for the user, the urinal as a
service, and the network of urinals. Implementing these elements would make the Support
more complete.
Another progression that could be developed from the Support is to create universal so­
ciocultural Design Lenses that would allow to design any product for women (and men?),
taking into account the sociocultural needs and context. These elements have also been
described in section 6.2.
7.3
Conclusion
The thesis aimed to understand how to support the design of female sanitation solutions
for emerging markets in developing countries and, more specifically, understand to which
extent female sanitation facilities can answer sanitation challenges in developing coun­
tries and humanitarian emergencies, in which context they can be a solution and what are
the key elements they should embody.
First, it has been shown, thanks to scientific review and interviews with professional and
local people, that the sanitation challenges are numerous and that women are facing ad­
ditional difficulties in safely using sanitation facilities. Lack of cleanliness, strong cultural
barriers, and taboos around MHM are factors that prevent women from properly access­
ing sanitation and managing their menstruation, especially in LLMICs. Facilities that are
designed and implemented for and with women can be game­changers to improve sani­
tation access for all.
The thesis has focused more specifically on shared urinals for women in public and semi­
public spaces. With fewer treatments of the waste, the possibility to recycle the urine
and the decongestion of normal toilets, urinals have a lot of benefits that can improve the
sanitary situation. It has been identified that specific places would be more relevant for
the implementation of female urinals, areas with high population density, high turnover of
91
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
people, in public or semi­public spaces and with a small purchasing power.
One of the main difficulty in designing female urinals in these contexts is the influence of
complex sociocultural contexts that directly affects the behaviour and customs of women.
That is why the thesis focused on developing a three­step Design Support to identify
these sociocultural needs and facilitate their incorporation in the design of female urinals.
The Support introduces three tools, each of them tackling a different part of the design
process. The foundations of the tools are six key design lenses i.e. sociocultural design
considerations, that help the designer navigate in the sociocultural context and include it
in their designs. The design lenses are Safety, Privacy, Inclusivity, Beliefs, Cleanliness
and Hygiene and MHM. The core mindset of the tool is to have a user­centred approach
and co­create the urinals with the collaboration of women, who will be the end­users. After
several tests, the Support received reliable validation elements. However, it has not been
tested directly on­site with the full collaboration of end­users on a concrete study case.
This should be further explored in order to assure the completeness of the Support and
the design lenses.
Finally, it is important to highlight that other elements are crucial when implementing san­
itation solutions, especially the logistics and economic dimensions. The thesis did not
focus directly on those, but they should be included in the design process and confronted
with the end­users needs.
To conclude, the research work and the developed Support give some key elements to
support the design of female sanitation solutions, and more specifically, female urinals,
which was the initial objective of the thesis.
92
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
7.4
Annotated bibliography
This section provides comments and reflections concerning some of the key literature
used in the thesis.
Product Design and Development
Product Design and Development from Ulrich et al. (2020) presents a set of tools and
methods for the product development process. The book provided the main design frame­
work based upon developing the Support to design female urinals. Written by two well­
known academics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Karl T. Ulrich and Steven
D. Eppinger, the number of citations and the publication of the 8th edition in 2020 make
the book a reliable source. Very focused on industrial product development, the book
gives practical advice and examples on how to define meaningful product specifications.
Some parts are slightly too technical for the analysis of female urinals design performed
in the master thesis, but the book still proved to be quite useful to the project.
State of the World’s Sanitation
State of the World’s Sanitation from UNICEF & WHO (2020) presents the world sanitation
situation in 2020. It results from a collaboration of well­known contributors in the WASH
sector, including United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and
World Health Organisation (WHO). It is one of the first times that both of them brought
together their data on sanitation coverage. The report states the progress made towards
achieving the 2030 SDG targets for sanitation and the challenges that remain. It also
consists of an urgent call to transform sanitation because, at this rhythm, the SDGs targets
will not be reached. The report has been very useful at the beginning of the thesis to
understand the state of the sanitation situation.
Sani Tweaks Best practices in sanitation
Sani Tweaks Best practices in sanitation from Oxfam (2018) is a booklet part of a com­
munication tool series aiming to promote best practices in sanitation programmes. Ox­
fam usually works with humanitarian emergencies, but the practices can also be applied
to sanitation in general. The booklet was found during the literature review, but it has
also been recommended by the two interviewees working with humanitarian emergencies.
Both the content and the organisation have been extremely useful for the development of
the Support in the thesis.
Female­friendly public and community toilets ­ a guide for planners and decision
makers
Female­friendly public and community toilets ­ a guide for planners and decision makers
from Unicef et al. (2018) is a guide aiming to support local government in implement­
ing female­friendly public toilets. It has been written in collaboration with WaterAid, Water
Sanitation for the Urban Poor and UNICEF. UNICEF is a crucial actor in the WASH sector
93
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
and gives reliability to the reports that it supports because it is the WASH cluster coor­
dinator (WASH Cluster, 2022). This report was found late in the thesis project but has
consisted of a very valuable resource to confront the developed Support.
94
==PAGE:108==
8
References
(2022). UN­Water | Coordinating the UN’s work on water and sanitation.
Access2Innovation (n.d.). Access2Innovation website. https://www.access2innovation.com/en/.
[Online; accessed June 2022].
Agerholm, H. (2018). Single­sex toilets needed to overcome girls’ barriers to education,’ says
Unesco.
Andreoni, J., Nikiforakis, N., and Siegenthaler, S. (2021).
Predicting social tipping and norm
change in controlled experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 118(16).
Anyarayor, B. K., Alhassan, A., and Faisal, A. M. (2019). Access to Improved Sanitation Facilities
and Female School Attendance: A study of Savelugu Municipality of Ghana. Journal of Arts
and Humanities, 8(1):56–67.
Assembly, G. (2016). Sixty­ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1
and Corr.1 and 2), chap. IV, sect. A. 3 Resolution 217 A (III). 4 See resolution 2200 A (XXI),
annex. 5 United Nations. Treaty Series, 660(9464):27531.
Baxter, M. (2018). Product Design.
Biolchini, J. and Mian, P. G. (2005). Systematic Review in Software Engineering.
Blessing, L. T. and Chakrabarti, A. (2009). DRM, a design research methodology.
Boeijen, A. v., Daalhuizen, J., Zijlstra, J., and Schoor, R. v. d. (2014). Delft design guide : design
methods.
Brown, J., Cumming, O., and Jeandron, A. (2012). Water , sanitation , and hygiene in emergencies
: summary review and recommendations for further research. (November 2014):10–29.
Browning, T. R. (2001). Applying the design structure matrix to system decomposition and integra­
tion problems: A review and new directions. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
48(3):292–306.
95
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCES
Burt, Z., Nelson, K., and Ray, I. (2016). Towards gender equality through sanitation access.
Carter, W., Spit, J., and McSorley, B. (2019). Emergency Sanitation Project.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Parasites ­ Schistosomiasis.
Centola, D., Becker, J., Brackbill, D., and Baronchelli, A. (2018). Experimental evidence for tipping
points in social convention. Science, 360(6393):1116–1119.
Cross, N. (2000). Engineering design methods: Strategies for product design.
DTU Skylab (2021). Ability prompt cards | DTU.
Ecoflo­WASH (2022). The effects of poor water sanitation on communities.
Eyrard, J. and ACF­France (2011).
Sanitation in emergencies Lessons learned from Port­au­
Prince : the portable toilets. 35th WEDC International Conference.
Geest, S. V. D. (1998). Akan Shit: Getting Rid of Dirt in Ghana. Anthropology Today, 14(3):8.
German WASH Network and Eawag Aquatic Research (2021). Sanitation Technologies.
Gilbert, A. (2012). Shining a light: How lighting in and around sanitation facilities affects the risk
of gender­based violence in camps. Technical Report 20.
Goran, G. T. (1981). There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write managements’s goals and objectives.
Management Review, 70(11):35–36.
Gupta, A. (2022). Interview. Online interviews held 28/02/2022.
Harvey, P. a. (2007). Excreta Disposal in Emergencies: A field manual. Technical report.
House, S., Ferron, S., Sommer, M., and Cavill, S. (2014). Violence Gender & Wash ­ A PRACTI­
TIONER’S TOOLKIT. Technical report.
ICRC (2021). Afghanistan: Repaired hand pumps in refugee camps.
IGI Global (2022). What is ’Developing Countries’.
Inter­Agency Standing Committee (2015). Guidelines for Gender­based Violence Interventions in
Humanitarian Action: Reducing risk, promoting resilience and aiding recovery. Technical report.
Jensen, P. K. M. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 21/02/2022.
Kher, R. (2022). Interview. Online interviews held in January, February and March 2022.
Klu, E. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 21/02/2022.
Lapee (2022). Welcome | Lapee ­ The female urinal.
Laylin, T. (2011). Pollee by UiWE | Inhabitat ­ Green Design, Innovation, Architecture, Green
Building.
96
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCES
Lockton, D. and Stanton, N. a. (2010). Design Intent behaviour through design.
Louise Raguet (2021). Marcelle ­ urinoir féminin sec.
M. Larsen, M. L. and Flensborg, A. (2011). Market Creatinon Toolbox: Your guide to entering
developing markets.
McSorley, B. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 11/02/2022.
Mobile Alert Toilets (2020). Mobile Alert Toilets in Nairobis slums, Young Water Fellowship pilot
update. https://youtu.be/oJfhjwU0YiM. [Online; accessed March 2022].
Naughton, M., Weiss, L. P. P., and Vargas­Ramirez, M. (2017). Providing Sustainable Sanitation
Services for All in WASH Interventions through a Menstrual Hygiene Management Approach.
Technical report.
Othman, Z. (2017). An analysis of the evolution of the world’s toilet habits. Unpublished.
Our world in data (2022). Sanitation Data.
Oxfam (2018). Sani Tweaks Best practices in sanitation. Technical report.
Pahl, G., Beitz, W., Feldhusen, J., and Grote, K. H. (2007). Engineering design: A systematic
approach.
Parikh, P., Diep, L., Hofmann, P., Tomei, J., Campos, L. C., Teh, T.­H., Mulugetta, Y., Milligan, B.,
and Lakhanpaul, M. (2021). Synergies and trade­offs between sanitation and the sustainable
development goals. UCL Open Environment, 2.
Patent7000 (2022). Patent7000 manufacturer of the Kros mobile Urinal.
Piccoli, A. (2013). This is lady p ­ Mediamatic.
Rehema, Z. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 24/02/2022.
Research for Health in Humanitarian Crises (2017).
THE FULL GUIDE A TOOLKIT FOR IN­
TEGRATING MENSTRUAL HYGIENE MANAGEMENT (MHM) INTO HUMANITARIAN RE­
SPONSE. Technical report.
Rheinländer, T., Bernard, K., Konradsen, F., Samuelsen, H., and Dalsgaard, A. (2013). Smell: an
overlooked factor in sanitation promotion. waterlines, 32(2).
Rheinländer, T., Gyapong, M., Akpakli, D. E., and Konradsen, F. (2019). Secrets, shame and
discipline: School girls’ experiences of sanitation and menstrual hygiene management in a peri­
urban community in Ghana. Health Care for Women International, 40(1):13–32.
Rheinländer, T., Konradsen, F., Keraita, B., Apoya, P., and Gyapong, M. (2015). Redefining shared
sanitation. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 93(7):509–510.
Ritchie, H. and Roser, M. (2021).
Clean water and sanitation.
Our World in Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/clean­water­sanitation.
97
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCES
Sanitation Systems & Technologies (2016). 2.2 Sanitation Products. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=jim5XF9wjtY&list=PLu7Imt8zDuWjEAclY_5UVn1wRxJgXuqKK&index=4. [Online; ac­
cessed March 2022].
Schneidt, A. (2022). Interview. Email interaction held in February and March 2022.
Scupin, R. (1997). The KJ method: A technique for analyzing data derived from Japanese ethnol­
ogy. Human Organization, 56(2):233–237.
Spit, J. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 24/02/2022.
Sultana, R. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 17/03/2022.
Sustainable Sanitation Alliance (2010). School sanitation ­ a common challenge in Kenya. https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvL6SCorSHU. [Online; accessed March 2022].
Sweetman, C. and Medland, L. (2019). Gender and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.
The Sphere (2018). The Sphere Handbook: Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in
Humanitarian Response, volume 1.
The World Bank (2021). WDI ­ The World by Income and Region.
Tilley, E., Ulrich, L., Lüthi, C., Reymond, P., and Zurbrügg, C. (2014). Compendium of Sanitation
Systems and Technologies 2nd revised edition. Technical report.
Ulrich, K. T., Eppinger, S. D., and Yang, M. C. (2020). Product Design and Development Seventh
Edition.
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2016). THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Develop­
ment.
UNESCO (2014).
Puberty Education and Mentsrual Hygiene Management.
Lancet,
1(8650):1330–1331.
UNHCR (2021). WASH in camps | Emergency Handbook.
Unicef, WaterAid, and Wsup (2018). Female­friendly public and community toilets ­ a guide for
planners and decision makers. Technical report.
UNICEF & WHO (2020). State of the World’s Sanitation: An urgent call to transform sanitation for
better health, environments, economies and societies. Technical report.
Vildekilde, T. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 07/03/2022.
Villers, M. C. (2022). Excel document associated to the developed design support.
WASH Cluster (2022). Global WASH Cluster.
Wendland, C., Yadav, M., Stock, A., and Seager, J. (2019).
Gender, Women and Sanitation.
Water and Sanitation for the 21st Century: Health and Microbiological Aspects of Excreta and
Wastewater Management (Global Water Pathogen Project).
98
==PAGE:112==
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCES
Wey, R. (2022). Interview. Online and in person interviews held 02/02/2022 and 09/02/2022.
WHO (2022a). Sanitation.
WHO (2022b). Water Sanitation and Health.
WHO/UNICEF (2017). Gender­Responsive Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Key elements for ef­
fective WASH programming Gender­Responsive Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 2 Key elements
for effective WASH programming. Technical report.
WHO/UNICEF (2019). Guidance on Menstrual Health and Hygiene. Technical report.
WHO/UNICEF (2021). FIVE YEARS INTO THE SDGs PROGRESS ON HOUSEHOLD DRINKING
WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE WHO/UNICEF JOINT MONITORING PROGRAMME
FOR WATER SUPPLY, SANITATION AND HYGIENE.
World Bank Data (2020). World Bank Country and Lending Groups.
Zwart, M. (2022). Interview. Online interview held 08/03/2022.
99
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 8. REFERENCES
TEST
100
==PAGE:114==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
==PAGE:115==
Appendices
102
==PAGE:116==
Contents ­ Appendices
A Introduction
105
A.1 Gantt chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.2 Learning Objectives of the MSc programme from DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
B Focus Clarification
108
B.1 Research Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
B.2 Sanitation Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
C Descriptive Study 1
111
C.1 Overview of the persons interviewed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
C.2 Research Diaries for the interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
C.3 Intermediate steps of the KJ mehtod for the research topic 2
. . . . . . . . . . . 116
C.4 Evaluation of Lapee from the interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
D Prescriptive Study
120
D.1 Comparaison of the design methods considered
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
D.2 Detailed representation of the design process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
D.3 Comparison of the different female urinals identified during the market analysis . 124
D.4 Complete overview of the specifications of a female urinal . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
D.5 Links between the specifications and the design considerations . . . . . . . . . . 129
D.6 Final version of the Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
D.7 Needs Identification Tool ­ Identifying the needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
D.8 Needs Identification Tool ­ Rating the needs for the case of the Ghanaian school
164
103
==PAGE:117==
D.9 Design Support Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
D.10 Evaluation of Lapee and LP3X design for the case of the Ghanaian school
. . . 167
E
Descriptive Study 2
168
E.1 Design brief on the Ghanaian school given to the designers before the workshops 168
E.2 Result of the workshop ­ creating a urinal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
E.3 Result of the workshop ­ adapting a urinal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
F
Discussion
175
F.1
Design sub­lenses of the three levels of design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
104
==PAGE:118==
A
Introduction
A.1
Gantt chart
Content begins on next page
105
==PAGE:119==
313
10
17
24
31
7
14
21
28
7
14
21
28
4
11
18
25
2
9
16
23
30
6
13
20
27
4
1/22
2/22
3/22
4/22
5/22
6/22
7/22
Master Thesis
  WP1 - Reasearch Clarification, EXPLORE
      Initial Context and Literature Study
      Initial Assessment of Lapee and LP3X
      Planning and Project Plan
      Milestone 1 - Project Plan Hand-in
  WP2 - Descriptive Study 1, ANALYSE
      Interviews and interviewees research
      Exploiting the interview data
      Specific literature review
      In-depth assessment of Lapee and LP3X
      Milestone 2 
  WP3 - Prescriptive Study , Part 1, DESIGN
      Design methods analysis
      Specification female urinal
      Design considerations
      Complementary research
      Design Lenses creation
      Milestone 3
  WP4 - Prescriptive Study , Part 2, DESIGN
      Tool development
      Design Lenses and sub lenses elaboration
      Layout of the tool
      Comapny Case
      Milestone 4
  WP5 - Descriptive Study 2, ASSESS
      Assessment protocol
      Workshops
      Iteration on the tool
      Milestone 5
  WP6 -  Finalisation and Hand-in
      Discussion Chapter
      Conclusion Chapter
      Finalisation
      Milestone: Hand-in
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX A. INTRODUCTION
A.2
Learning Objectives of the MSc programme from DTU
• Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction be­
tween the various components that make up an issue.
• Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction be­
tween the various components that make up an issue.
• Can, based on a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at international
level to develop ideas and solve problems.
• Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories, and tools, and has the capacity to
take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, put it into a broader academic
and societal perspective, and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions while
considering sustainability.
• Can develop relevant models, systems, technologies, and processes aimed at solving
technological problems.
• Can communicate and mediate research­based knowledge both orally and in writing is
familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area.
• Can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development, and spe­
cialization.
• Masters technical problem­solving at a high level through cross­disciplinary teamwork,
and has the capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including prepa­
ration of timetables, design, solution, and documentation.
107
==PAGE:121==
B
Focus Clarification
108
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX B. FOCUS CLARIFICATION
B.1
Research Protocol
Figure B.1: Research Protocol for Literature Review
109
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX B. FOCUS CLARIFICATION
B.2
Sanitation Barriers
Figure B.2: Sanitation Barriers
110
==PAGE:124==
C
Descriptive Study 1
111
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1
C.1
Overview of the persons interviewed
Figure C.1: Overview of the persons interviewed with detailed on the meetings
112
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1
C.2
Research Diaries for the interviews
Content begins on next page
113
==PAGE:127==
Target Group: Companies working with sanitation 
  
Research Topic 1: Company  
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. Which problem are you aiming to solve? 
2. What is your solution? And why is it answering 
the problem? 
3. How does your technology work? 
a. Has the problem changed through time? 
Have you pivoted? 
4. What are your desired customers? Where is your 
solution meant to be implemented 
(situation/country)? 
b. Have your customers evolved? 
5. What are the company’s future plans? 
c. 
Expand in similar regions? 
d. With which topic are you working on the 
most right now? 
  
Research Topic 2: Needs and issues 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. What are the biggest issues with sanitation in 
C/S? 
2. What are the characteristics of C/S? 
3. Do you see other regions that could have similar 
characteristics? 
a. Issues with challenging ground 
conditions? 
b. How is the situation in schools? 
4. What are the current solutions implemented? 
5. Do these solutions work completely? 
6. What is the desludging system? 
 
c. 
What are the current solutions for urban 
areas where pit latrines cannot be raised? 
d. Does a perfect solution exist and how 
would it look like? 
7. What are realistic price ranges for sanitation 
solutions? 
e. Who is paying for the development of 
solutions? 
 
  
Research Topic 3: Role of Lapee 
 
Activity: show images of Lapee and LP3X 
 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. What do you think about Lapee's solution in C / S 
context? 
a. What do you think are the assets and 
limits of Lapee in the HE context? 
b. What needs/requirements are not 
fulfilled? 
2. What about LP3X? 
SAME 
3. How would you change it? 
  
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
Target Group: Humanitarian Emergencies actors and Researchers 
 
Research Topic 1: Organisation and Interviewee 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. Have you worked with specific 
situations/countries? 
2. What are the characteristics of these given 
places? 
a. With which topic are you working the most right 
now? 
b. Contact in this area? 
3. What is the goal and organisation of your 
NGO/association? 
c. 
Do they focus on a specific issue / location / stage 
of the emergency? 
  
Research Topic 2.1: Humanitarian Emergencies / Developing countries - needs and issues 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. What are the biggest issues with sanitation in 
HE? 
a. What are the issues with challenging ground 
conditions? 
2. What are the current solutions? 
3. Do these solutions work completely? 
b. What are the current solutions for urban areas 
where pit latrines cannot be raised? 
c. 
What are the assets of container-based sanitation? 
d. Does a perfect solution exist and how would it look 
like? 
4. Is there specific sanitation answers for defined 
groups of HE? 
e. Do you cluster the type of HE? 
  
 Research Topic 2.2: Humanitarian Emergencies - logistics 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. How is humanitarian help organised? Does each NGO 
have their pool of material that can be deployed? Or 
are you in contact with local organisations? 
a. How are the logistics specifically with 
Oxfam/Red Cross? 
2. What are realistic price ranges for sanitation solutions? b. Who is paying for the development of 
solutions? 
  
  
Research Topic 3: Role of Lapee 
 
Activity: show images of Lapee and LP3X 
 
Key Questions: 
Sub-Questions: 
1. What do you think about Lapee's 
solution in C / S context? 
a. What do you think are the assets and limits of 
Lapee in the HE context? 
b. What needs/requirements are not fulfilled? 
2. What about LP3X? 
SAME 
3. How would you change it? 
  
 
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1
C.3
Intermediate steps of the KJ mehtod for the research topic 2
Figure C.2: Data gathered in categories and ordered according to the interviewees.
116
==PAGE:130==
 
 
 
 
Figure C.2.B: Creating links between the data collected during the interview 
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1
118
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 1
C.4
Evaluation of Lapee from the interviews
Figure C.3: Data collected from the evaluation of Lapee urinal during the interviews
119
==PAGE:133==
D
Prescriptive Study
D.1
Comparaison of the design methods considered
Content begins on next page
120
==PAGE:134==
 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.2
Detailed representation of the design process
Content begins on next page
122
==PAGE:136==
 
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.3
Comparison of the different female urinals identified during
the market analysis
Content begins on next page
124
==PAGE:138==
Picture 
Name and information 
Superstructure 
Bowl/Slab 
Storage/collection 
Trade-off 
privacy/defecation 
 
Lapee 
Denmark 
2017 
https://lapee.dk/ 
 
- Plastic 
- Opened 
- No doors 
- Bowl on the floor, mid-
high 
- Urination position: need 
to squat low or high to 
urinate 
- Tank 
- Can be linked to the 
sewage system 
- Open superstructure 
 
Polee by UiWE 
Denmark 
2010 – 2011 
- Plastic 
- No walls 
- No doors 
- Urination position: need 
to squat 
- Needs to be linked to 
the sewage system 
- Open superstructure 
 
Lady p 
The Netherland 
1999 - 2015 
 
- No outdoor urinal 
- Glass separator 
between the urinals 
- Bowl attached to the wall 
- Urination position: need 
to squat 
- Linked to the sewage 
system 
- Open arrangement  
 
MissWizz 
Belgium 
2019 
https://misswizz.be/ 
 
- Closed cabin in 
plastic sheets 
- Door with zipper 
 
- Bowl attached to the wall 
- Two sizes of bowl 
- Urination position: Need 
to stand to pee 
- Can be used facing a 
turning away from the wall 
- Needs to be linked to 
the sewage system 
? 
 
PEEQUAL Ltd 
The United Kingdom 
2019 
https://www.peequal.com/ 
- Plastic 
- Opened 
- No doors 
? 
- Tank 
- Can be linked to the 
sewage system 
- Open superstructure 
==PAGE:139==
 
Missoir 
Germany 
2019 
https://www.missoir.de/ 
- Plastic sheet 
- Common space 
inside with 3 urinals 
- Slab on the floor 
- Need to crouch to urinate 
- Tank 
- Can be linked to the 
sewage system 
- Grid on the bowl 
 
MadamePee 
France 
2017 
https://www.madamepee.com/ 
- Metallic and plastic 
structure 
- Swinging doors 
- Bowl attached to the wall 
- Urination position: 
squatting to urinate 
- Grid to nudge the liquid-
only 
- Tank 
- Can be linked to the 
sewage system 
- Grid on the bowl to 
nudge the user not to 
defecate 
 
Urinoir Marcelle 
2019 
https://urinoirmarcelle.fr/ 
 
- A plastic structure 
where the shadows 
inside the urinal can 
be seen 
- No doors but 
discreet entrance 
- Covering walls 
- Bowl attached to the wall 
- Urination position: 
squatting to urinate 
- Tank 
- No doors 
- Superstructure that 
make out the shadow 
of the user 
 
 
Weestand by LiquidGold Africa 
South Africa 
?? 
https://liquidgold.co.za/our-
products/weestand 
 
 
Just a bowl 
 
- Bowl attached to the wall 
- Need to stand to urinate 
- Urination position with 
back on the wall 
Just a bowl 
 
? 
 
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.4
Complete overview of the specifications of a female urinal
Figure D.1: Legend of the specifications table
Content continues next page
127
==PAGE:141==
 
 
# Design Focus 
Areas
#
Specific Focus
Business / 
Product
Basic / 
Specific #
Requirements (must have)
Criteria (nice to have)
Priority
Indicator
Example of different possibilities
What will be influenced?
A Urinating 
experience
1 TU collects urine
P
Sp
1 TU collects xx L of urine a day
3 Liter of urine
TU offers a place to handle the 
menstrual cycle
P
Sp
2
TU provides an access to water
2 Liter of water available inside TU
Acess to running wate ror not
How to get water inside TU
P
Sp
3 TU provides a disposal facility
5 Quantity of waste found around 
or in TU.
Women use disposable/reusable 
menstrual pads
Bin: Size, position and opening
TU offers a clean urinating 
experience to women
P
Sp
4
TU provides the necessary cleansing 
material
3 Cleanliness of user's vulva
Toilet paper, water
Add-ons inside TU (toilet paper, bin, 
etc.)
P
Ba
5
TU reduces misuses (i.e. avoid people 
defecating, urinating in the wrong 
place) and stays without urine or 
faeces after being used by 100 
different users.
2
Liter of faeces and urine around 
the slab/bowl
P
Ba
6
The user receive 0 drops from the 
urine back-splashes
3 Number of drops received by the 
user
P
Ba
7
TU does not smell after 100  uses
1 Bad smell detected by sensation 
or chemical particules
P
Ba
8
There are less than 2 touching 
points inside TU
3 Number of touching points 
between the user and TU
P
Ba
9
There are no flies and rodents after 
100 uses
1 Number of flies and rodent
TU offers an efficient urinating 
experience to women
P
Sp
10
TU is adapted to different anatomy (i.e. 
size, weight, shapes, etc.)
1 Women with different anatomy 
trying the toilets
Women living in the areas are 
quite short, the majority of 
women using TU are pregnant...
Bowl/Slab: Height 
P
Sp
11
TU is adapted to different urination 
positions (i.e. crouching, squatting, etc.)
2 Women with different urination 
position trying the toilets
Standing, squatting, crouching, … Bowl/Slab: design
P
Sp
12
TU can be used with any kind of cloth
2 Women with different cloth using 
the toilets
Pants, skirts, dresses, …
Bowl/Slab: design
P
Sp
13
TU is intuitive to use and it takes 
less than 6sec to the user to 
understand its functioning
3 Time for a user to understand 
how to use TU
P
Sp
14
TU can be used by disabled persons
1 Disabled users using TU
Women in wheelchair, with 
crutches 
Superstructure: Size inside, access 
with/without a step
15
TU can be used by elderly
2 Elderly users using TU
Superstructure: Size inside, access 
with/without a step
P
Sp
16
TU can be used by children over xx yo
1 Child using TU
Girls who go alone, with their 
mother
Bowl/Slab: design and size of the 
holes
B TU fits the 
given 
environment
6
TU has an identified duration
P & B
Sp
17
4
TU is a permanent, temporary or 
semi-permanent solution
Capacity to be transported, Space 
occupied
7 TU fits the given space
P
Sp
18
TU is compatible with the size, the 
shapes of the environment
3 Space available for TU
Space very scarce, narrow or no 
limit
Superstructure
Storage and/or collection system
P
Sp
19
TU takes into account the 
exisitng/available collection of 
excreta
3 Compatibility between TU and 
Collection system
Sewage system available or not
Slab/Bowl
Storage and/or collection system
8 TU can be used under every 
condition
P
Sp
20
TU can normally be used at night
2
Normal functioning 
(understanding and no misuses) 
with few luminosity
/
Everything
P
Sp
21
TU can normally be used when it is 
raining
2
Normal functioning 
(understanding and no misuses) 
with high waterfall
/
Superstructure
C Technical 
Features
9
TU is technically feasable
P
Ba
22 TU is robust
3 xx persons can use the urinal
Ba
23 TU is resistant to fluid
3
D Social 
Sustainability
P
Ba
24 TU is safe to use
3 Harmed done to the user
P
Sp
25
TU makes the users feel safe
3
Feeling expressed by the user
Height of the doors, presence of 
locks inside, discreet entrance, …
Superstructure: design
P
Sp
26 TU gives privacy to the users 
3 Feeling expressed by the user
Same
Superstructure: design
11 TU fits the sociocultural context
P & B
Sp
27
TU is socially accepted by the local 
population
3 Feeling expressed by the 
community
Fit the cultural and religious 
beliefs, women can and want to 
use the facilities
Everything
E Environmental 
Sustainability
P
Ba
28
100% of the material used to make the 
urinal come from recycled material
2 Recycled material in TU
P
Ba
29
100% of TU can be recycled at the 
end of its life-cycle
3 Recyclable material in TU
P
Ba
30 TU is waterless
3 Liter of water used for flushing
P
Ba
31
TU uses limited resources during the 
production stage
2 Energy quantity
14 TU is manufactured locally
B
Sp
32
TU is manufactured locally
2 Km between production place 
and use place
Manufacturing place
15 Transport of TU is sustainable
P & B
Ba
33
Carbon emission are limited during 
transportation
3
B
Sp
34
Air transport is limited for shipped 
urinal
3 Km of transportation by air
Manufacturing place
F Maintenance 
and transport
16 TU is easy to maitain
P
Ba
35 TU is easy to clean
3 Time and tools required for 
cleaning
P
Sp
36
TU can be emptied
3
Frequency of possible emptying
Tank where urine is stored, 
collecting system link to sewage 
system, …
Storage and/or collection: type
P
Sp
37
TU is easy to install
1 Time and tools for installation
Deliver in kit, deliver as one 
product, tools required
Everything
P
Sp
38
TU is easy to repair
1 Time and tools for reparation
Material easily reparable with 
resources available locally
Material used
P
Ba
39
TU has a lifespan of xx years
2 Number of years
17 TU is easy to transport
P
Ba
40
TU is compact during transportation
2
P
Ba
41
TU is light-weight
2
G Economic 
context
18 TU fits the economic context
B
Sp
42 TU is affordable
3 Price of the urinal
Cheap, need to be affordable for 
the customer
Type of material, transportation, 
manufacturing costs
B
Sp
43
The service of using TU is 
affordable for the users
3 Service price of the urinal
B
Sp
44
TU allows to recycle the urine
2 Number of urine liters recycled
B
Sp
45
TU allows to create job opportunities
1 Number of jobs created
Person employed for cleaning, 
for watching TU, …
Socioeconmic system implemented 
around TU
13 TU uses a reduce amount of 
resources
Needs --> Specifications
For the Specific Needs
4
2
5 TU is inclusive
3
10 TU combines a sufficient level of 
privacy and safety for women to 
feel comfortable using it
12 TU uses materials sustainably
==PAGE:142==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.5
Links between the specifications and the design considera­
tions
Content begins on next page
129
==PAGE:143==
 
 
#
Specific Focus
#
                                                                      Design Considerations
Specifications
TimeFrame
Economic 
Sustainability
Urine 
Collection
MHM
Safety
Privacy
Inclusivity
Beliefs
Cleanliness and 
Hygiene
Technical 
Features
Environmental 
Sustainability
1
TU collects urine
1 TU collects xx L of urine a day
x
x
TU offers a place 
to handle the 
menstrual cycle
2
TU provides an access to water
x
x
3 TU provides a disposal facility
x
x
TU offers a clean 
urinating 
experience to 
women
4 TU provides the necessary cleansing material
x
x
x
5
TU reduces misuses (i.e. avoid people defecating, 
urinating in the wrong place) and stays without urine 
or faeces after being used by 100 different users.
x
x
x
6 The user receive 0 drops from the urine back-splashes
x
7 TU does not smell after 100  uses
x
8 There are less than 2 touching points inside TU
x
9 There are no flies and rodents after 100 uses
x
TU offers an 
efficient urinating 
experience to 
women
10
TU is adapted to different anatomy (i.e. size, weight, 
shapes, etc.)
x
x
11
TU is adapted to different urination positions (i.e. 
crouching, squatting, etc.)
x
x
12 TU can be used with any kind of cloth
x
x
13
TU is intuitive to use and it takes less than 6sec to the 
user to understand its functioning
x
14 TU can be used by disabled persons
x
x
15 TU can be used by elderly
x
x
16 TU can be used by children over xx yo
x
x
6
TU has an duration 17 TU has an identified time frame
x
7
TU fits the given 
space
18
TU is compatible with the size, the shapes of the 
environment
x
x
19
TU takes into account the exisitng/available collection 
of excreta
x
x
8
TU can be used 
under every 
condition
20
TU can normally be used at night
x
21 TU can normally be used when it is raining
x
9
22 TU is robust
x
23 TU is resistant to fluid
x
24 TU is safe to use
x
25
TU makes the users feel safe
x
x
26 TU gives privacy to the users 
x
x
11
TU fits the 
sociocultural 
context
27
TU is socially accepted by the local population
x
28
100% of the material used to make the urinal come 
from recycled material
x
x
29 100% of TU can be recycled at the end of its life-cycle
x
x
30 TU is waterless
x
x
31 TU uses limited resources during the production stage
x
x
14
TU is 
manufactured 
locally
32
TU is manufactured locally
x
x
15
Transport of TU is 33 Carbon emission are limited during transportation
x
x
34 Air transport is limited for shipped urinal
x
x
16
TU is easy to 
maitain
35 TU is easy to clean
36 TU can be emptied
x
37 TU is easy to install
x
38 TU is easy to repair
x
39 TU has a lifespan of xx years
x
17
TU is easy to 
transport
40 TU is compact during transportation
x
x
41 TU is light-weight
x
x
18
TU fits the 
economic context
42 TU is affordable
x
43 The service of using TU is affordable for the users
x
44 TU allows to recycle the urine
x
45 TU allows to create job opportunities
x
12
TU uses materials 
sustainably
13
TU uses a reduce 
amount of 
resources
2
3
4
5
TU is inclusive
TECHNICAL ELEMENTS
CONTEXT
FUNCTIONS
DESIGN LENSES
10
TU combines a 
sufficient level of 
privacy and safety 
for women to feel 
comfortable using 
it
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.6
Final version of the Support
Content begins on next page
131
==PAGE:145==
03/07/2022
1
Female public and 
community urinals
•
•
2
1
2
==PAGE:146==
03/07/2022
2
•
•
•
3
•
•
•
4
3
4
==PAGE:147==
03/07/2022
3
5



6
5
6
==PAGE:148==
03/07/2022
4
7
8
7
8
==PAGE:149==
03/07/2022
5
9
10
9
10
==PAGE:150==
03/07/2022
6
11
#
Design Lens
#
Design Sub-Lens
Importance
A
Safety
A1
No harmful elements
A2
Robust superstructure
A3
Good Lighting
A4
Safe Location and Surroudings 
and Clear Access
B
Privacy
B1
Women-only space
B2
Discreet entrance
B3
Private inner space
C
Inclusivity
C1
Clothes
C2
Anatomy
C3
Urination Position
C4
Inclusivity of Disabled and 
elderly
C5
Inclusivity of Children
D
Beliefs
D1
Symbols
D2
Values and rituals
D3
Hygiene understanding
E
Cleanliness 
and Hygiene
E1
Urine-only facility
E2
Hygienic and clean
E3
Intuitive interfaces
E4
Cleansing material
F
MHM
F1
Disposal of menstrual products
F2
Access to water and soap
F3
Off-floor surfaces
F4
Taboos within MHM
0
1
2
3
4
5
Safety
Privacy
Inclusivity
Beliefs
Cleanliness
and Hygiene
MHM
Requirements Map
What importance is given to the design 
lenses?
12
11
12
==PAGE:151==
03/07/2022
7
13

For each design sub-lens, a table is detailing the characteristics:
Influenced by
Other design lenses that 
influence the design and 
choices of this design 
lens 
Essential Features
Elements that are 
necessary to include and 
consider for the design 
and the implementation
Desirable Features
Elements that are nice to 
think of and potentially 
include in the design and 
implementation if 
necessary.
Morphology
Example of how to 
tackle the different 
features and translate 
them into design 
choices
Affects the design of
Impacts of the design lens on 
a specific part of the urinal 
(superstructure, bowl/slab, 
storage/collection or 
everything)
14
13
14
==PAGE:152==
03/07/2022
8
15
16
•
•
15
16
==PAGE:153==
03/07/2022
9
17
18
•
•
•
•
•
17
18
==PAGE:154==
03/07/2022
10
19
20
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
19
20
==PAGE:155==
03/07/2022
11
21
22
•
•
•
•
•
•
21
22
==PAGE:156==
03/07/2022
12
23
24
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
23
24
==PAGE:157==
03/07/2022
13
25
26
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
25
26
==PAGE:158==
03/07/2022
14
27
28
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
27
28
==PAGE:159==
03/07/2022
15
29
30
•
•
•
•
29
30
==PAGE:160==
03/07/2022
16
31
32
•
•
•
•
31
32
==PAGE:161==
03/07/2022
17
33
34
•
•
•
33
34
==PAGE:162==
03/07/2022
18
35
36
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
35
36
==PAGE:163==
03/07/2022
19
37
38
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
37
38
==PAGE:164==
03/07/2022
20
39
40
•
•
•
39
40
==PAGE:165==
03/07/2022
21
41
42
•
•
41
42
==PAGE:166==
03/07/2022
22
43
44
•
•
•
•
43
44
==PAGE:167==
03/07/2022
23
45
46
•
•
•
45
46
==PAGE:168==
03/07/2022
24
47
48
•
•
•
•
•
•
47
48
==PAGE:169==
03/07/2022
25
49
50
•
•
•
•
49
50
==PAGE:170==
03/07/2022
26
51
52
•
•
•
•
51
52
==PAGE:171==
03/07/2022
27
53
54
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
53
54
==PAGE:172==
03/07/2022
28
55
56
•
•
•
•
•
•
55
56
==PAGE:173==
03/07/2022
29
57
58
•
•
•
57
58
==PAGE:174==
03/07/2022
30
59
60
•
•
59
60
==PAGE:175==
03/07/2022
31
61


61
==PAGE:176==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.7
Needs Identification Tool ­ Identifying the needs
Table D.1: Needs Identification Tool ­ Questions to examine to identify sociocultural needs
Design Lens
#
Design Sub­Lens
Description
Example of requirements morphology
A
Safety
A1
No harmful elements
What elements in the urinal could potentially be harmful to the user?
Physical element of the urinal,
size of the hole/slab
A2
Robust superstructure
What environmental conditions should the urinal be resistant to?
Rain, wind
A3
Good Lighting
What kind of lighting would be necessary to implement inside the urinal?
Outside the urinal? Could natural light be used?
Urinal used at night, urinal is inside
A4
Safe Location and Surroundings
and Clear Access
What elements in the surroundings of and access
to the urinal could be a threat?
Vermin, forest, place known as
dangerous in the community
B
Privacy
B1
Women­only space
What kind of women­only space could be created?
Which services should it include?
Adding extra services as providing
menstrual protection
B2
Discreet entrance
What level of privacy should the entrance have?
What elements could decrease the privacy of the entrance?
What elements are desired by the users?
Shame of being seen entering the urinal,
desire of a screen in front of the urinal
entrance
B3
Private inner space
What elements would make the inner space more
or less private in the eyes of the user?
No holes in the walls,…
C
Inclusivity
C1
Clothes
What kind of clothes is usually worn by the user in the community?
How do the types of clothes influence the urinal design?
Pant, Dress
C2
Anatomy
Are there specific kinds of anatomy among the users?
How to take into account all the differences?
Height, corpulence, crotch sizes
C3
Urination Position
What kind of urination position is prefered by the users?
Squatting, crouching, different angles,
different position with the rest of the body
C4
Inclusivity of Disabled and
Elderly
Which level of inclusivity for disabled and elderly wants to be tackled?
How does it influence the design of the urinal?
What barriers should be tackled and for what kind of disability?
The level of disability:
wheelchair, blind person, etc.
C5
Inclusivity of Children
What is the minimum age to use the urinal?
How does it influence the design of the urinal?
The minimum age authorized
D
Beliefs
D1
Symbols
Are there any symbols that are meaningful to the local
population and could influence the design choices?
Colours, Shapes
D2
Values and rituals
Are there other values that could influence the acceptance of the urinal?
Environemnent, specific rituals or beliefs
D3
Hygiene understanding
How hygiene is perceived by the community and
how does it influence the use of latrine/urinals?
Why do users want sanitation facilities?
Look at existing sanitation facilities (conditions, …)
Why women would like to use a urinal?
Are there any urinals already implemented?
Are they used and why?
E
Cleanliness
and Hygiene
E1
Urine­only facility
Is the community used to urinal facilities?
If yes, what are the concepts they are used to?
If not, what could be the barriers?
E2
Hygienic and clean
What are the conditions of existing sanitation facilities in terms of cleanliness?
What kind of diseases are present in the area and
how to prevent them within the design of the urinal?
Existence of worms that multiply in wet
and warm environments can lead to avoid
designing grooves or nooks in the urinals
E3
Intuitive interfaces
What are the interfaces the users are used to?
What are the conditions of existing sanitation facilities?
Where to urinate, where to throw trash,
where to put the feet, etc.
E4
Cleansing material
What kind of cleansing materials are used?
How to include the disposal of the cleansing material?
Paper, water, both
F
MHM
F1
Disposal of menstrual products
What kind of menstrual protections are used?
How does it affect the disposal?
Disposable or reusable
F2
Access to water and soap
What are the available water sources?
What kind of access is required inside the urinal? Outside the urinal?
Running water is available or not
F3
Off­floor surfaces
What kind of off­floor surfaces would be relevant to implement?
To hold what kind of items?
How does the user behave inside
a urinal to deal with the menstrual hygiene?
F4
Taboos within MHM
What are the taboos and cultural habits existing with MHM and
how to include them in the design?
Vision of blood, etc.
163
==PAGE:177==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.8
Needs Identification Tool ­ Rating the needs for the case of the
Ghanaian school
Figure D.2: Table representing the rating of the needs for the case of the Ghanaian school
164
==PAGE:178==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
Figure D.3: Diagram representing the rating of the needs for the case of the Ghanaian school
D.9
Design Support Tool
Content begins on next page
165
==PAGE:179==
#
Design Lens
#
Design Sub-Lens
Context / 
Product
Interdependancies 
between the design 
sub-lens. It is 
influenced by …
Which part of the 
urinal is 
influenced?
Morphology Examples
A1
No harmful elements
P
C2, C4, C5
Everything
When normally used, no pieces of the 
superstructure or the slabs is harmful for 
the user
Misuses of the slab/superstructure do not 
create potential harm to the user
A2
Robust superstructure
P
Superstructure
The superstructure is solid
If outside, the urinal can face critical 
environmental conditions (like rain, wind, etc)
The urinal structure supports an 
intensive use without being 
damaged
The urinal resists to potential intentional 
or unintentional damages
A3
Good Lighting
P & C
B2, B3
Everything
The lighting makes the users feel safe inside 
the urinal
The lighting makes the users feel safe on the 
way to/back from the urinal
The lighting does not only 
illuminate the urinal structure
Using natural light has been 
considered
The lighting avoid casting dark shadows
The lighting does not illuminate the 
silhouette of the user
- Light in the urinal itself
- Light at the entrance of the urinal
- Light on the way to the urinal
- Natural Light
A4
Safe Location and Surroundings 
and Clear Access
C
A3
Everything
The user feel safe on the way to and back 
from the urinal
The location of the urinal is a trade-off 
between a crowded and isolated place to 
give both safety and privacy.
If outside, the surroundings of 
the urinal are cleared of bushes 
that could house vermins, 
animals, etc.
Signage to access the urinal 
are clear (potential use of 
symbols and colours)
- Signage
- Cut bushes around the urinal to avoid vermin 
to breed
B1
Women-only space
P & C
D1, D2
Superstructure
The urinals are male/female segregated
The female urinals are far enough from the 
male facilities
The entrance of male and 
female facilities face different 
directions and are not back to 
back.
The signage to recognize the 
urinal is clear
The inclusion of  third gender or gender-
neutral people is taken into account in the 
design of the urinal
Extra service are available inside 
the women-only space
- Women-only space between the urinals
- Women-only space within the urinals
- Offer more services than just urinals
B2
Discreet entrance
P & C
A2, A3
Superstructure
The user can enter the latrines without 
being observed
The user understand easily where is the 
entrance
If needed, a lock fit the doors and are 
accessible by every kind of user
- Screened entrance
- Position of the entrance
- Door
- Lock
B3
Private inner space
P
A3
Superstructure
The size an shape of the superstructure give 
a sufficient level of privacy
The superstructure material cannot be seen 
through
The layout of the superstructure 
prevent passers-by to see inside 
the urinal
Ventilation systems do not compromise 
the privacy of the users
The wall materials are not easily 
damageable and do not mar the 
privacy level
- Size of the walls
- Material of the walls
C1
Clothes
P
D2
Bowl/slab
The urinal allows a user with different kind 
of clothes to use the urinal without problem
The urinal is optimized for the clothes 
locally worn
- Urinal bowl fits to the wall
- Urinal bowl fits to the floor
C2
Anatomy
P
Bowl/slab
Users with different kinds of corpulence can 
use the urinal
A specific kind of corpulence is identified 
as the most common and the urinal is 
optimized for this one
- Different urinals for different sizes
- Adaptable urinal
C3
Urination Position
P
C1, C2, C4, C5
Bowl/slab
The urinal allows the user to urinate with 
slightly different urination positions
The urinal is optimized for the most 
common urination position - potentially 
linked to the type of clothes used
Position of the slab/bowl
C4
Inclusivity of Disabled and 
Elderly
P & C
A3, A4
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
A level of inclusivity is chosen to make the 
urinal accessible to elderly and disabled 
persons
The design of the urinal is adapted to the 
level of inclusivity chosen
The privacy, safety and 
functions of the urinal are 
ensured for the included 
population
There are few barriers for 
disabled and elderly people 
to access and use the urinal
The urinal is in a reasonable distance for 
disabled and elderly who can take longer 
to access the urinal
- Handrails inside the urinal 
- Raised toilet
- Space for wheelchair
- Other elements of the urinal are lower and 
easily accessible (through rope for instance)
- Tactile signs are included for visually impaired 
people
C5
Inclusivity of Children
P & C
A3, A4
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
A level of inclusivity is chosen to make the 
urinal accessible to children
The design of the urinal is adapted to the 
level chosen with potentially some add-on 
elements
The privacy, safety and 
functions of the urinal are 
ensured for the children
Pregnant women needs and capacities are 
taken into the design of the urinal
If necessary, babies are also 
included
- Bowl compatible with children size
- Add-on elements
D1
Symbols
P
D2
Superstructure
The colours used in the urinal design fit the 
local beliefs
The shapes used in the urinal design fit the 
local beliefs
Other symbols used in the urinal 
design fit the local beliefs
D2
Values and rituals
P
Superstructure
The values/rituals of the local population 
are respected by the urinal
The use of the urinal by women does not 
interfere with rituals/values of the local 
population
D3
Hygiene understanding
P & C
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
The urinal plays with the hygiene 
understanding of the local population to be 
integrated into the community
The urinal helps bring better perspectives on 
the hygiene understanding of the local 
population
The urinal is not in total contradiction with 
the hygiene understanding of the local 
population, which would result in nobody 
using the urinal
Educational campain should go along the 
urinal implementation
E1
Urine-only facility
P
E3
Everything
The design nudges the user to not defecate 
in the urinal
There are trade-offs between nudging the 
user and the level of privacy
Nudging with a bowl/slab that cannot receive 
other waste than urine
E2
Hygienic and clean
P
E3
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
The urinal does not create contact between 
the fluid waste and the users
Urine backsplashes are limited
The smell should be limited
The urinal takes into account in the design 
the combat against common diseases 
present in the local area
- No grooves on the slabs that can foster the 
germs proliferation
- Easy-washable material for the slab surfaces
E3
Intuitive interfaces
P
E2
Everything
The different interfaces are easily 
identifiable by all the population
The interfaces prevent dirt and foster a clean 
urinal
Few misuses occur during the use of the 
urinal
Even if misuses are intending to be done, the 
architecture of the toilet makes it impossible
E4
Cleansing material
P
E3
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
Local cleansing material is available inside 
the urinal
The cleansing material is easily reachable by 
the users when they are urinating
- Water bucket and cup for washers
- Bin for toilet paper for wipers
F1
Disposal of menstrual products
P
E2, E3, E4
Superstructure
An adequate, safe and culturally 
appropriate disposable facility is available 
in the urinal
If required, women have ways to wash and 
reuse their MHM materials
A full disposal system is considered to 
handle the waste
Menstrual protections are available 
in the urinal 
- Bin with lid to not let the menstrual 
protection in sight
- Water and soap to wash the reusable 
menstrual protection
- Incineration device
F2
Access to water and soap
P & C
E2, E3, E4
Superstructure
Water and soap are available inside the 
urinal for cleansing and managing 
menstruation
Water is available outside the urinal for 
handwashing or cleaning
- Inside the urinal itself
- Outside the urinal but within the sanitation 
space
F3
Off-floor surfaces
P
E2, E3
Superstructure
Elements are available inside the urinal to 
keep the clothes and menstrual products 
off-floor
- Hooks
- Shelves
F4
Taboos within MHM
P & C
B1, D2, D4
Superstructure, 
Bowl/slab
Women are not afraid of managing their 
menstrual cycles in the urinal
The urinal takes into account the taboos 
around MHM and tries to facilitate the 
menstrual hygiene process
Privacy
B
Essential
Desirable
Safety
A
MHM
F
Inclusivity
C
Beliefs
D
Cleanliness and 
Hygiene
E
 
 
==PAGE:180==
APPENDIX D. PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY
D.10
Evaluation of Lapee and LP3X design for the case of the Ghana­
ian school
Figure D.4: Diagram representing the evaluation of Lapee and LP3X for the case of the Ghana­
ian school
167
==PAGE:181==
E
Descriptive Study 2
E.1
Design brief on the Ghanaian school given to the designers
before the workshops
Content begins on next page
168
==PAGE:182==
1 
 
Study Case – Ghanaian School 
 
Context: Design an outdoor shared female urinal for a school in low and middle-income settings in Ghana 
• 
School in a peri-urban coastal community in Ghana, close to the city of Accra 
• 
45% of the population relies on open defecation, in bushes and on the beach. Only 12% have access to single-households latrines 
• 
Unknown if urinals exist already but it seems like they do not. 
 
 
Current Situation: 
Toilet conditions at schools 
• 
Pit latrines are the common facilities 
• 
Few toilets are working properly, and the pits are often blocked. 
• 
Bad smell, 'heat' emanating from the pit 
• 
No light apart from holes in the walls 
• 
No waste management system 
• 
Water shortage and rationing 
  
 
Behaviours 
• 
Toilets are not appreciated by the students who try to avoid them 
• 
Students are not supposed to leave the school, but girls sneak off to go to the toilet in the bushes 
• 
Fear of public insults, shaming, and assaults because public defecation is usually done during night-time 
  
 
MHM (Menstrual Hygiene Management) 
• 
Goal, find a place to change menstrual pads and clean themselves: toilets are not the desirable options usually the bushes are preferred 
• 
Fear that somebody sees the menstrual blood in the toilet or in the menstrual pads because it is associated with something dirty and shameful 
• 
So, girls avoid using the toilets or try not to stain the toilets with menstrual blood 
• 
Hide the menstrual pads 
• 
Some girls also decide not to come to school 
 
 
ACCRA 
==PAGE:183==
2 
 
Identification of the needs 
# 
Design Lens 
# 
Design Sub-Lens 
Description 
A 
Safety 
A1 No harmful elements 
Users are children and adolescents, they can be shorter than the average adult height. 
A2 Robust superstructure 
Hot and humid weather. Rainy season in summer with a peak in June. Can have strong wind. 
A3 Good Lighting 
Avoid holes in the wall that could decrease the privacy level. 
A4 Safe Location and Surroundings and 
Clear Access 
Dangerous vermin can be found in the bushes. 
B 
Privacy 
B1 Women-only space 
Women-only space is necessary to create privacy for menstrual management. 
B2 Discreet entrance 
Potentially screened the entrance to give extra privacy to the girls when they enter the urinal. 
B3 Private inner space 
Inner space should be private and enjoyable. 
C 
Inclusivity 
C1 
Clothes 
Unknown 
C2 
Anatomy 
Young and adolescent girls are going to be the main user. The urinal shapes should be adapted to 
their anatomy. 
C3 
Urination Position 
Unknown 
C4 
Inclusivity of Disabled and Elderly 
No or very few elderly persons. Few disabled students. Type of disability: Unknown 
C5 
Inclusivity of Children 
Girls and adolescents are going to use the urinal. The size of the hole should be adapted. 
D 
Beliefs 
D1 Symbols 
Unknown 
D2 Values and rituals 
Unknown 
D3 Hygiene understanding 
Open defecation is still practised by 45% of the population. The existing toilets in the school are very 
dirty. 
E 
Cleanliness 
and Hygiene 
E1 
Urine-only facility 
Urine-only facilities do not seem to be spread 
E2 
Hygienic and clean 
The urinal should be very clean and not smelly - two problems very common in existing sanitation 
facilities. 
E3 
Intuitive interfaces 
Typical facilities are slab and pit latrines 
E4 
Cleansing material 
Toilet paper is used. Disposal bin to put the toilet paper and treatment of the waste should be 
implemented 
F 
MHM 
F1 
Disposal of menstrual products 
Disposable pads are used. Requires bin with lid in the urinal or incineration facilities outside the 
urinal but in a private and women-only space. 
F2 
Access to water and soap 
A lot of water shortage. Little water is available. Water and soap should be available inside the urinal 
for cleaning. 
F3 
Off-floor surfaces 
They should hold menstrual products. They should hold clothes. 
F4 
Taboos within MHM 
Menstrual blood is associated with dirtiness. It is not usual to talk openly about menstruation 
 
 
==PAGE:184==
3 
 
 
Grading of the needs 
Each Design Sub-Lens has been graded for the specific situation in Ghana,  
5: High Importance, 3: Medium Importance, 1: Low Importance 
# 
Design 
Lens 
# 
Design Sub-Lens 
Importance 
Average 
Importance 
Standard 
Deviation 
A 
Safety 
A1 
No harmful elements 
5 
4 
1 
A2 
Robust superstructure 
3 
A3 
Good Lighting 
3 
A4 
Safe Location and 
Surroundings and Clear 
Access 
5 
B 
Privacy 
B1 
Women-only space 
5 
5 
0,000 
B2 
Discreet entrance 
5 
B3 
Private inner space 
5 
C 
Inclusivity 
C1 
Clothes 
3 
2,6 
1,497 
C2 
Anatomy 
1 
C3 
Urination Position 
3 
C4 
Inclusivity of Disabled 
and Elderly 
1 
C5 
Inclusivity of Children 
5 
D 
Beliefs 
D1 
Symbols 
3 
4,33 
0,943 
D2 
Values and rituals 
5 
D3 
Hygiene understanding 
5 
E 
Cleanliness 
and 
Hygiene 
E1 
Urine-only facility 
5 
4 
1,000 
E2 
Hygienic and clean 
5 
E3 
Intuitive interfaces 
3 
E4 
Cleansing material 
3 
F 
MHM 
F1 
Disposal of menstrual 
products 
5 
4,50 
0,866 
F2 
Access to water and 
soap 
5 
F3 
Off-floor surfaces 
3 
F4 
Taboos within MHM 
5 
 
 
==PAGE:185==
APPENDIX E. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2
172
==PAGE:186==
APPENDIX E. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2
E.2
Result of the workshop ­ creating a urinal
Figure E.1: Results of the workshop that aimed to create a urinal from scratch
173
==PAGE:187==
APPENDIX E. DESCRIPTIVE STUDY 2
E.3
Result of the workshop ­ adapting a urinal
Figure E.2: Results of the workshop that aimed to adapt a urinal to a specific context
174
==PAGE:188==
F
Discussion
F.1
Design sub­lenses of the three levels of design
Figure F.1: Design lenses and sub­lenses for the level 2
Figure F.2: Design lenses and sub­lenses for the level 3
175
