==PAGE:1==
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
Syuan Yu Wang
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
Syuan Yu Wang
Master Thesis
June, 2022
Author
Syuan Yu Wang
E­mail: s202536@student.dtu.dk
Supervisor
Associate Professor Ivano Eligio Castelli
Section for Atomic Materials Modeling
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
E­mail: ivca@dtu.dk
Co­Supervisors
PhD Student Kai Zheng
Section for Atomic Materials Modeling
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
E­mail: kzhe@dtu.dk
PhD Student Benjamin Heckscher Sjølin
Section for Atomic Materials Modeling
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
E­mail: benjas@dtu.dk
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej
Building 301
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 46 77 58 00
info@energy.dtu.dk
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis is submitted in Master degree from the Technical University of Den­
mark (DTU). The work has been carried out between January 2022 and June
2022 at section for Atomic Scale Materials Modeling (ASM) at the Department of
Energy Conversion and Storage. The study has been supervised by Ivano Eligio
Castelli.
Syuan Yu Wang ­ s202536
Signature
Date
ii
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With the prospect of a more advanced method of machine learning, cheaper and
better results can be calculated and attained. Density Functional Theory (DFT) is
commonly used to calculate and simulate the properties and behaviors of materi­
als, but this method is typically time­consuming and costly. Using machine learn­
ing to avoid these disadvantages is possible if the appropriate machine learning
algorithm is developed.
In this study, the data­driven discovery of Janus Nanotube is presented by combin­
ing machine learning with open source databases in the field of Janus nanotubes.
This study aims to develop an algorithm capable of predicting the curve of strain
energy versus radius, the minimum strain energy, and the optimal radius. After
each step of data filtering, test results are presented and analyzed. The model
with the lowest mean absolute percentage error rate is ultimately presented, and
model validation is used to assess the model’s performance.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Before anything else, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my advi­
sor, professor Ivano Eligio Castelli, for providing me with the opportunity to con­
duct the master’s thesis on this topic, as well as for his guidance and words of
encouragement throughout the entire project.
In addition, I am grateful to my co­supervisor, PhD student Kai Zheng, for providing
me with knowledge support and all the discussion regarding Janus nanotubes. In
addition, I’d like to thank my co­supervisor, PhD student Benjamin Heckscher Sjlin,
for guiding me in the field of machine learning and supporting machine learning
result discussion.
iv
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
5
2.1
Descriptor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Curve fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Data­driven discovery by Machine learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results and discussion
17
3.1
Janus tube and initial database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Nanotube strain energy and optimal radius
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Machine learning model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Discussion regarding error rate between predicted a and b and pre­
dicted minimal strain energy, Emin, and optimal radius, Ropt. . . . .
49
4
Conclusion
51
5
Future work
53
Bibliography
55
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the twenty­first century, the field of computational chemistry has become in­
creasingly predictive, with activity in applications ranging as widely as the devel­
opment of catalysts for the conversion of greenhouse gases[1][2], nanotube simu­
lation[3], energy generation[4][5], the discovery of materials for energy harvesting
and storage[6][7], etc. The modern chemical­simulation toolbox makes it possible
to predict (with an accuracy level that is acceptable) the properties of a compound
before the compound has even been created in the laboratory. This prediction can
be done with acceptable levels of precision. The use of high­throughput computa­
tional screening, which enables researchers to determine the properties of thou­
sands of different compounds within the context of a single investigation, is now
considered standard practice[8]. There are many different approaches to compu­
tational simulation that are used nowadays, including but not limited to molecular
dynamics[9][10], Monte Carlo techniques[11], the phase­field method[12][13], and
electronic structure simulations based on density functional theory(DFT)[14][15].
In particular, density functional theory (DFT)[14][15], which is now an established
method for calculating the structure and behavior of solids[16], has made it pos­
sible to develop extensive databases that cover the calculated properties of both
known and hypothetical systems. These systems include organic and inorganic
crystals, single molecules[17][18][19], and etc. When compared to the amount
of time needed for actual measurement, the amount of time needed for compu­
tational simulation is significantly less. When it comes to the provision of real
experiments, the fact that one has complete control over the essential variables
is an advantage that should not be overlooked. However, before it can be put to
any practical use, there are a great many challenges connected to computational
simulation that need to be overcome. For the purpose of carrying out computa­
tional simulation programs, for instance, high­performance computer hardware is
required. In addition, explicit assumptions founded on the outcomes of previous
calculations are not allowed to be utilized during the process of adding a new
system. Because of this, modern material research frequently requires the close
integration of computation and experimentation in order to produce a fundamen­
tal understanding of the structures and properties of the materials of interest and
how they are related to the procedures involved in their synthesis and process­
ing. This is necessary in order to produce a fundamental understanding of the
structures and properties of the materials of interest and how they are related to
the procedures involved in their synthesis and processing. In addition, it is of­
ten the case that neither experimental measurement nor computational modeling
are able to solve newly emerging problems. For instance, the investigation of the
transition temperature of glass [20] through experiment is complicated and can
not be simulated using computer programs since it depends on a variety of in­
ternal and external conditions[21]. Because of this, numerous efforts have been
made in the field of materials science to establish methods that are capable of
overcoming the limitations that are imposed by both simulation and experiment.
These strategies are an attempt to get around the issue that has been uncovered
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
1
==PAGE:10==
and are the reason for the development of these methods.
The proliferation of platforms for the sharing of data on generic materials and
the development of cutting­edge techniques for artificial intelligence have the po­
tential to significantly change and improve the role that computers play in the
conduct of scientific research and the creation of new technologies. With the as­
sistance of a platform such as the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD),
the super­conducting critical temperatures (SuperCon), the Open Quantum Mate­
rials Database (OQMD), the Cambridge Structural Databases, the Harvard Clean
Energy Project (HCEP), the Materials Project (MP), the Materials Commons, and
the Materials Data Facility, the procedure of finding new materials and designing
them could potentially be sped up by a significant amount. This is because the
platform would make it possible to store and share The ever­increasing rates of
data acquisition and storage capacities in today’s world of modern materials sci­
ence present a challenge for advanced techniques for characterizing materials.
This presents a problem in the modern world of modern materials science. As
a direct consequence of this, the development of brand new methods for rapidly
evaluating and analyzing the data that has been gathered is required. With the
help of big data and AI, the chemical industry is seeing a phenomenal growth in
the number of applications it can utilize. This is largely due to the fact that these
two technologies are being utilized. Machine learning, which is a powerful tool
for finding patterns in high­dimensional data, is a subfield of artificial intelligence
that has evolved rapidly in recent years. This has allowed it to become a more
powerful tool. The statistical methods that model the linear or nonlinear correla­
tions between the properties of materials and related factors are at the heart of the
applications that make up machine learning. These methods enable a computer
to learn from empirical data by modeling the correlations between those proper­
ties and factors[22]. In recent years, the challenges associated with accurately
modeling the links between the properties of materials and the myriad of compli­
cated physical parameters have been successfully overcome by the application of
approaches based on machine learning[23] and big data[24]. These approaches
have allowed for accurate modeling of the links between the properties of materi­
als and the complex physical parameters. In addition, techniques that make use of
machine learning (ML) are becoming an increasingly common alternative. These
methods make an attempt to make the same kinds of predictions by utilizing an
approximate or surrogate model; however, they require only a small portion of
the computational expenses that are required by the traditional methods. In com­
putational chemistry, materials science, and also condensed­matter physics, the
application of ML is frequently centered on the regression (fitting) of atomic prop­
erties. This can also be said of the application of ML in condensed­matter physics.
This is a reference to the functional dependence that a particular quantity has on
the structural environment of its immediate surroundings. To put it another way,
ML is utilized to evaluate how well a model corresponds to the data. When it
comes to the topic of force fields and interatomic potentials, there are a number
of papers that offer a comprehensive overview[25][26], in addition to examples of
recent investigations that function as benchmarks[27][28].
The low­dimensional Janus transition metal chalcogenides, also known as TMDs,
2
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:11==
have been garnering an increasing amount of attention in a variety of research
and technological fields. Investigations, both experimental and theoretical, have
shown that the breaking of the mirror­asymmetry in the Janus TMD structure,
which results in an intrinsic dipole moment that is perpendicular to the system’s
layers, is the origin of these emerging properties, either directly or indirectly. In
addition, because an asymmetry structure can naturally wrap and form nanotubes
of a well­defined size, it is regarded as a possible solution to the difficulty of pro­
ducing single­wall tubes with a specific radius and controllable physio­chemical
properties. This is because of the fact that asymmetry structures can naturally
wrap and form nanotubes. When compared to other curled shapes, such as tubes
or scrolls, it is anticipated that the unsupported sheet will be more unstable due
to the presence of the asymmetry. Pauling postulated that the lattice­mismatch
that exists between the two inner and outer atomic layers is responsible for the
driving force that causes sheets to curve[29]. Single­walled inorganic nanotubes
with well­defined diameters hold promise for technological applications, not only
due to their reduced dimensionality, but also due to their unique properties, which
are frequently fundamentally distinct from those of the corresponding asymmet­
ric sheets. In other words, single­walled two­dimensional materials can not only
preserve the properties of their constituent parts, but also introduce new function­
alities[30]. This encourages research and interest in the design and testing of
novel Janus monolayer materials[31].
Janus sheets, such as MoSSe[32] or BiTeI[33], are examples of one of the possi­
ble classes of materials that can form asymmetric 2D monolayers. These sheets
can be wrapped to form 1D tubes[34][35]. According to the findings of a study[35],
the radii of single­wall Janus TMD tubes need to be well below 35 Å in order to be
created. These tubes have significantly different (electronic) properties compared
to the corresponding asymmetric sheet. Although research on simple synthesis
routes for the production of single­wall inorganic nanotubes has been going on for
a long time, not a lot of focus has been placed on the question of which materi­
als could make such a structure without also producing multi­wall tubes. Recent
research[8] included a comprehensive screening study on the stability of 135 dif­
ferent inorganic nanotubes generated from the rolling of asymmetric 2D Janus
sheets along both the armchair and zigzag directions. The study was conducted
within the framework of Density Functional Theory (DFT). The unraveling of the
wrapping mechanism responsible for the curling of 2D Janus sheets was accom­
plished by performing approximately 4500 DFT relaxations, as well as calculating
the stability and strain energy of the selected nanotubes. In addition to this, a
potential route for the synthesis of nanotubes with small radii has been outlined.
The construction of a high throughput study for the purpose of predicting poten­
tially feasible 1D Janus nanotubes is, however, still beyond the budgetary limits
of the project. As a result, for the purpose of directing the future synthesis and
simulation of single­wall nanotubes, it is necessary to conduct a data­driven study
of Janus nanotubes with the goal of developing an appropriate machine learning
algorithm that can predict the properties of Janus nanotubes.
In this study, the data­driven discovery of Janus Nanotube is presented by com­
bining machine learning method to open source databese in Janus nanotube field.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
3
==PAGE:12==
The goal of this study is building up an algorithm which can predict curve of strain
energy against radius, minimal strain energy Emin, and optimal radius Ropt. Fol­
lowing each data­filtering step, the test results are presented and analyzed. Ul­
timately, the model with the lowest mean absolute percentage error rate is pre­
sented, and model validation is used to evaluate the model’s performance.
4
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:13==
2
Methods
2.1
Descriptor
2.1.1
Atomic structure representation
The Cartesian positions, denoted by the notation {ri}, of the atoms that make
up a molecule or materials are the element that most directly defines its chem­
ical structure. These positions are not commonly used as input in interatomic
potential models; rather, the models convert them into a distinct mathematical
representation. In this way, the resulting potential can automatically gain some
desirable properties, particularly symmetries of the potential energy with respect
to the translation, rotation, and permutation (swapping) of atoms of the same ele­
ment. These symmetries are particularly useful in determining how the potential
energy changes when atoms of the same element are exchanged. In addition, the
representation should accurately reflect other physical requirements, such as the
smoothness of the mapping, additivity when applied to the learning of extensive
properties, and correct limiting behaviors, such as the fact that the atomization
energy is zero (by definition) when the atoms are at an infinite separation from
one another. Before applying machine learning techniques to predict properties
of materials or to discover new materials with desired properties, it’s important to
find an appropriate method to convert the molecular structures into values which
can be understood by machine learning algorithms, because nuclear charges and
atomic positions are not rotationally and translationally invariant. When the rep­
resentation of the input data is more appropriate, an algorithm is able to map that
representation more correctly to the output data. Because it is not always obvious
which choice of representation will give the best performance, this is a topic that
is actively being researched for chemical systems. Choosing how to best repre­
sent the data could require insight into both the underlying scientific problem and
the operation of the learning algorithm.In other words, the machine learning algo­
rithms need to be retrained for every dataset if the original atomistic systems are
used, thus results in significantly increasing amount of required training dataset.
To transform chemical and structural information to suitable input for machine
learning algorithms, the descriptor is often used. The following properties are
the most important properties for an ideal descriptor[36][37]:
• Invariant with respect to spatial translation of the coordinate system:
isometry of space.
• Invariant with respect to rotation of the coordinate system: isotropy of
space.
• Invariant with respect to permutation of atomic indices: changing the
enumeration of atoms does not affect the physical properties of the system.
• Unique: there is a single way to construct a descriptor from an atomic struc­
ture and the descriptor itself corresponds to a single property.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
5
==PAGE:14==
• Continuous: small changes in the atomic structure should translate to small
changes in the descriptor.
• Compact: the descriptor should contain sufficient information of the system
for performing the prediction while keeping the feature count to minimum.
• Computationally cheap and efficient: the computation of the descriptor
should be significantly faster than any existing computational model for di­
rectly calculating the physical property of interest.
There are a variety of representations that can be used to encode different kinds
of structures and attributes. The Coulomb matrix[38] is an example of this. This
matrix is invariant to changes in the translation and rotation of molecules, and it
contains information on the atomic nuclear repulsion as well as the potential en­
ergy of unbound atoms. The traditional method of describing crystal structures in
the solid state, which makes use of translation vectors and fractional coordinates
of the atoms, does not lend itself well to machine learning. This is due to the fact
that a lattice can be represented in an infinite number of different ways simply by
selecting a different coordinate system. One of the novel approaches that is be­
ing taken to solve this issue is the use of representations that are based on radial
distribution functions[39], Voronoi tessellations[40], or property­labelled materials
fragments[41]. For every different descriptors, the choice of basis functions will
impact the computational cost of evaluating them, as well as their performance in
classifying structures and in regressing their properties. Additionally, the choice of
basis functions will influence how well they perform in regressing their properties.
Even for formally equivalent representations, the condition number of the linear
transformation that occurs between them and their respective bases has a sig­
nificant influence on the numerical behavior of the computed coefficients as well
as the quantities that are derived from these coefficients. This is the case even
when the representations are equivalent in every other respect. To decide which
descriptor to use, an obvious criterion is the performance of the model when it
is utilized in the regression of valuable atomic­scale properties; nevertheless, a
comparison of this kind is intricately linked with both the target property and the
regression algorithm. Very recent efforts have been made to define different rep­
resentations in terms of their information richness. For example, using the eigen­
value spectrum of the covariance or kernel matrix associated with a dataset, the
drop in accuracy while reducing the number of features[42], etc. In Ref.[43], the
numerical sensitivity of the feature landscape has been examined through the use
of random search strategy, and all of the representations that were analyzed func­
tioned admirably for a limited number of neighbors in the reference environment;
however, only SOAP was able to accurately recreate the reference environments
of more than 12 neighbors.
There are many different kinds of applications that offer SOAP transformation.
The packages quippy[44], dscribe[36], and librascal, all of which may be easily
integrated into Python programming because to their open­source nature, are an­
alyzed and contrasted[45]. The ”SOAP” features are computed by all three of
these packages, however the basis functions that are used are different. One
cannot expect to be able to combine the features computed by one package with
6
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:15==
the regression weights computed by another package in the same way that one
cannot expect to be able to combine the results of different electronic structure
codes, which frequently produce results that differ significantly despite perform­
ing nominally the same type of calculations. According to linear reconstruction
error (GFRE) and the reconstruction distortion (GFRD) result shown in the ar­
ticle, dscribe have similar amounts of information and converge faster than the
bases used in quippy and the librascal DVR implementation[45], and indicating
that implementation specifics cause persistent disparities in the weighting of cer­
tain kinds of correlations even when (nmax, lmax ) grow above the numbers that are
normally utilized in practice. Therefore, Dscribe package is decided to be used
for descriptor transformation in this study.
2.1.2
Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions
To build up an appropriate input from materials structures for machine learning
method, Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) is chosen as a descrip­
tor, which encodes regions of atomic geometries by using a local expansion of a
gaussian smeared atomic density with orthonormal functions based on spherical
harmonics and radial basis functions. SOAP is included in the DScribe package,
providing efficient and scalable descriptor transformations. The output of SOAP
from DScribe is the partial power spectrum vector p, where the individual vector
elements are defined as [46]:
pZ1Z2
nn′l = π
r
8
2l + 1
X
m
cZ1
nlm
∗cZ2
n′lm
(2.1)
where n and n′ are indices for the different radial basis functions up to nmax, l is
the angular degree of the spherical harmonics up to lmax and Z1 and Z2 are atomic
species.
The coefficients cZ
nlm are defined as the following inner products:
cZ
nlm =
ZZZ
R3 dV gn(r)Ylm(θ, ϕ)ρZ(r).
(2.2)
where ρZ(r) is the gaussian smoothed atomic density for atoms with atomic num­
ber Z defined as:
ρZ(r) =
|Zi|
X
i
e−1/2σ2|r−Ri|2
(2.3)
Ylm(θ, ϕ) are the real spherical harmonics, and gn(r) is the radial basis function.
By default the DScribe implementation uses spherical gaussian type orbitals as
radial basis functions [47], as they allow much faster analytic computation. More­
over, the possibility of using the original polynomial radial basis set [43] is included.
The spherical harmonics definition used by DScribe is based on real spherical
harmonics. This real form spans the same space as the complex version, and is
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
7
==PAGE:16==
defined as a linear combination of the complex basis. As the atomic density is a
real­valued quantity (no imaginary part), it is natural and computationally efficient
to use this form that does not require complex algebra.
In default implementation, a set of spherical primitive gaussian type orbitals gnl(r)
as radial basis functions are used. The definition of basis functions are shown
below:
gnl(r) =
nmax
X
n′=1
βnn′lϕn′l(r)
(2.4)
ϕn′l(r) = rle−αnlr2
(2.5)
This basis function allows analytical integration of the cnlm coefficients defined by
Eq. 2.2, and speeds the calculation up over various other radial basis functions
that require numerical integration. The decay parameter αn are chosen so that
each nonorthonormalized function ϕnl decays to a threshould value of 10−3 at a
cutoff radius taken on an evenly spaced grid from 1Å to rcut with a step of rcut−1
nmax .
Therefore the parameter rcut controls the maximum reach of the basis and a better
sampling can be obtained by increasing the number of basis functions nmax.[36]
In DScribe, there are two averaging modes, inner and outer, to turn a local descrip­
tor into a global descriptor by taking the average over all sites. The inner average
is taken over the sites before summing up the magnetic quantum number, and
outer average averages over the power spectrum of individual sites. Generally,
the inner average can preserve the configurational information better than outer
average.
In this study, rcut, nmax, and lmax are set as 6, 3, and 2, respectively, to have a
good trade off between accuracy and computationally expense. Moreover, the
inner average is used to turn local descriptor to global one.
2.2
Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes (GPs) are a generic supervised learning method which can
be used to solve regression (for continuous outputs) and probabilistic classifica­
tion (for discrete outputs) problems. A GPs is a collection of random variables,
for example, {χi}n
i=1, any finite number of which have (consistent) joint Gaus­
sian distributions [48]. Generally, GPs is specified by its mean function m(x) and
covariance function k(x, x
′). On the other word, GPs defines a distribution over
functions. In the function­space perspective of GPs, GPs can be written as:
f ∼GP(m(x), k(x, x
′))
(2.6)
where m(x) is a mean function, and k(x, x
′) is a covariance function.
8
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:17==
2.2.1
Gaussian Process Regression
Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) is one of applications of GPs in modeling re­
gression via machine learning. GPR is a nonlinear and nonparametric regression
tool, based on Bayesian probability theory. This regression can be conceptual­
ized as kernelized Bayesian linear regression, where the kernel parameterization
is determined by the choice of covariance/kernel function and the data used to
make prediction [48]. Several kernel options would be introduced in the following
section. In the weight­space view of GPR, ˜y(x) is defined as a linear combination
of M basis function:
˜y(x) =
M
X
m=1
cmk(x, xm)
(2.7)
where the basis functions, k, are placed at arbitrary locations in the input space,
xm, consist of representative set, {xm}M
m=1 (also know as ”active” or ”sparse” set),
and cm are coefficients or weights [49]. The actual form of k (used to be called
kernel, a covariance function, kernel function, or covariance kernel) is a positive­
definite function of two inputs x,x
′, and k describes the similarity between the
function at two arbitrary locations, x,x
′. Essentially, the form of the kernel function
doesn’t matter, but the result of a GPR model is largely depend on the chosen
kernel. In the other words, appropriate kernel plays an important role of getting a
reasonable model. The kernel specifies estimated functions are likely under the
GP prior, which determines the generalization properties of the model.
2.2.2
Kernels
Kernels are a crucial element of GPs which decide the shape of prior and posterior
of GP. As illustrated above, kernel function is used to define the similarity between
two data points. Each kernel has several parameters to specify the precise shape
of the covariance function. In general, these parameters inside each kernel are
called hyperparameters, which specifies a distribution over function parameters,
instead of being parameters which specify a function directly. For example, in
Matérn kernel, ν controls the smoothness of the resulting function.
There are two categories of kernel: stationary and non­stationary kernel. Station­
ary kernel is a function of x−x
′, thus it’s invariant even if all x values are moved by
the same amount. For example, the square exponential(SE) covariance function
shown in Eq.2.8 is stationary. In stationary kernels, they can be subdivided into
isotropic and anisotropic regarding if kernels are invariant to rotations in the input
space, for example, SE shown in Eq.2.8 is isotropic.
cov(f(xp), f(xq)) = k(xp, xq) = exp(−1
2|xp −xq|2).
(2.8)
However, non­statonary kernels, for instance linear kernels, depends on the spe­
cific values of the data points and the corresponding GP model would get different
prediction if the data are moved while the kernel parameters were kept fixed.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
9
==PAGE:18==
In the following section, all kernels included in GaussianProcessRegressor from
scikit­learn package are introduced.
Radial­basis function (RBF) kernel
RBF kernel is a stationary kernel, which is also known as ”squared exponential”
kernel. The kernel is shown below:
kRBF(xi, xj) = exp

−d(xi, xj)2
2l2

(2.9)
where l is the length scale of the kernel and d(·, ·) is the Euclidean distance. This
kernel is infinitely differentiable, which means that the GP with this covariance
function has mean square derivatives of all orders, and is thus very smooth [50].
Matérn kernel
The Matérn kernel is given by:
kMatrn(xi, xj) = 21−ν
Γ(ν)
 √
2νd(xi, xj)
l
νKν(
√
2ν
l
d(xi, xj))
(2.10)
where d(·, ·) is the Euclidean distance, Kν(·) is a modified Bassel function, Γ(·) is
the gamma function, l is length­scale(which is positive ), and ν is the parameter
controlling the smoothness of the resulting function. Note that the length­scale, l,
can either be a scalar (isotropic variant of the kernel) or a vector with the same
number of dimensions as the input x(anisotropic variant of the kernel).
Rational quadratic kernel
The Rational quadratic kernel function is defined by:
k(xi, xj) =

1 + d(xi, xj)2
2αl2
−α
(2.11)
where l is a length­scale parameter, and α is a scale mixture parameter. Note that
l > 0 and α > 0. The Rational quadratic kernel can be taken as a scale mixture
(an infinite sum) of RBF kernels with different characteristic length­scales.
Exp­Sine­Squared kernel
The Exp­Sine­Squared kernel function is defined by:
k(xi, xj) = exp
 
−2 sin2(πd(xi, xj)/p)
l2
!
(2.12)
where l is a length­scale parameter, and p is a periodicity parameter. Note that
l > 0 and p > 0. Generally, the Exp­Sine­Squared kernel is used to model periodic
functions.
10
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:19==
Dot­Product kernel
The Dot­Product kernel function is defined by:
k(xi, xj) = σ2
0 + xi · xj
(2.13)
The function is parameterized by σ2
0. If σ2
0 = 0, it becomes the homogeneous
linear kernel, otherwise inhomogeneous. The Dot­Product kernel function can
be obtain from linear regression by putting N(0, 1) priors on the coefficients of
xd(d = 1, . . . , D) and a prior of N(0, σ2
0) on the basis. Note that this kernel is non­
stationary and invariant to a rotation of the coordinates about the origin, but not
translations [50].
2.3
Curve fitting
The relationship between optimal radius and strain energy for asymmetric tubes
can be described by Eq. 3.2 and the further discussion is in Sec. 3.2.
To extrapolate the function by using the obtained DFT from dataset, the curve
fitting API from scipy.optimize.curvefit is used. By giving 3 or more datapoint, the
fitting curve and parameters (this case, a and b in Eq. 3.1 are needed) of it can
be obtained.
2.4
Data­driven discovery by Machine learning
2.4.1
Brief introduction of machine learning
The following is an example of a traditional definition of machine learning: P,T,E>,
where P, T, and E each refer to the respective concepts of performance, task, and
experience. This phrase is typically interpreted to mean that it refers to the ca­
pacity of a computer program to ”learn from experience E” in relation to a specific
category of responsibilities. This interpretation is the most common one. T and a
performance measure P in order to determine whether or not its performance on
tasks in T, as assessed by P, improves with experience E. T and P are being used
to determine whether or not this is the case. When applying machine learning to
a specific issue in materials science, it is necessary to first construct a machine
learning system[51]. The general paradigm of such machine learning systems is
shown in Fig2.1. Each part demonstrating in Fig2.1 will be discuss more in the
following part.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of building up machine learning system.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4.2
Data collection
The field of materials science relies on both computational models and experimen­
tal observations to compile its first­ever datasets. It is necessary to perform clean­
ing on the original data before using them to create a sample because the original
data are typically noisy, inconsistent, and missing information. For instance, the
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) contains more than 190,000 items
that have been inspected for technical errors but are still susceptible to errors
caused by human intervention and measurement inaccuracies. To stop machine­
learning algorithms from being confused, these flaws need to be located and fixed
as soon as possible. In addition, any sample that is obtained is subject to the in­
fluence of a number of conditional factors, some of which have nothing to do with
the decision­making qualities. For example, in study on the prediction of Li ionic
conductivity[52], only the five most significant parameters, ion diffusivity, average
volume, transition temperature, and experimental temperature, are important for
comparative trials. Therefore, it is important to be careful to clean data and use
a proper feature selection method[53] to determine the subset of attributes to be
used in the final simulation.
2.4.3
Data representation
In spite of the fact that raw scientific data are frequently represented numerically,
the presentation of data in a particular format has a significant bearing on the pro­
cess of learning. Numerous kinds of spectroscopy acquire the signal in the time
domain, but then use the Fourier transform to interpret it in the frequency domain.
This is done for a number of different reasons. It’s possible that, similar to hu­
man researchers, a machine­learning algorithm will learn better using one format
than the other. The process of converting unprocessed data into a format that
is better suited for use with an algorithm is referred to as featurization or feature
engineering. When an algorithm’s ability to translate input data to output data is
more precise, the representation of the input data is said to be more appropriate.
When it comes to deciding how to best represent the data, one of the most active
areas of research for chemical systems is in this area. This is due to the fact that it
is not always obvious which method of data representation would result in the best
performance.[54]. More detail and different representation ways are discussed in
Sec.2.1.1.
2.4.4
Model selection
In its most fundamental form, it is a black box that connects input data to output
data by applying a predetermined set of nonlinear or linear functions. In other
words, it takes data as input and produces data as output. When conducting
traditional research in materials science, it is typical for complex correlations to
exist between the conditional elements and the target qualities. These correla­
tions are difficult for standard approaches to handle because of the nature of the
relationships between the conditional elements and the target qualities. Machine
learning makes it possible to determine the coefficients of a mapping function by
utilizing examples of a target function. This ensures that the mapping function
approximates the target function as closely as it possibly can. The selection of
an appropriate machine learning algorithm is one of the most important steps in­
volved in the process of building a system for machine learning. This decision
12
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:21==
has a sizeable bearing on the system’s capacity to generalize previously acquired
knowledge and produce reliable forecasts.[55]. Because each algorithm has its
own specific range of applications, there is no single algorithm that can solve all
of the complexities that are associated with a particular problem.
Table.2.1 lists some commonly used machine learning algorithms. As Table.2.1
shown, probability estimation, regression, clustering, and classification are the
four categories into which the machine learning algorithms that are utilized most
frequently in the field of materials science can be categorized as belonging. To
be more specific, the algorithms that are used most often for the discovery of new
materials are those that involve probability estimation, whereas the algorithms
that are used for the prediction of material properties on both the macro and micro
levels are those that involve regression, clustering, and classification.
Machine Learning Algorithms in Materials Science
Regression
Classification & Clustering
Probability estimation
Support Vector Regression
Support Vector Classification
Expectation Maximization
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
Naive Bays
Multiple Linear Regression
Naive Bayes
Logistic Regression
K­Nearest Neighbors
Kernel Ridge Regression
Decision Tree
Gaussian Process Regression (GPR)
K­Means
DBSCAN
Table 2.1: Commonly used machine learning algorithms in materials science[56].
2.4.5
Model optimization
Following the selection of a learner (or set of learners) and the creation of pre­
dictions, it is necessary to conduct a review of a trial model in order to carry out
optimization and to make the ultimate decision regarding which model is the most
suitable. Model bias, model variance, and irreducible errors are the three primary
causes of error that may occur and need to be taken into consideration. Taking
these three factors into account will help ensure that errors do not occur. The
aggregate error is the same as the sum of these three distinct categories of er­
ror. The term ”bias” refers to the inaccurate result that occurs as a result of the
algorithm making incorrect assumptions, which in turn can cause the model to fail
to take into account underlying relationships. The sensitivity of a training set to
relatively insignificant shifts is what we mean when we talk about variance. Even
well­trained machine learning models can make errors due to noise in the train­
ing data, measurement limits, computation uncertainties, or even just outliers or
missing data. These factors can all contribute to the problem. The interaction of
all of these factors can lead to a wide variety of different kinds of mistakes. In
most cases, a poor performance of the model is evidence of either a significant
bias or a high variance.
When a model is not flexible enough to adequately describe the relationship be­
tween inputs and predicted outputs, which is also known as underfitting, or when
the data are insufficiently detailed to allow for the discovery of suitable rules, high
bias can occur. High bias can also occur when a model is not flexible enough to
adequately describe the relationship between inputs and predicted outputs. Both
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
13
==PAGE:22==
of these circumstances have the potential to result in incorrect predictions. When
a model is overly complicated, it can result in high variance, which is another name
for the phenomenon known as ”overfitting.” In most cases, this issue appears as
a result of an increase in the total number of parameters contained within the
model. The diagnostic test for overfitting is when the accuracy of a model contin­
ues to increase when it comes to modeling training data, but the performance of
the model when it comes to estimating test data either plateaus or worsens. This
is because overfitting causes a model to become overly specific to the training
data. It is possible to determine the generalization errors of models by employing
tests that are based on calculations, and then making use of the results to choose
the model that is most appropriate. This is possible in the majority of cases. Test­
ing data are needed in order to evaluate the discriminative ability of models on a
new dataset, which is necessary in order to achieve this objective. After this, the
test error that is obtained on the testing data can be utilized as an approximation
of the generalization error. This is because the test error and the generalization
error are closely related.
The performance of an algorithm is evaluated to determine how valuable it is dur­
ing the analysis process. Examining the accuracy of the model’s predictions by
contrasting the results of experiments with the predictions that were made for
those experiments. The criteria for evaluation shift and change depending on
the specifics of the situation at hand. Generally, the mean absolute percent er­
ror (MAPE), the root mean square error (RMSE) and the correlation coefficient
(R2) are used to evaluate models for solving regression problems. In most cases,
MAPE is used to determine whether or not a prediction model is appropriate by
measuring how closely the value predicted by the model corresponds to the ac­
tual value. The root mean squared error, or RMSE, is a measure of how reliable
a prediction model is. This measure can exaggerate the actual error while also
highlighting how accurate the prediction is. R2 is a random variable that deter­
mines how accurately the predicted value was predicted. R2 has a range of 0 to
1, inclusive. The prediction model has a higher degree of accuracy the closer it is
to 1 in this expression. The expressions of MAPE, RMSE and R2 are shown in
Eq.2.14, Eq.2.15, and Eq.2.16, respectively.
MAPE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|y
′
i −yi|
yi
(2.14)
RMSE =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(y
′
i −yi)2
(2.15)
R2 =
[Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)(y
′
i −¯y
′)]2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)2 · Pn
i=1(y
′
i −¯y
′)2
(2.16)
2.4.6
Model validation
There are several methods that can be used to evaluate if model is optimized.
Here, hold­out method, cross­validation method, and bootstrapping sampling are
introduced. Table.2.2 shortly compares these three evaluation methods.
14
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:23==
Method
Advantage
Disadvantage
Applicable situation
Hold­out
Low computational difficulty
1. It is challenging to establish the correct
proportions of training/testing data.
2. The quantity of training data is less
than that of the original dataset.
The data volume is sufficient.
Cross­validation
Not much affected by variations
in training data volume.
1. Complexity of computation is significant,
particularly for huge datasets;
2. The training dataset is smaller
than the original dataset.
The data volume is sufficient.
The data volume is small, and the training
and testing data can be partitioned effectively.
Bootstrapping
Effective separation of
training and test data.
1. The distribution of the training data differs
from that of the initial data set.
The volume of data is little, and it is
difficult to split the training and testing data.
Table 2.2: The comparison of three evaluation methods.
Hold­out method
In the hold­out method, the dataset D is divided into the dataset S for training
and the dataset T for testing. It is common practice to make use of a category­
preserving sampling method that goes by the name ”stratified sampling.” This
is done in order to keep the consistency of the data distribution to the greatest
extent possible, thereby preventing the introduction of any additional deviations.
Because there is no reliable method for determining the relative proportions of S
and T, it is common practice to classify anywhere from two thirds to four fifths of
the samples in D as belonging to the S category, while the remaining samples are
labeled as belonging to the T category.
Cross­validation method
During the cross­validation process, the initial dataset, D, is cut up into k differ­
ent subsets of the same size that are mutually exclusive from one another. The
dataset S that is used for training is the union of k­1 of the subsets, and the dataset
T that is used for testing is the subset that is left over. When there are the same
number of samples in both D and k, this technique is referred to as leave­one­out
cross­validation (LOOCV). It does not have any impact on the random sample
partitioning. It should be noted that this process is carried out multiple times for
each set of data, making the total number of experiments carried out k. Because
of this, cross­validation might be too time­consuming and impractical for use with
large datasets.
Bootstrapping method
The bootstrapping method is based on bootstrapping sampling and includes re­
peatedly copying one sample from D into a new dataset D
′ until D
′ contains m
samples. Finally, D
′ is the training dataset, while D/D
′ is the testing dataset. Due
to the fact that it maintains a number of training samples equal to the size of the
original dataset, the bootstrapping method is successful when the data volume is
small and it is difficult to divide the training/testing data correctly. The bootstrap­
ping procedure, however, modifies the distribution of the original data set, which
may introduce estimation bias.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:25==
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Janus tube and initial database
Generally, 1D Janus MXY nanotube is formed by wrapping up asymmetric 2D
Janus MXY sheet, which is produced by the symmetric MY2 and MX2 parents
sheets. The diagram of formation of Janus nanotube is shown in Fig.3.1. In
Fig.3.1, a classic Janus nanotube, MoSSe, is taken as an example, where MoS2
and MoSe2 symmetric parents sheets form asymmetric 2D Janus MoSSe sheet,
then wrapped up into 1D Janus MoSSe nanotube. The formation principle behind
1D Janus nanotube is the lack of mirror symmetry, for instance, S and Se have
different dipole moment in the out­of­plane direction. Even though the size of the
dipole moment will be varied by several factors, it shows strong correlation of dif­
ference in electronegativity of the X and Y atoms in asymmetric 2D Janus MXY
sheet [57].
The nanotube examined in this work comprises of three layers composed of sev­
eral mid­layer components (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Cr, Mo, W, Fe, Ge, Sn, As,
Sb, Bi) adorned with X and Y (X,Y = O, S, Se, Te, Cl, Br, I). Nanotubes are pro­
duced by rolling up 2D layers in both the T­phase and H­phase crystal structures
along armchair directions.
Figure 3.1: Diagram of formation of Janus nanotube MoSSe.
3.2
Nanotube strain energy and optimal radius
When it comes to asymmetric nanotubes, there are two primary quantities that
are required in order to characterize an asymmetric nanotube. These quantities
are the optimal radius, which determines the most stable nanotube size, and the
strain energy, which determines the energy associated with the wrapping of a
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
17
==PAGE:26==
two­dimensional sheet into a nanotube. Both of these quantities are known as
the optimal radius.
In most cases, the strain energy is defined as the difference in energy between
the nanotube and the 2D­Janus sheet that corresponds to the nanotube[58]. Note
that negative strain energies means that the 2D sheet can wrap into nanotube
spontaneously. The formula is given:
Estrain(R) = Etube
Ntube
−EMXY
NMXY
(3.1)
where Etube is the energy of nanotube with Ntube atoms and EMXY is the energy
of the corresponding 2D Janus sheet with NMXY atoms in the unit cell. When
R →∞, the strain energy is infinitely close to 0 because of the energy per atom
of a tube is equal to the energy per atom of an infinite 2D Janus sheet at this point
[8].
It is necessary to investigate the relationship between strain energy and radius
in order to make accurate predictions about either variable. Even though it has
been demonstrated that the nanotube strain energy follows a
1
R2 dependency for
symmetric tubes[59], including C[60][61], BN[60][61], BC2N[60], this equation
cannot be applied to asymmetric tubes because those tubes have a minimum on
the strain energy curve. Alternatively, it can be expressed more precisely using
the equation given by [8] [59]:
Estrain(R) = a
R2 + b
R
(3.2)
To further obtain the minimal strain energy, Emin, and optimal radius, Ropt, the
equation is needed to be differentiated. The minimal strain energy at optimal
radius can be obtained by:
Ropt = −2a
b
(3.3)
Emin = −b2
4a
(3.4)
The fitting curve can be generated according to Eq.3.2 for all of the materials
that were investigated in this study utilizing the scipy.optimize.curve_fit that is
included in the Scipy package. The diagram of strain energy as a function of
nanotube radius for an asymmetric MoSSe nanotube is shown in Fig.3.2. The
fitting curve has an extremely low amount of error (0.21% mean average error
rate) and precisely matches all of the DFT data points of MoSSe. However, some
of the materials in the database used for this study have inaccurate fitting curves,
which may lead to an incorrect interpretation of the method.
18
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: Diagram of strain energy as a function of nanotube radius for asym­
metry MoSSe nanotube.
In spite of the fact that the Eq.3.2 can produce a good fit in the region around
the optimal tube radius, further study has uncovered a divergence when strain
energies is large [62]. This uncertainty is taken into account in other research, and
Bayesian regression is used to analyze the computed uncertainty with relation to
the function fit by Eq.3.2 for the DFT data that was acquired. According to Felix’s
research, there are several situations where the uncertainty are large:
1. The model is not able to accurately represent the variation in strain energies
that occurs across a range of tube radii because it does not take into account
this phenomenon. Nevertheless, there are only a few structures, such as
SbTeBr, that do not fit the model that has been proposed, which results in a
significant amount of uncertainty in the forecast.
2. The strain energy curves are relatively flat because the energy minimum is
not as pronounced as it would otherwise be. Because of this, it is challeng­
ing to make an accurate estimation of what the precise optimal tube radius
should be.
3. There are just three known data points, which might result in high uncer­
tainty.
In the initial phase of this research project, none of the possible scenarios are
considered because the objective is to create a GPR algorithm that can also learn
from uncertainty. In the event that the GPR algorithm is unable to learn the under­
lying complex relationship, further investigation can be conducted by examining
the situations discussed above.
3.3
Machine learning model
3.3.1
Machine learning workflow
The Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) algorithm is used to develop a machine
learning workflow. Fig.3.3 depicts the machine learning workflow with GPR. In
the very first step, the materials structure in the initial database is changed into
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
19
==PAGE:28==
a descriptor vector as Representation. In Regression part, the GPR ML model
is then trained with the help of the input data which includes test representation
and test (a,b). In the end, Prediction of the values of the variables (a,b) in the
Eq.3.2 can be predicted by feeding it the appropriate format of material structure
representation.
Figure 3.3:
Diagram of machine learning with Gaussian Process Regres­
sion(GPR) workflow.
3.3.2
Data cleaning
When it comes to training a machine learning model, having data of a high quality
is absolutely necessary. This point was brought up earlier. It is necessary to verify
and filter all of the data that has the potential to mislead the training, such as data
that is empty or data that is unrelated to prediction. This is because it is possible
for the training to be misled by any of these types of data. This process is referred
to as ”data cleaning” within the realm of data science and its associated fields.
First of all, the twod_sheets.db and janus_nanotubes.db are imported as 2D
database and 1D database to Python Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
in this research. However, the only data that are relevant to this investigation
are the following: name, material, prototype, energy, and diameter. These two
databases contain a large amount of information; however, only those data are
relevant to this investigation. As a consequence of this, checking the data for
errors, checking for missing data, and checking the scale of the numbers are all
mentioned above.
3.3.3
Data preparation
After thoroughly cleaning and organizing all of the data and putting it in the appro­
priate format, the input for machine learning can be made ready for use.
The descriptor method is a practical tool that can be used to translate the compre­
hensive chemical and structural information of the materials that are the subject
of the investigation into a format that is appropriate for machine learning. In light
of the information provided in Sec.2.1.1, it was decided to transform descriptor by
the ”SOAP” descriptor that is provided by package DScribe in this study. Atomic
20
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:29==
Simulation Environment, or ASE[63], is a package that is used to provide infor­
mation about materials and to build structures based on chemical formulas that
are derived from material names taken from a 2D dataset. ASE is responsible for
providing the atomic simulation environment. After that, the descriptor vector can
be built by making use of these individual pieces of information as the basis for
the construction. In the end, descriptors with a size of (191709,) are constructed
and made ready for input.
After converting the materials information to the descriptor, the next step is to in­
clude the appropriate materials information to be used as input data. This step
comes after the initial step of converting the materials information to the descriptor.
This is a very significant stage in the process. For instance, a 1D Janus nanotube
is produced by rolling up a 2D Janus sheet, as Fig.3.1 shown; consequently, the
machine needs to know the material information of the 2D Janus sheet in order
to comprehend the mechanism behind it. In addition to this, the two­dimensional
Janus sheet is composed of two separate 2D nanosheets; as a result, the char­
acteristics of the fundamental 2D nanosheet must also be taken into account. In
addition, it was found that the minimum strain energy could be estimated fairly ac­
curately by making use of the energy difference that exists between a 2D Janus
descriptor and an alternating sheet descriptor[8]. Fig.3.4 depicts the structure of
a 2D Janus sheet and a 2D Janus sheet with alternate rows (2D ­ alt). Because
any piece of information could be useful in deciphering the mysterious mecha­
nism that underlies the formation of 1D Janus nanotubes, it is imperative that
every piece of information outlined above be included in the input data in order
to properly train the machine learning algorithm. This is because any piece of
information could be useful in deciphering the mechanism that underlies the for­
mation of 1D Janus nanotubes. Therefore, the input data includes information of
[MXY ,MXYalt1,MXYalt2,MX2,MY2].
Figure 3.4: 2D ­ Janus sheet and 2D ­ Janus sheet with alternating rows (2D ­ alt)
of MoSSe.
In order to get ready to work with the output data, it is necessary to reformat the
1D dataset. A fitting curve is utilized to produce the variables a and b of the fitting
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
21
==PAGE:30==
function. This is as a direct result of the fact that the 1D dataset contains one­of­
a­kind combinations of the energy and radius of each material that were derived
from the DFT calculation. ZrClBr is used as an illustration and Fig.3.5 depicts
the conversion of a 1D database datapoint to a and b. As Fig.3.5 shown, ZrClBr
has 5 datapoints including 5 different energies linked to 5 different radii, and the
curve is fit to these datapoints. As a consequence of this, a and b are able to be
calculated with the aid of the fitting curve and are subsequently saved as output
data for later use in training. However, there are certain materials for which there
are insufficient datapoints to fit the curve. These materials include: In order to
provide even more insight into the topic at hand, it is necessary to have at least
two datapoints in order to fit a function that has two variables. Because of this,
the materials that have fewer than two data points have been removed.
Figure 3.5: Diagram of converting datapoint in 1D database to a and b.
The schematic representation of preparing both input data and output data is
shown in Fig.3.6. Eventually, the input data is an array of descriptor vector in­
cluding information of [MXY ,MXYalt1,MXYalt2,MX2,MY2] and the output data is
an array including variables of Eq.3.2 a and b.
Figure 3.6: Diagram of preparing input data and output data.
3.3.4
Data split
Following the cleaning and preparation of the data, the input (X) and output (y)
data will need to be partitioned into a training set (Xtrain and ytrain) and a testing
set (Xtest and ytest) before the machine learning algorithm can be applied. To
22
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:31==
be more specific, the machine learning algorithm would be trained by conducting
a predicting model after processing the relation between the input training data
(Xtrain) and the output training data (ytrain). This would train the algorithm. After
that, the predictive model will make its predictions for the output data (ypredicted)
by using the input test data (Xtest) as its basis. As a final step, but certainly not
the least important one, the accuracy of the predicting model can be evaluated by
comparing the predicted output data (ypredicted) to the output test set (ytest), which
is also known as the true value.
3.3.5
Model selection
As Sec.2.4.4 illustrated, the decision regarding which model to employ has a size­
able impact on the system’s ability to generalize newly obtained knowledge and
produce accurate forecasts. In this investigation, the goal of the machine learn­
ing algorithm that was applied to the data­driven discovery of Janus nanotubes
was to predict the minimal strain energy at the optimal radius of the nanotubes.
The discovery of Janus nanotubes was driven by the data. The algorithm was
given chemical and structural information pertaining to new chemical composition
in order to accomplish this goal. When conducting research on the capability of
predicting the properties of a material, it is common practice to make use of the
methods from regression analysis. As a result of this, it is possible to make ac­
curate predictions regarding both the macroscopic and microscopic properties of
the substance.
The Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) class of supervised machine learning
algorithms relies on only a small number of parameters in order to generate gener­
alizable predictions of targets based on test points. This stands in stark contrast to
many of today’s state­of­the­art regression models, which rely on a large number
of parameters in order to generate accurate predictions. As a direct consequence
of this, the GPR class of algorithms is exceptionally potent. The ability of GPs to
compute the marginal likelihood of a dataset given a particular model, which is
also referred to as the evidence, is an essential feature that enables us to auto­
matically construct models. Additionally, the term ”evidence” can be used inter­
changeably. This feature is also known as the evidence[64]. Comparing models,
taking into account both their predictive power and how well they fit the data, is
made possible through the use of the marginal likelihood[65]. With the assis­
tance of Gaussian processes, learning in kernel machines can be accomplished
in a manner that is not only principled but also practical and probabilistic. This not
only offers advantages when it comes to the interpretation of model predictions,
but it also offers a solid foundation for learning and model selection. As a result of
the theoretical and practical developments that have taken place over the course
of the past decade, gaussian processes have evolved into a serious competitor
for real­world supervised learning applications. These developments have taken
place both in theory and in practice.
GPs in particular are well­suited for the task of building a language of regression
models for a number of reasons, including the following[66]:
• Analytic inference: It is possible to precisely compute the predictive pos­
terior distribution in closed form when given a kernel function and some ob­
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
23
==PAGE:32==
servations. This is an extremely uncommon quality found in nonparametric
models.
• Expressivity: When it comes to modeling, users have the ability to express
a wide variety of assumptions based on the covariance function that they
choose to make use of in the modeling process.
• Integration surpassing hypotheses: Due to the fact that a GP posterior,
when provided with a fixed kernel, enables us to integrate exactly over a
wide range of hypotheses, the problem of overfitting is significantly less of
an issue with this model class than it is with other model classes that are
comparable. For instance, in contrast to neural networks, there is only a
small number of parameters that need to be estimated, which reduces the
requirement for intricate optimization or regularization schemes. This is be­
cause neural networks consist of a large number of hidden nodes.
• Model comparison: Users have the ability to integrate over all hypotheses,
which is a benefit in and of itself, and as a side benefit, users are able to
compute the marginal likelihood of the data given a model. This ability is
a side benefit. Users are provided with a principled method to compare a
wide variety of different models as a result of this.
• Closed­form predictive distribution: To put it another way, what makes
up the predictive distribution of a GP at a given set of test points is what is
known as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. This suggests that GPs are
very open to being combined with a wide variety of other decision­making
processes or models.
• Simple to analyze: When contrasted with the alternative of attempting to
do inference in the set of all computable functions, restricting ourselves to a
limited model class may give the impression of being less satisfying. How­
ever, this is only true when compared to the alternative. On the other hand,
simple models can be used as well­understood building blocks in order to
construct more interesting models. This is because simple models are eas­
ier to comprehend.
However, because of their adaptability, GP models raise the question of which
kernel is the most appropriate for a particular situation. Finding a useful kernel to
run the algorithm on is the same thing as learning a useful representation of the
input. Although it is possible to set kernel parameters automatically by optimizing
the marginal likelihood, selecting the parametric form of the kernel was, until very
recently, a task that could only be performed by human experts. Even though it is
possible to set kernel parameters automatically, it was not until very recently that
this was possible.
3.3.6
Kernel selection
As Sec.3.3.5 mentioned, the kernel of a GPs model can have a significant impact
on the results, and the type of structure that can be learned by a GP model is
determined by the kernel that is used. The fact that a wide variety of models can be
constructed by adding and multiplying together a few base kernels demonstrates
24
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:33==
that this point is valid.
Kernel selection workflow
Before selecting the appropriate kernel for GPs, it is necessary to construct an ap­
propriate workflow. The workflow of kernel selection is illustrated in this study in
the diagram that can be found at Fig.3.7. As Fig.3.7 shown, before deciding which
kernel to use, it is possible to think of the GPs as having no structure function at
all. This is because the function of the kernel largely determines the function of the
GPs. As a direct consequence of this, the initial kernel test is executed in order
to check the functionality of the model by utilizing a number of different kernels.
Matérn, Radial basis function (RBF), Dot Product (DP), and Rational quadratic are
some of the kernels that are included here (RQ). Take note that the white noise
kernel is incorporated into the training process in order to prevent the model from
becoming overfit. This was done in order to prevent the model from becoming
too accurate. In addition, GPs is specified by a set of kernels that capture various
properties of functions and by a set of rules that combine kernels to produce other
valid kernels. These two aspects work together to produce other valid kernels.
The specification incorporates both these kernels and these rules into its frame­
work. As a consequence of this, it is worthwhile to try using kernels that contain
two different kernels in order to accommodate the possibility that different combi­
nations of kernels may result in different properties. In other words, it is worthwhile
to try using kernels that contain two different kernels. The kernel combination test
is depicted in Fig.3.7 and shows every possible combination of kernels that are
examined.
Figure 3.7: Diagram of kernel selection work flow.
3.3.7
The results of the first test on each kernel before
removing any data
The results of the first test on each kernel are displayed in the Table.3.1. It is
important to take note that the error rate that has been applied here is the mean
absolute percentage error, which can be found in Eq.2.14. In accordance with
the data presented in the Table.3.1, the Dot product (DP) kernel demonstrates
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
25
==PAGE:34==
the highest level of performance on a, whereas the RBF kernel demonstrates the
lowest level of error rate on b. However, each and every one of the kernels has
an error rate that is either equal to or higher than one hundred percent, which
indicates that not a single one of the kernels is able to learn effectively from the
data that is being presented.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn kernel
54.94%
144.76%
Rational quadratic kernel
52.17%
140.1%
Dot product kernel
44.17%
105.93%
RBF kernel
100%
100%
Table 3.1: First test result of each kernel
The kernel combination test is carried out because the performance of the model
when using a single kernel is unable to capture the data. The purpose of the test
is to determine whether or not the performance of the model can be improved
by combining two distinct kernels. The first test result of the various kernel com­
binations is presented in the Table.3.2. The Table.3.2 reveals that the RBF+DP
and RQ+DP models have shown the best error rate of a, which is 44.17%, and
that the RBF+RQ models show the best prediction of error rate of b, which is 100
%. Despite this, the fact that the error rate is greater than 100% suggests that it
is impossible to capture data information using any combination of different ker­
nels. Due to the fact that this is the situation, additional research is required to
determine how to acquire a model that is more accurate.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn + RBF
55.26%
145.34%
Matérn + RQ
54.93%
144.74%
Matérn + DP
51.72%
136.04%
RBF + RQ
100%
100%
RBF + DP
44.17%
105.93%
RQ + DP
44.17%
105.93%
Table 3.2: The first test result of kernel combinations
Because neither a single kernel nor a combination of kernels is capable of predict­
ing data with an acceptable rate of error, it is absolutely necessary that additional
research be carried out in order to identify the component that caused the model
to be incorrect. This is because neither a single kernel nor a combination of ker­
nels is capable of predicting data with an acceptable rate of error. The predicted
values for a and b are input into a Eq.3.2 to determine the minimal strain energy,
Emin, and optimal radius, Ropt, in order to investigate the cause of the inaccurate
prediction. Fig,3.8 shows the results of visualization the comparison of minimal
strain energy Emin and optimal radiusRopt from DFT data (original data) and ma­
chine learning prediction by using Mateérn kernel, and the diagonal dash line is
26
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:35==
used to compare how far the prediction and the original data. According to Fig.3.8,
the predictions are unable to capture data information. In Emin part, most of pre­
dictions are far from the diagonal dash line and equal to 0. In Ropt part, the model
is able to predict Ropt when Ropt is below 30, but the predictions are biased when
the radius is higher.
Figure 3.8: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and opti­
mal radiusRopt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction.
Even though the small dataset could be the possible cause because it offers too
little information for GPR to train the model properly, another possibility could be
that some of the fitting curves have a high error rate and therefore are unable to
provide the correct information regarding the real material properties. The original
fitting curve is plotted using the DFT data, and then the predicted a and b are used
to plot a predicted fitting curve to compare with the original fitting curve. Fig.3.9
demonstrates the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of NbOS, which is one of data in test set. As Fig.3.9 displayed, the
trend of the original fitting curve is not followed particularly closely by the predicted
curve at all. In its simplest form, the predicted curve is a horizontal line, which can­
not exist for any material in the real world. Therefore, it is a reasonable suspicion
that some of the material’s properties, or some of the material’s properties, cannot
be properly translated by the fitting curve function.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.9: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of NbOS.
3.3.8
Kernel test after removing materials with over 5% error
rate between fitting curve and DFT data point.
A bad prediction result could have been caused by a number of factors, one of
which is the mean absolute percentage error rate between the fitting curve and
the actual DFT data point. One way to determine whether or not the fitting curve
is capable of accurately describing the relation between energy and radius is to
calculate the mean absolute percentage error rate of energy from both the fitting
curve and the DFT data at the same radius. This error rate is calculated using
the same radius for both sets of data. Surprisingly, there are 66 materials in the
database that have a mean absolute percentage error rate that is higher than 5%.
This accounts for almost one third of the total materials in the database. As a
consequence of this, it is possible to draw the conclusion that approximately one
third of the database is unable to provide accurate information that corresponds
to the structural and chemical information of input materials. Fig.3.10 displays,
for example, the fitting curve as well as the original datapoint from the DFT for
SnSeTe. According to the Fig.3.10, at the same radius, the mean absolute per­
centage error rate of energy that was derived from the fitting curve and the DFT
data is approximately 8.88%. In addition, the direction of the trend of the orig­
inal DFT datapoint is quite different from the direction of the trend of the fitting
curve. Because of this, these materials, which have an inaccurate fitting curve,
need to be screened before training the GPR algorithm in order to achieve a more
accurate prediction. This will ensure that the algorithm is properly calibrated.
28
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.10: Plot of fitting curve and original DFT data of SnSeTe.
Kernel test result after filtering materials with fitting curve higher than 5%
mean absolute percentage error rate.
The elimination of data that could be misleading should, at the very least accord­
ing to the theory, result in a reduction in the percentage of incorrect predictions.
Table.3.3 presents the results of the kernel test after materials with an error rate
of more than 5 % have been eliminated. According to the Table.3.3, when com­
pared to what it was before, the error rate associated with variable b has seen
a considerable drop, while the error rate associated with variable a has essen­
tially remained unchanged. This significant improvement suggests that the poor
prediction is the result of some misleading data that was used when training the
GPR algorithm. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the situation has
significantly improved.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn kernel
48.18%
74.19%
Rational quadratic kernel
46.57%
71.18%
Dot product kernel
41.46%
61.64%
RBF kernel
46.57%
71.18%
Table 3.3: Kernel test after removing materials with >5% error rate
After removing any materials that have mean absolute percentage error rate of
more than 5%, the kernel combination test is carried out to determine whether
or not GPR is capable of capturing the correct information by utilizing a variety
of kernel combinations. This test determines whether or not GPR is capable of
capturing the correct information by utilizing a variety of kernel combinations. The
results of the Kernel combination test are shown in the Table.3.4 after removing
materials with an error rate of more than 5%. With mean absolute percentage
error rate of 44.93% for a and 67.5% for b, respectively, Matérn + DP kernel has
the lowest error rate among all of kernel combination. After taking into account
the Dot product from single kernel test, the result for the single­kernel prediction
is 41.46% for a and 61.64% for b; however, this result is still inferior to the result
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
29
==PAGE:38==
of the single­kernel prediction. After the components with the highest error rate
have been removed from consideration, the kernel combination method is unable
to improve the accuracy of model prediction as a direct consequence of this.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn + RBF
48.3%
73.93%
Matérn + RQ
48.3%
73.93%
Matérn + DP
44.93%
67.5%
RBF + RQ
46.5%
71.19%
RBF + DP
44.77%
67.62%
RQ + DP
44.77%
67.62%
Table 3.4: Kernel combination test after removing materials with >5% error rate
The minimal strain energy, denoted by Emin, and the optimal radius, denoted by
Ropt, are calculated based on the values predicted for a and b by the kernel with
the best performance. The comparison of the minimal strain energy, denoted by
Emin, and the optimal radius, denoted by Ropt, derived from DFT data (the original
data) and machine learning prediction by using Dot Product kernel after materi­
als have been removed with a 5 percent margin of error is presented in Fig.3.11.
The diagonal black dash line, the blue line, and the orange line are drawn as the 0
percent absolute percentage error rate baseline, the +50% absolute percentage
error rate baseline, and the ­50% absolute percentage error rate baseline, re­
spectively, to make it easier to compare the predicted data with the original data.
The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of Emin and Ropt are 125.11% and
26.12%, respectively. Base on the prediction result, the GPR is not able to predict
the correct relationship between material information and Emin and Ropt.
Figure 3.11: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and opti­
mal radiusRopt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction after
removing materials with >5% error rate.
30
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:39==
As an example for further examination of the prediction result, one of the predicted
data is selected. Fig.3.12 displays the Plot of comparison between original fitting
curve and predicted fitting curve of TiSTe, which has mean absolute percentage
error rate of 415% and 51% on Emin and Ropt. According to Fig.3.12, the predicted
curve shows relatively deep curve and an apparent local minimal, which is not
observed in DFT fitting curve. Apparently, the trained GPR algorithm is not able
to predicted not only curve shape but right value.
Figure 3.12: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of TiSTe.
3.3.9
Kernel test on different prototype after removing
materials with over 5% mean absolute percentage error
rate.
Because a single kernel or any combination of kernels cannot predict the data with
a low mean absolute percentage error rate, it is necessary to use a different strat­
egy. This is because a single kernel or any combination of kernels cannot predict
the data. The result that was presented above demonstrates that removing fitting
curves that have mean absolute percentage error rate of more than 5 percent is
not the solution to the problem of preventing the GPR algorithm from learning in­
formation about materials. As a direct result of this, the fitting curve is now in a
position to correctly describe the Energy­Radius curve using DFT data that has
been demonstrated to be accurate. It is necessary to first train the algorithm using
a sufficient amount of data before the algorithm can accurately predict data that it
has not yet seen. If the dataset is too small or contains too many different types
of patterns but not enough data for each pattern, then the GPR algorithm will not
be able to be trained by enough information. This can happen if the dataset is too
small or if it contains too many different types of patterns. To put it another way,
it will prevent the algorithm from being trained in its new state.
Because of the way its crystal structure is organized, a Janus nanotube can be
classified as belonging to any one of a number of different types of prototypes.
In the vast majority of instances, a different prototype will not only have a unique
crystal structure, but it will also display noticeably distinct material properties, such
as electronic and optical characteristics[67]. There are four different prototype,
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
31
==PAGE:40==
MoSSe, BiTeI, MoS2 and CdI2, including in dataset of this study. This may imply
that there are four distinct mechanisms at work between the materials and the
fitting curve that are interacting with one another. As a consequence of this, the
primary focus of this section is the investigation of kernel tests that were carried
out on a variety of prototypes contained within the database.
The mean absolute percentage error rates of a and b for the kernel test are dis­
played in Table.3.5 below for a variety of prototypes. No matter which kernel is
utilized, the MoSSe and CdI2 prototypes are the only ones that demonstrate an
acceptable error rate, which is below 30%. After removing materials with an error
rate of more than 5%, the MoSSe and CdI2 prototype’s prediction result is supe­
rior to the prediction result of the kernel test. This demonstrates that a smaller
dataset does not preclude the possibility of improved prediction. However, none
of the kernels are capable of capturing the pattern of the BiTeI and MoS2 proto­
types, and both of the prototypes show a significant error rate of 857% and 462%
on b in the majority of the kernels. At least for the size of the dataset that is
currently available, this suggests that the GPR algorithm is unable to learn any
pattern from these two prototypes. The prediction result of the kernel test after
removing materials with an error rate of more than 5% is worse than the predic­
tion result of the kernel test performed on the MoSSe and CdI2 prototype. This
is due to the fact that some of the data points coming from the BiTeI and MoS2
prototype could mislead the algorithm. Therefore, the removal of some outliers or
the collection of additional data is required in order to arrive at a prediction that is
even remotely plausible.
kernel type
prototype
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn
MoSSe
8.9%
31.35%
BiTeI
7.6%
856.43%
MoS2
22.9%
91.33%
CdI2
16.67%
28.59%
Rational Quadratic (RQ)
MoSSe
9.3%
30.41%
BiTeI
8.11%
857.12%
MoS2
28.99%
462.32%
CdI2
16.59%
27.7%
Dot Product (DP)
MoSSe
9.7%
30.87%
BiTeI
8.2%
854.43%
MoS2
21.27%
73.85%
CdI2
26.58%
30.86%
Radial Basis Function (RBF)
MoSSe
9.3%
30.41%
BiTeI
8.11%
857.13%
MoS2
28.93%
457.35%
CdI2
16.59%
27.69%
Table 3.5: Kernel test results on different prototypes.
32
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:41==
3.3.10
Kernel test on data after filtering unreasonable data
according to other research
It is essential to have a more in­depth understanding of the database in order
to gain more insight about the database. According to the findings of another
study[8] pertaining to this databese, twod_sheets.db and janus_nanotube.db,
there are a number of factors that need to be taken into consideration, and some
datapoints need to be removed so that the final result is accurate.
• Occurrence of prototype changing: Several tubes observed, in favor of its
energetically favored prototype, a transition between the various prototypes
(H­/T­ phase) that occurred during the relaxation phase. There is a certain
strain energy that lies beneath every janus sheet, even in the configuration
with the minimum tube energy. Because the kinetic barriers associated with
it can be overcome, this strain energy has the potential to cause changes in
prototypes. In order to ensure that the prototype is consistent, the similarity
measures are applied between the corresponding infinite janus sheet and
the nanotube.
• Tube elongate or contract along the tube axis: By elongating their lattice
constants along the tube axis, certain nanotubes are able to achieve lower
energy minima. These tubes are not taken into consideration because they
cannot be compared to the janus sheet that corresponds to them.
• if the tube is circular: By confirming that the atoms still have the capacity
to arrange themselves in a circular tube shape after the relaxation process,
it is made certain that the tube will not separate into its component parts.
In addition, tubes that break up into fragments are not permitted. For in­
stance, it has been observed that some tubes change their prototype to the
1T’ distorted type, which is not a part of the current study.
• Calculation finished without errors: This also includes labeling as ”timed
out” any computations that did not complete within a reasonable amount of
time after being given enough time to do so.
Considering these factors, these materials needed to be removed are list here:
VClI, VBrI, VClBr, NbClI, NbBrI, NbClBr, TaClI, TaBrI, TaClBr, CrClI, CrBrI, CrClBr,
MoClI, MoBrI, MoClBr, WClI, WBrI, WClBr, FeSTe, FeSSe, SnOTe, GeOTe, and
GeSTe. Most of them are removed when filtering error rate of fitting curve higher
than 5%, and only GeOTe and SnOTe are not included. This implies that the fitting
curve error rate filtering step accidentally agrees point of Felix’s result.
The kernel test is performed once more after the GeOTe and SnOTe data have
been filtered according to the aforementioned criteria in their respective order.
The results of the kernel test by using both single kernel and kernel combinations
are displayed in Table.3.6. As Table.3.6 displayed, Every single kernel and kernel
combination, with the exception of the RBF kernel, produces an error rate that is
comparable. The error rate of a and b is approximately 35% and 41%, respec­
tively, which is a significant improvement over the previous best result, which was
41.46% and 61.64% from the Dot Product kernel.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
33
==PAGE:42==
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matérn
38.03%
41.93%
Rational Quadratic (RQ)
35.3%
42.28%
Dot Product (DP)
25.37%
36.55%
Radial Basis Function (RBF)
100%
100%
Matérn + RBF
38.83%
41.92%
Matérn + RQ
38.04%
41.91%
Matérn + DP
33.4%
42.22%
RBF + RQ
35.29%
42.28%
RBF + DP
33.32%
42.34%
RQ + DP
33.33%
42.33%
Table 3.6: Kernel test after filtering more data according to other research.
The minimal strain energy, which is denoted by the symbol Emin, and the optimal
radius, which is denoted by the symbol Ropt are determined by performing cal­
culations based on the values predicted for a and b by the kernel, Dot Product
kernel, that has the highest level of performance. The comparison of the minimal
strain energy, which is denoted by Emin, and the optimal radius, which is denoted
by Ropt, both of which were derived from DFT data (the original data), and ma­
chine learning prediction after unreasonable data was removed is presented in
Fig.3.13. Emin and Ropt each have a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of
57.11%, while Ropt has a MAPE of 59.86%.
The diagonal black dash line, the blue line, and the orange line are drawn as
the 0% absolute percentage error rate baseline, +50% absolute percentage error
rate baseline, and ­50% absolute percentage error rate baseline, respectively, for
the purpose of making it easier to compare the predicting data and the original
one. In minimal strain energy, Emin, part, 4 data points are out of 50% absolute
percentage error rate, and all of them are labeled by its material name, which are
TiSTe, BiSeBr, TiOS, and SbSeCl. In optimal radius part, Ropt, part, only 2 data
points are out of 50% absolute percentage error rate, and both of them are labeled
by its material name as well, which are BiSeBr and SbSeCl.
34
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.13: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and opti­
mal radiusRopt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction after
removing unreasonable data.
As mentioned above, some of the data points that the Dot Product kernel was
unable to accurately predict have been visualized and contrasted with the original
fitting curve that was derived from DFT data. Investigation of outliers is required in
order to determine the potential ways in which the model can be improved. TiSTe,
TiOS, BiSeBr, and SbSeCl demonstrates higher than 50% absolute percentage
error rate in Emin prediction. In addition, BiSeBr and SbSeCl also have over 50%
absolute percentage error rate in Ropt prediction. Fig.3.14, Fig.3.15, Fig.3.17,
Fig.3.16 display plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve.
It has been demonstrated in Fig.3.14 that the GPR algorithm with the Dot Product
kernel is unable to accurately predict the fitting curve. When compared to the
original data, the predicted value of Emin has a greater than fifty percent absolute
percentage error rate and, to be more specific, a twenty two point three percent
error rate. The shape of the curve is completely different from the fitting curve that
was based on DFT datapoints.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.14: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of TiSTe.
The results presented in Fig.3.15 demonstrate that the GPR algorithm is capable
of making accurate predictions regarding the shape of the TiOS curve; however,
the accuracy of the E min value is not particularly precise. The predicted value of
Emin has an error rate of almost 100% absolute percentage error rate, whereas
the predicted value of Ropt is quite accurate.
Figure 3.15: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of TiOS.
Fig.3.16 depicts the predicted and DFT fitting curves of SbSeCl, and the fact that
the predicted fitting curve demonstrates a completely different curve shape than
the DFT fitting curve suggests that the GPR algorithm with the Dot Product kernel
cannot capture the pattern of this material. In comparison to the initial data, the
absolute percentage error rate for the predicted values of Emin and Ropt is greater
than 50%; to be more specific, the error rate is 80% and 102.56% absolute per­
centage error rate, respectively.
36
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.16: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of SbSeCl.
As shown in Fig.3.17, the fact that the predicted fitting curve for BiSeBr has a
completely different curve shape than the DFT fitting curve, indicates that the
GPR algorithm with Dot Product kernel is unable to capture the material pattern
as effectively as the DFT fitting curve does. When compared to the data from the
initial DFT run, both of Emin and Ropt show more than 50% absolute percentage
error rate, to be more particular, which has absolute percentage error rate of 95%
and 423%, respectively.
Figure 3.17: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of BiSeBr.
When these outliers with an absolute percentage error rate of more than 50% are
investigated, some interesting phenomena are discovered. For instance, both
SbSeCl and BiSeBr exhibit a very high absolute percentage error rate, and the
shape of the predicted fitting curve for both of these compounds exhibits very
similar characteristics. These characteristics include a very flat tail of the curve
and no obvious minimal point. This flat curve may be a good point to start from in
order to crack the principle of fitting curves for predicting Emin and Ropt, despite
the fact that the mechanism behind this is not yet clear. Additionally, the predicting
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
37
==PAGE:46==
fitting curve of TiOS has the right shape but not the right Emin prediction, despite
the fact that it has the right shape. The reason for this could be a potential area
of investigation, and one possibility is that it is due to a lack of training data. Last
but not least, the prediction result of SbSeCl shows a relatively correct curve,
whereas the original DFT fitting curve is quite flat. This may suggest that the GPR
algorithm learned the curve shape from another material that possessed chemical
or structural properties that were comparable to those of SbSeCl. However, the
original flat DFT fitting curve of SbSeCl might be the potential reason which misled
the GPR to predict the high error rate curve such as SbSeCl and BiSeBr. This
could be the case.
3.3.11
Kernel test after filtering materials with wrong trend
fitting curve
More data is filtered manually by checking the plot of the fitting curve and the
original DFT data in order to achieve a better prediction error rate, also known
as an absolute percentage error rate. AsSI and AsSBr are removed since their
unreasonable fitting curve trend which shows that the fitting curve is not able to
capture the DFT data point, abd these might mislead the GPR algorithm. More
detail is discussed below:
Fig.3.18 demonstrates the plot of fitting curve and original DFT data of AsSI. As
Fig.3.18 shown, the trend of DFT data point is going higher along the x axis and
there is no local minimal. However, the fitting curve shows the a totally different
trend and there is a local minimal around 8Å, which doesn’t exist in DFT datapoint.
Therefore, the fitting curve of AsSI is not able to describe the true situation of the
material.
Fig.3.19 displays the plot of fitting curve and original DFT data of AsSBr. In
Fig.3.19, the shape of DFT data point is almost flat, which means the fitting curve
can decide any of the point to be the local minimal and fit an inaccurate curve
since the data point doesn’t provide any trend information. As a result, this mate­
rial should be eliminated since its wrong information might mislead the algorithm.
Figure 3.18: Plot of fitting curve and original DFT data of AsSI.
38
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.19: Plot of fitting curve and original DFT data of AsSBr.
After all of the data has been filtered, single kernel is tested once more to deter­
mine whether or not the error rate of a and b has decreased. The results of the
kernel test following removing fitting curves with unreasonable trend are shown
in the Table.3.7. According to the Table.3.7, the error rate of a of each single ker­
nel test falls around 30%, and the error rate of b of most single kernel tests falls
approximately 40% as well, with the exception of the radial basis function (RBF)
kernel. The Dot Product kernel seemed to have the best performance in the sin­
gle kernel test, with an absolute percentage error rate of 26% for a and 23.96% for
b, respectively. When compared to the results of the previous test with a single
kernel, the absolute percentage error rate of a and b has decreased slightly. To
be more specific, the previous best result with a single kernel was 25.31% and
36.55% for absolute percentage error rate of a and b from the Dot Product kernel.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matern kernel
35.37%
32.68%
Rational quadratic kernel
33.24%
32%
Dot product kernel
26%
23.96%
RBF kernel
100%
100%
Table 3.7: Kernel test after filtering fitting curves with unreasonable trend.
Fig.3.20 demonstrates the visualization of the comparison between minimal strain
energy Emin and optimal radius Ropt from original DFT data and machine learning
prediction after removing fitting curves with unreasonable trend which potentially
mislead the model. The scatter plot is plotted with data from the original DFT in
the x axis and predicted data in the y axis in order to further investigate the result
of minimal strain energy, Emin, and optimal radius,Ropt, converted from predicted
and original a and b. Both Emin and Ropt are found to have a mean absolute
percentage error rate that is calculated to be 31.58% and 58.95%, respectively.
When compared to the result of the previous test that was conducted before these
three unreasonable data were removed, the mean absolute percentage error rate
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
39
==PAGE:48==
of Emin has decreased by approximately 25%, and the mean absolute percentage
error rate of Ropt has decreased by approximately 1%.
The baselines for the 0% absolute percentage error rate, the +50% absolute per­
centage error rate, and the ­50% absolute percentage error rate have been drawn
as the diagonal black dash line, the blue line, and the orange line, respectively,
for the purpose of making it easier to compare the predicting data and the origi­
nal one. Visualization of minimal strain energy, Emin, is shown in the left part of
Fig.3.20. Despite the fact that the mean absolute percentage error rate of Emin
is only 31.58%, there are still two materials that have more than 50% absolute
percentage error rate. Both SbSeCl and BiSeBr, which are denoted by the di­
rectional arrow in red, exhibit 77.06% and 95.57% of absolute percentage error
rate, respectively. The comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of SbSeCl and BiSeBr are plotted to investigate further. Visualiza­
tion of optimal radius, Ropt, is shown in the right part of Fig.3.20, and only SbSeCl
and BiSeBr owing predicted result are over 50% absolute percentage error rate,
which are denoted by the directional arrow in red, exhibit 88.05% and 428.88%
of absolute percentage error rate, respectively. Note that BiSeBr displays outra­
geous absolute percentage error rate of Ropt, and this leads to high mean absolute
percentage error rate in Ropt prediction.
Figure 3.20: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and op­
timal radius Ropt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction
after removing fitting curves with unreasonable.
Fig.3.21 displays the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and pre­
dicted fitting curve of SbSeCl. As depicted in Fig.3.21, the predicted curve differs
from the original DFT fitting curve, indicating that the GPR algorithm is incapable of
predicting this type of material, despite the fact that the mean absolute percentage
error rate has decreased significantly compared to previous tests. Surprisingly,
the predicted fitting curve has the same shape as the one from the previous test,
as shown in Fig.3.16, and the highest absolute percentage error rate among the
40
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:49==
entire test set. This suggests that more of this type of materials data should be
included in training data; otherwise, the GPR algorithm will not be able to predict
materials patterns, even with a very low mean absolute percentage error rate in
this case.
Figure 3.21: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of SbSeCl.
Fig.3.22 depicts the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of BiSeBr.As shown in Fig.3.22, the predicted fitting curve has a
significantly flatter shape than the original DFT fitting curve, which is completely
incorrect. Note that BiSeBr is also an outlier of a previous test and showing similar
predicted curve shape, as shown in Fig.3.17. This indicates that even though
the mean absolute percentage error rate is low, the GPR is unable to predict a
particular type of curve or material if the training data is insufficient.
Figure 3.22: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of BiSeBr.
Kernel test after filtering optimal radius Ropt higher than 30Å.
In this section, a different strategy is put to the test after all the filtering which have
been done previously. Because it is theoretically more difficult to form Janus nan­
otubes, every material with an optimal radius greater than 30Å has been elimi­
nated. Note that this theory is predicated on Janus nanotubes that have been
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
41
==PAGE:50==
successfully synthesized, and it is possible that there are unknown Janus nan­
otubes that have a radius that is greater than the optimal value of 30Å.
Table.3.8 shows kernel test result after filtering optimal radius, Ropt, above 30Å.
According to the mean absolute percentage error rate of a and b, Matérn kernel,
Rational quatratic kernel and RBF kernel are unable to predict a and b properly
because of almost 100% mean absolute percentage error rate. Dot Product ker­
nel shows the best mean absolute percentage error rate of a and b, which is
91.75% and 83.1%, respectively. Comparing to the previous test result, shown in
Table.3.7, which includes materials with optimal radius higher than 30Å, the mean
absolute percentage error rate of a and b are increased by almost 70%. This indi­
cated that removing materials with optimal radius Ropt higher than 30Å is not able
to improve model prediction.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matern kernel
99.99%
99.99%
Rational quadratic kernel
106.07%
93.56%
Dot product kernel
91.75%
83.11%
RBF kernel
100%
100%
Table 3.8: Kernel test result after filtering optimal radius above 30Å.
Original a and b and predicted a and b are used to be calculated to get optimal
radius, Ropt, and minimal strain energy, Emin. The mean absolute percentage
of Emin and Ropt are calculated as 75.13% and 14.64%, respectively. Fig.3.23
shows the scatter plot of comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and optimal
radius Ropt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction after
removing material optimal radius above 30Å. The baselines for the 0% absolute
percentage error rate, the +50% absolute percentage error rate, and the 50% ab­
solute percentage error rate have been drawn as the diagonal black dash line,
the blue line, and the orange line, respectively, in order to make it simpler to com­
pare the predicting data with the original one. These baselines are represented
by the colors blue, orange, and black, respectively. Visualization of minimal strain
energy, Emin, is shown in the left part of Fig.3.23. Only half of test point can be
predicted within 50% absolute percentage error rate. To further investigated those
points with higher than 50% absolute percentage error rate, three data points are
labeled by red arrow and its corresponding material name. To be more specific,
three outliers are GeClI, TiOS and SbSBr with 322.85%, 107.01% and 58.12%
absolute percentage error rate, respectively. The further investigation are done
below. Visualization of optimal radius, Ropt, is shown in the right part of Fig.3.23,
and all of Ropt predictions are within 50% absolute percentage error rate.
42
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.23: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and op­
timal radius Ropt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction
after removing material optimal radius above 30Å.
Fig.3.24 depicts the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of GeClI.As shown in Fig.3.24, the predicted fitting curve shows more
curvy curve than the original DFT fitting curve, and has relatively deep local mini­
mal which results in high absolute percentage error rate, 322.85%. Although the
predicted Ropt is quite accurate, 8.85Å comparing to 9.18Å, the high error rate of
Emin demonstrates that the GPR algorithm is unable to accurately predict the Emin
and Ropt of certain materials.
Figure 3.24: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of SGeClI.
Fig.3.25 shows the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of TiOS. In Fig.3.25, the predicted curve exhibits a curve that is
comparable to the DFT fitting curve; however, the local minimum is much lower
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
43
==PAGE:52==
than the DFT fitting curve, which results in a high absolute percentage error rate
of 107.01%. The Ropt is predicted precisely, 8.85Å comparing to 9.18Å, but 107%
absolute percentage error rate implies that some information is lost when the GPR
algorithm is trained.
Figure 3.25: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of TiOS.
Fig.3.26 demonstrates the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and
predicted fitting curve of SbSr. According to Fig.3.26, the predicted curve dis­
plays relative flat curve, and higher Emin at local minimum than DFT fitting curve.
For SbSBr, not only Emin shows high absolute percentage error rate, which is
58.12%, but also Ropt, which is 50.45%. Interesting thing is that the predicted
curve of SbSBr is almost as same as DFT fitting curve of TiOS, and vice versa.
This implies that the incapability of predicting Emin and Ropt results from the con­
fusion between certain materials. Therefore, more data is necessary to train GPR
algorithm properly.
Figure 3.26: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of SbSBr.
44
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:53==
Kernel test after filtering materials with minimal strain energy Emin higher
than ­0.05 eV/atom
In this section, the similar strategy in Sec.3.3.11 is tested after all the filtering
which have been done previously but without removing materials with optimal ra­
dius higher than 30Å. Every material with a minimal strain energy that was higher
than ­0.05 eV/atom was ruled out because it is theoretically more difficult to form
Janus nanotubes. Again, note that this theory is predicated on Janus nanotubes
that have been successfully synthesized, and it is possible that there are un­
known Janus nanotubes that have a minimal strain energy that is greater than
­0.05 eV/atom.
Table.3.9 shows kernel test result after filtering minimal strain energy higher than
­0.05 eV/atom. According to Table.3.9, Matérn kernel and RBF kernel are not
able to predict a and b at all since their high mean absolute percentage error rate
of a and b, all colse to 100%. Dot Product kernel displays the best prediction
performance by showing 51.06% and 40.08% mean absolute percentage error
rate of a and b, respectively. Comparing to test result before removing materials
with minimal strain energy Emin higher than ­0.05 eV/atom, shown in Table3.7, the
mean absolute percentage error rate of a and b are increased approximately 20%
which means more data filtered less accurate prediction. However, comparing to
test result in Sec.3.3.11, shown in Table.3.8, the mean absolute percentage error
rate of a and b are improved by 40%, which implies removing data by the view of
Emin can lead to better prediction result.
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
Matern kernel
99.99%
99.99%
Rational quadratic kernel
86.21%
51.85
Dot product kernel
51.06%
40.08
RBF kernel
100%
100%
Table 3.9:
Kernel test after filtering minimal strain energy higher than ­0.05
eV/atom.
In order to evaluate how well mininal strain energy, Emin, and optimal radius, Ropt,
can be predicted by Dot Product kernel, predicted a and b are first converted to
Emin and Ropt, and then these values are compared to the Emin and Ropt that were
computed using the original DFT a and b. Fig.3.27 displays the scatter plot of the
comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and optimal radius Ropt from DFT data
(original data) and machine learning prediction after removing materials with mini­
mal strain energy Emin higher than ­0.05 eV/atom. The mean absolute percentage
error rate of Emin and Ropt are calculated as 32.52% and 9.09%, respectively. The
baselines for the 0% absolute percentage error rate, the +50% absolute percent­
age error rate, and the ­50% absolute percentage error rate have been depicted
as the diagonal black dash line, the blue line, and the orange line, respectively,
so that it is easier to compare the predicted data with the original data. These
baselines are respectively represented by the colors blue, orange, and black.
Visualization of minimal strain energy, Emin, is in the left of Fig.3.27, which shows
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
45
==PAGE:54==
one outlier with over 50% absolute percentage error rate. Again, this outlier is
investigated to see how GPR algorithm confused by this specific material. In ad­
dition, Visualization of optimal radius, Ropt, is displayed in the right of Fig.3.27, and
all of predicted Ropt are within 50% absolute percentage error rate. To be more
specific, all of predicted Ropt are along diagonal black dash line which represents
0% error rate.
Figure 3.27: Visualization the comparison of minimal strain energy Emin and opti­
mal radius Ropt from DFT data (original data) and machine learning prediction after
removing materials with minimal strain energy Emin higher than ­0.05 eV/atom.
Fig.3.28 shows the plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted
fitting curve of TiOSe. In Fig.3.28, the predicted fitting curve demonstrates right
shape of curve and correct location of local minimum which can be check by value
of Ropt. However, the absolute percentage error rate of predicted Emin is still high,
61.45%, even shape of curve and Ropt are predicted precisely. This indicates that
more information or more data are needed to get a better prediction in Emin
46
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.28: Plot of comparison between original fitting curve and predicted fitting
curve of TiOSe.
3.3.12
Model validation
Even though the model’s performance is excellent, validation is necessary to de­
termine whether the current model is the best. The performance of the model is
evaluated based on how accurately the trained model is able to predict input test
data. This is done by comparing the predicted result to the data that was actually
tested. Model selection is accomplished by making use of this measure, and the
performance of the model on the validation set is used as a stand­in for the gen­
eralization error. To be more specific, the entire dataset is divided into two parts:
the training set, which is used to evaluate the effectiveness of the model, and the
test set, which is employed in the process of instructing the algorithm. However,
the way splitting the training set and test set can result in totally different model.
For this reason, model validation is absolutely necessary in order to choose the
model that is the most applicable. There are several different method, which is
briefly discussed in Sec.2.4.5, can be used under different situation for different
purpose. In this study, the cross­validation (CV) with Kfold = 10 is used for model
evaluation because of the size of dataset.
Table.3.10 shows the cross­validation result after filtering minimal strain energy,
Emin,> 0.05 eV/atom. In addition, the mean absolute percentage error rate of a
and b are calculated as 43.97% and 35.69%, respectively. As Table.3.10 shown,
both of a and b demonstrates decent mean absolute percentage error rate on each
cross validation set. This indicates that GPR algorithm with using Dot Product
kernel can predict this data set very well no matter how training set and testing
set are divided.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
47
==PAGE:56==
Number of cross validation set
Error rate of a
Error rate of b
0
45.07%
33.8%
1
30.24%
28.87%
2
58.44%
46.21%
3
44.55%
59.56%
4
54.14%
40.38%
5
33.79%
16.82%
6
52.41%
32.58%
7
51.97%
26.28%
8
33.99%
29.12%
9
35.15%
43.24%
Table 3.10: Cross­validation result after filtering minimal strain energy, Emin,
>0.05eV/atom.
Cross validation is also used to determine whether the model is overfit by compar­
ing the test error and train error in each cross validation set to determine whether
the model is overfit. To get train error, the predicted model is used to predict by
inputting train data, Xtrain, instead of test data, Xtest, and the train error is calcu­
lated by comparing the result to ytrain. Fig.3.29 displays the plot of comparison
between train error rate and test error rate in cross validation, and comparison
between train error and test error of a and b are shown in left and right part,
respectively. According to Fig.3.29, both of train error rate of a and b are not ex­
tremely low, such as lower than 5%. In addition, the train error of a and b have the
same trend of test error of a and b, which indicates the model showing the same
variance when prediciting Xtrain and Xtest.
Figure 3.29: Plot of comparison between train error rate and test error rate in cross
validation.
Table.3.11 demonstrates cross validation result covert to Emin and Ropt after fil­
tering materials with minimal strain energy, Emin, >0.05 eV/atom. The average of
mean absolute percentage error rate of Emin and Ropt are calculated as 3445.05%
and 51.44%, respectively. According to Table.3.11, all of the mean absolute per­
centage error rate of Emin in cross validation set are higher than the original per­
formance, shown in Sec3.3.11 with 32.52% mean absolute percentage error rate.
48
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:57==
Furthermore, non of mean absolute percentage error of Ropt can not compete with
the original performance as well, shown in Sec3.3.11 with 9.09% mean absolute
percentage error rate. In conclusion, the conversion of a and b to Emin and Ropt
from cross validation test displays that the GPR algorithm is not able to predict
Emin and Ropt well. Even though the cross validation result of a and b shows very
consistent performance as the original performance shown in Sec3.3.11, the per­
formance of predicted Emin and Ropt from cross validation is not as good as the
original one.
Number of cross validation set
Error rate of Emin
Error rate of Ropt
0
873.81%
64.52%
1
512.07%
53.53%
2
1396.33%
50.41%
3
246.77%
40.33%
4
152.52%
39.74%
5
911.04%
76.36%
6
234.96%
44.35%
7
20739.89%
39.34%
8
728.79%
66.35%
9
454.98%
39.49%
Table 3.11: Cross­validation result covert to Emin and Ropt after filtering materials
with minimal strain energy, Emin, >0.05eV/atom.
3.4
Discussion regarding error rate between
predicted a and b and predicted minimal strain
energy, Emin, and optimal radius, Ropt.
As Sec.3.2 mentioned, Eq.3.2 plays a vital role in describing relation between
strain energy and tube radius. In addition, minimal strain energy, Emin, at optimal
radius, Ropt, can be derived by differentiating Eq.3.2. Therefore, Emin and Ropt
can be represented by Eq.3.4 and Eq.3.3.
In this study, the variables a and b from Eq.3.2 are predicted. If the error rate of a
and b can be denoted as h and k, Eq.3.2 can be rewrite as follow:
Estrain(R) = ha
R2 + kb
R
(3.5)
where h is error rate of variable a and k is error rate of b.
In addition, Emin and Ropt can also be rewrote as:
Ropt = −2ha
kb
(3.6)
Emin = −k2b2
4ha
(3.7)
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
49
==PAGE:58==
Hereby, the error rate of Emin and Ropt can be represented as:
Rerror = h
k −1
(3.8)
Eerror = k2
h −1
(3.9)
Generally, Eerror is higher than Rerror when h is close to k because Eerror has one
more order than Rerror. This explains most of predicted Eerror is higher than Rerror.
However, extreme cases can occur, such as when h and k are extremely negative
and positive, respectively. In contrast, h and k are comparable in this study.
50
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:59==
4
Conclusion
In this study a data­driven discovery of Janus nanotubes based on machine learn­
ing have been presented. 1D Janus nanotube database, janus_nanotubes.db,
and 2D Janus nanosheet database, twod_sheet.db, are imported and converted
to right format to train and test Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) model. An­
alyzing the result of GPR prediction, the mean absolute percentage error rate of
function, Eq.3.2, variables a and b demonstrates that the GPR model is not able
to produce acceptable error rate. As a result, the following 5 data filtering steps
have been done to investigate the respond of the GPR model. The more specific
filtering flow can be expressed by following:
• (1) Materials with over 5% error rate between fitting curve and DFT data
point are removed.
• (2) The unreasonable data, which might lead to high uncertainty, according
to other research are eliminated.
• (3) Materials with wrong fitting curve trend are filtered.
• (4a) Materials with actual optimal radius, Ropt, above 30Å.
• (4b) Materials with actual minimal strain energy, Emin, above 0.05 eV/atom.
However, only the (4b) filtering demonstrated an acceptable mean absolute per­
centage error rate, which is 51.06% and 40.08% for a and b by using Dot Product
kernel. In addition, the performance after converting a and b to Emin and Ropt in
(4b) filtering shows a good mean absolute percentage error rate, which is 32.52%
and 9.09%, respectively. Furthermore, the cross­validation test is employed to
investigate a more general performance of the fifth filtering. The cross­validation
result of error rate of a and b displays that the model performs stably in each
cross­validation set. But, after converting a and b to Emin and Ropt, the error rate
of Emin and Ropt shows a larger and inconsistent result in each cross­validation
set. Note that there is only 43 data remaining after the fifth filtering. It’s possible to
get a better prediction if more filter is done, but the more filtering, the less material
it can predict. Therefore, to move toward the original goal of this study, which is
using machine learning predicting fitting curve, Emin and Ropt, more researches
are necessary to crack the pattern of using machine learning in materials field.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:61==
5
Future work
To improve the prediction result of machine learning applied to the field of Janus
nanotubes, it is worthwhile to investigate a number of factors.
First and foremost, more data is required for machine learning algorithms to make
accurate predictions. According to all comparison plots between the original fitting
curve and the predicted fitting curve after each data filtering, the machine learning
algorithm’s accuracy in predicting the fitting curve does not improve as the data
size decreases. This suggests that additional data is required to train a machine
algorithm so that it can capture the pattern of Janus nanotubes. There are numer­
ous factors that can influence the material properties of each and every material.
The Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) might be able to perform better with
more data.
Second, the selection of kernel is crucial to the GPR algorithm, and there are
numerous kernel combination possibilities. In this study, only basic kernel com­
binations and single kernels from scikit­learn were used. However, there are ad­
ditional methods for constructing a unique kernel, such as kernel multiplication.
There is a need for further research to compare the performance of various kernel
combinations, as distinct kernel combinations can lead to radically different model
outcomes.
Thirdly, the selection of algorithm is a fundamental aspect of the study of machine
learning methods. The GPR algorithm has a number of advantages, including
its ease of analysis, closed­form predictive distribution, and analytical inference,
among others. However, it is uncertain whether this is the optimal algorithm for
Janus nanotubes. To select the optimal algorithm, additional model research is
necessary.
Last but not least, the choice of descriptor has a substantial impact on the out­
come.
Different descriptors serve different purposes to convey structural and
chemical information about complex materials. These details are crucial for prop­
erly training an algorithm. In other words, incorrect or inaccurate information input
can result in an algorithm producing an entirely different outcome. Therefore, it
is essential to compare and select an appropriate descriptor for a specific type of
material, as different materials or property predictions may require different em­
phasis on different information.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
E.A. Kotomin et al. “Energy Conversion: Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: First­Principles
Modeling of Elementary Processes”. In: Computational Approaches to En­
ergy Materials. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2013. Chap. 6, pp. 149–186. ISBN:
9781118551462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118551462.ch6. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118551462.ch6. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118551462.ch6.
[2]
Rutger A. van Santen, Evgeny A. Pidko, and Emiel J.M. Hensen. “Energy
Conversion: Heterogeneous Catalysis”. In: Computational Approaches to
Energy Materials. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2013. Chap. 7, pp. 187–229. ISBN:
9781118551462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118551462.ch7. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118551462.ch7. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118551462.ch7.
[3]
Phuti E. Ngoepe, Rapela R. Maphanga, and Dean C. Sayle. “Toward the
Nanoscale”. In: Computational Approaches to Energy Materials. John Wiley
Sons, Ltd, 2013. Chap. 9, pp. 261–294. ISBN: 9781118551462. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/9781118551462.ch9. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118551462.ch9. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/9781118551462.ch9.
[4]
Silvana Botti and Julien Vidal. “Energy Generation: Solar Energy”. In: Com­
putational Approaches to Energy Materials. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2013.
Chap. 2, pp. 29–69. ISBN: 9781118551462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118551462.ch2. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
9781118551462.ch2. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
9781118551462.ch2.
[5]
Dorothy Duffy. “Energy Generation: Nuclear Energy”. In: Computational Ap­
proaches to Energy Materials. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2013. Chap. 3, pp. 71–
107. ISBN: 9781118551462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118551462.
ch3. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118551462.
ch3. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118551462.
ch3.
[6]
M. Saiful Islam and Craig A.J. Fisher. “Energy Storage: Rechargeable Lithium
Batteries”. In: Computational Approaches to Energy Materials. John Wiley
Sons, Ltd, 2013. Chap. 4, pp. 109–129. ISBN: 9781118551462. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/9781118551462.ch4. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/9781118551462.ch4. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/9781118551462.ch4.
[7]
Viet­Duc Le and Yong­Hyun Kim. “Energy Storage: Hydrogen”. In: Com­
putational Approaches to Energy Materials. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2013.
Chap. 5, pp. 131–148. ISBN: 9781118551462. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1002/9781118551462.ch5. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/9781118551462.ch5. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/9781118551462.ch5.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
55
==PAGE:64==
[8]
Felix T. Bölle et al. “Structural and chemical mechanisms governing stability
of inorganic Janus nanotubes”. In: npj Computational Materials 7.1 (Mar.
2021), p. 41. ISSN: 2057­3960. DOI: 10.1038/s41524-021-00505-9. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-021-00505-9.
[9]
A. Rahman. “Correlations in the Motion of Atoms in Liquid Argon”. In: Phys.
Rev. 136 (2A Oct. 1964), A405–A411. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.A405. URL:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.136.A405.
[10]
B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright. “Studies in Molecular Dynamics. I. General
Method”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 31.2 (1959), pp. 459–466.
DOI: 10.1063/1.1730376. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1730376. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1730376.
[11]
K. Binder and Steven M. Girvin. “The Monte Carlo Method in Condensed
Matter Physics”. In: Physics Today 46.6 (Jan. 1993), p. 94. DOI: 10.1063/1.
2808938.
[12]
Long­Qing Chen. “Phase­Field Models for Microstructure Evolution”. In: An­
nual Review of Materials Research 32.1 (2002), pp. 113–140. DOI: 10.1146/
annurev.matsci.32.112001.132041. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
matsci.32.112001.132041. URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.32.
112001.132041.
[13]
Ingo Steinbach. “Phase­field models in materials science”. In: Modelling and
Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 17.7 (July 2009), p. 073001.
DOI: 10.1088/0965-0393/17/7/073001. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-
0393/17/7/073001.
[14]
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. “Inhomogeneous Electron Gas”. In: Phys. Rev.
136 (3B Nov. 1964), B864–B871. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864. URL:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.
[15]
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. “Self­Consistent Equations Including Exchange
and Correlation Effects”. In: Phys. Rev. 140 (4A Nov. 1965), A1133–A1138.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.140.A1133. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRev.140.A1133.
[16]
Kurt Lejaeghere et al. “Reproducibility in density functional theory calcula­
tions of solids”. en. In: Science 351.6280 (Mar. 2016), aad3000.
[17]
Johannes Hachmann et al. “The Harvard Clean Energy Project: Large­Scale
Computational Screening and Design of Organic Photovoltaics on the World
Community Grid”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2.17 (2011),
pp. 2241–2251. DOI: 10.1021/jz200866s. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
jz200866s. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/jz200866s.
[18]
Camilo E. Calderon et al. The AFLOW Standard for High­Throughput Ma­
terials Science Calculations. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1506.00303. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.00303.
[19]
Anubhav Jain et al. “Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome
approach to accelerating materials innovation”. In: APL Materials 1.1 (2013),
p. 011002. DOI: 10.1063/1.4812323. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
4812323. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4812323.
[20]
C. Camacho­Zuñiga and F. A. Ruiz­Treviño. “A New Group Contribution
Scheme To Estimate the Glass Transition Temperature for Polymers and
Diluents”. In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 42.7 (2003),
56
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:65==
pp. 1530–1534. DOI: 10.1021/ie0205389. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie0205389. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0205389.
[21]
Xinliang Yu, Bing Yi, and Xueye Wang. “PREDICTION OF THE GLASS
TRANSITION TEMPERATURES FOR POLYMERS WITH ARTIFICIAL NEU­
RAL NETWORK”. In: Journal of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
07 (2008), pp. 953–963.
[22]
Kevin P. Murphy. Machine learning : a probabilistic perspective. eng. In­
troduction – Probability – Generative Models for Discrete Data – Gaussian
Models – Bayesian Statistics – Frequentist Statistics – Linear Regression
– Logistic Regression – Generalized Linear Models and the Exponential
Family – Directed Graphical Models (Bayes Nets) – Mixture Models and
the EM Algorithm – Latent Linear Models – Sparse Linear Models – Ker­
nels – Gaussian Processes – Adaptive Basis Function Models – Markov
and Hidden Markov Models – State Space Models – Undirected Graphical
Models (Markov Random Fields) – Exact Inference for Graphical Models –
Variational Inference – More Variational Inference – Monte Carlo Inference
– Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) Inference – Clustering – Graphical
Model Structure Learning – Latent Variable Models for Discrete Data – Deep
Learning. Cambridge, MA, 2012.
[23]
Tim Mueller, Aaron Gilad Kusne, and Rampi Ramprasad. “MACHINE LEARN­
ING IN MATERIALS SCIENCE: RECENT PROGRESS AND EMERGING
APPLICATIONS”. In: REVIEWS IN COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY, VOL
29. Ed. by AL Parrill and KB Lipkowitz. Vol. 29. Reviews in Computational
Chemistry. 2016, pp. 186–273. ISBN: 978­1­119­14873­9; 978­1­119­10393­
6.
[24]
Luca M. Ghiringhelli et al. “Big Data of Materials Science: Critical Role of
the Descriptor”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (10 Mar. 2015), p. 105503. DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.105503. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.114.105503.
[25]
P Friederich, F Häse, and J Proppe. “Aspuru­Guzik A. Machine­learned po­
tentials for next­generation matter simulations”. In: Nat Mater 20.6 (2021),
pp. 750–761.
[26]
Frank Noé et al. “Machine Learning for Molecular Simulation”. In: Annual
Review of Physical Chemistry 71.1 (2020). PMID: 32092281, pp. 361–390.
DOI: 10.1146/annurev- physchem- 042018- 052331. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-physchem-042018-052331. URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-physchem-042018-052331.
[27]
Yunxing Zuo et al. “Performance and Cost Assessment of Machine Learn­
ing Interatomic Potentials”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 124.4
(2020). PMID: 31916773, pp. 731–745. DOI: 10 . 1021 / acs . jpca . 9b08723.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b08723. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.jpca.9b08723.
[28]
Aditya Kamath et al. “Neural networks vs Gaussian process regression for
representing potential energy surfaces: A comparative study of fit quality
and vibrational spectrum accuracy”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics
148.24 (2018), p. 241702. DOI: 10.1063/1.5003074. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5003074. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5003074.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
57
==PAGE:66==
[29]
Linus Pauling. “The Structure of the Micas and Related Minerals”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 16.2 (1930), pp. 123–129.
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.16.2.123. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/
pnas.16.2.123. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.16.2.123.
[30]
Wenjin Yin et al. “Role of intrinsic dipole on photocatalytic water splitting for
Janus MoSSe/nitrides heterostructure: A first­principles study”. In: Progress
in Natural Science: Materials International 29.3 (2019). Special Issue of
Computational Materials, pp. 335–340. ISSN: 1002­0071. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pnsc.2019.05.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1002007119303442.
[31]
Huanli Wang et al. “Semiconductor heterojunction photocatalysts: design,
construction, and photocatalytic performances”. In: Chem. Soc. Rev. 43 (15
2014), pp. 5234–5244. DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00126E. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1039/C4CS00126E.
[32]
Ang­Yu Lu et al. “Janus monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides”. In:
Nature Nanotechnology 12.8 (Aug. 2017), pp. 744–749. ISSN: 1748­3395.
DOI: 10.1038/nnano.2017.100. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2017.100.
[33]
Bálint Fülöp et al. “Exfoliation of single layer BiTeI flakes”. In: 2D Materials
5.3 (June 2018), p. 031013. DOI: 10.1088/2053-1583/aac652. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1088/2053-1583/aac652.
[34]
Shuntaro Oshima, Masayuki Toyoda, and Susumu Saito. “Geometrical and
electronic properties of unstrained and strained transition metal dichalco­
genide nanotubes”. In: Phys. Rev. Materials 4 (2 Feb. 2020), p. 026004.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.026004. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.026004.
[35]
Wen Zhao et al. “Ultra­stable small diameter hybrid transition metal dichalco­
genide nanotubes X–M–Y (X, Y = S, Se, Te; M = Mo, W, Nb, Ta): a compu­
tational study”. In: Nanoscale 7 (32 2015), pp. 13586–13590. DOI: 10.1039/
C5NR02812D. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C5NR02812D.
[36]
Lauri Himanen et al. “DScribe: Library of descriptors for machine learning
in materials science”. In: Computer Physics Communications 247 (2020),
p. 106949. ISSN: 0010­4655. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2019.
106949. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010465519303042.
[37]
Felix Faber et al. “Crystal structure representations for machine learning
models of formation energies”. In: INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUAN­
TUM CHEMISTRY 115.16, SI (Aug. 2015), pp. 1094–1101. ISSN: 0020­
7608. DOI: 10.1002/qua.24917.
[38]
Matthias Rupp et al. “Fast and Accurate Modeling of Molecular Atomization
Energies with Machine Learning”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (5 Jan. 2012),
p. 058301. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.058301. URL: https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.058301.
[39]
K. T. Schütt et al. “How to represent crystal structures for machine learning:
Towards fast prediction of electronic properties”. In: Phys. Rev. B 89 (20
May 2014), p. 205118. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.205118. URL: https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.89.205118.
[40]
Logan Ward et al. “Including crystal structure attributes in machine learning
models of formation energies via Voronoi tessellations”. In: Phys. Rev. B 96
58
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:67==
(2 July 2017), p. 024104. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.96.024104. URL: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.024104.
[41]
Olexandr Isayev et al. “Universal fragment descriptors for predicting proper­
ties of inorganic crystals”. en. In: Nat. Commun. 8.1 (June 2017), p. 15679.
[42]
Berk Onat, Christoph Ortner, and James R. Kermode. “Sensitivity and di­
mensionality of atomic environment representations used for machine learn­
ing interatomic potentials”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 153.14 (2020),
p. 144106. DOI: 10.1063/5.0016005. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0016005. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0016005.
[43]
Albert P. Bartók, Risi Kondor, and Gábor Csányi. “On representing chemical
environments”. In: Phys. Rev. B 87 (18 May 2013), p. 184115. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.87.184115. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.87.
184115.
[44]
Gábor Csányi, Noam Bernstein, and James Richard Kermode. libAtom­
s/QUIP. Version 0.9.9. Nov. 2021. URL: https://github.com/libAtoms/QUIP.
[45]
Felix Musil et al. “Physics­Inspired Structural Representations for Molecules
and Materials”. In: Chemical Reviews 121.16 (2021). PMID: 34310133, pp. 9759–
9815. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00021. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
chemrev.1c00021. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00021.
[46]
Sandip De et al. “Comparing molecules and solids across structural and al­
chemical space”. In: Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (20 2016), pp. 13754–
13769. DOI: 10 . 1039 / C6CP00415F. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 /
C6CP00415F.
[47]
Marc O.J. Jäger et al. “Machine learning hydrogen adsorption on nanoclus­
ters through structural descriptors”. In: npj Computational Materials (2018).
DOI: 10.1038/s41524-018-0096-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-018-
0096-5.
[48]
Carl Edward Rasmussen. “Gaussian Processes in Machine Learning”. In:
Advanced Lectures on Machine Learning: ML Summer Schools 2003, Can­
berra, Australia, February 2 ­ 14, 2003, Tübingen, Germany, August 4 ­
16, 2003, Revised Lectures. Ed. by Olivier Bousquet, Ulrike von Luxburg,
and Gunnar Rätsch. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004,
pp. 63–71. ISBN: 978­3­540­28650­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-28650-9_4.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-28650-9_4.
[49]
Volker L. Deringer et al. “Gaussian Process Regression for Materials and
Molecules”. In: Chemical Reviews 121.16 (2021). PMID: 34398616, pp. 10073–
10141. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00022. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.chemrev.1c00022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00022.
[50]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Pro­
cesses for Machine Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learn­
ing). The MIT Press, 2005. ISBN: 026218253X. URL: http://www.amazon.
com/Gaussian-Processes-Learning-Adaptive-Computation/dp/026218253X.
[51]
Tom M. Mitchell. “Machine Learning and Data Mining”. In: Commun. ACM
42.11 (Nov. 1999), pp. 30–36. ISSN: 0001­0782. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 319382 .
319388. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/319382.319388.
[52]
Koji Fujimura et al. “Accelerated Materials Design of Lithium Superionic
Conductors Based on First­Principles Calculations and Machine Learning
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
59
==PAGE:68==
Algorithms”. In: ADVANCED ENERGY MATERIALS 3.8 (Aug. 2013), pp. 980–
985. ISSN: 1614­6832. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201300060.
[53]
Isabelle Guyon. “An introduction to variable and feature selection”. In: JMLR
(), p. 2003.
[54]
Felix A. Faber et al. “Prediction Errors of Molecular Machine Learning Mod­
els Lower than Hybrid DFT Error”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Com­
putation 13.11 (2017). PMID: 28926232, pp. 5255–5264. DOI: 10.1021/acs.
jctc.7b00577. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b0057. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00577.
[55]
Nasser M. Nasrabadi. “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning”. In: Jour­
nal of Electronic Imaging 16.4 (2007). DOI: 10.1117/1.2819119. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1117/1.2819119.
[56]
Yue Liu et al. “Materials discovery and design using machine learning”. In:
Journal of Materiomics 3.3 (2017). High­throughput Experimental and Mod­
eling Research toward Advanced Batteries, pp. 159–177. ISSN: 2352­8478.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmat.2017.08.002. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352847817300515.
[57]
Anders C. Riis­Jensen et al. “Classifying the Electronic and Optical Proper­
ties of Janus Monolayers”. In: ACS Nano 13.11 (2019). PMID: 31613091,
pp. 13354–13364. DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b06698. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acsnano.9b06698. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b06698.
[58]
J. Tersoff. “Energies of fullerenes”. In: Phys. Rev. B 46 (23 Dec. 1992),
pp. 15546–15549. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.46.15546. URL: https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.46.15546.
[59]
Luciana Guimarães et al. “Imogolite Nanotubes: Stability, Electronic, and
Mechanical Properties”. In: ACS Nano 1.4 (2007). PMID: 19206688, pp. 362–
368. DOI: 10.1021/nn700184k. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/nn700184k.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/nn700184k.
[60]
E. Hernández et al. “Elastic Properties of C and BxCyNz Composite Nan­
otubes”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 (20 May 1998), pp. 4502–4505. DOI: 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.80.4502. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
80.4502.
[61]
E. Hernández et al. “Elastic properties of single­wall nanotubes”. In: Applied
Physics A 68.3 (Mar. 1999), pp. 287–292. ISSN: 1432­0630. DOI: 10.1007/
s003390050890. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s003390050890.
[62]
Raffaella Demichelis et al. “Serpentine polymorphism: a quantitative insight
from first­principles calculations”. In: CrystEngComm 18 (23 2016), pp. 4412–
4419. DOI: 10.1039/C6CE00190D. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C6CE00190D.
[63]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python li­
brary for working with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
29.27 (June 2017), p. 273002. DOI: 10.1088/1361-648x/aa680e. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1361-648x/aa680e.
[64]
David John Cameron Mackay. “Bayesian methods for adaptive models”.
PhD thesis. California Institute of Technology, 1992.
[65]
David JC MacKay, David JC Mac Kay, et al. Information theory, inference
and learning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2003.
60
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:69==
[66]
David Duvenaud. “Automatic model construction with Gaussian processes”.
PhD thesis. University of Cambridge, 2014.
[67]
Anders C. Riis­Jensen et al. “Classifying the Electronic and Optical Proper­
ties of Janus Monolayers”. In: ACS Nano 13.11 (2019). PMID: 31613091,
pp. 13354–13364. DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b06698. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acsnano.9b06698. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b06698.
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
==PAGE:71==
Data­driven Discovery of Janus Nanotubes
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej, 301
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.energy.dtu.dk
