==PAGE:1==
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated
two­dimensional materials
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
Master Thesis
July, 2022
Author
Paul Christian Dahl Sinding
Supervisors
Kristian Sommer Thygesen, Stefano Americo
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics,
Fysikvej, Building 311, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The field of materials design is expanding as the demand for new materials for electronics,
catalysis, energy storage and biotech increases. The design of new materials require both
experimental, theoretical and computational approaches in order to manufacture, charac­
terise and understand these novel materials. Materials design is not simply the slapping
together of the 80 stable nuclides of the periodic table, in the hope that interesting prop­
erties will emerge. It is the careful selection of new ways to combine existing materials
to obtain new ones with compelling attributes. One approach to engineering materials is
to use the extensive range of known atomically thin 2D materials, stacking them in series
to achieve new and interesting properties. One way using these types of materials is to
intercalate them, ie. populating the van der Waals gap between the layers with additional
atoms. In this project, a specific self­intercalated material, TaS2 intercalated with addi­
tional Ta atoms, is investigated computationally. The investigation is carried out using a
workflow based on cluster expansions and Monte Carlo simulations, that has previously
been used extensively to study alloys. The aim of this work is to obtain information on the
ordering of the intercalated atoms in the van der Waals gap at non­zero temperatures,
and to determine if any phase transitions occur at relevant temperatures.
ii
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was written at the section for Computational Atomic­scale Materials Design
(CAMD) at the Technical university of Denmark (DTU), under the supervision of Kristian
Sommer Thygesen and Stefano Americo. Thank you for introducing me to the project,
supervising it and assisting me in the process. Additional thanks to Jacob Schiøtz for
assisting me with finding this project on very short notice, and for introducing me to the
topic of materials design way back in 2017.
During the project i was assisted by Magnus Rahm, department of physics, Chalmers
university of technology. Thank you for your invaluable help with cluster expansions and
Monte Carlo simulations.
Additional assistance with feedback, proofreading, basic python syntax and myqueue
problems was provided by Sif Arnbjerg­Nielsen, Louise Floor Frellsen, Teitur Hansen and
Jiban Kangsabanik.
I would not be writing this thesis, or even studying physics, if not for my study group: So­
phie Kargo Kaptain, Kirstine Nielsen, Sif Arnbjerg­Nielsen and Dorte Danielsen. Thank
you for convincing me to study physics and nanotechnology, and for your support through­
out the ordeal that followed.
Finally i would like to thank Jannik Johansen for his unquestioning belief in me.
This is my master thesis. It is the end of a long road, and the beginning of another. It is
the culmination of my seven years at DTU, and of my own personal journey in academics.
I would not be in a position to write this without the help of everyone above, and a (figu­
ratively) uncountable number of friends, family, teachers and academic supervisors.
It has been a pleasure and a challenge.
This thesis is my own work, I have cited the appropriate sources when I have consulted
the works of others.
Paul Christian Dahl Sinding ­ s154033
Signature
Date
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Intercalated bi­layer structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Density functional theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cluster Expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Monte Carlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Intercalated TaS2
15
4
Cluster expansions
17
4.1
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Constructing the cluster expansions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Monte Carlo simulations
25
5.1
Procedure and Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6
Discussion
31
6.1
Cells and systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Accuracy of CE models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.3
Applying Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The field of materials research is large and varied, and the search for novel materials
with useful applications is ever ongoing. As manufacturing, characterisation and simula­
tion capabilities improve, many interesting systems become available for analysis, be it
experimentally, theoretically or computationally.
On the atomic scale, there are several approaches to constructing these new materials.
One can construct nanoparticles and increase the catalytic activity compared to the bulk
material. Existing bulk materials may be doped with foreign atoms to enhance their semi­
conductor properties, or exfoliated to create 2D materials. 2D materials can in turn be
stacked, changing their properties. The possibilities are myriad.
Since the discovery of graphene in 2004[1], the topic of 2D materials has become a large
field of study, and many useful applications have been discovered. A substantial class of
2D materials are the Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), which have been inves­
tigated thoroughly and have several applications in fx. electronics[2] and catalysis[3].
Properties TMDs vary substantially, encompassing both semi­conductors, metals and
even superconductors[4]. As their name suggest, TMDs consist of a transition metal and
two chalcogens, with the metal forming the core of the monolayer, and the two identical
chalcogens placed on either side of the plane, see fig. 1.1.
Another class of novel materials is the broad class of intercalated materials. These con­
sists of two mono­layers of a 2D material stacked, but with additional atoms populating
the van der Waals gap between the layers. A special case of these materials are the
self­intercalated structures, where the atoms in the van der Waals gap are restricted to
be elements appearing in the monolayers.
1.1
Intercalated bi­layer structures
In their 2020 paper [6], Zhao et. al. demonstrated the growth of self­intercalated TaS2
(and other materials) using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and chemical vapor deposition
(CVD), under high chemical potentials of the intercalation metal. Using STEM microscopy,
the authors observed that the when additonal Ta atoms were placed in the vdW gap of
bi­layer TaS2, they formed a class of intercalated materials, where the intercalated atoms
Figure 1.1: Example of a TMD monolayer[5]. The transition metal atoms (black) are
arranged in a plane, with the chalcogens (yellow) distributed on either side of said plane.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
1
==PAGE:10==
in the van der Waals (vdW) gap displayed periodic occupancy of octahedral sites in the
vdW gap for certain ’magic’ concentrations. As such, the materials are confirmed to exist
and to be stable enough to study in lab conditions, but the knowledge of their behaviour
is limited.
There are many avenues of exploration when it comes to these SICs. A fundamental one
is the question of phase transitions of the ordered lattice of intercalants. One could hy­
pothesise that the observed ordered structures can reach a temperature, where that order
breaks down, in favour of a disordered state of higher entropy, and therefore decreased
free energy.
Studies of ordered structures in monolayer TMDs has already been carried out using the
methods employed in this project[7]. In the study, the effects of substituting either the
metals or chalcogens of TMDs with atoms of the same category are investigated. It is
found that various substitution types leads to various types of order, including complete
phase­separation of the original and substituted elements, the formation of atomic ribbons
of alternating elements, as well as Janus structures.
1.2
Thesis scope
This work concerns the intercalation of the TMD bi­layer of TaS2 with Ta atoms (self­
intercalation) and aims to investigate the phase transitions of the intercalants from an
ordered to a disordered phase. The construction of phase diagrams is done using a
workflow previously described in [8, 7], where DFT calculations are used as training data
for a cluster expansion model, which is then sampled using the Monte Carlo method to
obtain information about the system behaviour at non­zero temperatures.
In the next section, the workflow will be introduced in brief. chapter 2 covers the theoretical
background related to the methods used in the workflow, giving short introductions to
density functional theory, cluster expansions and the Monte Carlo method as used in
statistical physics. chapter 3 more formally introduces the systems under study in this
project, while chapter 4 covers the implementation of the cluster expansion model and
the results derived from it. chapter 5 describes the implementation of the Monte Carlo
method and covers the main results, relating to the orderering of the intercalants. The
results of the previous chapters are discussed in chapter 6 and a conclusion is given in
chapter 7, where an outlook to further work is also given.
2
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:11==
1.3
The workflow
This is an introduction to the central workflow used to obtain the results in this thesis. The
theoretical background of each step is described in chapter 2, while the implementation
is discussed in chapters 4 and 5.
To calculate the thermodynamic properties of our intercalated systems, a Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) method is employed. Monte Carlo methods are generally used to
calculate integrals over high­dimensional systems. In this case, the object of study is the
averages of thermodynamical quantities across the space of possible configurations of
the intercalated atoms. MCMC methods are itterative, and usually need a large number
of steps to converge. Each step samples a different configuration, and requires the cal­
culation of the potential energy of that configuration. Adding insult to injury, the space of
configurations needs to be of a certain size, for the sampling to be accurate. This means
that it is necessary to sample the energy from large super cells.
The usual way of calculating the energy of these atomic systems is to use density func­
tional theory (DFT). The method provides good estimates of the potential energy of a
given atomic system, but the method is far too time consuming to use for each step of
the MC­simulation, considering the number of steps (on the order of 104 ­ 106) and the
size of the required super cells (≈160 atoms in a 5 × 5 super cell of a TMD, including
intercalants).
To combat this problem, the cluster expansion (CE) method is used to bridge the gap
between DFT and MC. The cluster expansion is a model designed to calculate relevant
properties (usually energies) of atomic systems as a function of the occupancy of each
site in a fixed lattice. The model is fitted using a set of training data where each entry cor­
responds to some atomic configuration and the relevant properties of that configuration.
This results in a model that readily calculates the property used for the fit, as a function
of the atomic occupation of the lattice, but much faster than DFT.
Combining these three methods, a workflow (fig. 1.2) that enables the use of the Monte
Carlo method is constructed. First the necessary training data is obtained using DFT
calculations, from this a cluster expansion model is constructed. Using this model, it
is then possible to sample the vast space of different atomic configurations efficiently
enough, to effectively use the MC­method and obtain the thermodynamic properties of
the system.
Training data
(DFT)
Cluster expansion
Monte Carlo
Simulations
Figure 1.2: Overarching workflow ­ the energy of a number of atomic structures are ob­
tained using DFT. These structures and their energies are used to train a cluster expan­
sion model, which is then used to conduct Monte Carlo simulations.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical background
In the following, density functional theory, cluster expansions and the Monte Carlo method
will be briefly introduced. Together, these three numerical methods form the workflow
described previously (section 1.3).
2.1
Density functional theory
The contents of this section is based primarily on the book by Kohanoff [9]. Additional
sources are cited when relevant.
Density functional theory (DFT) was developed in response to the need for calculating
the electronic properties of atomic systems, where the electrons satisfy the electronic
Schrödinger equation:
ˆHeΦ(r, r) = ε(r)Φ(r, r)
(2.1)
Where ˆHe is the complete N­electron­Hamiltonian:
ˆHe = −¯h2
2me
N
∑
i=1
∇2
i
|
{z
}
ˆT
−e2
P
∑
I=1
N
∑
i=1
ZI
|RI −ri|
|
{z
}
ˆVext
+ e2
2
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
j̸=i
1
|ri −rj|
|
{z
}
ˆUee
Where ˆT represents the kinetic energy of the system, ˆVext is the external potential rep­
resenting the potential energy of the electron­atom interactions and ˆUee represents the
potential energy of the electron­electron interactions.
In the above, and in the following, the nuclear coordinates R enter only as coordinates,
the inter­nuclear term has been omitted and the electron­nuclear interaction is regarded
as an external potential caused by nuclei of atomic number ZI at positions Ri. This is
called the Born­Oppenheimer approximation, or the classical nuclei approximation, and
is justified by the fact that at typical conditions, the nuclei can be treated as classical
particles that the electrons respond to instantaneously. This makes it possible to treat the
nuclear and electronic parts of the system separately.
Even without the inter­nuclear interaction, the electronic Schrödinger equation is still dif­
ficult to solve for all but the simplest systems. To this end, density functional theory has
been developed. The core idea of DFT is to reformulate the electronic Schrödinger equa­
tion in terms of the electron density ρ, such that the energy can be obtained via the density
functional E[ρ].
2.1.1
The Hohenberg­Kohn theorems
The use of the electron density as a representation of the atomic system is justified by
The Hohenberg­Kohn (HK) theorems, that demonstrate two important properties of the
electron density. The HK theorems are the theoretical foundation of DFT.
First theorem The external potential ˆVext is uniquely determined by the electron density
(up to an additive constant). This ensures that the electron density is a valid representation
of the system, in the same way that the wave function is.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
5
==PAGE:14==
Second theorem The density functional E[ρ] is minimised if and only if the input density is
that of the ground state. This is essentially a restatement of the variational principle, and
makes it possible to obtain the true ground state density by minimising E[ρ] with respect
to ρ.
Before continuing, it should be noted that there are some additional constraints on the
density, for it to be physically sound. The density must be normalised to the number of
electrons N, and the derivative should not diverge to infinity.
Z
ρ(r) dr = N
Z
|∇ρ1/2(r)|2 dr < ∞
(2.2)
2.1.2
The density functional
The question is now, what is the density functional? Like the Hamiltonian, the functional
can be written as a sum of the kinetic and potential terms.
E[ρ] = ⟨Φ[ρ]| ˆT + ˆUee + ˆVext|Φ[ρ]⟩= T[ρ] + Uee[ρ] + Vext[ρ]
(2.3)
Where Φ[ρ] is the ground state corresponding to the density ρ.
The sum of the kinetic and electron­electron interaction is sometimes referred to as the
universal functional F[ρ] = T[ρ] + Uee[ρ], since it is independent of the atomic system,
represented by Vext[ρ].
The energy from the external potential Vext can be explicitly calculated as
Vext[ρ] =
Z
ρ(r)vext(r) dr
(2.4)
and the inter­electron interaction can be separated into a known electrostatic part (typically
refereed to as the Hartree energy), and a (so far) unknown exchange­correlation (XC)
functional EXC[ρ]
Uee[ρ] = EXC[ρ] + UHartree[ρ]
UHartree[ρ] = 1
2
ZZ ρ(r)ρ(r′)
|r −r′| dr dr′
(2.5)
So the density functional can be expressed exactly as:
E[ρ] = T[ρ] + EXC[ρ] +
Z
ρ(r)vext(r) dr + 1
2
ZZ ρ(r)ρ(r′)
|r −r′| dr dr′
(2.6)
2.1.3
The Kohn­Sham equation
At this point, the kinetic contribution to the density functional is by far the unknown term of
the greatest magnitude. One approach to obtaining the kinetic contribution is the Kohn­
Sham (KS) formulation of DFT. In this approach, it is assumed that the many­body kinetic
energy of the interacting system can be obtained by obtaining the kinetic energy of a non­
interacting system that has the same electronic density. If such a system can be found, it
will (by the HK theorems) have the same energy as the interacting system.
The wave function of the non­interacting system can be represented as a Slater determi­
nant
Φ(r) =
1
√Ns

φ1(r1)
φ2(r1)
. . .
φNs(r1)
φ1(r2)
φ2(r2)
. . .
φNs(r2)
...
...
...
...
φ1(rNs)
φ2(rNs)
. . .
φNs(rNs)

(2.7)
6
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:15==
Where φi(rj) are the solutions corresponding to the Ns = N/2 lowest eigenvalues of the
KS equation:
ˆHKS φi = εiφi
(2.8)
Where the KS Hamiltonian is the non­interacting Hamiltonian HKS and the external poten­
tial vKS(r) must be chosen in such a way that the density of the KS­system is identical to
that of the fully interacting system.
ˆHKS = −¯h2
2m∇2 + vKS(r)
(2.9)
The single electron orbitals can be used to obtain the KS density ρKS and the kinetic
energy TKS
ρKS =
Ns
∑
i
|φi(r)|2
TKS =
Ns
∑
i
⟨φ∗
i (r)|−¯h2
2m∇2|φi(r)⟩
(2.10)
The approximation of the true kinetic energy as the kinetic energy of a non­interacting
system is not perfect, as it discounts the kinetic correlation effects that arise from the
many­body interaction. This kinetic correlation must instead be taken care of in the XC­
functional, which is formally redefined as:
˜EXC[ρ] = EXC[ρ] +
(T −TKS)
|
{z
}
kinetic correlation
(2.11)
It can now be shown using variational methods, that the KS potential vKS(r) must satisfy
vKS(r) = vext(r) +
Z
ρ(r′)
|r −r′| dr′ + δ ˜EXC[ρ]
δρ(r)
(2.12)
Where δ ˜EXC[ρ]
δρ(r) is the functional derivative of the XC functional with respect to the density
ρ.
It should be noted that the potential used to determine the density ρ itself depends on ρ.
The solution to this problem is to solve the two equations self­consistently. Beginning with
an input guess for density, the KS potential is obtained from eq. (2.12), the KS­equation
eq. (2.8) is then solved, in order to obtain a new density. This process continues until the
input and output densities match each other, meaning that both equations are satisfied.
This self­consistency loop is the heart of KS­DFT, and it is the repeated solving of the
KS­equation makes the method computationally demanding.
Having solved the KS­equation self consistently, the final KS­energy functional is:
EKS = TKS + UHartree + Uext + ˜EXC
(2.13)
Which is an exact expression of the potential energy up to the accuracy of the approxi­
mation of the XC­functional.
2.1.4
XC­functionals, basis functions, pseudopotentials and more
The above sections contain a very broad outline of the principles behind Kohn­Sham DFT.
In order to implement the method, and to do so efficiently, several additional concepts are
needed. A few of the most important are described bellow.
The most important choice is that of the XC­functional. Different types of functionals
exist, the simplest being the ones using the local density approximation (LDA). In these
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
7
==PAGE:16==
functionals, the XC­energy is calculated as the XC­energy of a homogeneous electron
gas with the given local density. Higher order methods exist, providing more accurate
results at the cost of computational complexity. In these methods, the XC­energy also
depends on the gradient of the density (the generalised gradient approximation ­ GGA)
and the Laplacian (meta GGA).
Some functionals may include elements of exact exchange, known from Hartree­Fock
theory, these are known as hybrid functionals. The typical XC­functionals are not very
good at representing dispersion, so in systems where van der Waals interactions are
important, these are usually taken care of separately.
The density itself also needs a representation, usually this is done in terms of basis func­
tions, either in the form of a Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO) or as plane
waves (PW). Both methods have their strengths, LCAO calculations are usually less com­
putationally demanding for large systems, compared to PW calculations, but require a
basis of atomic orbitals, while the PW calculations do not.
The number of electrons to be explicitly considered can be significantly reduced by omit­
ting the core electrons the actual calculations, assuming that only the valence electrons
actually interact with each other. Instead of explicitly considering the core electrons, the
density in the regions around the nuclei is represented by so­called pseudo­potentials.
In extended systems, comprehensive sampling of the Brillouin zone is necessary, in order
to recover the behaviour of the periodic system.
These are just a few of the additional techniques and considerations that are needed to
do proper DFT calculations. A complete description of the methods used in this project
can be found in the section 4.1.3.
2.1.5
Relaxation
Being able to calculate the energy of a given configuration of atoms with fixed coordinates
is important, but it is only half the story. To get an accurate estimate of the energy, the
system needs to be in its equilibrium configuration (sometimes referred to as being ’re­
laxed’). In DFT, the nuclei are regarded as classical particles, so this means that they
must be in a mechanical equilibrium, where the force on each atom is equal to zero. The
process of determining this configuration is called relaxation.
In this project the standard BFGS algorithm has been used. The BFGS is a iterative al­
gorithm for solving multivariate non­linear optimisation problems, which uses an approxi­
mation of the Hessian matrix to determine the direction of descent1.
It usually takes a significant number of steps to properly relax the intercalated structures
seen in this thesis, making it quite time consuming. The amount of structures needed
to construct an accurate cluster expansion, and the time used to relax them, is the main
computational bottleneck of the workflow.
1CITE BGFS
8
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Cluster Expansions
The contents of this section are based primarily on the article by Ångquist et. al. [8]. Other
sources are cited when relevant.
A cluster expansion (CE) is a way of expressing observables of an atomic system as a
function of the occupation of the sites in the system. Cluster expansions require that the
system under study retains the same lattice structure when the occupations of the sites are
changed. The method is usually employed on alloys, and makes it possible to calculate
the properties of large systems, without having to use electronic structure methods, such
as DFT, directly on these large systems. This is especially usefull when doing Monte Carlo
sampling of the alloy, where the energy of many large supercells is needed.
The method is based on the separation of atomic structures into clusters. A cluster of
order k is a collection of k sites, where the maximum distance between two atoms of
the cluster is at most rk, known as the cutoff radius of order k. Some clusters may be
symmetrically equivalent to other clusters, due to the underlying symmetry of the lattice.
The collection of all symmetrically equivalent clusters is called an orbit.
Figure 2.1: Examples of 2nd and 3rd order clusters of intercalants (large circles) on the
lattice of intercalation sites (small dots). A cluster of order k is a collection of k sites with a
maximum inter­atomic distance of rk that occupied by atoms of the same element. Shaded
clusters represents symmetrically equivalent clusters belonging to the same orbit as the
fully coloured clusters.
It can be shown that any observable Q(σ), which is a function of the occupation σ, can
be represented by an expansion in the clusters α of the system, represented by a set of
cluster functions Πα(σ), in turn made up of point functions, representing each point in
the cluster.
Q(σ) = ∑
α
JαΠα(σ)
(2.14)
In the limit of infinite k and infinite rk, the cluster expansion is an analytical expression of
said observable Q(σ), but due to the relatively local behaviour of the electronic structure,
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
9
==PAGE:18==
the expansion truncates quickly. This means that in most cases, only the first few orders
of k are needed, and that the cutoffs rk can be chosen to be relatively small. Because
of this, the computational effort needed to train and sample a CE is comparatively low,
compared to applying DFT directly ­ provided that one has obtained the sufficient training
data for the CE.
The main computational challenge when fitting a CE model is obtaining the training data.
This training data usually consists of a number of relaxed structures and DFT calculations
of their energies (or other relevant observables). The relaxation of these structures is what
makes the data aquisition time consuming, and is the main computational bottleneck of
the method. Fortunately, the before mentioned truncation of the expansion means, that
relatively small structures can be used as training data, while the resulting CE model can
be used to predict the observables of arbitrarily sized structures.
2.2.1
Cluster Functions
Suppose that we have an atomic system, where M atomic species are distributed on
N sites. σ is the occupation vector with N elements corresponding to each site, with
values σp ∈[−s, −s + 1, . . . s −1, s], where s = M/2 for even M and s = (M −1)/2 for
uneven M. It should be noted that M is point­dependent, taking on the value relevant
for the particular sub­lattice. This means that in the case of intercalation, M = 2 for the
intercalation sites and M = 1 for the bi­layer sites.
For each point p on the lattice, one can define a set of M point functions Θm(σp) as a
function of the occupation of that particular site.
Θn(σp) =





1
n = 0
−cos
 π(n + 1)σp/M

n is odd
−sin
 πnσp/M

n is even
(2.15)
These point functions form an orthogonal set when summed over each occupation number
(ie. all possible values of θp).

Θn
Θ′
n
 = ∑
σp
Θn(σp)Θn′(σp) ∝δnn′
(2.16)
The point functions can now be used to construct a function for each cluster α = [n1, n2, . . . nN],
where ni = 0 if that site is not a part of the cluster (such that Θ = 1) α, ni = m if the site
is part of a cluster of the species m. In this way, the cluster function becomes the product
of the point functions of that cluster, as functions of the species occupying the cluster.
Πα(σ) =
N
∏
i=1
Θni(σi)
(2.17)
The quantity Q(σ) can now be expanded in terms of the cluster functions, with expansion
coefficients Jα known as ECIs (effective cluster interactions).
Q(σ) = ∑
α
JαΠα(σ)
(2.18)
Since many clusters will be equivalent by symmetry, one can instead sum over the unique
orbits,
Q(σ) = ∑
α
Jαmα ⟨Πα′(σ)⟩α
(2.19)
Where mα is the multiplicity of the orbit, and ⟨Πα′(σ)⟩α denotes the average over all
clusters α′ that are equivalent to α by symmetry.
10
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:19==
2.2.2
Fitting the model
Before the cluster expansion can be used to actually obtain values of Q(σ), the ECIs Jα
must be found. By obtaining the values Q = [Q1, Q2, . . . , Qi] for a set of training structures
[σ1, σ2, . . . , σi], one can rewrite eq. (2.19) as a linear system of equations:
Q = ΠJ
(2.20)
Where the entries of the cluster matrix Π are defined as:
Πij = mαj
D
Πα′
j(σi)
E
αj
(2.21)
The ECIs in J = [Jα1, Jα2, . . . , Jαj] can now be determined by solving the linear system of
equations in eq. (2.20). The number of training structures is usually selected to be much
larger than the number of ECIs, making the problem over­determined. The most optimal
solution Jopt is then the one which minimises the l2 norm of the equation:
Jopt = argmin
J
{∥ΠJ −Q∥2}
(2.22)
There exists several well known methods for minimising such problems, a number of
which are implemented in the Trainstation package2, which is developed for use with the
ICET package. The details of linear optimisation algorithms are not the focus of this work,
and will as such not be discussed in any further detail.
2CITE TRAINSTATION
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Monte Carlo
The contents of this section is based primarily on the book by Frenkel and Smit [10].
Additional sources are cited when relevant.
2.3.1
Thermodynamics
While density functional theory makes the calculation of many electronic properties possi­
ble, and cluster expansions makes it easy to calculate these properties for large systems,
it does not take temperature or entropy into account. This makes it difficult to say anything
about the thermodynamic properties of atomic systems using these methods alone.
At temperatures above 0 K, a system will not simply remain in its ground state, but will
continuously switch between different micro states, due to thermal fluctuations. Each
microstate is now associated with a probability of the system being in that configuration,
and the observable properties (the macro state) is determined by the average behaviour
of the system across all micro states. In the language of statistical mechanics, this set of
micro states is typically referred to as an ensemble. Ensembles are usually classified by
which quantities are conserved, and which are not. In this thesis, the canonical ensemble
is used to simulate intercalated systems at fixed temperatures and concentrations.
An ensemble is associated with a procedure to obtain the probability of the system being
in a given micro state. In the canonical ensemble, the micro states follow Boltzmann
statistics, and the probability of a system at temperature T being in a micro state σ with
energy E(σ) is given by:
p(σ) = e−βE(σ)
Z
,
β =
1
kBT
(2.23)
Where Z is the partition function, which normalizes p(σ)
Z =
Z
PS e−βE(σ) dσ
(2.24)
The shorthand ’PS’ in the integral denotes the phase space, the entire space of every
possible micro state, in our case, every possible configuration of the intercalated atoms.
The average value of some observable A(σ) can now be calculated as an integral over
the phase space
⟨A⟩= 1
Z
Z
PS A(σ) e−βE(σ) dσ
(2.25)
Averages are usually thought of as averages over time. These averages on the other
hand, are ensemble averages ­ averages over various configurations σ, the ordering of
which does not represent any physical evolution of the system (as seen, for example, in
classical molecular dynamics). The configurations sampled simply represent a range of
more or less probable states that the system can be in.
The phase space is usually high­dimensional, describing the properties of many sites/par­
ticles in a system. Because of this, traditional grid­based methods of numerical integration
quickly become insufficient as the dimensionality increases. To compute these integrals,
a more statistical approach is required ­ this is where the Monte­Carlo method comes into
the picture.
12
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:21==
2.3.2
The Monte Carlo Method
The Monte Carlo method is a method used to evaluate high dimensional integrals. In
statistical mechanics, these usually appear as ensemble averages of different systems of
interest, as seen in the previous section. The simplest implementation of a Monte Carlo
method is to randomly select N uniformly distributed points σi in the phase space, and
average over these, approximating the integral as a sum:
⟨A⟩≈1
N
N
∑
i=1
A(σi)e−βE(σi)
Z
(2.26)
The trouble with this approach is, that there is a high probability that a uniformly random
selected configuration of the system will have a very high energy, and that the Boltzmann­
factor e−βE(σi) as a consequence, will be very small. Uniform sampling of the phase space
will as such lead to the inclusion of many unlikely configurations in the average, which
makes for a poor description of the system. Furthermore, the calculation of the probability
p(σi) is made difficult by the normalisation factor Z.
A better approach is to sample directly from the Boltzmann distribution p(σ), eq. (2.23),
this is what is called ’importance sampling’. Assuming now that we can draw samples ˜σi
from the phase space according to the Boltzmann distribution, the average of an observ­
able can be expressed as:
⟨A⟩≈1
N
N
∑
i=1
A( ˜σi)
(2.27)
Sampling from the Boltzmann distribution is not trivial, since it requires knowledge of the
partition function, Z, which itself is an integral of the same dimensionality as the integral
we seek to approximate. Fortunately there is a way to bypass the computation of Z com­
pletely, while still drawing samples from the Boltzmann distribution. This process is called
the Metropolis algorithm.
2.3.3
The Metropolis algorithm
The Metroplis algorithm is the workhorse of the Monte Carlo method. It is this algorithm
that makes it possible to sample directly from the Boltzmann distribution, without knowing
the normalisation factor Z. In fact, it is possible to derive and appreciate that any distribu­
tion P(x) can be sampled by the Metropolis algorithm provided that one can sample from
another distribution p(x), satisfying:
p(x) ∝P(x)
(2.28)
The core of the Metropolis algorithm is a Markov Chain, which is a sequence of states σ,
each generated on the basis of the previous state in the chain. After enough iterations,
the states in the Markov chain generated by the metropolis algorithm will be distributed
according to the desired probability distribution.
The Metropolis algorithm generates the Markov chain by successively adding new states
to the chain, starting from an initial input state σ0. New states are proposed as small
perturbations of the previous state, but are only appended to the chain with a certain
acceptance probability P(σi →σi+1), given by:
P(σi →σi+1) = min

1, e−β∆E
,
∆E = E(σi+1) −E(σi)
(2.29)
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
13
==PAGE:22==
Meaning that any state where the energy of the new state is lower is accepted with abso­
lute certainty, while new states with a higher energy only are accepted with the probability
p = e−β∆E. A graphical representation of this process is found in fig. 2.2.
The new states in the canoncial ensemble are generated by switching the identity of two
non­equivalent atoms, so that the number of particles of each species is conserved, but
a slightly different configuration is obtained.
The Metropolis algorithm is iterative, converging towards the desired distribution in finite
time, under certain conditions. Because there is no guarantee that the initial state σ0 is
one of the more likely states, it may take a number of steps to reach the region of the
phase space where the Markov chain actually approximates the target distribution. This
phenomenon is known as ’burn in’, and the usual solution is to exclude a number of steps
from the beginning of the Monte Carlo simulation from the calculations of averages of
interest, ensuring that these are averages only over probable states.
It is important to understand, that the Markov chain does not represent any actual physical
time­evolution of the system, but is a mathematical construct used to generate random
variables following a certain distribution.
Initial configuration σ
Propose new configuration σ′
Evaluate transition probability
p = min(1, e−β∆E)
Reject or accept
new configuration?
Update configuration
σ = σ′
Keep old configuration
σ = σ
Reject
Accept
Figure 2.2: One trial step of the Metropolis Algorithm. A new configuration is generated
and accepted with a probability depending on the energy difference between the cur­
rent and proposed configurations. If accepted, the proposed configuration becomes the
current configuration, otherwise, another new configuration is proposed. This process
continues for a set number of cycles.
14
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:23==
3
Intercalated TaS2
The object of study in this project is the self­intercalated system, consisting of two stacked
monolayers of the TMD TaS2 with a varying number of intercalated atoms placed in the
van der Waals (vdW) gap between the two layers. This system is known experimen­
tally[6], where it has been demonstrated that the material can be grown using chemical
vapour deposition (CVD), a well known method for growing layered structures for use in
nanotechnology.
There exists two types, referred to as phases, of TaS2. Examples of the H and T­phases
are shown in fig. 3.1. Primitive relaxed cells of the mono­layers of each phase is obtained
from the C2DB database[11, 12].
(a) H­phase, top view
(b) T­phase, top view
(c) H­phase, side view
(d) T­phase, side view
Figure 3.1: Phases of TaS2 ­ In both phases a Ta atom (Blue) is accompanied by two S
atoms (Yellow). In the H­phase, the S atoms are placed colinearly with the out­of­plane
axis, whereas in the T­phase, they are offset by an angle of 60◦.
In addition to the two different phases, there are also myriad ways to physically stack the
two layers. In this project only the two most typical are considered. In AA stacking, the
layers are stacked such that each atoms of the top layer is placed directly above the same
atom of the bottom layer. In AB stacking, the upper layer is placed such that the Ta atom
of the top layer is situated directly above the upper S atom of the bottom layer, see fig. 3.2.
In principle, the intercalated atoms could be placed anywhere in the vdW gap. In reality
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) AA stacking
(b) AB stacking
Figure 3.2: Stackings of TaS2 demonstrated for the H­phase (left) and T­phase (right).
In AA­stacking, the TA atoms are placed directly on top of each other, while they are
displaced in the AB­stacking.
however, they will most likely move to one of only a few sites during the relaxation process.
These local minima on the potential energy surface are usually characterised by a high
degree of symmetry. High symmetry sites encompass a range of sites, including on­top,
tri­fold and bridge sites. Because of their favourable energetic, such sites are chosen as
the possible intercalation sites of each structure.
The 4 different combinations of phases and stackings (H­AA, H­AB, T­AA, T­AB) have
some slight variations in the number and nature of their intercalation sites, these are
shown in fig. 3.3. The main difference is that AA stacked H­phase TaS2 does not have
any on­top sites on the sulfur atoms, because the space between the two sulfur atoms is
deemed to be too small to accommodate an intercalation atom. This may be an incorrect
assumption, since there is no reason that the layers could not separate further and make
space available, where an atom to be placed on such a site. On the other hand, intercala­
tion of the on­topS site is not experimentally observed in[6], whereas intercalation of the
vacant honeycomb­site and the on­top Ta­site is.
The stage is now set for the training and construction of cluster expansion models of
the intercalated TaS2 systems, using the theory outlined in chapter 2. A model will be
constructed for each of the four combinations of phase and stacking.
(a) AA stacked
H­phase
(b) AB stacked
H­phase
(c) AA stacked
T­phase
(d) AB stacked
T­phase
Figure 3.3: Intercalation sites (red dots) of bi­layer TaS2 systems, displayed on 3 × 3
supercells. The top layer has been removed for visualisation purposes.
16
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:25==
4
Cluster expansions
The cluster expansion method is one of the central elements in the process of obtaining
thermodynamical properties of the intercalated systems. The theoretical aspects of the
method is described in detail in section 2.2, in this section the details of the implementation
in this particular project, are discussed.
The construction of the cluster expansions, including the identification clusters, compu­
tation of point­ and cluster functions, and the setup of the linear system etc. is handled
by the Python package ICET (Integrated Cluster Expansion Toolkit)[8], developed at the
Chalmers university of technology and European spallation source. The solving and val­
idation of the linear system to determine the ECIs is carried out using the Trainstation
package [13] which is built upon the Scikit­learn module[14].
There are three main areas of interest, when it comes to the implementation of the cluster
expansion method. Firstly, there is the matter of how the training data is selected and
refined, secondly, there is the matter of the order of the expansion, and the cutoff radii of
each order, and finally there is the matter of the solution method used for obtaining the
ECIs.
4.1
Input data
There are many ways of selecting input data for a cluster expansion. The structures used
for training should be big enough to represent clusters of the necessary size, that size
being governed by how far apart intercalation sites have to be from each other, before
they stop interacting. The training structures also need to be varied, and represent a wide
range of different combinations of clusters, and there has to be enough of it.
4.1.1
Choice of training structures
For the training structures, a range of symmetrically inequivalent 3 × 3 supercells of vary­
ing intercalation concentrations and configurations are used. Because some of the possi­
ble intercalation sites are spaced very close, intercalated atoms are prevented from occu­
pying sites too close to each other, so as to avoid structures that are physically unfeasible
due to repulsion (see fig. 4.1).
Using fixed size supercells is not the typical approach to generating training structures.
The most common approach as demonstrated in[8, 7] is to create training structures by
enumeration, generating every symmetrically inequivalent configuration of the system up
to a certain size. The amount of structures generated by this method quickly increases
as larger systems are allowed, resulting in very large data sets (even when excluding
physically unfeasible sites and symmetrically equivalent systems). The first structures in
these enumeration­generated sets small, making them easier to relax, they then grow as
the maximum allowed size is increased. The benefit of this method is that it provides a
natural and consistent way of generating increasingly large datasets as they are needed.
The reason that the enumeration method has not been used in this project is a conse­
quence of problems with the coding, that has been solved, but too late for the method to
be used to generate, and more importantly, relax training structures. The implementation
of a enumeration­based training set seems to be a obvious path of further development,
especially if one is interested in creating an automated version of the CE­MC workflow.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Forbidden sites. Intercalation sites (red) are forbidden from being simultane­
ously occupied (green) if the distance between the intercalants is less than 1.5 times the
covalent radius of the intercalated atom. There is as such no specific forbidden sites ­
that depends entirely on the current configuration.
4.1.2
Mixing energies
Each training structure is also associated with a quantity that the model is fitted to and
should be able to predict. Usually, this quantity is some energy associated with the struc­
ture, but it could also be fx. the electronic band gap. In this project, the mixing energy is
used as the target of the fit. The mixing energy is the energy difference between the sys­
tem with configuration σ and the energy of the fully intercalated, and fully non­intercalated
system, normalised by the concentration C of intercalated atoms.
Emix = E(σ) −(CE100% + (1 −C)E0%)
(4.1)
The mixing energy can be seen as the energy gained by mixing intercalation atoms in the
configuration σ, compared to separating the intercalated atoms in completely separate
phases of 0% and 100% intercalation. By definition, the mixing energy of the completely
(un)intercalated reference systems are 0.
The mixing energy is most commonly used in the investigation of binary alloys, where
the completely occupied reference systems are uniquely determined. For intercalated
systems, this is not the case. Occupying every intercalation site results in the intercalation
atoms being far to closely spaced, leading to unphysical behaviour, so this cannot be the
reference system. One instead takes 100% intercalation to mean that the system has 1
intercalation atom per primitive unit cell. Now the trouble is, that there are several valid
choices for what constitutes 100% intercalation ­ one for each intercalation site of the
primitive unit cell. The 100% intercalated system used for calculating the mixing energy
is chosen as the one with the lowest potential energy. In the context of cluster expansions,
this choice amounts to nothing more than an additive constant on every mixing energy,
so the actual impact of choosing one system over the other, is fairly minor.
18
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:27==
4.1.3
Electronic structure calculations
The mixing energies are obtained by calculating the potential energies of the reference
systems and of each training configurations σ, using DFT. The structures are managed us­
ing the ASE python module[15], and calculations are carried out using the GPAW code[16,
17], using a plane wave basis with a energy cutoff of 500 eV , a k­point sampling with a den­
sity of 4 /Å−1 and Fermi­Dirac smearing of the occupations at 0.05 K. The XC­functional
used is the PBE functional[18] with the DFT­D3 dispersion correction[19] to account for
van der Waals effects. The wave functions are initialised with the dzp basis set.
To obtain the potential energies, each configuration is first relaxed using the BFGS al­
gorithm. The relaxation is carried out in two steps. First, both the atomic positions and
the cell are allowed to change, until the maximum force on any atom does not exceed
0.03 eV Å−1, then the atomic positions are relaxed in a fixed cell to an even smaller force
threshold of 0.01 eV Å−1.
The cutoff energy and k­point density has been chosen on the basis of a convergence
study, where a single unit cell of AA stacked H­phase TaS2 is relaxed and the potential
energy calculated for a range of cutoff energies and k­point densities (see fig. 4.2). The
accuracy of the relaxation is calculated as the RMSE over atomic displacement compared
to the calculation with the finest parameters.
The coarsest parameters giving a sufficient precision are chosen, in order to speed up the
acquisition of data in the subsequent stages of the project. The choice of k­point density
has clearly been made a bit too coarsely, since there is a difference in the potential energy
going from 4 to 6 /Å−1 of ≈2.5 eV.
One thing to notice is, that the relaxation does seem to converge quicker in the k­point
density, compared to the potential energy. One strategy for obtaining more accurate val­
ues for the potential energy without increasing the computational effort significantly could
be to carry out relaxations at relatively coarse parameters, as seen in this project, and
then to do a final calculation of the potential energy at much finer parameters, and using
this energy for the training of the cluster expansion.
4.1.4
Structure mapping
The relaxation of structures is necessary in order to obtain the most accurate values of the
potential energy, but the relaxation obviously re­arranges the structures slightly, or even
substantially, if the initial configuration is simply unstable.
Because of this, it is necessary to map the relaxed structures onto an idealised supercell
of the same size. Cluster expansions rely on the systems ability to be represented as
a fixed lattice with varying occupations, meaning that structures that change too much
during relaxation should be excluded from the training data. Change is quantified in two
ways, as an average displacement of all atoms in the cell compared to the ideal cell, and
as a maximum displacement of any atom in the cell. If any of these exceed a certain
threshold, the structure is excluded.
In the process of mapping the structures, it became apparant that a substantial amount
of the T­AB structures had reordered themselves substantially during relaxation, and to
such a degree that they are deemed unfit for use in a cluster expansion. Because of this,
the T­AB system has been excluded from further study.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Convergence study showing the convergence of energy (right) and structure
(left) as a function of the plane wave energy cutoff (a) and k­point density (b).
20
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Constructing the cluster expansions
Given a valid set of input data, a cluster expansion can be constructed. The task is now to
ensure that this cluster expansion is an accurate representation of the fitted quantity (here
the mixing energy). The ability of the model to predict values of Q(σ) is quantified by the
root­mean­square error (RMSE) of the model against a set of Nv validation structures, not
used for training the model.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
Nv
Nv
∑
i
(QCE
i
−QDFT
i
)2
(4.2)
To decrease the statistical error of the RMSE, the data set is randomly several ways (called
a shuffle­split) into different training and validation sets, and the RMSE is averaged over
each of these splits, resulting in a more robust measure of the accuracy of the model.
The linear optimisation of the ECIs is carried out using the automatic relevance detection
regression (ARDR) method, implemented in Trainstation[13] using Scikit­learn[14]. The
performance of the ARDR method compared to other methods has not been evaluated.
ARDR is used on good performance shown in[8] and its use on TMD­monolayer systems
in[7].
4.2.1
Cluster order and their cutoffs
The main parameters of the cluster expansion is the choice of cutoff radii rk and the num­
ber of cluster orders k to include. In fig. 4.3, the validation RMSE has been plotted as a
function of the cutoff radius for orders 2, 3 and 4. With this in mind, the cutoff radii has
been chosen as seen in table 4.1, ie. third order expansions.
System
r2 [Å]
r3 [Å]
H­AA
5
5
H­AB
5
5
T­AA
6
3
T­AB
­
­
Table 4.1: Table of cluster expansion cutoffs used for each system.
4.2.2
Number of training structures
As mentioned previously, the number and quality of training structures is of great impor­
tance when constructing cluster expansions. It is therefore beneficial to study the ac­
curacy of the cluster expansion as a function of the number of training structures. The
RMSE of cluster expansions with between 10 and 75 training structures is calculated using
a shuffle­split method. The results are shown in fig. 4.4.
The study of the training set size indicates that the accuracy of the model begins to con­
verge around 65 training structures for the two H­phase systems. Once again, the T­AA
system displays an erratic behaviour, converging on average, but with large spikes in the
RMSE. It is determined that the models are sufficiently converged in the training set size
when 65 or more structures are used, but since additional structures in themselves only
makes the training, and not the application, of the model more computationally expensive,
all 100 available training structures are used.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.3: Convergence study ­ cluster expansion cutoffs. The H­phase systems are
reasonably well behaved, becoming more accurate as more clusters are included. The
T­AA system on the other hand behaves strangely, the accuracy of the model increasing
and decreasing again, as the cutoffs are raised.
Figure 4.4: Convergence study ­ training set size
22
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:31==
4.2.3
Finished models
Before continuing to the Monte Carlo simulations, where the cluster expansions will be
put into action, it would be prudent to have a look at the finished CE models. For each
system, the target and predicted values of the mixing energy has been plotted. These
are predictions based on a full model, using every available structure for training, and are
therefore predicting themselves. Also shown is a plot depicting the ability of the model to
predict the mixing energy of systems that are not included in the training, obtained during
the shuffle­split procedure.
The three models perform to varying degrees of satisfaction. The models for H­AA and
T­AA have shuffle­split RMSE values of 71.26 meV and 52.77 meV respectively. In the
case of T­AA figs. 4.5e and 4.5f , this value corresponds to a large fraction of the mixing
energy values, and since the target values only span a range of ≈400 meV, the actual
usefulness of this model is negligible. The same is true, albeit to a lesser extent, of
the H­AA systemfigs. 4.5a and 4.5b, where most mixing energies fall within a range of
≈1000 meV, with a RMSE om the predictions of 71.26 meV. The same problem is also
evident for the H­AB system figs. 4.5c and 4.5d, though this system does have a lower
RMSE of only 10 meV, and does seem to perform better when self­predicting and during
the shuffle split.
These models are, evidently, far from perfect, pretty far from usefull even. One would
be wise to heed the advice on converging the DFT calculations in section 4.1.3 and on
choosing training structures in section 4.1.1.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) H­AA
(b) H­AA
(c) H­AB
(d) H­AB
(e) T­AA
(f) T­AA
Figure 4.5: Left: Mixing energies of training structures (a, c, e). Right: Comparison of
target and predicted mixing energies in a based on 10 shuffle­splits of the training data.
24
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:33==
5
Monte Carlo simulations
The calculation of phase diagrams of self­intercalated 2D materials is the actual goal of
this work. This is achieved through Monte Carlo sampling of the intercalated systems,
and the analysis of the resulting structures. Of particular interest is the observation and
quantification of periodic order of the intercalated atoms, and the behaviour of this ordering
as a function of the temperature and intercalation concentration.
5.1
Procedure and Parameters
The Monte Carlo simulatios are carried out using the MCHAMMER package, shipped as
a part of ICET. Simulations are carried out on 15 × 15 supercells, totaling at 64 primitive
cells, at intercalation concentrations ranging from 10% to 70%.
To aid in the initialisation and equilibration of the calculations, the first 45 Monte Carlo
sweeps at each concentration are carried out in series, starting with a randomly occupied
structure at a T = 1000 K and decreasing in steps of 10 K, with the last configuration of the
previous calculation being used as the initial state of the MC­simulation. One MC sweep
corresponds to n MC steps, where n is the number of supercells. Following this process,
each MC simulation is converged in parallel for another 200 sweeps. The data obtained
from the first 45 sweeps is excluded from the analysis to allow for equilibration.
5.1.1
Observables
The mixing energy is readily obtained from the MC simulations, since it is that energy
which controls the MC simulations. To analyse the order, a long range order parameter is
used. Long range order is quantified by the structure factor S(q)
S(q) =
1
∑N
i fj
N
∑
(i,j)
fi fje−iq(ri−rj)
(5.1)
Where the sum runs over all atomic pairs (i, j) and fi is the form factor of the i’th atom.
The structure factor takes the input q, which determines which kinds of periodicity the
structure factor should detect. If there is periodicity in the chosen q, the periodicity will be
non­zero, and zero otherwise.
q is chosen as a multiple of the reciprocal lattice vectors of the primitive cell in the direction
where one desires to quantify the periodicity. This means that q must satisfy
q · r = 2πN
(5.2)
Where N and r is the periodicity and primitive lattice vector in the direction of study. In
practice, the reciprocal lattice vectors of the primitive cell are found by solving the above
equation for N = 1. Periodicity can then be found in any multiple of any direction by
calculating.
S(q/N)
(5.3)
Compared to running the MC simulation, the process of obtaining the structure factor is
relatively cheap. Because of this, the structure factor has been calculated for several N
for both in­plane lattice vectors. Specifically, the structure factor has been computed for
all periodicities of factor 2, 3 and 4.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
25
==PAGE:34==
5.2
Results
The central goal of this project is to obtain phase diagrams for the intercalated layer of self­
intercalated TaS2. This has been more difficult than initially expected. Of the remaining
three materials all show tendency towards order at specific concentrations, but only T­AA
has a phase transition from order to disorder as the temperature increases.
H­AA
The H­phase AA stacked TaS2 displays an ordered phase around 66.7% intercalation.
This concentration coincides with the location of the minimum of the mixing energy (fig. 5.3a),
with a mixing energy of −401 meV/cell (at 100 K).
The intercalated Ta atoms occupy a trigonal prism vacancy in the S atoms, forming a
dense structure of regular hexagons. The unit cell of this structure is a
√
3a ×
√
3a rhombic
cell with an angle of 60◦(fig. 5.1). This structure is not reported as existing for TaS2 in
the experimental work, but a corresponding structure is observed for TaSe2, another self­
intercalated TMD. The ordered state reported at 25% intercalation is not observed, though
this may be because the chosen 15 × 15 supercell does not accommodate the 2a ×
√
3a
unit cell that the 25% structure is ordered by. The structure does not appear to have any
phase transitions within the range of simulated temperatures.
Figure 5.1: Ordered phase of 66.6% self­intercalated H­AA TaS2. Intercalated atoms are
shown in purple, with the two green atoms representing an out­of­order vacancies due to
an atom deficiency. The primitive unit cell of the intercalation structure is shown in red. It
has dimensions
√
3a ×
√
3a and an angle of 60◦
H­AB
The Monte Carlo simulations of the H­phase AB stacked TaS2 shows that the material has
an ordered ground state at 33.3%. As for H­AA, the ordered phase is the minimum of the
mixing energy at −412 meV/cell (at 100 K).
The intercalated atoms occupy an octahedral vacancy in the S atoms, and are ordered in
a
√
3a ×
√
3a rhombic cell with an angle of 60◦(fig. 5.2). This is consistent with the kind
of order observed experimentally[6] for this concentration of intercalated atoms. Like with
ts AA­stacked counterpart, this ordered phase at 25% is not observed, and similarly, no
phase transition are observed for H­AB.
26
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.2: Ordered phase of 33.3% self­intercalated H­AB TaS2. Intercalated atoms are
shown in purple, with the single green atom representing an out­of­order surplus atom.
The primitive unit cell of the intercalation structure is shown in red. It has dimensions
√
3a ×
√
3a and an angle of 60◦
(a) H­AA
(b) H­AB
Figure 5.3: Mixing energies of the H­phase materials. Note that the minima of the mix­
ing energies correspond to the ordere phases of the materials. The discontinuities in
the energies are caused by too small supercells and insufficient converging of the MC
simulations.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
27
==PAGE:36==
T­AA
For the final material, AA­stacked T­phase TaS2, the atoms have an ordered phase at
33.3% for low temperatures. This phase is not observed experimentally in the Zhao paper.
The structure is a regular lattice of triangular clusters of intercalated Ta, filling a 3a × 3a
rhombic unit cell (fig. 5.5a). Interestingly, this material has a phase transition at ≈250 K.
At this temperature, the order parameter begins rapidly descending to zero (fig. 5.6), which
is also confirmed by visually inspecting structures beyond these temperatures (fig. 5.5b).
Curiously, the periodic structure observed at 33.3% does not coincide with the minimum
of the mixing energy, though the mixing energy at 10 K does display a transition from a
rapid descent to a more moderate, which continues until the actual minimum at ≈66.7%
intercalation. It is confirmed that no ordered phase appears at this minimum.
The T­AA system does have a noticeably lower energy of mixing (in absolute terms) com­
pared to the H­phase systems. This may be the reason that this system has a phase
transition, while the others do not. The energy minima in the H­phase systems may sim­
ply be too energetically favourable for a breakdown of order to occur.
Figure 5.4: Mixing energy of T­phase AA stacked TaS2. Unlike for the H­phase materials,
the minimum of the mixing energy does not coincide with the concentration of the ordered
phase.
28
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:37==
(a) Ordered phase
(b) Disordered phase
Figure 5.5: Ordered and disordered phases of 33.3% self­intercalated T­AA. Intercalated
atoms are shown in purple, with the single green atom in the ordered phase representing
an out­of­order surplus atom. The in the ordered phase, the atoms are ordered in a 3a × 3a
rhombic unit cell (red).
Figure 5.6: Phase diagram of 33.3% self­intercalated T­phase AA­stacked TaS2. The
structure factor, a parameter quantifying the order of the system, begins rapidly decreas­
ing when the temperature exceeds 250 K.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
This section contains a brief discussion of the observations and results obtained in the
previous sections. Due to the limited results regarding phase transition, focus is put on
how one could improve the workflow in order to obtain a more accurate representation
of the intercalated TaS2 system. Improvements can be made in all steps of the workflow,
these are covered below.
6.1
Cells and systems
While choosing to represent the system using the primitive unit cell of TaS2 is an easy
choice, it is not necessarily the right one. The periodic structures of TaS2 observed in[6]
are not periodic in supercells that are integer multiples of the primitive cell. The structure
observed at 25% has a square ordering in a 2a ×
√
3 a cell and the 33.3% structure ap­
pears in a rhombic
√
3 a ×
√
3 a cell, with a 60◦angle. These can be accommodated by a
an integer supercell of primitive cells, but it must be of a certain dimensions.
The 25% square supercell is accommodated only by supercells of size 2n × 3m, and
the rhombic cell only by supercells of size 3n × 3m, where (n, m) are positive integers.
This means that only supercells of sizes 6n × 3m can perfectly represent the periodic
structures observed for 25% and 33% intercalation. Additionally, to represent structures
with concentrations of 25% and 33%, the number of cells needs to be divisible by 4 and 3.
Since will then be 18nm cells in each structure, nm must be even, in order for the number
of cells to be divisible by 4. This means that the 15 × 15 cells used in this project only can
accommodate the rhombic
√
3 a ×
√
3 a and not the square cell. In future work, it would
obviously be beneficial to choose cells that reflect the systems under scrutiny.
6.2
Accuracy of CE models
Another issue with the workflow at the moment is, that the obtained CE models are not
accurate enough, and the desired accuracy on the order of ≈1 meV per atom is only
achieved for the H­AB systems. To remedy this, a more robust way of selecting and
processing the training data should be implemented.
First of all, it would be beneficial to implement an enumeration­based approach to acquir­
ing training structures. There are several benefits to this approach. It ensures that each
training structure is represented only by the smallest possible cell, which decreases the
overall time spent relaxing the systems, as they on average are smaller. The method is
also consistent, and ensures that the space of possible intercalation structures is sam­
pled densely. One caveat is, that the number of structures generated by enumeration
increases rapidly, as the allowed size of the system grows.
Secondly, a finer set of parameters should have been chosen for the DFT calculations.
One should at least increase the k­point density to a minimum of 6 /Å−1, and one could
also consider increasing the plane wave cutoff energy to 600 eV.
Finally, it would be prudent to revisit the choice of linear optimisation algorithm used to
obtain the ECIs, and make sure that one chooses the one best suited for the systems at
hand. If this choice can improve the accuracy of the model, then it is time well spent.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
31
==PAGE:40==
6.3
Applying Monte Carlo
Aside from the improvements to the Monte Carlo simulations gained by choosing the
correct supercell dimensions and using a better CE model, several things can be done to
improve the MC simulations.
The first improvements are of a technical nature. At its heart, Monte Carlo requires many
degrees of freedom and a large number of trial steps.
The 15 × 15 supercell primarily used in this project is not really big enough for Monte Carlo,
and for future work, one should choose a larger cell. A good choice could be the 30 × 36
cell, which contains 1080 unit cells and satisfies the conditions on the supercell, described
above. The MC simulations should also be converged much better, the literature suggest
that similar systems should be converged for 1000 MC sweeps[7].
The MC simulations should also be applied in a different manner, than they have been in
this project.
The sampling of a wide range of concentrations, in the context of the canonical ensem­
ble, is not necessarily that interesting. The systems of interest when working at fixed
concentrations are those ’magic’ concentrations that display periodic ordering of the in­
tercalants, and possibly their integer multiples (ie. 50%, 66.7%). Those are the con­
centrations that should primarily be studied. It does however grant access to the full
concentration­dependent mixing energy diagram, which may be useful.
That the focus should be on specific concentrations is also supported by the experimental
work in[6], where it is shown that when growing TaS2 in the presence of a high chemical
potential of Ta, the observed concentrations do not vary continuously with the chemical
potential. Instead, discrete values of concentration appear in specific ranges of the chem­
ical potential.
The simulation of materials in the presence of a chemical potential is also possible using
MC simulations, as implemented in ICET. Using the semi­grand canonical ensemble, the
number of atoms of each species Z can be allowed to vary, according to some chemical
potential µZ. While this does not simulate growth conditions exactly, it would be interest­
ing to study if the same threshold behaviour in regards to the magical concentrations is
recovered from these simulations.
32
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:41==
7
Conclusion
In this project the periodic occupation of the vdW gap between two TMD monolayers
has been examined, using a well known workflow combining DFT calculations, cluster
expansions and the Monte Carlo method.
For each variant of the self­intercalated material TaS2, a cluster expansion model has
been trained on a large set of relaxed structures, and employed to carry out Monte Carlo
simulations of these materials. The effects of intercalation in the vdW gap has been in­
vestigated by conducting MC simulations on systems with a wide range of concentrations
and in a wide range of temperatures.
The results are in general agreement with previous experimental work in the field[6], being
able to recreate several periodic structures observed during actual fabrication of these
materials. These ordered structures typically appear at concentrations that also minimise
the energy of mixing. For one material (AA­stacked T­phase TaS2 at 33.3% intercalation)
a phase transition from an ordered to a disordered structure was observed around 250 K.
It is suggested that the phase transition occurs for this material, and not the others, due
to the significantly smaller mixing energy of the T­AA system, compared to the H­phase
systems.
These results indicate that the DFT­CE­MC workflow is a viable approach to investigating
intercalated TMDs, being able to reconstruct important experimental results and model
expected behaviour, such as phase transitions.
Not without its faults, several improvements to the workflow has been suggested in chap­
ter 6. These should be implemented prior to a wider application of the workflow on the
many possible self­intercalated TMDs that may exist. The most demanding suggestion is
to rethink the generation of training structures, but since the tools for carrying out struc­
ture enumeration are already implemented in ICET, it should not be an insurmountable
obstacle. It is also suggested to investigate the effect of using different linear optimizers
to train the CE model, as there may be significant performance differences for different
systems[8]. The remaining suggestions are trivial increases in parameters that should im­
prove the accuracy of the model predictions, though at the cost of added computational
effort.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
K. S. Novoselov et al. “Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films”. In:
Science 306.5696 (2004), pp. 666–669. DOI: 10.1126/science.1102896. eprint: https:
//www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1102896. URL: https://www.science.org/
doi/abs/10.1126/science.1102896.
[2]
Gianluca Fiori et al. “Electronics based on two­dimensional materials”. In: Nature
Nanotechnology 9.10 (2014), pp. 768–779.
[3]
Jun Mao et al. “The rise of two­dimensional MoS2 for catalysis”. eng. In: Frontiers of
Physics 13.4 (2018), p. 138118. ISSN: 20950470, 20950462. DOI: 10.1007/s11467-
018-0812-0.
[4]
Qing Hua Wang et al. “Electronics and optoelectronics of two­dimensional transition
metal dichalcogenides”. eng. In: Nature Nanotechnology 7.11 (2012), pp. 699–712.
ISSN: 17483395, 17483387. DOI: 10.1038/nnano.2012.193.
[5]
3113Ian. Monolayer_TMDC_structure.jpg. 2014. URL: https://commons.wikimedia.
org/wiki/File:Monolayer_TMDC_structure.jpg (visited on 06/30/2022).
[6]
Xiaoxu Zhao et al. “Engineering covalently bonded 2D layered materials by self­
intercalation”. In: Nature 581.7807 (2020), pp. 171–177.
[7]
Christopher Linderälv, J. Magnus Rahm, and Paul Erhart. “High­throughput char­
acterization of transition metal dichalcogenide alloys: Thermodynamic stability and
electronic band alignment”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2204.11223. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11223.
[8]
Mattias Ångqvist et al. “ICET – A Python Library for Constructing and Sampling Alloy
Cluster Expansions”. In: Advanced Theory and Simulations 2.7 (2019), p. 1900015.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adts.201900015. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/adts.201900015. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/adts.201900015.
[9]
Jorge Kohanoff. Electronic structure calculations for solids and molecules. Theory
and computational methods. 2006. ISBN: 0­521­81591­6.
[10]
Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit. Understanding Molecular Simulation: From Algo­
rithms to Applications. Second. Vol. 1. Computational Science Series. Academic
Press, 2002.
[11]
Morten Niklas Gjerding et al. “Recent progress of the Computational 2D Materials
Database (C2DB)”. In: 2D Materials 8.4 (Aug. 2021), p. 044002. DOI: 10.1088/2053-
1583/ac1059. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1583/ac1059.
[12]
Sten Haastrup et al. “The Computational 2D Materials Database: high­throughput
modeling and discovery of atomically thin crystals”. In: 2D Materials 5.4 (Sept.
2018), p. 042002. DOI: 10 . 1088 / 2053 - 1583 / aacfc1. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1088/2053-1583/aacfc1.
[13]
Erik Fransson, Fredrik Eriksson, and Paul Erhart. “Efficient construction of linear
models in materials modeling and applications to force constant expansions”. In:
npj Computational Materials 6.1 (2020), p. 135.
[14]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit­Learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12.null (Nov. 2011), pp. 2825–2830. ISSN: 1532­4435.
[15]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for
working with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (2017), p. 273002.
URL: http://stacks.iop.org/0953-8984/29/i=27/a=273002.
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
35
==PAGE:44==
[16]
J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen. “Real­space grid implementa­
tion of the projector augmented wave method”. In: Phys. Rev. B 71.3 (Jan. 2005),
p. 035109. ISSN: 1098­0121. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035109.
[17]
J Enkovaara et al. “Electronic structure calculations with GPAW: a real­space im­
plementation of the projector augmented­wave method”. In: Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 22.25 (2010), p. 253202. URL: http://stacks.iop.org/0953-
8984/22/i=25/a=253202.
[18]
John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. “Generalized gradient ap­
proximation made simple”. eng. In: Physical Review Letters 77.18 (1996), pp. 3865–
3868. ISSN: 10797114, 00319007. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865.
[19]
Stefan Grimme et al. “A consistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density
functional dispersion correction (DFT­D) for the 94 elements H­Pu”. In: The Journal
of Chemical Physics 132.15 (2010), p. 154104. DOI: 10.1063/1.3382344. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3382344.
36
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
==PAGE:45==
Calculation of phase diagrams of intercalated two­dimensional materials
37
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 311
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.fysik.dtu.dk
