==PAGE:1==
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
A method for precision-based decision-making
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
A method for precision-based decision-making
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Marine Kohler
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Management, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
https://www.man.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared during six months in collaboration with Greenly, a Carbon
Accounting startup, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MScEng.
Marine Kohler - s202921
Signature
Date
ii
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Current industrial emissions accounting and reduction exhibit a limited uptake of GHG
assessment and reduction actions in company strategies. Furthermore, current appli-
cations of GHG assessment frameworks lack accuracy since emission sources that are
irrelevant for a given company are often confused with sources that are not reported.
Therefore, in an effort to increase the quality of GHG assessments in the industrial sector,
this work offers recommendations on processes and insights for the most relevant emis-
sion sources. Furthermore, we present a comprehensive uncertainty modeling structure
that ranks available methodologies used to compute emissions corresponding to various
sources. Finally, we develop a recommendation algorithm that can lead to substantial
time savings in GHG assessments while maintaining acceptable accuracy levels.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Marine Kohler, MSc Industrial Engineering Management, DTU
Author of this Master’s Thesis.
Adrien Proby, Manager in the carbon expert team, Greenly
Supervisor of the Master’s Thesis at Greenly.
Thomas Howard, Head of Entrepreneurship Practice, Head of DTU X-Tech, Associate
Professor, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship, DTU
Supervisor of the Master’s Thesis at DTU.
Alexandre S. Avaro, for his thorough proofreading, constructive criticism and zucchini
fritters.
iv
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
0.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
0.3
Hand-in material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
0.4
Sector delimitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Industrial emissions and reduction strategies
5
1.1
Industrial Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Current reduction objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Current action plans to alleviate the industry’s footprint . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
GHG Assessment methodologies
11
2.1
General Greenhouse gas accounting methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2
Available Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Current Handling of SME industrial clients at Greenly . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Recommendations for sector specific processes
23
3.1
Perimeter and unfolding of GHG assessments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Key and negligible emission sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Uncertainty assessment of carbon assessment methodologies
31
4.1
Uncertainty handling objectives in GHG Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Current uncertainty handling frameworks in environmental assessments . . 32
4.3
Proposition of uncertainty accounting framework for Greenly
. . . . . . . . 34
5
Uncertainty assessment of GHG assessments
49
5.1
Simulation of total of emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Uncertainty of the GHG Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6
Automatic methodology recommendations for increased GHG assessment
accuracy
59
6.1
Algorithm proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
6.3
Results on indicator evolution and chosen modules and next steps . . . . . 62
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
0.1
Background
In order to meet the Paris Agreements’ target of limiting the rise of the global temperature
to 1.5°C, the 2020s decade must be a key turning point when it comes to greenhouse
gases (GHG) emissions management. As the urgency for action against climate change
gains recognition on the world stage, companies also begin to take interest in their carbon
footprint. Although this new interest is often pushed by other motives, such as market-
ing, client company demands, or label requirements, it still constitutes a new incentive
for companies to perform a Carbon Assessment to grasp the full extent of their GHG
emissions.
The Carbon Assessment methodology (Bilan Carbone© in French) was first formalized by
the ADEME in 2002 (French Agency for Ecological Transition), following the GHG protocol
in 2001. It is a general stepwise process to account for all emissions linked to the activity
of a company, and is currently used by a growing number of companies to communicate
on their emissions and construct GHG emissions reduction pathways.
The ADEME methodology offers a database of emission factors to match physical or
monetary flows with the corresponding CO2e emissions. It must be noted that mone-
tary emission factors are often deemed less precise than physical ones due to the rapid
fluctuations in prices of goods and wider ranges of products and services covered.
Greenly, a startup based in Paris, set up a consulting business based on these method-
ologies in 2019. It offers mostly small and medium companies a tool to compute and
communicate on their GHG emissions. This is done automatically using their Fichier des
Ecritures Comptables (abbreviated FEC), or French official accounting report, and only
uses monetary emission factors.
A physical approach can complement this analysis if its level of accuracy is deemed un-
satisfactory by a human expert from the startup. In collaboration with the client, Greenly
determines what additional data should be collected based on data availability and com-
pany accounting profile.
This two-step method allows for significant time gains compared to a complete physical
GHG assessment. This enables companies that usually cannot afford this type of study
to monitor their emissions. Yet, given that no formal method for quantifying accuracy
nor any standards of data collection have been established, the accuracy of the Carbon
Accounting results considerably varies between sectors of activity and companies, and
the process lacks efficiency.
Parallel to the development of Greenly, the French government agency ADEME has
started adapting its Carbon Accounting methodology to various activity fields with the
publication of so-called “sectorial guides”. These guides include an overview of the major
contributors of GHG for each sector, list relevant sector-specific data to collect, and finally
give sector-specific GHG emissions reduction actions advice.
Relying on this newly available knowledge and on their growing experience with clients,
Greenly would like to devise a formal methodology to automate carbon accounting of a
specific sector. As a case example of such specification, we will study in the scope of this
thesis small and medium sized industrial businesses.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
1
==PAGE:10==
0.2
Objectives
The project was given the following guidelines:
Collect information on the sector using academic research and client FEC study
• Establish adequate perimeters of GHG assessment : organizational, operational,
and temporal;
• Identify key emission sectors (by variability and/or impact);
• Identify negligible emission sectors;
• Draft a new systemic way to handle industrial clients.
Identify and prioritize between several methodologies for GHG assessment of the key
emission sectors
• Given available data;
• Given uncertainties due to the employed methods;
• Reflect on acceptable precision level and eventually build a precision indicator.
0.3
Hand-in material
Along with the report, further hand-in materials were agreed upon. They can be found in
this Google Drive folder.
• Source code, available on Github.
• Anonymized client GHG assessments, available in the Google Drive folder.
• Data set, available in the Google Drive folder.
0.4
Sector delimitation
Because the word ”industrial” is used to refer to various activities, it is necessary to define
the scope of our analysis. We here define what businesses will fall in the scope of the
present study.
We use the NAF (French activity nomenclature) business codes from the INSEE (French
institute of statistics) to identify industry businesses. A complete list of the NAF codes is
available on the INSEE website. Their structure is very similar to the one of international
NACE (Nomenclature of activities of the European Community) codes. [NAF]
The INSEE distinguishes two groups under the label ”industry”: extractive and manufac-
turing industries. The extraction of materials in negligible both employment- and turnover-
wise in Europe. (REF) Moreover, mining activities have a significantly different emission
profile compared to manufacturing groups. Both these arguments compel us to remove
extractive industries from the scope of this study. [europa]
Among the activities grouped as manufacturing industries (code C in the NAF system),
we choose to exclude three of them:
• 10: Food Industry. This sector is excluded because clients from this industry have
very specific business constraints linked to the manufacturing of perishable goods.
Hence, such clients are treated separately at Greenly.
• 19: Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products. This sector is excluded as
its emission profile dramatically differs from other industrial groups. This is mainly
due to the impact of oil combustion.
• 33: Repair and maintenance of machine and equipment. This sector is excluded as
its emissions profile also dramatically differs from other industrial groups it does not
2
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:11==
relies as much on purchases of goods.
Although the results of this analysis will not cover these activities, the methodology de-
veloped throughout the paper can be applied to any business group.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
3
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Industrial emissions and reduction
strategies
1.1
Industrial Emissions
Industrial emissions have been under scrutiny since the beginning of the ecological rev-
olution. In 1962, ”Silent Spring” by Rachael Carson REF underlined for the first time the
then overlooked impact of the chemical industry on ecosystems. Furthermore, the 1972
report ”Limits to growth” pointed the material limits to the seemingly exponential growth
resulting from the industrial revolution. Although these ground setting papers received
little corporate attention, they set standards for the consideration of air, soil, and water
pollution along with resource consumption of the industrial ecosystems. They notably in-
fluenced the following principles stated during the Stockholm United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment on industrial impact:
• Principle 2: The natural resources of Earth… must be safeguarded for the benefit
of present and future generations.
• Principle 5: The nonrenewable resources of Earth must be employed in such a way
as to guard against the danger of their future exhaustion.
• Principle 6: The discharge of toxic substances […] in such quantities or concentra-
tions as to exceed the capacity of the environment to render them harmless must
be halted.
[industrial_eco]
Following these first contributions, the impact of mankind on climate became a growing
concern in the 1970s. The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was created
in 1988 to collect and analyze evidence of climate change. [Langsdorf2022] The first
IPCC report in 1990 highlighted both the rise in greenhouse gas concentration in the
atmosphere and in temperature since the industrial revolution. [Langsdorf2022] The
second report, published in 1995, confirmed the ”indiscernible human influence on the
Earth’s climate.” [Langsdorf2022] As consensus grew, mitigation options were studied in
the fourth IPCC report, issued in 2007, and notably focused on the identification and the
limitation of industrial emissions.
Figure 1.1 shows that direct emissions from the industry (i.e., emissions linked to the
combustion of fuel, to F-gas leakage or coming from chemical processes and change
in the use of land) partly stem from heavy industrial processes. These include the ex-
traction of resources, cement production, the chemical industry, and waste management.
In addition, in 2010, indirect emissions resulting from energy consumption (electricity,
heat and cold networks) represented more than half the amount of direct emissions.
[Fischedick2014] In 2019, the International Energy Agency (IEA) reported that the in-
dustry sector represented the first source of greenhouse gases worldwide, emitting over
40% of global emissions (12.3 GtCO2e) if emissions resulting from energy generation
were allocated to their final sectors. [IEA]
Emissions in the EU, and more specifically in France since 1990, have reduced. [statist]
This can be traced back to the dwindling industrial activity in these regions to the benefit of
developing countries, whose industrial emissions have been increasing. [Demmou2010]
Emissions have been steadily rising due to the high carbon intensity of energy despite
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.1: Review of total global industry direct and indirect GHG emissions by source,
1970–2010 (GtCO2eq/yr, IPCC 4rth report, 2007 [Fischedick2014]
progress in energy efficiency and processes. [UEA] In addition, the drop in global emis-
sions due to the COVID-19 pandemic has been compensated by economic recovery.
[UNEP]
In parallel, international conferences in Rio (Earth summit, 1992) and Kyoto (1997) set
voluntary targets for countries to reduce their emissions. These conferences led to the
2015 Paris Agreement, aiming to keep the rise in the mean global temperature to well
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels, and preferably limit the increase to 1.5 °C. This ob-
jective targeted a substantial limitation of the effects of climate change. In this framework,
emissions would be reduced as soon as possible and reach net-zero by the middle of the
21st century. To stay below 1.5°C of global warming, emissions need to be cut roughly
by half by 2030. [paris]
Therefore, regulations have grown tighter on companies and more specifically on indus-
trial groups. In this context, GHG assessment are key, as they offer a global framework
6
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:15==
to monitor and compare emissions. Therefore, emission reporting has been enforced
through GHG reports government disclosure schemes in several countries. [Kauffmann2012]
In France, it is now mandatory for any company of more than 500 employees to report di-
rect emissions every 4 years. [ADEME_BEGES] Policy recommendations push towards
the generalization of this practice, on all scopes and regardless of company size, [1] but,
for now, only recommendations for climate disclosure are available at the European level.
[2]
1.2
Current reduction objectives
The objective of GHG accounting is to identify the most important emission sources, set
up emission reduction objectives and enable companies to build a strategy to achieve
them.
Currently, companies reporting their emissions through the ADEME framework must de-
clare reduction objectives on scope 12 emission sources (direct emissions and emissions
linked to energy consumption). However, the reported reduction objectives are defined
by the company and often remain trifling compared to the objectives stated in the Paris
Agreement.
Voluntary reduction frameworks bridge the gap between these limited objectives and
global objectives to fight global warming. Among those, the most recognized are the
Science Based Target initiative (SBTi) and Transition Pathway Initiative (TPI) frameworks.
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/ https://www.transitionpathwayinitiative.org/publications/65.pdf
Both offer standard reduction objectives to meet the Paris Agreement’s requirement for
small and medium-sized entreprises (SMEs) [3] and review climate objectives for corpo-
rations. Various business coalition group companies have committed to a pledge. (We
mean business [4], Race to zero [5]).
Two general approaches coexist when setting decarbonisation targets: absolute contrac-
tion and sectoral decarbonisation. [SBTi2019] The former distributes the total reduction
of emissions uniformly regardless of the company’s sector. The latter uses IEA Energy
Technology to compute sectoral intensity pathways. Yet, specific guidance for industrial
groups is yet to come. [6]
Furthermore, neither of these approaches include scope 3 emissions (all emissions through-
out the value chain of the client), as the responsibility of these emissions is left unassigned.
Finally, the impact of these frameworks still needs to be confirmed: companies tend to fail
to deliver on scope 3 reduction targets or on absolute emission targets. Overall, objectives
that are met were generally already on track when targets were set. [Giesekam2021]
1.3
Current action plans to alleviate the industry’s footprint
1.3.1
Current industrial strategies
To meet the limited reduction objectives, industrial groups rely on various strategies. We
list these strategies in this section.
The most common trend is Industrial Ecology, that focuses on footprint control and energy
and material efficiency. One of core principles of Industrial Ecology is the integration of
impact assessment tools, like Life Cycle Assessment or flow management tools. Such
tools assess the consequences of production, among other impacts, on global warming ex
post. Results are then integrated into decision processes. The latter help understanding
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
7
==PAGE:16==
how to mitigate the ecological impact of products while maintaining production levels.
[industrial_eco]
This process often entails optimization of the use of resources. Total Material Require-
ment, i.e.
the total use of natural resources that national economic activity requires,
was introduced as a key metric by the World Resource Institute (WRI) as early as 1997.
[Adriaanse1997] [Stoneham2009] Although progress has been made in industrialized
countries regarding material consumption, Domestic Material consumption was not suc-
cessfully decorrelated from growth between 1970 and 2004.
Furthermore, economic
growth of developing countries still requires a strong material component. [Steinberger2013]
Further initiatives have been taken to challenge linear supply chains and transition to
circular economy structures on the inter-firm level. In such systems, industrial groups
are considered parts of one ecosystem. Their material and energy inputs and outputs
are linked to other production facilities. Industrial production is redesigned to fit into eco-
industrial parks, where eco-efficiency is maximized using Mixed Integer Linear Programs
(MILP). [Walker2021]
All available methods are based on cost/benefit approaches since marginal abatement
costs are used to hierarchize action plans. Along with the raise of energy prices and
carbon taxes, this encourages the focus on both direct emissions and emissions resulting
from energy use.
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/the-joint-effects-of-energy-prices-and-carbon-taxes-
on-environmental-and-economic-performance-evidence-from-the-french-sectorb84b1b7d−
enOthersimilarapproachescanalsobeusedtochoosebetweenplans, suchasminimizingimpactoveraddedvalue.Th
//reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0040162599000554?token = 72D8C1B389FD1D9A3087597F608483D
eu −west −1originCreation = 20220320135357
These global trends result in tangible strategies that can be directly applied to Greenly
clients, notably :
• Electrification of processes,
• Relocalization of processes in countries with a lower carbon electricity intensity,
• Changes in purchase policies to integrate ecological criteria,
• Natural gas, hydrogen or electrical freight solutions,
• Mobility plans,
• Waste handling and limitation.
1.3.2
Future outlook
Future pathways to reduce industrial emissions are listed in the IPCC third report, chapter
7. In particular, the report presents equation 1.1, where G stands for GHG emissions, E
for energy consumption, M for material production, P for stock of products created from
these materials, and S for service resulting from the use of these products. 5 axes for re-
duction of emissions can be derived from the previouequation. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02
G
E × E
M × M
P × P
S × S(1.1)
• Energy efficiency (E/M): Although this field has been under scrutiny since the start
of Industrial Ecology, energy efficiency opportunities can still be found within sector
specific processes and systems. Recycling can also help reduce this indicator, as it
enables the manufacturing of product while limiting the required energy and material
needs.
8
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:17==
• Emission efficiency (G/E): Options to alleviate the industrial footprint focus on decar-
bonizing available energy sources. This can be achieved through a plethora of solu-
tions. Examples of such solutions are natural gas, more efficient combined heat and
power generation (CHP), waste and biomass, heat pumps with decarbonized energy
generation replacing boilers, etc. The diffusion of the best available technologies is
essential to limit emissions as developing countries industrialize. https://reader.el-
sevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0301421596803600?token=679D8E0F43B8F16A83323923A0583D4CB
riginRegion=eu-west-1originCreation=20220526082957
• Material efficiency in production and product design (M/P): Reducing the amount
of material needed to deliver a given service is another option to reduce industrial
emissions. Two options to achieve this are the reduction of the yield losses in mate-
rials production, manufacturing, and construction and the re-use of material. Further
reduction can be achieved by substituting energy-intensive material for alternative
ones, or optimizing product weight while keeping the same functionality.
• Using products more intensively (P/S): Eliminating waste and increasing products’
lifespan reduce demand for additional goods, and hence reduce emissions.
• Reducing overall demand for product services (S): Mechanically, as industrial groups
produce to meet demand, a contraction in demand would result in a decrease of
global emissions. This last lever to reduce industrial emission questions consump-
tion, growth, and their necessity to achieve happiness above a certain wealth level.
Because these measures are unlikely to allow a sufficient reduction of emissions to reach
the Paris Agreement’s objectives, the International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that a
large part of emission reduction in heavy industry will occur by carbon dioxide capture and
storage (CCS). https://www.iea.org/reports/about-ccus Although existing technologies of
carbon capture can be applied to industrial concentrated GHG outputs, doubt remains
on its scalability, as the IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage
underlined that potential industrial use of CO2 is limited and the storage time of CO2 in
industrial products is often short.
Even though mitigation pathways are well-defined, the integration of risks linked to climate
change in the strategies of industrial groups is low. This is because the carbon market cov-
ers an insufficient range of emissions. https://cdn.cdp.net/cdp-production/cms/reports/documents/000/00
a-price-on-carbon-CDP-Report-2017.pdf?1508947761 https://carbonpricingdashboard.worldbank.org/m
Even when the carbon cost is integrated into decision policies, its price remains too
low to fully take into account the socio-economic costs of climate change. https://iop-
science.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac1d0b/pdf
The uptake of these action plans is therefore limited and industrial groups focus on short
term mitigation efforts, although the window to act to meet the Paris Agreement’s objec-
tives is closing. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCCAR6W GIISummaryForPolic
Conclusion
Industrial emissions have gained public interest as they represent over 40% of global
GHG emissions. Carbon Assessment methodologies, namely the Bilan Carbone© and
the GHG Protocol, offer frameworks to account for all emissions given one business.
However, inconsistencies in the application of the methods remain, and their usage is
still limited to government-enforced regulations. Although they have gained recognition,
voluntary current reduction objective frameworks remain limited both in ambition and in
use. Mandatory reduction frameworks remain only symbolic. In parallel, current action
plans to reduce industrial GHG emissions have a limited uptake in business strategies,
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
9
==PAGE:18==
although various reduction levers have been formerly identified.
In reaction to these observations, Greenly launched a B2B business solution in 2019
aiming to generalize carbon accounting. It aims to trigger reduction pledges and build
coherent climate strategies by shedding light on the growing climate and transition risks
companies are facing. Industrial groups are one of the key targets for the firm.
10
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:19==
2
GHG Assessment methodologies
2.1
General Greenhouse gas accounting methodologies
The Bilan Carbone© methodology was created in 2004 by the ADEME to address the
growing number of calls for corporate responsibility on climate change issues. It is de-
rived from the 2001 GHG Protocol, which was developed and launched by the World
Business Council for Sustainable development (WBSC) and the World Resource Institute
(WRI). Both these tools define a stepwise process to compute the emissions of green-
house gases a company depends on for a given year. The aim of both the Bilan Car-
bone© and the GHG Protocol is to identify main emission sources for a company, a pub-
lic association or a collectivity, and trigger appropriate reduction measures. These re-
duction measures ultimately serve two goals : mitigating corporate impact and adapting
businesses to future economical changes.
https://www.associationbilancarbone.fr/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/guide-methodologique-en-v2.pdf
2.1.1
Accounting processes
The two methodologies described above agree on the steps to follow to carry out the as-
sessment, but they vary which steps are required. We list these steps below: https://www.as-
sociationbilancarbone.fr/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/guide-methodologique-en-v2.pdf https://ghg-
protocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf
• Designation of a project manager and setting objectives for the study (required for
both),
• Definition of the scope of study (assessment year and business perimeter) (required
for both),
• Data collection (required for both),
• Results calculation ((required for both),
• Results disclosure to stakeholders (required for both),
• Delimitation of the reduction objectives and pathways (required for the ADEME
method, only suggested for the GHG Protocol)
• Launch of reduction actions (required for the ADEME method, only suggested for
the GHG Protocol).
Despite the fact that both methodologies require the same GHG quantification meth-
ods, the French Bilan Carbone© is more restrictive than the GHG protocol. Finally, both
methodologies account for all greenhouses gases defined by the Kyoto protocol using the
IPCC-defined Global Warming Potentials (GWP) and the tCO2e metric.
Emission are typically divided in three main categories, called ”scopes.”
• Scope 1 covers direct emissions from the company activity,
• Scope 2 covers indirect emissions linked to energy consumption,
• Scope 3 covers all indirect emissions in the company’s value chain.
A schematic representation of the three scopes and examples of emissions that fall in
each of these scopes can be found in Figure 2.1.
Each of the scope is further divided into emission sources. For example, Table 2.1 shows
this division in the ADEME methodology. Then, for each source, both frameworks provide
one or multiple methods to compute the associated emissions. These methodologies rely
on the use of both emissions factors and company data. REF
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.1: Schematic view of scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions, GHG Protocol
2.1.2
Available methodologies for each emission source
An overview of all available methodologies to compute emission sources, based on Greenly
internal know-how, is shown in figure 2.2. The table is not meant to be exhaustive, as fur-
ther methodologies that use supplementary intermediary computations exist, and more
complex client-specific methods can be applied. Nevertheless, it provides a picture of the
range of existing methodologies.
More specifically, the ADEME distinguishes two methods for this quantification. One the
one hand, the physical approach uses activity data to estimate emissions. On the other
hand, the monetary approach solely uses accounting inputs. The latter is deemed less
precise than the former due to price variations and should be applied to a variety of data
inputs to reach accurate global results. The methodologies presented in Figure 2.2 thus
fall into one of the two categories.
2.1.3
Available emission factors databases
Available data for GHG emissions computing include, but are not limited to:
• ADEME Bilan GES: Official database provided by the ADEME for GHG assess-
ments. This database contains data that is specific to France and/or Europe. It is
open to contributions, peer-reviewed, and free to use.
• ADEME Base Impacts: Official database provided by the ADEME for Life Cycle
Assessments (LCA). It is open to contributions, peer-reviewed, and free to use.
• Ecoinvent: Independent database for LCA. This database gathers a worldwide
range of assessments.
It is based on process flows.
Emission factors are dy-
namic and must be recomputed before each use. Unlike the ADEME Bilan GES,
this database is under commercial license.
• Greenly Terrabase: Database of all emissions factors collected by Greenly for spe-
12
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:21==
cific studies. This database gathers private values and methodologies for emissions
factors are shared depending on client needs.
2.1.4
Specificities
It must be noted that, in both the GHG protocol and the ADEME methodology, scope 3
covers all emissions in the company’s supply chain. This directly stems from the objec-
tives of the methodology: disclosing the carbon dependency of business activities. Given
that any company depends on their suppliers and their clients, the emissions of the lat-
ter two must be included in the GHG Assessment. Hence, the GHG assessment is not a
method to compute nation-wide company statistics, but rather a tool to individually assess
the climate risk businesses are exposed to.
Even though results must be published using the tCO2e metric, groupi, it has become
common practice to compare companies’ GHG records using tCO2e/employee or tCO2e/€
turnover instead.
Finally, emissions that were avoided or captured cannot be subtracted from the GHG
measurement. Indeed, this would infringe the principle of measuring corporate carbon
dependency, as GHG contributions do not reduce GHG emissions linked to the company’s
business.
Currently, neither the ADEME nor the GHG Protocol provide an accounting methodol-
ogy that is specific to industrial groups. Recommendations for efficient GHG calcula-
tion and reduction pathway identification exist, but such recommendations are either lim-
ited to specific industrial sectors (chemical industry, concrete manufacturers, etc) or too
general to provide actionable advice. https://ghgprotocol.org/guidance-0 https://bilans-
ges.ademe.fr/fr/ressource/guide-sectoriel-list/index/idElement/2/siGras/1
Due to data availability, we will use tCO2e per collaborator as the comparison metric
between businesses in this report. In the next sections of this thesis, any reference to GHG
accounting methods is a reference to the ADEME framework because Greenly’s current
algorithms are based on the Bilan Carbone© methodology. However, the methodology
that we develop in this study is not specific to the ADEME methodology and can be applied
to the GHG Protocol.
2.2
Available Databases
Both GHG assessment methods incite businesses to publish their results. Various databases
gathering such results are available. Published GHG report are not verified by a third
party. Among those, the most comprehensive are:
• The ADEME database. It gathers results of French businesses and lists more than
4,000 results for both businesses and collectivities, including small and medium
enterprises (SME).
• The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) database. It gathers results of international
companies.
A complete scrapping of the ADEME database was made on April 7, 2022, and can be
accessed here. It constitutes the source of raw data for GHG accounting in this paper.
The source code for data extraction can be access upon request in this Github repository.
This code is a variation from an open-source scrapping method developed by a French
collective named (Lou Dupont). NAF codes can be used to select sector-specific data as
described in introduction (see 0.4).
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
13
==PAGE:22==
As GHG results are not verified, we explored data quality before using it to draw further
conclusions.
2.2.1
Data quality
The methods described above have gained international recognition because they enable
all stakeholders to measure and track emissions. However, our data exploration showed
that difficulties in implementation remain.
First of all, we quantified the proportion of GHG Assessments that include scope 3 emis-
sions and found that only 47% of recordings cover only scope 1&2 emissions. Raw data
for this study can be found in this ggsheet.
Second, Figure 2.2 shows the share of scope 3 in total emissions for companies that ac-
tually report scope 3. The bimodal distribution suggests discrepancies in the accuracy of
scope 3 emission quantification. Indeed, Greenly reports that scope 3 emissions typically
amount to 80% of total emissions. This corresponds to the right portion of the histogram.
If we assume that only reports for which scope 3 emissions represent more than half the
emissions are reliable, then only 28% of all GHG reports offer an accurate overview of
scope 3 emissions. We attribute the peak in the distribution around 20% to companies
that only report upstream energy-related GHG emissions (emission source 8). Indeed,
this computation requires no supplementary data to the mandatory scope 1 & 2 report
and can be directly deduced from it.
Figure 2.2: Histogram of share of scope 3 on total emissions of the ADEME database
(07/04/2022)
Additionally, we conducted a statistical analysis on the ADEME entries of industrial groups.
These groups were identified by their NAF codes, as we mentioned in the introduction (see
section 0.4). We retrieved 801 industry GHG Assessments. We report these results in
Table 2.3. Officially, NaN values correspond to emission sources that were not quanti-
fied in the assessment. Zeros represent negligible or irrelevant emission sources for the
company.
14
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:23==
First, the results confirm the explanation for the left peak of scope 3 percentage given
above: among scope 3 emissions sources, upstream GHG emissions from energy con-
sumption are covered at least twice as often as other emission sources. Moreover, the
proportion of scope 3 emissions sources that are not computed is coherent with the values
we presented in Figure 2.2.
Second, Table 2.3 also highlights the poor distinction between zero and NaN. Scope 1
and 2 emissions should systematically be quantified since their evaluation is mandatory.
Yet, 43% of reports did not declare any quantification of 7th emission source (Indirect
emissions linked to the use of hot or cold networks). We attribute this high number to the
fact that most companies, for which this source is negligible, wrongly report that they do
not have computed such emissions (Nan) instead of reporting that it not relevant to their
activity (0).
Third, specific scope 3 emission items that have an important impact are not quantified
by most reports. This is especially noteworthy for change in agricultural land, impact of
sold products and end of life of sold products. This jeopardizes the accurate comparison
across reports.
Finally, we must note that the size of the available dataset is still very restricted. This is
due to the limited voluntary uptake of the methodology in the previous decade, as shown
by the 4-year periodicity appearing in Figure 2.3, that can be traced back to the imposed
frequency of mandatory reporting.
Figure 2.3: Histogram of reporting years on the ADEME database (07/04/2022)
In addition to the previous computations, we performed further studies to assess whether
emission profiles are comparable from industrial subsector to another. This data would
have allowed us to better understand the relevance of each emission source for different
industrial activities. However, due to the limited number of entries for each subsector, no
clear tendency emerged.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Current Handling of SME industrial clients at Greenly
2.3.1
GHG Accounting methodology
Greenly’s objective is to provide an efficient and affordable tool to compute GHG emis-
sions using the ADEME framework. To do so, the company uses both monetary emission
factors provided by the ADEME REF and benefits from the widely uniform accounting
standards in Europe. Greenly clients undergo a two steps analysis process, as summa-
rized in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Scheme of GHG assessment methodology proposed by Greenly
To get a global picture of their emission profile, all companies must provide their account-
ing files for the year corresponding to the GHG Assessment. Emission factors are then
automatically attributed for each transaction. Because accounting data typically covers
the complete activity for a given business, this assessment is usually regarded as thor-
ough. Thus, Carbon Assessment only initially rely on the monetary methodologies pre-
sented in Table 2.2. Yet, as monetary emission factors suffer from high uncertainty due to
their price dependency and low product specificity, the precision of the results is deemed
unsatisfactory by regulatory agencies.
Therefore, to increase the precision of the assessment, complementary physical data
analysis modules are offered to the client. Some of these modules are systematically of-
fered to the client because they account for emissions outside the accounting files’ scope.
Such modules include employee commuting, employee lunches or use and end of life of
sold products. Others modules are suggested based on the availability of the data and
the main emission sources identified during the monetary analysis. This choice of mod-
ules is made using both Greenly’s expertise and the client’s insight. Each module choice
16
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:25==
corresponds to a change in methodology from a monetary approach to one of the avail-
able physical methods. Modules can either be directly integrated in the Greenly platform,
or, if a more specific study is needed, computed separately on a dedicated spreadsheet
software. Computed emissions using these modules then replace the initial monetary
estimations. Once all modules initially agreed upon are completed, a GHG report is pub-
lished and this concludes the analysis.
In conclusion, this double approach simplifies the emission calculation process while
maintaining a satisfactory emission report precision.
2.3.2
Client handling process
Processes to handle clients are built to facilitate the application this dual methodology.
An overview of the client handling process is shown in Figure 2.5.
We summarize Greenly’s process in the following way:
• Onboarding and Kick Off phase: In this phase, Greenly presents the mission to
the client. Greenly and the client agree on the mission perimeter, get the neces-
sary accounting data and select the eventual complementary physical analyses to
perform the target assessment.
• Data collection phase: The client fills the dedicated modules for complementary
physical analyses, or shares raw data when modules are not available.
• Analysis phase: Greenly processes raw data outside modules and ensures data
consistency. This phase often happens in parallel with the previous phase.
• Restitution phase: Results are exported from the platform and gathered in a GHG
Assessment report. A consultant from Greenly (manually) adds action plan recom-
mendations. A meeting with decision-makers ensues to present final results and
discuss action plans.
2.3.3
Sectorialisation
Currently, there is no formal sector-based difference in client handling in Greenly pro-
cesses. Differences in analyses only stem from the choice of physical offered modules.
Such modules only depend on the profile of the client’s emission sources and the consul-
tant’s grasp of GHG assessment precision.
The development of sector-specific processes, and, more specifically, sector-specific
client experience and standards for modules to fill, has been a priority in the company
since start of 2022. This is part of the aggressive expansion strategy of the start-up, that
aims to conquer new markets and become a reference for carbon accounting in each
sector. For this, specificities of GHG assessments projects linked to different business
activities must be understood.
Conclusion
In conclusion, although various GHG accounting frameworks coexist in the start of the
2000s, their application lacks accuracy as unreported and irrelevant emissions sources
are indistinguishable and as specific emission sources are arbitrarily left aside, impeding
comparison between results. Furthermore, voluntary reporting of emissions seems still to
be in its premises. Greenly, a french startup, aims to tackle these issues by democratizing
GHG accounting. They provide an efficient calculation methodology based on the ADEME
frameworks. It consists in a two-step process that relies first on monetary factors and then
on further physical studies. The general mission rollout is designed to applied this dual
methodology. However, as the star-up grows, it becomes necessary to differentiate this
two-step approach and the mission rollout to adapt to specific sectors.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
17
==PAGE:26==
Emissions sources
Description
Example
1- Direct emissions resulting from fixed
combustion sources
Emissions from any fixed combustion source
Emissions resulting from the use of gas boilers,
electrical generators, etc
2- Direct emissions resulting from
mobile combustion sources
Emissions from vehicles owned by the company
Emissions resulting from the use of company cars,
handling equipment, etc
3- Direct emissions resulting from production processes
Emissions resulting from chemical reactions
Emissions from decarbonization in cement making
3- Direct emissions resulting from leaks
Emissions resulting for the gas leakages
Leakages of Refrigerating gases in air-conditioning
Scope 1
3- Direct emissions resulting from the use of land
and their transformation
Emissions from soil when artificialized
Emissions released by agricultural land built upon
6- Indirect emissions linked to electricity production
Emissions from electricity production facilities
(market-based)
Average market emissions for the production of
electricity
Scope 2
7. - Indirect emissions linked to the use
of heat or cold networks
Emissions from heat or cold production facilities
Emissions resulting from waste incineration for
urban heating
8 - Upstream GHG emissions from energy use
Upstream emissions for energy production
Emissions linked to losses on electricity network
and network maintenance
9a - Goods purchase
Emissions of extraction and manufacturing
of purchased goods
Emissions linked to the purchase of raw material
9b - Services purchase
Emissions linked to service fulfillment
Emissions from the service supplier’s activity
(business travels, energy use...)
10 - Capital Assets
Emissions of extraction and manufacturing
of assets, amortized over the depreciation period
Emissions from the manufacturing of industrial
machine assets
11 - Waste
Emissions resulting from the handling of waste
Emissions from waste incineration
12 - Upstream freight
Emissions from upstream transportation of goods
or assets
Emissions linked to transportation of products to
the company
13 - Business travels
Emissions from business travels, except commuting
Emissions from plane journeys to visit clients
14 - Upstream Leasing
Emissions linked to the manufacturing of leased assets
Emissions from manufacturing of leased machines
or vehicles
15 - Investments
Emissions of businesses invested in,
depending on the share owned
Emissions from supported startup
16 - Transport and visitors
Emissions linked to transportation of visitors
Emissions from plane journeys for visiting clients
17 - Transportation of goods downstream
Emissions linked to transportation of goods to clients
Emissions from freight suppliers
18 - Use and transformation of products sold
Emissions from use or further manufacturing of product
Emissions from the energy use of the sold electronic
product
19 - End of life of sold products
Emissions from product disposal
Emissions from the dismantling and recycling of the
sold electrical product components
20 - Franchises
Emissions from franchised businesses
Emissions from independent restaurants of a fast food chain
21 - Downstream leasing
Emissions from leasing of products
Emissions resulting from the use of rented machinery
22 - Commuting
Commuting of employees
Emissions from individual car daily commuting
Scope 3
23 - Others
Any other relevant emission
Table 2.1: Summary from the emissions sources listed in the Bilan Carbone methodology - REF
18
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:27==
Emissions sources
Methodology
Description
Fuel consumption
GHG emissions are computed using fuel type, fuel consumption values and fuel emission factors.
Time of use of a machine and estimated power input
GHG emissions are computed using the total use time of the machine and the machine power. Using estimations of load factors and efficiency,
we can compute an estimation of fuel consumption in kWh to multiply with the corresponding fuel emission factor.
1- Direct emissions resulting from fixed combustion sources
Fuel bills
GHG emissions are computed using fuel expenses and a fuel monetary emission factor.
Fuel consumption
GHG emissions are computed using fuel type, fuel consumption values and fuel emission factors.
Time of use of a machine and estimated power input
GHG emissions are computed using the total use time of the machine and the machine power. Using estimations of load factors and efficiency,
we can compute an estimation of fuel consumption in kWh to multiply with the corresponding fuel emission factor.
Kilometers driven
GHG emissions are computed using the total number of kilometers driven by the vehicles, and multiplying it with the corresponding fuel
emission factor (in kgCO2e/km).
2 - Direct emissions resulting from mobile combustion sources
Fuel bills
GHG emissions are computed using fuel expenses and a fuel monetary emission factor.
Direct emissions measurement
GHG emissions are measured directly on production lines and integrated into the GHG Assessment.
3 - Direct emissions resulting from production processes
Production activity and chemical ratio
GHG emissions are computed using total production levels and an estimation of quantity of emissions per unit of output.
This estimation can be computed using the chemical ratio of the emissive reaction.
Leaked amount (volume or mass) and measured gaz
GHG emissions are computed using the type of gas leaked and its amount. The amount is simply multiplied by the gases
Global Warming Potential.
Total mass of gaz, extrapolated leakage rate and measured gaz
GHG emissions are computed using the total mass of gad in the system, an average leakage rate and the gases Global Warming Potential.
4 - Direct emissions resulting from leaks
Air conditionned surface, average gaz consumption per square meter, average gaz
GHG emissions are computed from the total air-conditioned surface. Leaked amount is estimated using average gas use per square meter
and average leakage rate. It is then multiplied by the average Global Warming Potential of refrigerating gazes.
5 - Direct emissions resulting from the use of land and their transformation
Switch type and total surface
GHG emissions are computed using the total surface modified and the type of change (from agricultural land to forest, from meadow to artifi-
cialized land, etc). Corresponding emissions factors per square meter are then used.
Electricity consumption
GHG emissions are computed using electricity consumption and the average GHG intensity of the electricity grid (location based framework).
6 - Indirect emissions linked to electricity production
Electricity bills
GHG emissions are computed using electricity bills and monetary emission factors for the GHG intensity of electricity.
Energy consumption
GHG emissions are computed using energy consumption and the corresponding heat or cold network GHG intensity.
7 - Indirect emissions linked to the use of heat or cold networks
Energy bills
GHG emissions are computed using energy bills and monetary emission factors for the GHG intensity of the heat or cold networks.
8 - Upstream GHG emissions from energy use
GHG emissions from this emission source are directly proportional to those of emission sources 1, 2 4 and 6. They do not require further
data nor computations.
Good quantity
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using measured goods quantities, whether they are units or weights, and corresponding emissions
factors.
Good computed weight
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using estimated goods quantities, whether they are units or weights, and corresponding emissions
factors. The estimation involves choosing an average weight for items.
9a - Goods purchase
Good price
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using good prices and corresponding monetary emission factors.
9b - Services purchase
Service price
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using service prices and corresponding monetary emission factors.
Amortisation expense
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using yearly depreciations and monetary emission factors corresponding to the asset.
Asset quantity
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the assets quantity and physical yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
10 - Capital Assets
Asset computed weight
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the assets weight and physical mass yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
Waste quantity
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using waste quantities and end-of-life physical emission factors.
Waste computed weight
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using waste weights and end-of-life physical mass emission factors.
11 - Waste
Waste disposal price
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using waste disposal bills and monetary emission factors.
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total distance travelled and the total mass transported, multiplying it by a corresponding
physical emission factor for the chosen transportation mode.
12 - Upstream freight
Freight expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using freight bills and corresponding monetary emission factors for the chosen transportation
mode.
Travels with distance travelled
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total distance travelled and physical emission factors for the chosen transportation
mode.
13 - Business travels
Agglomerated travel expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using agglomerated travel expenses and monetary emission factor for the average transportation
mode.
Leasing expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using leasing expenses and monetary emission factors linked to the rental service.
Leased asset quantity
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the leased assets quantity and physical yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
14 - Upstream Leasing
Leased asset computed weight
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the leased assets weight and physical mass yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
15 - Investments
Invested amount
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total invested amount and monetary emission factors for the sector of investment.
Travels with distance travelled
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total distance travelled and physical emission factors for the chosen transportation
mode.
16 - Transport and visitors
Agglomerated travel expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using agglomerated travel expenses and monetary emission factor for the average transportation
mode.
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total distance travelled and the total mass transported, multiplying it by a corresponding
physical emission factor for the chosen transportation mode.
17 - Transportation of goods upstream and distribution
Freight expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using freight bills and corresponding monetary emission factors for the chosen transportation
mode.
18 - Use and transformation of products sold
No systematic approach available
19 - End of life of sold products
No systematic approach available
20 - Franchises
Irrelevant emission source
Leasing expense
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using leasing expenses and monetary emission factors linked to the rental service.
Leased asset quantity
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the leased assets quantity and physical yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
21 - Downstream leasing
Leased asset computed weight
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the leased assets weight and physical mass yearly emission factors associated to the asset.
Travels with distance travelled
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using the total distance travelled and physical emission factors for the chosen transportation
mode.
22 - Commuting
Travel expenses
GHG emissions for this emission source are computed using agglomerated travel expenses and monetary emission factor for the average transportation
mode.
23 - Others
No systematic approach available
Table 2.2: Overview of all available methodologies to compute emissions of each emission source
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
19
==PAGE:28==
Emission
source
id
Emission source
Non zero count
Zero count
NaN count
Percentage NaN
Average of emissions
per collaborator
(tCO2e/collaborator)
Standard deviation
of emissions per
collaborator
(tCO2e/collaborator)
Coefficient
of variation
1
1- Direct emissions resulting from fixed combustion sources
752
21
28
3%
11.26
36.43
3.23
2
2- Direct emissions resulting from mobile combustion sources
683
100
18
2%
1.44
5.18
3.60
3
3- Direct emissions resulting from production processes
193
578
30
4%
8.37
35.03
4.18
4
3- Direct emissions resulting from leaks
506
276
19
2%
1.24
9.41
7.61
5
3- Direct emissions resulting from the use of land and their transformation
16
767
18
2%
33.27
97.90
2.94
6
6- Indirect emissions linked to electricity production
772
3
26
3%
3.35
18.30
5.46
7
7. - Indirect emissions linked to the use of heat or cold networks
143
317
341
43%
6.94
24.26
3.50
8
8 - Upstream GHG emissions from energy use
238
38
525
66%
2.23
8.72
3.91
9
9 - Goods and service purchases
107
63
631
79%
32.92
49.77
1.51
10
10 - Capital Assets
120
58
623
78%
3.11
6.20
2.00
11
11 - Waste
131
56
614
77%
1.16
3.39
2.92
12
12 - Upstream freight
108
75
618
77%
5.39
11.61
2.15
13
13 - Business travels
121
63
617
77%
1.03
1.68
1.64
14
14 - Upstream Leasing
12
116
673
84%
0.57
0.53
0.93
15
15 - Investments
2
113
686
86%
0.36
0.15
0.41
16
16 - Transport and visitors
35
93
673
84%
2.99
8.10
2.71
17
17 - Transportation of goods upstream and distribution
44
98
659
82%
4.74
7.23
1.52
18
18 - Use and transformation of products sold
21
110
670
84%
19.10
53.94
2.82
19
19 - End of life of sold products
44
96
661
83%
9.36
42.63
4.55
20
20 - Franchises
7
114
680
85%
2.07
2.55
1.24
21
21 - Downstream leasing
0
119
682
85%
22
22 - Commuting
95
68
638
80%
1.85
1.36
0.73
23
23 - Others
30
101
670
84%
1.67
2.20
1.32
Table 2.3: Results of the statistical analysis of ADEME GHG Assessement entries for industrial groups
20
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.5: Scheme of mission handling in Greenly
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
21
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
3
Recommendations for sector specific
processes
In this chapter, we gather advice based on findings discovered while performing GHG
assessment for several industrial groups and ADEME GHG assessment statistics that
would help sectorialize Greenly’s service. Associated GHG reports can be found in the
hand-in drive folder, and statistics can be consulted in this ggsheet. This chapter thus
constitutes a basis to decide on future sector-specific GHG assessment processes.
3.1
Perimeter and unfolding of GHG assessments
3.1.1
Perimeter of GHG assessment
We discuss here several dimensions that should be discussed with the client before the
GHG assessment to lead an efficient study.
The first dimension that should be discussed is the time frame of the assessment. Greenly
and the client should agree at the very beginning of the study to use either the fiscal year
or the calendar year. Most Greenly clients prefer to use the fiscal year because their
accounting files are the main source of information. However, industrial clients often rather
use the calendar year to relate their GHG Assessment results to their product outputs
levels. This sets the temporal scope of the assessment.
Second, all emissions sources should be discussed with the client to identify the relevant
ones. Information on relevance of emissions sources should be preciously stored and
clearly displayed since GHG reporting limits will come under scrutiny when published.
This sets the methodological scope of the assessment.
Third, each industrial site or subsidiary should get its own GHG assessment. Unlike most
Greenly clients, industrial groups often have a very hierarchical structure with different
activities from division to another. A bottom-up approach, which requires multiple carbon
assessments, ensures that the proposed reduction actions remain specific and concrete.
This contrasts with a top-down approach that would likely limit the impact of the mis-
sion. However, clients might disregard this option since Greenly’s pricing depends on the
number of assessments. It should be made clear to the client that the quality and the ap-
plicability of Greenly’s results depend on it. This delimitation sets the operational scope
of the assessment.
3.1.2
Considering the structure of industrial groups
Industrial clients tend to be more rigorous than others on the applied methodology be-
cause industrial groups often gather the most carbon intensive activities. Therefore, a
thorough and precise additional data collection phase is key to reaching satisfactory re-
sults, hence the points listed below.
As data requirements for industrial groups are more strict and company structures more
complex, the data collection phase mentioned in section 2.3.2 often becomes tedious. As
the result of poor or lack of communication between Greenly of the client, the exchanged
data can be incomplete or even faulty and the accuracy of the assessment may plummet.
To limit such issues, one path of improvement is to efficiently identify interlocutors who can
provide a representative overview of activities. In the specific case of industrial groups,
best practice would be to have one contact per industrial site who would be included in
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
23
==PAGE:32==
the organizational perimeter and would be responsible to send and verify the appropriate
data.
A second major improvement would be to better map the information structure within
the group. For example, depending on internal structure, some sites might have global
information on freight and not others. Information sources can be easily tracked using a
hierarchical diagram that depicts flows and sources of information. Monetary and material
flows should also be shown on such diagrams to avoid counting emissions from internal
transactions within the GHG Assessment perimeter.
3.1.3
Suggested mission unfolding for industrial groups
The suggestions listed above result in slight modifications to the current mission of Greenly.
We propose a new process shown in Figure 3.3.
This new process entails the following modifications compared to the previous one, shown
in Figure 2.5:
• The mission Kick-Off meeting becomes a one-on-one meeting with the project man-
ager in the company. In this meeting, only methodology and global mission guide-
lines are presented. The main takeaways from this meeting for the consultant are
the group hierarchical diagram and the name of all site contacts for data collection.
• Shortly after, we propose to implement a ”mission data collection meeting.” This
meeting gathers all the relevant interlocutors on site and the group agrees on data
to collect for each site. Collected data can be either global data (relevant to the
whole firm) and site-specific data.
• Data collection emails are sent out to each interlocutors and every stakeholder re-
ceives access to the platform to upload the relevant data.
• A meeting is held to confirm the completion the data collection phase before the
GHG report is edited. In this meeting, the project manager reviews the available
data and verifies that its completion and consistency.
These additional steps are designed to ease data collection and should reduce data avail-
ability issues that typically result in amendments of the GHG Assessments and waste of
time.
24
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Key and negligible emission sectors
In order to anticipate data to collect, we aim to better understand the relative importance of
the different emission sources in industrial GHG assessments. This section the presents
findings based on key and negligible emission sectors based on GHG assessments for
several industrial groups and ADEME GHG assessment statistics.
Based on the statistics from table 2.3, we can establish a hierarchy of emissions sources
for industrial sectors. As a remainder, any conclusion drawn from table 2.3 depends on the
quality of the data but should also be considered in the scope of the limitations that have
been discussed in subsection 4.3.5. An overview of the average and standard deviation
for non nul emissions for each emission source is shown in Figure 3.1. We also report
further statistics on missing and null data in Table 2.3.
Figure 3.1: Mean and standard deviation values on non-zero emission declarations for
each emission scope
Effect of data quality
It must be noted that the data quality issues mentioned in section 4.3.5 have effects on
the different statistics we report in this thesis. Figure 3.2 shows boxplots of declared
emissions per collaborators for all emissions sources in the industrial sector. We removed
outliers on the condition zscore > 3 for any emission source.
First, we note that mean values are strongly skewed towards low values of emissions
per collaborator due to ”zero” entries corresponding to negligible emissions. This causes
the standard deviations of poorly reported emissions (typically in scope 3) to rise since
correctly reported values are far from the mean.
Second, we underline the fact that mean and standard deviations estimations of real
emissions distributions have different precisions depending on the considered emission
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: Boxplot of emissions per collaborator for each emission source, (on the con-
dition zscore > 3, for any emission source)
source. Indeed, the volume of available data is different for each emissions scope be-
cause ambiguous emissions are labeled with ”NaN” or 0 and do not count in this calcula-
tion.
Third, further research must be performed to detect outliers. Data processing methods
should take in account the asymmetry of the skewed distributions. When considering the
most variable emissions scopes (5 - Direct emissions resulting from land use, or 18 - Use
and transformation of sold products, for instance), data in Figure 3.2 seems to shows a
different lower variance compared to the one displayed in Figure 3.1.
Thus, in order to confirm or infirm the assertions developed in the following subsections,
we recommend the computation of further statistics using Greenly’s internal data. Indeed,
this data set is deemed more reliable (notably, on the difference between zeros and NaN)
and more complete on scope 3 emissions. Nevertheless, we can gather evidence using
the already available data that support our conclusions.
3.2.1
Key emission sectors
Using both the data from the ADEME and Greenly’s experience with French industrial
groups, we thus identified the following emissions sources as the most significant ones in
Industrial GHG Assessments :
• Goods and services purchases. This is typically the most important emission
source for industrial groups. The Bilan Carbone© framework does not formally dis-
26
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:35==
tinguish between goods and services purchases. However emissions are mostly
linked to purchase of products according to GHG assessments performed by Greenly.
This results from the dependency of the industrial groups to either semi-finished
products that they assemble or raw materials that they transform. Because these
emissions belong to scope 3, their accounting still needs to be generalized. In ad-
dition, the impact of services gathers R&D outsourcing, operations consulting and
machine maintenance. These emissions can only be estimated from accounting
data and represent a smaller proportion of industrial GHG assessments. Evidence
supporting the importance of this emission source is shown in Figure 3.1 (second
most highest mean value, at 33tCO2e/collaborator) and the Carbon Assessments
of EFI Automotive, Cousion Biotech and Khimod.
• Direct emissions resulting from fixed combustion sources and Indirect emis-
sions linked to energy use. These two emission items result from energy con-
sumption. The ADEME data shows indirect emissions linked to energy use are
smaller than direct emissions resulting from fixed combustion sources. However
this is a French specificity linked to the low carbon intensity of the French electric-
ity grid. Emissions due to fixed combustion sources are still particularly significant
for heavy industry (Metal production and working, especially Aluminium production,
Mining, etc.) and industrial groups whose proportion of international assets, based
in countries where electricity production is highly carbonated, is high. Similarly, en-
ergy data is usually easy to gather because it is strongly regulated. One noteworthy
example of the importance of energy-related emissions is the reporting of scope
1&2 emissions for EFI International.
• Freight. Freight (both outbound and inbound) is important source of emissions in
industrial assessments. However, these emissions are accounted for in scope 3
since inbound freight is often managed by their suppliers and outbound freight is
often externalized to a transportation group. Therefore, such emissions are often
overlooked. In application of Article L. 1431-3 of the French transport code, trans-
portation providers are now required to provide data on the GHG emissions resulting
from their services, facilitating the accounting of such emissions. The importance
of these emissions can be seen throughout all GHG assessments made available.
• Assets and Upstream Leasing. Depending on the type of production, heavy ma-
chinery might constitute a substantial part in the company’s GHG assessment. This
includes, among others, production machinery, RD machinery, material handling
and heavy-duty vehicles, buildings, etc. If machines are leased by the company, a
similar proportion of emissions is reported under ”Upstream Leasing”. These emis-
sions are computed using the value of depreciation but accurate data using physical
analysis (machine type and weight) is often not available. The impact of assets can
be seen throughout all GHG assessments made available.
Yet, other emissions sources have a high variability, and must be studied when performing
an industrial GHG Assessment.
• Direct emissions from production processes. Depending on the activity of the
industrial group, direct emissions from processes might constitute the majority of
the company’s scope 1 & 2 emissions. This is especially true for the following two
specific industries as listed by the IPCC: cement production (calcination reaction)
and chemicals production (ammonia production). These emissions are closely mon-
itored and data is usually easily available for GHG accounting. The importance of
this item varies, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
27
==PAGE:36==
• Use and transformation of sold product and End of life of sold product These
emissions are rarely accounted for in industrial GHG assessment, yet they often
represent a non-negligible part of the activities’ carbon dependency. The lack of
reporting of these emissions stems from the lack of direct data availability for these
emissions. For example, a machine manufacturer is unlikely to have access to the
energy consumption of its products once they are sold, nor to information regarding
their disposal methods since this information depends on choices made by the final
users. It is possible to draft different scenarios to estimate the average emissions per
product, but the accuracy of such a method is unclear. An example of the importance
of this emission source can be found in the GHG Assessment of Acces Industrie, an
industrial material lessor, where up to 43% of total emissions are attributed to this
item. The emission sources also display a high variability on graph 3.1.
• Change in the use of land. These emissions results from GHG emissions coming
from artificialized soil over long time frames. According to the ADEME, this only
applies in the 20 years following the construction of a given structure. Therefore,
the age of the plants must be verified when performing a GHG Assessment. Newly
installed plants cause significant emissions. This emission item is often overlooked
: indeed, this phenomenon is often neglected or wrongly thought to be included
with the emissions corresponding to the construction of assets. The variability and
importance of this emission source are supported by ADEME data, as presented in
Figure 3.1.
3.2.2
Negligible emission sectors
Conversely, some emission sources appear negligible for industrial GHG Assessments.
Yet, they should not be left out of the scope of the assessment without the group’s ap-
proval. Indeed, they might result from a specific side activity from the group or they could
encourage quick win action plans that will help build up momentum for a company’s cli-
mate strategy. We identified these emission sources as:
• Transport and visitors,
• Commuting, and
• Waste.
Finally, some emissions sources seem to be altogether irrelevant to industrial groups. We
identified these to be:
• Franchises,
• Investments, and
• Downstream leasing.
Conclusions presented above are consistent with macroscopic data that covers scope
1&2 emissions. Scope 3 emissions can also be derived from the elements of the supply
chain of industrial groups. https://ourworldindata.org/emissions-by-sector
28
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.3: Proposition of new scheme for industrial groups mission handling in Greenly
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:39==
4
Uncertainty assessment of carbon
assessment methodologies
Now that we have identified the main emission sources, the next problem we should
address is to set standard modules to fill for companies in the industrial sector. As we
mentioned previously, choosing a module to fill is equivalent to choosing a methodology
for a given emission source from Table 2.2.
Two main criteria distinguish methodologies: accuracy and amount required data on the
client side. For a given data availability level (i.e., given one client), the only metric to
optimize when choosing methodologies is thus the accuracy of the final report.
Note that throughout chapter 4 and 5, all presented computations were made using Python.
All files and outputs are available in this Github repository you can request access to.
Furthermore, although the algorithm has been applied specifically to the industrial sector
(using sector average and industrial GHG assessments as test data), it can be generalized
to any sector by changing these inputs.
4.1
Uncertainty handling objectives in GHG Assessments
The GHG Accounting methodology and the Bilan Carbone© both enforce the mandatory
reporting of final uncertainties on GHG emissions. Yet, uncertainty values have received
little consideration so far. As an introduction, we thus explore why uncertainty has been
overlooked and what role it should play in GHG assessments [Marland2014].
We attribute this to a lack of knowledge on the methodology from a substantial fraction
of the companies performing GHG assessments, but also partly because of the fear of
public opinion. In fact, the value of typical uncertainty on emission factors, which only
represent a part of the uncertainty source, can already be discouraging as estimations
of emissions with such high uncertainties seems pointless [ADEME_BEGES]. Further-
more, we observe substantial variability in the estimation of such uncertainties since most
available methodologies rely on expert judgment to compute model uncertainties, and no
standards have yet been established [ghgprotocolguidance].
Nevertheless, uncertainty reporting in GHG acccounting remains essential. The GHG
protocol underlines uncertainty assessment can be a rigorous—although subjective—pro-
cess to assess quality and guide the implementation of quality management [ghgprotocolguidance].
: uncertainty in GHG assessment should be considered an indicator for report quality,
rather than a formal quantification of the range of real emissions. Additionally, a lack of un-
certainty estimations hinders policy setting, such as carbon taxes or mandatory reduction
objectives [Marland2014]. Finally, the objective of the GHG Assessments is not to pro-
vide a rigorous scientific estimate of emissions linked to a company’s activities, but rather
to identify the most important emissions sources and their order of magnitude. Therefore,
disclosing uncertainty levels should not throw doubt on the utility of the assessment itself
[ABCv2].
Therefore, we decided to develop an uncertainty indicator for GHG Assessments. This
indicator aims to:
• Discriminate between calculation methodologies for each emission source,
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
31
==PAGE:40==
• Provide the user with an estimate of their data quality and an estimate of their final
report quality,
• Enhance comparability between users and allow for comparison of report precision.
In particular, we will be able to use it contribute to the setting of standard modules to fill
for companies in the industrial sector, as detailed in section 6.
4.2
Current uncertainty handling frameworks in
environmental assessments
In the following paragraphs, we give an overview of the state of the art on GHG assess-
ment uncertainty handling.
4.2.1
Official recommendations of GHG Accounting frameworks
Official accounting frameworks and GHG reporting agencies specify that uncertainty stems
from two sources, emission factors and activity data. GHG computations can indeed be
summarized by the following equation:
X
i∈I
Ai × Efi
(4.1)
Where Ai is activity data for emission source i and Efi the associated emission factor,
and i the index of the emission source, in I the set of all identified relevant emissions
sources on scope 1, 2 & 3. [fuelcombest]
More specifically, the GHG protocol divides estimation uncertainty into two categories:
parameter uncertainty, resulting from activity data variability, and model uncertainty, re-
sulting from the inaccuracy of modeling emissions by a product with an emission factor.
This is shown in Figure 4.1. A further breakdown of uncertainties creates a distinction
between statistical data uncertainty, resulting from random variability of sample data, and
systematic uncertainty, accounting for systematic biases [ghgprotocolguidance].
The ADEME provides model uncertainty estimates for each emission factors, based on
expert opinions. These estimate ease the measure of model uncertainty.
However, stakeholders who perform the GHG Assessment lack expertise to quantify pa-
rameter uncertainty : they often lack information on possible errors their activity data might
entail.
Therefore, most frameworks introduce qualitative scales and pedigree matrices to rate
data accuracy and attribute statistical uncertainty levels. Such pedigree matrices allow
to rate the data according to various attributes and assign uncertainty scaling factorsto
the data. The most common attributes are precision, completeness, temporal represen-
tativeness, geographical representativeness, and source and technological representa-
tiveness.
However, these scales do not cover systematic uncertainty, which is left to the appre-
ciation of the user. Furthermore, the ADEME recommends to use experts opinions to
quantify activity data randomness instead. Therefore, pedigree matrixes are still rarely
used when performing GHG assessments.
Once all sources of uncertainty have been quantified, the frameworks advise to consider
uncertainty propagation to reach a final value of the variance reported on the GHG As-
sessment. Two methodologies exist to compute final uncertainties:
32
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.1: Division of emissions estimation uncertainty by the GHG Protocol
• Propagation of uncertainty under normal assumptions Assuming the emissions
from all sources are distributed along normal distributions and are uncorrelated, we
apply the following formula to derive the total uncertainty based on the respective
uncertainties from each emissions items.
E =
X
i
Ei =⇒σ2
E =
X
i
σ2
Ei
(4.2)
And
Ei = Ai × Efi =⇒σ2
Ei
E2
i
= σ2
Ai
A2
i
+
σ2
Efi
Ef2
i
(4.3)
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
33
==PAGE:42==
In this equation, E is the total emission, Ei the value of emissions from source i, Ai
the value of the activity data, Efi the value of the associated emission factor, σEi,
σEi, σAi, σEfi standard deviations of respectively emissions per emission source,
total emissions, activity data and emission factor.
• Monte Carlo analysis of emissions : All entry parameters (activity data or emis-
sions factors) are randomly sampled and these random values are multiplied. One
can obtain the distribution of the final emission values as output. Figure 4.5 by the
GHG protocol shows this process.
Although the first method relies on unverified statistical assumptions, it is the most applied.
This is because Monte-Carlo analyses typically require more parameter input and more
computational resources.
A previous attempt was made at Greenly in 2020 to systematically quantify uncertainties.
However, due to time constraints, uncertainties on uncertainty quantification itself and
complexity issues, the project was abandoned.
4.2.2
Further methods from other impact assessments frameworks
Other quantification of uncertainty methods were developed to be used in other impact
assessments frameworks (e.g., Life Cycle Assessments (LCA)).
Among those, the pedigree matrix approach developed by Ecoinvent v12 stands out. It
relies on the use of a single emission matrix for all flows and rates data quality on the
following criteria: Reliability, Completeness, Temporal correlation, Geographical correla-
tion and Further Technological correlation. The definition of score levels for each criteria
is shown in Figure 4.2. This approach is more precise than other pedigree matrix based
frameworks, as it offers quantified uncertainty indicators for each criteria and each score
level. Each indicator is computed or extrapolated from statistics on flow data ranking at
different levels on the criteria. These computed indicators are shown in Figure 4.3 (values
that were not encountered in the datasets used are denoted ”(n.a.)”).
Furthermore, the Ecoinvent database recommends different distribution modeling options
than the arbitrary normal distribution hypothesis. In particular, this framework recom-
mends the use of lognormal distribution, consistently with the IPCC reports on uncertainty
modeling. Indeed, final emission values result from the multiplication of multiple indepen-
dent factors which are best modelled using lognormal laws.
4.3
Proposition of uncertainty accounting framework for
Greenly
Based on this state of the art, we make in the following subsections a proposition for an
uncertainty estimation framework for Greenly. We first identify uncertainty sources. Then,
we propose a combination of default model uncertainty factors and pedigree matrices to
take in account. We also define 3 data quality levels to simplify the use of the model.
Finally, we show how to compute precision indicators for each methodology from these
different uncertainty sources.
4.3.1
Sources of uncertainty, uncertainty modelling and computation
As a basis for our work, we consider each emission source entry can be computed using
an equation structures as described delow:
Ei =
Y
j∈J
Ai,j × Efi ×
Y
k∈K
Tfi,k
(4.4)
34
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2: Data pedigree matrix suggested by the LCA database Ecoinvent
Figure 4.3: Indicators associated to pedigree matrice suggested by the LCA database
Ecoinvent, expressed as coefficients of variation (CV)
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
35
==PAGE:44==
Here, Ai,j is the j-th activity data, J the set of all necessary activity data, Efi the asso-
ciated emission factor, Tfi,k the k-th transformation factor to fit the units of the activity
data and the emission factor (density, price per kilogram, etc.), and K the set of all the
necessary transformation factors. Although their influence is not included in previous
frameworks, the presence of such transformation factors is quite common in GHG as-
sessments. Both emissions factors and uncertainty factors will be named ”factors” in the
following paragraphs.
For methodology presented in Table 2.2, we thus identify the type of activity data and
factors used. The division of each methodology in activity data and factors is presented
in Table 4.2.
The complete list of used factors and activity data types can be directly derived from this
table.
First, we formally identify uncertainty sources. In accordance with methodologies of previ-
ous accounting frameworks, we consider both model and parameter uncertainties, along
with additional fit uncertainties.
• Model uncertainty In equation 4.4, model uncertainty stems from the following two
sources:
– Model uncertainty is due to measurement precision in the case of activity data.
For instance, model uncertainty on the energy consumption of a building will
be the accuracy of the electricity meter.
– Model uncertainty for factors is due to inaccuracy in the model they represent.
Model uncertainties must be understood as default uncertainties over which param-
eter uncertainty is built upon using uncertainty scaling factors.
• Parameter uncertainty In the proposed framework, parameters uncertainties stem
from the uncertainty on activity data (human error and estimation, lack of complete-
ness or accuracy etc.)
• Fit uncertainty Finally, we assess the goodness of fit between the factors and the
data. In fact, emission factors are often used to estimate emissions outside their
official impact perimeter. For instance, emission factors corresponding to printing
paper might be used as a proxy to compute emissions for food packaging. The
parameter fit uncertainties capture the potential resulting additional error.
To be able to compare uncertainties, we represented each uncertainty by its variation
coefficients (CV) that is computed by dividing the standard deviation of a distribution by
its mean.
In the following paragraph, choices of coefficients for each of these uncertainties will be
presented. These choices are subject to some uncertainty. To account for this, we con-
ducted a sensitivity analysis to determine which of these coefficients are the most influ-
ential on the model final outputs. We present this analysis and its results in section 5.3.
4.3.2
Default model uncertainties
For activity data
As mentioned above, the model uncertainties for activity data are mea-
surement errors. Therefore, default uncertainties for measured data were set to 5%. For
accounting data or bills, the measurement is exact and default uncertainty is set to 0. An
overview of all default uncertainties assigned to the activity data is shown in table 4.3.
36
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: Proposal of model uncertainty framework for monetary emission factors
For factors
We assigned default model uncertainties with the following heuristic:
• Physical emissions factors stemming from the ADEME database are matched to
the model uncertainty suggested by the ADEME. If various uncertainties values are
available for the same emission factor, we then select the average value. For in-
stance, this applies in the case of travel emissions factors: uncertainty values de-
pend on the transportation mode considered.
• We assigned a 50% model uncertainty to emission factors resulting from other spe-
cific LCA assessments. This was corroborated by the study of truncation errors in
LCAs. Such errors results from impacts occurring outside of the assessment scope
and are assumed to be the most significant errors made in LCA assessments.
• Monetary emission factors have no formal uncertainty assessment. Hence, we had
to estimate their model uncertainty. To do so, one can remember that monetary
emission factors can be derived from physical emission factors by dividing the latter
by unit price. Therefore, we suggest to use the default uncertainty for the associated
physical factor and add an estimation of the price variability for the item. This can be
done by adding the coefficients on the scales shown in Figure 4.4 [ratiomonetaires].
• Factors that can result from measurement (mass per product, etc.) were assigned
measurement default model uncertainties (5%).
All default uncertainty values for factors are shown in Figure 4.4.
4.3.3
Pedigree matrix for parameter uncertainties
As discussed above, additional parameter uncertainties are taken into account using pedi-
gree matrices. This matrix applies to activity data, as described in equation 4.4. We de-
rived this matrix from similar matrix in the Ecoinvent framework. Indeed, the Ecoinvent
pedigree matrix is the only one that exhibits non-arbitrary coefficients, which fits recom-
mendations made by both the GHG Protocol and the IPCC. An overview of the categories,
criteria and scores is shown in Figure 4.6. Scores are directly sourced from the Ecoinvent
matrix, derived from Ecoinvent score assuming a linear relation between score and the
indicator used in the category, or deduced from sampling theory.
4.3.4
Pedigree matrix for fit uncertainties
Similarly, we derived a pedigree matrix from the Ecoinvent framework to quantify the
goodness of fit of the factor that quantifies emissions. This matrix thus applies to emission
and transformation factors as described in equation 4.4. As completion-related issues do
not apply to emission factors (the scope of computed emissions being transmitted to the
computed total), they were left out of this second matrix. The pedigree matrix is shown in
Figure 4.7.
4.3.5
Default rating on matrices
Finally, to reduce the number of cases to be studied, we suggest default matrix ratings
for both factors and activity data. Three levels of overall data quality are available:
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
37
==PAGE:46==
• Best: Emissions factors and activity data have the best possible rating on every
criteria from their respective matrices.
• Worst: Emissions factors and activity data have the worst possible rating on every
criteria from their respective matrices.
• Average: Emissions factors and activity data have the most likely rating on all cri-
teria from their respective matrices, based on Greenly experience of client data
specifications. Regarding activity data, all monetary coefficients get the best rating
available because they are, by nature, verified and complete. Furthermore, exclud-
ing exceptional cases, accounting data used during the GHG assessment always
stems from the appropriate geographical and temporal perimeter. The rest of ac-
tivity data is also assigned the best score on all criteria except reliability. This is
because data handed by client is most likely to be unverified.
Average data quality of emission factors is less consistent. Most likely, rating on the
fit pedigree matrix were attributed case by case, which depends on most the most
likely emission factor used.
All default scorings are shown in Figures 4.8 and 4.9.
4.3.6
Computation of total uncertainty indicators for each methodology
Given the default model uncertainty levels, the pedigree coefficients and defaults scoring,
we derive a final uncertainty indicator per methodology as described below.
As a basis for our calculations, we follow what has been done by Ecoinvent and we model
the input distribution in GHG calculations as lognormal distributions for both factors or
activity data. This choice was initially motivated by the importance of the skewness of
total emissions declared on the ADEME database, as shown in Figure 3.2.
Under the assumption that all factors follow a lognormal distribution and that they are
independent from one another, their product also follows a lognormal distribution. Fur-
thermore, the coefficient of variation of the product follows equation 4.5.
P =
Y
i∈I
(Fi) =⇒CVP =
sY
i∈I
(1 + CVFi)2 −1
(4.5)
From this, we can compute the total uncertainty for each item based on its model uncer-
tainty and ranking on the pedigree matrix, according to equation 4.6.
CVX =
s
(1 + CVmodel)2 ×
Y
l∈L
(1 + CVi)2 −1
(4.6)
Here, CVX is the coefficient of variation for the considered variable X, CVmodel the default
coefficient of variation for model uncertainty, l the index of the considered pedigree ma-
trix criterion, L the set of all pedigree matrix criterion and CVi the coefficient of variation
corresponding to the scoring of X on criterion i [ciroth].
Then, we derive the coefficient of variation of emissions stemming from a specific source
(equation 4.7)[ciroth].
CVEi =
sY
j∈J
(CVAi,j + 1)2 × (CVEfi + 1)2 ×
Y
k∈K
(CVTi,k + 1)2 −1
(4.7)
38
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:47==
In this equation, Ai,j the j-th activity data, J the set of all necessary activity data, Efi the
associated emission factor and Tfi,k any k-th transformation factor necessary to fit the
units of the activity data and the emission factor (density, price per kilogram, etc.), and K
the set of all such transformation factors.
Results
Using the two formulas 4.6 and 4.7 and the Table 4.2, we compute coefficients of varia-
tions for all methodologies under each data quality assumption. We present an overview
of results in table 4.1.
Data quality assumption
Emission source
Description
Best
Most
likely
Worst
1
Fuel consumption
1.4
3.7
69.1
1
Fuel bills
3.9
7.6
180.0
1
Time of use of a machine- power generated- and average consumption
2.7
10.1
419.0
2
Fuel consumption
1.4
3.7
69.1
2
Time of use of a machine- power generated- and average consumption
2.0
5.6
77.6
2
Fuel bills
3.9
7.6
180.0
2
Kilometers driven
1.4
3.7
69.1
3
Direct emissions measurement
2.2
4.5
83.2
3
Production activity and chemical ratio
3.9
9.5
504.0
4
Leaked amount (volume or mass) and measured gaz
2.2
4.5
83.2
4
Total mass of gaz, extrapolated leakage rate, measured gaz
5.0
11.6
612.9
4
Air conditionned surface, average gaz consumption per square meter and average leakage
10.8
29.4
4517.5
5
Switch type and total surface
3.0
6.0
105.4
6
Electricity consumption
1.6
3.9
71.9
6
Electricity bills
3.9
7.6
180.0
7
Energy consumption
2.2
4.7
83.2
7
Energy bills
4.2
8.2
195.9
10
Amortisation expense
4.8
9.3
222.2
10
Asset quantity
2.6
6.7
94.3
10
Asset computed weight
3.6
8.9
509.5
11
Waste quantity
0.9
1.9
12.8
11
Waste disposal price
1.9
3.0
90.1
11
Waste computed weight
3.6
8.9
509.5
12
Freight expenses
4.8
9.3
222.2
12
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
4.0
12.9
1349.3
13
Travels with distance travelled
3.0
6.0
105.4
13
Agglomerated travel expenses
5.8
11.4
274.8
14
leasing expense
4.8
9.3
222.2
14
Leased asset quantity
2.6
6.7
94.3
14
Leased asset computed weight
1.4
2.7
69.1
15
Invested amount
0.9
0.9
12.8
16
Travels with distance travelled
3.0
6.0
105.4
16
Agglomerated travel expenses
5.8
11.4
274.8
17
Freight expenses
4.8
9.3
222.2
17
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
4.0
12.9
1349.3
21
leasing expense
4.8
9.3
222.2
21
Leased asset quantity
2.6
6.7
94.3
21
Leased asset computed weight
1.4
2.7
69.1
22
Travels with distance travelled
3.0
6.0
105.4
22
Travel expenses
5.8
11.4
274.8
9a
Good quantity
2.6
6.7
94.3
9a
Good price
4.8
9.3
222.2
9a
Good computed weight
3.6
8.9
509.5
9b
Service price
5.8
11.4
274.8
Table 4.1: Coefficients of variations for all methodologies depending on data quality as-
sumption
We draw the following conclusions from these initial results.
First, results show that GHG Assessment should only be used to identify orders of magni-
tude and not to provide exact emission measures. Indeed, the lowest computed variation
coefficient reaches 90%. This is in line with statements of the ADEME, as mentioned in
section 4.1.
Second, even though variation coefficients in the case where data quality is best or aver-
age are acceptable to identify order of magnitude, this is not the case in the worst case. In
this configuration, most coefficients of variation exceed 100. This is expected, since this
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
39
==PAGE:48==
case corresponds to the case where all factors and activity data are based on estimates
with poor completeness and correlation with the emission being measured. This unreal-
istic extreme case does not call into question the quality of the methodologies applied.
However, it points out that the acceptable limit of accuracy is within the acceptable data
quality range. We should thus be careful when accepting poor quality data.
Third, the precision of a given method seems to be driven by both the number of inputs
in equation 4.4 and their model accuracy. For instance, we expected emissions being
computed using freight expenses to be significantly less precise than the one computed
using freight distances and weights. Surprisingly, this is not true in the best data quality
assumption. More complex physical methods should thus be used with great care. For-
tunately, the difference between monetary methods (with a high model uncertainty) and
complex physical methods grows as data quality drops. Complex physical methodology
can thus still be of use in realistic data cases.
Conclusion
To conclude, we insisted on the necessity of building an uncertainty model to be able to
discriminate between modules. We then proceeded to do so, basing our calculations on
the current. state of art of the topic. We suggest to consider three uncertainty sources:
• model uncertainty for both factors and activity data (accounting for errors in the
modelling of the inputs, estimated using default coefficients of variation)
• statistical uncertainty for activity data (accounting for the random variability of data,
estimated using a pedigree matrix derived from Ecoinvent)
• fit uncertainty for factors (accounting for the improper use of emission factors, esti-
mated using a pedigree matrix derived from Ecoinvent)
We also suggest to use lognormal distributions to model each input, and introduce 3 dif-
ferent data quality levels to simplify the number of output possibilities. Applying these
recommendations, we deduce coefficients of variation for all methodologies listed in Fig-
ure 2.2. First, the computed coefficient confirm that GHG computations should aim to
estimate orders of magnitude rather than precise emissions levels. Second, we raise a
warning a poor data quality might lead to uncertainty levels impeding the identification
of orders of magnitude. Third, the study underlines that methodologies with numerous
factors can have as low precision as monetary ones.
With these results in mind, we can build a formal assessment of uncertainty for a total
GHG Assessment.
40
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.5: Monte Carlo Process for uncertainty propagation as suggested by the GHG
protocol
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
41
==PAGE:50==
Emission source
Description
Activity data 1
Activity data 2
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
1
Fuel consumption
fuel consumption
fuel emission factor
1
Time of use of a machine- power generated- and average consumption
time of use of machine
average time consumption
fuel emission factor
1
Fuel bills
fuel bills
fuel monetary emission factor
2
Fuel consumption
fuel consumption
fuel emission factor
2
Time of use of a machine- power generated- and average consumption
time of use of machine
average time consumption
2
Kilometers driven
kilometers driven
mobile fuel emission factor
2
Fuel bills
fuel bills
mobile fuel monetary emission factor
3
Direct emissions measurement
direct emission measurement
global warming potential
3
Production activity and chemical ratio
production activity data
chemical ratio
global warming potential
4
Leaked amount (volume or mass) and measured gaz
leaked amount
global warming potential
4
Total mass of gaz- extrapolated leakage rate- measured gaz
total amount of gaz
leakage rate
global warming potential
4
Air conditionned surface- average gaz consumption per square meter- average leakage
air conditionned surface
average gaz consumption per surface
leakage rate
global warming potential
5
Switch type and total surface
total surface footprint
artificilisation emission factor
6
Electricity consumption
electricity consumption
electricity emission factor
6
Electricity bills
electricity bills
electricity monetary emission factor
7
Energy consumption
energy consumption
energy emission factor
7
Energy bills
energy bills
energy monetary emission factor
9a
Good quantity
good unit
product emission factor
9a
Good computed weight
good unit
mass per product unit
product mass emission factor
9a
Good price
good price
product monetary emission factor
9b
Service price
service price
service monetary emission factor
10
Amortisation expense
amortisation
product monetary yearly emission factor
10
Asset quantity
asset quantity
product yearly emission factor
10
Asset computed weight
asset quantity
mass per asset unit
asset mass emission factor
11
Waste quantity
waste unit
product disposal emission factor
11
Waste computed weight
waste unit
mass per waste unit
waste disposal mass emission factor
11
Waste disposal price
waste disposal price
product disposal monetary emission factor
12
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
distance travelled
mass transported
freight emission factor
12
Freight expenses
freight price
freight monetary emission factor
13
Travels with distance travelled
distance travelled
travel emission factor
13
Agglomerated travel expenses
travel price
travel monetary emission factor
14
leasing expense
leasing price
product monetary yearly emission factor
14
Leased asset quantity
asset quantity
product yearly emission factor
14
Leased asset computed weight
asset unit
mass per asset unit
15
Invested amount
invested amount
monetary emission factor investment
16
Travels with distance travelled
distance travelled
travel emission factor
16
Agglomerated travel expenses
travel price
travel monetary emission factor
17
Freight with distance travelled and mass transported
distance travelled
mass transported
freight emission factor
17
Freight expenses
freight price
freight monetary emission factor
21
leasing expense
leasing price
product monetary yearly emission factor
21
Leased asset quantity
asset quantity
product yearly emission factor
21
Leased asset computed weight
asset quantity
mass per asset unit
22
Travels with distance travelled
distance travelled
travel emission factor
22
Travel expenses
travel price
travel monetary emission factor
Table 4.2: Division of each available methodology into activity data and emission factors elements
42
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:51==
[Perkins2019]
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
43
==PAGE:52==
Data
Default base uncertainty
Is monetary
Description
fuel consumption
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
time of use of machine
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
fuel bills
0.00
TRUE
kilometers driven
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
direct emission measurement
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
production activity data
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
leaked amount
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
total amount of gaz
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
air conditionned surface
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
total surface footprint
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
electricity consumption
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
electricity bills
0.00
TRUE
energy consumption
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
energy bills
0.00
TRUE
good unit
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
good price
0.00
TRUE
service price
0.00
TRUE
amortisation
0.00
TRUE
asset quantity
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
waste unit
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
waste disposal price
0.00
TRUE
distance travelled
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
freight price
0.00
TRUE
travel price
0.00
TRUE
leasing price
0.00
TRUE
asset unit
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
invested amount
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
mass transported
0.05
FALSE
Measurement precision
Table 4.3: Default model uncertainties for activity data
Factor
Default base uncertainty
Is monetary ?
Source
fuel emission factor
0.05
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
average time consumption
0.20
FALSE
Specific client study
fuel monetary emission factor
2.20
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
mobile fuel emission factor
0.05
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
mobile fuel monetary emission factor
2.20
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
global warming potential
0.30
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
chemical ratio
0.20
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
leakage rate
0.50
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
average gaz consumption per surface
0.50
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
artificilisation emission factor
0.70
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
electricity emission factor
0.10
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
electricity monetary emission factor
2.20
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
energy emission factor
0.30
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
energy monetary emission factor
2.50
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
product emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
mass per product unit
0.05
FALSE
Associated to a measurement error
product monetary emission factor
3.00
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
service monetary emission factor
4.00
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
product monetary yearly emission factor
3.00
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
product yearly emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
mass per asset unit
0.05
FALSE
Associated to a measurement error
product disposal emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
mass per waste unit
0.05
FALSE
Associated to a measurement error
product disposal monetary emission factor
0.50
TRUE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
freight emission factor
0.70
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
freight monetary emission factor
3.00
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
travel emission factor
0.70
FALSE
ADEME defaut uncertainty for factor
travel monetary emission factor
4.00
TRUE
Computed using monetary factor model uncertainty assessment framework
product mass emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
asset mass emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
waste disposal mass emission factor
0.50
FALSE
Estimation of uncertainty on LCA Assessments
Table 4.4: Default model uncertainties for factors, based on ADEME data, and
44
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.6: Pedigree Matrix for parameter uncertainty quantification
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.7: Pedigree matrix for fit between emission factor and data uncertainty quantification
46
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.8: Average score of data on pedigree matrix
Figure 4.9: Average score of factors on pedigree matrix
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:57==
5
Uncertainty assessment of GHG
assessments
Now that we have defined a framework to assess uncertainty for all available methodolo-
gies to compute emissions from all emissions sources, let us now use this framework to
build a more general uncertainty model for GHG assessments.
In this section, a GHG assessment is represented by a table of declaration of emissions,
as shown in Figure 5.1. All other information included in the full report (description of
assumptions and activities, recommendation actions, etc.) are not considered to affect
the precision of the assessment. We measure total emissions by tCO2e/collaborator to
allow comparison on accuracy final results.
Figure 5.1: Example GHG Assessment, as taken into account by the uncertainty model
In this section, we will first confirm the accuracy of our uncertainty model by simulating
the total emissions. Then, reassured on our partial results, we will proceed to build an
uncertainty assessment framework for GHG assessment, including the choice of a global
uncertainty indicator.
5.1
Simulation of total of emissions
First, in order to assess the quality of our uncertainty model, we simulate total emissions
based on real emission sources from the ADEME database (averaged over all entries, as
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
49
==PAGE:58==
in Figure 3.1) and uncertainties computed based on the model developed earlier (shown
in Table 4.3. We then compare our results for total emissions with the ones available in
the ADEME database.
As we explained above, total emissions per collaborator result from the sum of all emis-
sions declared on each source as described equation 5.1.
E =
X
i∈I
Ei
(5.1)
Here, E is the total of emissions per collaborator, Ei the total of emissions per collaborator
on computed emission source i, and I the set of all computed emission sources. Thanks
to the framework described in section 4.3, we know that these emissions follow lognormal
distributions. These distributions are parameterized by coefficients of variation of the
chosen methodology and total emissions reported in the assessment. As a start, we
must thus choose one methodology per emission source.
5.1.1
Default methodology choices
Similarly to the three levels of data quality defined in section 4.3.5, we define here three
methodology quality levels to reduce the number of cases to study.
• Best: Chosen methodology is the one with the smallest coefficient of variation for
each considered emission source.
• Worst: Chosen methodology is the one with the largest coefficient of variation for
each considered emission source.
• Average: Chosen coefficient of variation is the average of all coefficients of varia-
tions for available methodologies for each emission source.
5.1.2
Monte Carlo simulation process
Now that we have defined the methodology quality levels, we model the propagation of
the uncertainty of emissions (for each source) to the sum of emissions.
However, the distribution of a sum of lognormal laws has no closed-form solution [lognormalsum].
Hence, we use Monte Carlo simulations to infer the distribution of the total emissions
per collaborator of each GHG assessment. We randomly sample emission subtotals and
compute the sum of random samples to deduce an estimate for the total emissions. We
get an estimate of the total emission distribution for each GHG Assessment by repeating
this process 10,000 times.
The reported value of total emissions should not depend on the uncertainty model. We
should thus find a proxy of total emissions that does not depend on the input uncertainties.
One of such proxy is the median value: for lognormal distributions, the median does not
depend on the standard deviation. Note that the average or the most probable value do
not satisfy this criterion. Further, a sum of numerous lognormal distributions (e.g., sum
of input uncertainties) can be itself approximated by a lognormal distribution (distribution
of total emissions here). This justifies the choice of the median value of the resulting
(lognormal) distribution as a proxy of total emissions. This choice, has also been con-
firmed by experimental observations, as the median of the distribution is stable whatever
methodology chosen. For each emission source, with thus take random samples from a
lognormal law with median Ei and standard deviation Ei×CV , where CV is the coefficient
of variation for the chosen methodology.
50
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:59==
5.1.3
Results
We here present the results of our Monte Carlo simulations. Figure 5.2 shows the distribu-
tion of total emissions assuming best data quality and best methodology assumption. The
median of the distribution is 290 tCO2e/collaborator. We can repeat this simulation now
considering only scope 1 and 2 emissions. Figure 5.3 shows the corresponding distribu-
tion. The median value then decreases to 100 tCO2e/collaborator. These distributions
can be compared to the distribution of total emissions per collaborator on ADEME entries,
shown in Figure 5.4, with median value 5tCO2e/collaborator.
We draw the following conclusions from these results.
First, lognormal distribution seem reasonable model for the total emissions since similar
skewness is observed across distributions.
Second, the average ADEME total emissions per collaborator is considerably lower than
the median values simulated on all three scope or on scope 1 2. We attribute this ob-
servation to two reasons: first, total emissions on the ADEME database are substantially
affected by incomplete declarations. Median values of simulated total emissions on the
three scopes and on scope 1 & 2 are in line with the usual orders of magnitude for in-
dustrial groups at Greenly, whereas ADEME values are order 10 times smaller. Second,
emission averages for each scope are overestimated because they were computed with-
out taking into account zero values. Simulated emissions match the ideal situation in
which all emission sources are relevant for all industrial groups.
Further certainty on the quality of the model could be derived if Greenly GHG assessment
could be used for comparison. Yet, the uncertainty modeling framework constructed so
far yields promising results and are consistent with observed and measured experimental
data.
Figure 5.2: Histogram of stimulated distribution of industrial assessment results, using
scope 1,2 and 3 means
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.3: Histogram of stimulated distribution of industrial assessment results, using
scope 1 and 2 means
Figure 5.4: Histogram of current ADEME distribution of industrial assessment results
5.2
Uncertainty of the GHG Assessment
The last brick of the uncertainty model consists in rating the accuracy of a GHG assess-
ment. Current uncertainty metrics, such as total variance or 95% range on total emis-
sions, are unsatisfactory because they mislead clients into thinking that the goal of GHG
assessment is to provide precise emission metrics.
We computed different metrics (total variance, 50% probability interval length, most prob-
able value, etc.) on all ADEME entries to compare their different behaviour. As explained
in section 4.3.5, most GHG assessments published on the ADEME website exhibit poor
data quality and lack entries in scope 3 emissions. To reasonably compare results, we
replaced null or zero emission declarations with average values over the industrial sector
as described in Figure 3.1.
52
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:61==
5.2.1
Selected metric
After a trial and error process, we selected the following metric: the ratio of the probability
that the five most important declared emission sources are correctly ranked and the prob-
ability that these sources are correctly ranked under the best data and best methodology
assumption. We refer to this metric as ”uncertainty metric” in the following sections.
Qualities
We selected this metric as it had the following properties which we deem adapted to our
study:
• Clarity and ease of comprehension for the end user. This metric offers an non-
dimensional distribution of uncertainty assessments between 0 and 1 and can easily
act as an indicator for clients.
• Informative about important emissions sources and their order of magnitude.
This is consistent with the objectives of the carbon assessment. This metric focuses
on the most important emissions sources and their order.
• Alignment with current Greenly processes, especially the content of the GHG
report. The current Greenly GHG report offers precision on the five most important
emission sources of the assessment.
• Independence from elements external to the choice of modules/methodolo-
gies applied. We initially chose IP(R) as a first, more intuitive version of the metric.
However, GHG assessments with close values of the most important emissions
sources were receiving poor precision scores, which was not representative of the
effective precision of the assessment. The normalization by the best case probabil-
ity solves this problem and enables all users to reach the maximal precision value
(1). Furthermore, we have strong evidence that this metric is uncorrelated with the
median total emission per collaborator and the interval length. Both of these mea-
sures are directly correlated to the magnitude of released emissions, as shown in
Figure 5.5. Larger emitters thus will not be unfairly penalized either.
Computation
We now derive an estimation of the uncertainty metric. Let R be the probabilistic event
(”Value of five most important emissions factors are given on the right order”).
We can write:
IP(R) = 1 −IP( ¯R)
=⇒IP(R) = 1 −IP

4[
i=1
(Ei+1 ≥Ei)

Here, (Ei+1 ≥Ei) is the event of emissions per collaborator of i + 1th biggest estimated
emission source are in fact superior to the ith.
According to Poincaré formula for the exclusion-inclusion principle, we have:
IP

4[
i=1
(Ei+1 ≥Ei)

=
4
X
i=1
 
(−1)i−1
X
I⊂[1,2,3,4]
card(I)=i
IP
 \
k∈I
(Ek+1 ≥Ek)
!!
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.5:
Pairplot of various GHG assessment metrics over, computed using the
ADEME dataset and random methodologies for all emission sources.
54
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:63==
It then comes:
IP(R) = 1 −
4
X
i=1
 
(−1)i−1
X
I⊂[1,2,3,4]
card(I)=i
IP
 \
k∈I
(Ek+1 ≥Ek)
!!
We measure IP
 
T
k∈I(Ek+1 ≥Ek)
!
during the Monte Carlo simulation by counting the
number of occurrences of all events (Ek+1 ≥Ek) for k in the subset I. We then estimate
IP(R) for any methodology level choice and any data quality level from the previous results.
Notably, we compute IP(R) in the specific case where both methodology and data quality
are at their best level. This provides an optimal value for IP(R) which we use to compute
the final normalized uncertainty metric.
5.2.2
Results
We computed the uncertainty metric for all scrapped ADEME GHG entries and for all data
quality and methodology levels. We computed average values of the uncertainty metric
for each combination of data quality and methodology level. Results are shown in table
5.1.
These results emphasize that the data quality has a more important relative impact than
methodology choices on the uncertainty metric we introduce in this work. Using the worst
available methodology with an ideal data quality still results an average 0.68 grade for
GHG Assessments. This justifies Greenly’s methodological choices presented in section
2.3. The proposed monetary initial assessment it typically is the worst methodology avail-
able. Yet, data quality of the accounting data is most likely close to ideal when assessed
on the pedigree matrix 4.6.
We computed similar results using other uncertainty metrics. Such results confirm the
trend we observed earlier.
Methodology
Worst
Average
Best
Worst
0.38
0.40
0.43
Average
0.56
0.61
0.70
Data quality
Best
0.68
0.78
1.00
Table 5.1: Average uncertainty metric on ADEME assessment depending on chosen data
quality and methodology.
5.3
Sensitivity Analysis
Finally, we present a sensitivity analysis to identify which assumptions have the most
important effect on the outputs of the uncertainty model.
All uncertainty model parameters listed in section 4.3 are tested, including default model
uncertainties for factors and data and all pedigree matrices factors.
We test every different case. We attribute 0 and 1 to each coefficient and its initial value
to every other coefficient remaining. This binary assessment method was chosen to limit
the required computation time for each parameter. We then compute variability coeffi-
cients for each methodology as presented in section 4.3. The uncertainty metric is then
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
55
==PAGE:64==
measured on the basis of these new methodology inputs using average data quality and
average methodology assumptions. The change in coefficient value on the uncertainty
metric leads to a change in the difference between the lowest and the highest uncertainty
metric recorded for 50 determined GHG assessment of the ADEME database. Finally,
we compute the average difference across these assessments. A similar variability as-
sessment was made for the most probable total value (tCO2e/collaborator).
5.3.1
Results
Average distances are available in this spreadsheet for each parameter.
Before we discuss the results, let us underline the fact that the uncertainty we measure
here uses data from the five most important declared emissions only. Therefore, it is not
sensitive to most scope 3 related factors. Indeed, as we showed earlier, ADEME GHG
assessment rarely report scope 3 emissions. This is not the case for the most probable
total value (tCO2e/collaborator).
Overall, default data quality values have a higher impact on the uncertainty metric than
pedigree matrix elements. This results from the fact that pedigree matrix elements are,
on average, less used than default model uncertainties. The latter are required whenever
a coefficient is used.
The most influential model parameters have been identified in green in the ggsheet. Each
one has been studied to assess the robustness of the initial parameter quantification. We
find that the most influential parameters have reliable first estimations as detailed in the
comment column of the sheet.
However, some influential parameter require more attention since the initial value it is
assigned is more arbitrary. Such parameters are:
• Average time consumption,
• Fuel monetary emission factor,
• Mobile fuel monetary emission factor,
• Average gaz consumption per surface,
• Electricity monetary emission factor,
• Product monetary yearly emission factor,
• Freight monetary emission factor,
• Travel monetary emission factor.
Monetary emissions factors represent a large fraction of this list. No formal model un-
certainty is available for these factors and their values is estimated based on a proxy
methodology that has limited scientific backing.
The main takeaway of this sensitivity analysis are is that the model we develop in this
work is globally very robust to changes in parameter values-at the exception of monetary
emission factors. Therefore, it is necessary to further develop the model uncertainty of
monetary emission factors to properly include it in this new model.
Conclusion
To conclude, this section allowed us to :
• Confirm our modelling of uncertainty by simulating total emissions for industrial
groups,
• Chose an appropriate uncertainty metric to compare GHG assessment on their pre-
cision,
56
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:65==
• Show that data quality is more impactful than methodology choice when it comes to
GHG assessment precision,
• Test the robustness of our model depending on the assumptions made on section 4,
and realize that the most influential and variable factors that influence the uncertainty
metric are model uncertainty levels for monetary emission factors.
Overview of proposed GHG uncertainty framework
To summarize, we provide an
overview of the new uncertainty framework described in chapters 4 and 5 in Figure 5.6.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.6: Scheme of the finalized uncertainty model.
58
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:67==
6
Automatic methodology
recommendations for increased GHG
assessment accuracy
We here present an automatic module recommendation model to raise accuracy in GHG
assessments. Indeed, one of the stated objectives of this work is to discriminate between
modules to apply to industrial groups in Greenly’s methodology. We explain in this section
a suggested method to automatize this process.
Similarly to the uncertainty methodology we developed in section 4 and 5, this algorithm
can be applied to any sector simply by changing the used means dataset. The results we
presented were applied to the specific case of industrial groups.
The goal of this chapter is to replace the human decision making step in the decision
of the complementary physical analyses to undertake. We believe this would enhance
consistency across Greenly GHG reports as it removes decisions that could vary across
consultants, and allow for significant time gains as clients are offered only the relevant
modules in their case.
Similarly to the work we described in section 4 and 5, the algorithm we developed used
Python, the linear programming package PuLP and the machine learning package sklearn.
The source code is available on Github.
To account for the implementation of the uncertainty and recommendation algorithms, we
propose a new process of performing GHG assessment at Greenly (currently, 2.3). The
new suggested process is shown in Figure 6.3.
6.1
Algorithm proposal
To provide precise results using as little resources as possible, we decided to minimize
the number of modules that need to be filled while reaching an acceptable precision level.
The algorithm takes as entries:
• An initial GHG report that gathers first estimates of emissions and a list of initial
methodologies. Applied to the Greenly methodology, this first GHG assessment
would be the one resulting from the monetary analysis as shown in Figure 2.3.
• A list of relevant emissions sources for the client.
• A list of available activity data for the company.
The algorithm first returns a list of methodologies to apply necessary to achieve an ac-
ceptable precision level. Given that each methodology can be matched to a physical
module offered by Greenly, it automatically chooses physical modules de facto. If a per-
tinent source is not considered in the first analysis and the client has the necessary data
to cover it, the algorithm automatically chooses a module to compute the corresponding
emissions. If a relevant source has not been studied and no data is available to compute
it on the client side, or if no specific methodology is available for this emission source, the
algorithm raises a warning. Note that, in the long term, these warnings could be used to
automatically define the perimeter of the carbon assessment.
We used mixed linear optimization to solve this decision problem.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
59
==PAGE:68==
6.1.1
Attempts at linear regression to predict the chosen uncertainty
metric
We first tried to linearize the uncertainty metric we developed earlier to integrate it into
the linear program.
The proposed model is described below (equation 6.1):




α1,1
α1,2
...
α1,S
α2,1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
αI,1
...
...
αI,S








x1
x2
...
xS



=




i1
i2
...
iI




(6.1)
Here, αk,j is the linearization coefficient that described the relation between the jth input
parameter and the kth uncertainty metric, xj the jth model input parameter and ik the kth
predicted uncertainty value.
We applied this model using uncertainty metrics as predicted values. We tried several in-
puts: variances and emissions values for each emission source, their respective powers,
and pairwise multiplications. We also tried various regressions models including ordinary
least squares linear regression and Lasso.
We find that no conclusive linear regression function could predict the uncertainty met-
ric under any parameter combination. Further effort might be more successful, but we
conclude that finding the correct linear formulation of this problem is far from trivial.
A naturally linear uncertainty metric is the variance of the total of emissions: this metric
is equal to the sum of the variances of emissions of each source. As a proxy for the
uncertainty metric, we decide to use the variance of the total emissions as an uncertainty
metric in the linear program. We examine in further detail the influence of this choice in
section 6.3.
6.1.2
Choice of acceptable precision level
As a test case, we decide to set the maximal total variance to 5% of the total variance
of the best case scenario. In this best case, the data quality level is at the highest level
and the uncertainty on the chosen methodology is at the lowest level for each emission
source.
6.1.3
Final optimization model
We present here the final linear optimization model.
Sets
• S is the range of all emission sources in a GHG assessment relevant for a given
client.
• Suncovered is the range of all emission sources in a GHG assessment for which we
have a formal methodology given the available data for a given client and that are
left uncovered (i.e., not treated) by the initial GHG assessment.
• Ms is the range of all methodologies available for emission source s given the avail-
able data for a given client.
60
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:69==
Parameters
• cs,m
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms is a binary indicator that is set to 1 to identify the initial module
used for emission source s.
• ds
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms is a binary indicator that is set to 1 to identify the assignment of
an arbitrary variance to emission source s since it was not covered in the initial GHG
Assessment. If no default high variance is assigned, then initial variance might be
lower than the one in the best case. This results in no modules chosen.
• vs,m
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms is the value of the variance for emission source s using
methodology m.
• bestvs,m
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms is the value of the best possible variance for emission
source s using methodology m.
Variables
• ys ∈J0, 1K
∀s ∈S is a binary variable that is set to 1 when a module is chosen for
emission source s.
• ns,m ∈J0, 1K
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms is a binary variable that is set to 1 when a module m
is chosen for emission source s.
Objective function
We aim to minimize the number of modules needed, so we minimize
S
X
s=1
ys
(6.2)
Constraints
Under the following constraints:
ns,m ≤1 −cs,m
∀s ∈S, m ∈Ms
(6.3)
X
m∈Ms
ns,m = ys
∀s ∈S
(6.4)
X
s∈S,m∈Ms
vars,m × ns,m +
X
s∈S,m∈Ms
(vars,m × cs,m) × (1 −ys)+
X
s∈S,m∈Ms
vars,m × ds × (1 −ys)
≤1.05 ×
X
s∈S
bestvs
(6.5)
ys = 1
∀s ∈Suncovered
(6.6)
Equation 6.3 impedes the algorithm to chose modules that use methodologies that are
already used. Equation 6.4 ensures that at most one new methodology is chosen for
each emission source. It also ensure that the indicator variable that tracks if a change
has occurred is correctly updated based on the methodology choice. The left hand side
of equation 6.6 shows the calculation of the variance of the total emissions given our
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
61
==PAGE:70==
decision variables. The first term of the three-part sum is the sum of variance for proposed
additional modules. The second term is the sum of current variances that have not been
modified (ys = 0). The last term is the sum of default variance that have not been modified
(ys = 0). Finally, equation 6.6 ensure that a methodology is chosen for emissions sources
that have not been treated in the initial GHG assessment.
Finally, this algorithm is embedded in a Python function. It raises a warning if a relevant
source has been left untreated and no data is available to compute it on the client side,
or no specific methodology is available for the emission source.
6.2
Overview
An overview of the workflow of the algorithm is available in Figure 6.2.
6.3
Results on indicator evolution and chosen modules and
next steps
We used the algorithm on 50 GHG assessments in the ADEME database. We replaced
null and empty emission values by sector averages. We assumed data quality level to be
ideal. We chose monetary methodologies as initial methodologies to be consistent with
Greenly’s GHG assessment framework.
First, we record global uncertainty metric according to the initial methodologies. Then, the
optimization algorithm modifies the chosen methodologies as described above to fit the
maximum variance constraint. Finally, the uncertainty metric of each report is updated.
Figure 6.1: Histogram of uncertainty metrics before and after the application of the pro-
posed optimization algorithm.
We find no significant improvement on the uncertainty metric as shown in Figure 6.1.
This can be traced back to the quality of the used data. Indeed, since null and zeros
values are replaced by sector averages, we observe that typically most of most important
62
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:71==
emission sources end up being average values. Yet, the emissions sources with the
highest average values have no corresponding methodology choice available. This is
shown in Figure 3.1 and 4.2. The optimization algorithm is thus unable to improve the
uncertainty metric. This underlines the need for further calculations methodologies for
these sources and the use of Greenly client data to test the algorithm.
As a case example, we applied the algorithm to Greenly client Acces Industrie’s mone-
tary GHG assessment. The algorithm identified downstream leasing, assets and product
purchases as modules needed. These recommendations would have saved up to a day
of work compared to the list of modules offered by the consultant to the client. Greenly
typically aims to compute industrial GHG assessment within roughly four days of work for
the consultant. The potential time savings achieved thanks to the implementation of this
algorithm are therefore significant.
We believe this algorithm can enable substantial time gains in Greenly processes if its
performance to reduce the uncertainty metric is further demonstrated. With proper ad-
vanced implementation and research, this could automatize one of the most pivotal step
of Greenly’s GHG assessment.
Conclusion
To conclude, this sections presents the functionning of a module recommendation algo-
rithm that chooses the least amount of physical modules to complete in order to reach a
desired GHG assessment accuracy level. Although the algorithm didn’t show effect on
the chosen uncertainty metric for GHG assessment in section 5, this can be traced back
to the quality of ADEME data. We believe this algorithm would raise the consistency of
completion of GHG assessment at Greenly. We also showed using an example that is
allows for significant time saving and is thus aligned with Greenly’s vision.
Overview of proposed workflow
An overview of the proposed workflow, including the
uncertainty modelling and the automatic recommendation algorithm is shown in Figure
2.3. It can be compared to the schematization of the current Greenly workflow, shown in
Figure 2.4.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.2: Schematization of the final optimization model
64
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.3: Proposal for new GHG assessment methodology.
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
65
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Conclusion
Overview of conclusions and recommendations
We gathered partial conclusions and recommendations at the end of each chapter. Let
us now summarize the current work and widen the discussion led in this thesis.
First, we reviewed current industrial emissions and reduction strategies. We found that in-
consistencies in the application of GHG assessment method remain and that their usage
is still limited to government-enforced regulations. In addition, voluntary and mandatory
reduction objective frameworks remain limited. This restricts current uptake of GHG re-
duction actions.
Second, the application of GHG assessment frameworks lacks accuracy because non-
reported and irrelevant emissions sources are indistinguishable and specific emission
sources are arbitrarily left aside. This impedes the comparison between results. Further-
more, voluntary reporting of emissions seems still to be in its premises.
Third, we identified changes that should be made in the mission rollout for client in the
industrial sectors and key emissions sources. These sources stand out either because of
their importance or their variability.
Then, we built a state-of-the-art methodology to assess accuracy for each methodology
available that is used to estimate emissions from all sources. This enables us to confirm
that GHG assessment metrics must only be used to identify orders of magnitude and not
to precisely quantify the value of total emissions. This also allows us to raise a warning
if unacceptable precision levels are reached because of poor quality data. Finally, we
discovered that the number of factors and activity data inputs in a given method can also
impair its accuracy.
In the continuation of this work, we built an indicator that tracks the global accuracy of a
GHG assessment. This indicator showed that data quality is more relevant than method-
ology choice when it comes to accuracy.
Finally, we developed a recommendation algorithm that selects the minimal number of
complementary physical analyses to reach an acceptable precision level. We then pro-
ceeded to show that this decision-making algorithm yielded results that are coherent with
statistics of the most important emissions sources of industrial sectors. Finally, we con-
cluded that the implementation of this algorithm would allow for significant time-savings.
Indeed, such an algorithm can be easily used in carbon accounting processes and is
mostly adapted to the one of Greenly.
Next steps
Next steps for this analysis revolve around the following two elements.
First, the modeling uncertainty of monetary factors must be further thoroughly studied to
increase the accuracy of the presented uncertainty framework. This was identified as the
most influential factor on final results of the current work.
Second, all suggested algorithms must be tested using the exhaustive Greenly data in-
stead of the often incomplete data recorded in the ADEME database. This would allow us
to confirm the uncertainty modeling accuracy and perform mass testing of the uncertainty
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
67
==PAGE:76==
metric. Finally, this would yield a better estimation of the precision of the recommendation
algorithm.
68
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
==PAGE:77==
Uncertainty modeling in carbon assessments
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.man.dtu.dk/
