==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
CyberSecure Health Technology Design
Forbedring af Cybersikkerhed i Sundhedsteknologisk Design
Simon Nam Thanh Vu (s200361)
Ziru Li (s163854)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at both the Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology (CACHET) and the Center for Digital Security, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The contents assume that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of computer
security and design research.
Simon Nam Thanh Vu - s200361
Signature
2022-06-24
Date
Ziru Li - s163854
Signature
2022-06-24
Date
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
We would like to, first of all, thank all the startups that took the time to participate
in this project. We would also like to thank the cybersecurity experts who also dedi-
cated time to give feedback on our solution design. Without their efforts, feedback and
experiences, this project would not have been successful.
We would also like to give our thanks to our supervisor Kevin Doherty for his excellent
guidance, positivity and engagement throughout the project. Last but not least, we
would like to thank our co-supervisor, Nicola Dragoni, for his insightful feedback based
on his in-depth experience managing Master’s theses.
Simon Nam Thanh Vu,
MSc Student - Computer Science and Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Ziru Li,
MSc Student - Design and Innovation, Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
New and innovative health technologies have the capacity to change lives, yet their
success increasingly hinges on their cybersecurity. This thesis documents the results of
an interdisciplinary design research study of the cybersecurity challenges, methods and
processes that arise and are faced by diverse Danish health technology startups. The
study focuses on startups, as they are trailblazers in introducing novel health technologies
that improve health. The aim of the thesis is to first gain insight into these startups’
approaches to cybersecurity and then leverage that insight for design in support of the
integration of cybersecurity considerations into the development of health and healthcare
technologies in startups.
The authors utilized a mixed-methods, co-design approach in close collaboration with
health technology startups and cybersecurity experts. They first identified gaps in knowl-
edge of current cybersecurity research concerning health and medical technology, such as
how startups were affected by regulations, how startups plan for cybersecurity and how
to facilitate a cybersecurity-aware culture in startups. The authors then invited eight
startups for interviews to shed light on the implementation of cybersecurity concerns
across the startups, including the need to prioritize product development over cyber-
security, pressure from health technology regulatory compliance and a general lack of
relevant cybersecurity knowledge.
The authors developed several candidate design proposals based on these insights and
held four validation and co-design workshops with nine participants.
The result of
these workshops was the design and prototype implementation of a cybersecurity self-
assessment platform. The platform aimed to support startups in building life-changing
health technologies by allowing them to discover impactful cybersecurity initiatives that
were most relevant to them. Following a further iteration of the design based on findings
from the workshops, the authors then engaged in feedback interviews with six cyberse-
curity experts to verify the feasibility and potential for real-world impact of the design.
The resulting final design is a user-centered, expert-validated solution to support the
integration of cybersecurity concerns within health technology startups. The authors
believe that this combination of interview insights and the final design resulting from
this study will enable researchers and startups alike to design and develop increasingly
security-conscious health technology solutions.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions and contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
4
3
Methodology
6
3.1
Phase 1 – Discover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Phase 2 – Define
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Phase 3 – Develop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Phase 4 - Deliver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Results
18
4.1
Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the startups . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.5
Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.6
Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5
Final design
82
6
Discussion
93
6.1
Summary and lessons learned
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
6.2
Reflection on the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
6.3
Opportunities for design and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7
Conclusion
103
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
Bibliography
105
A - Appendices
114
A.1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
A.2 Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
A.3 Gantt Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
A.4 Participant Information Sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
A.5 Workshop Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
A.6 Expert Interview guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
A.7 Interview Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
A.8 External Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
A.9 Workshop results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
A.10 Design iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As technology and digitization becomes the default for everything in society, so too
has healthcare become the target of the benefits provided by technology. Compared to
other areas of technology, the proper design and guidelines on the use of health and
healthcare technology is a life-or-death matter, and any compromise of security can
have fatal consequences. Cybersecurity researchers have long drawn attention to how
increasingly connected devices pose risks for individuals’ health, for example, through
the hacking and disabling of insulin pumps [1]. In addition, health information is also
considered especially sensitive and needs to be adequately secured [2]. In 2021 alone, for
example, it is estimated that 45 million individuals were affected by healthcare attacks,
an increase of 32% over 2020 [3]. Good guidelines and the design of cybersecurity tools
to mitigate vulnerabilities and reduce the risk of a security compromise is paramount to
ensuring data privacy and patient outcomes [4].
Startups and small organizations are of particular interest, as they often introduce new
digitized health and medical technology approaches, as seen by umbrella organizations
such as Health Tech Hub Copenhagen [5].
”New technology tends to come from new ventures - startups” - Peter Thiel [6]
As developers create new technologies to improve health, ensuring the cybersecurity of
that technology also becomes more critical. For example, an analysis of the current state
of medical devices shows some vulnerability in up to 73% of some categories of essential
medical devices [7]. Cybersecurity is a complicated, multi-faceted area that requires
deep expertise to protect essential assets adequately and startups have fewer resources
compared to larger organizations and are therefore increasingly dependent on external
services such as the cloud and outsourcing [8]. Therefore, targeting startups is vital to
support cybersecurity in new digital health and medical technology products. However,
startups are known to have different patterns and a larger variety of organizational and
role structures compared to more established companies, requiring further study into
how best to support these unique structures [9].
Insecure health technology devices can result in disruption of operations, send false infor-
mation to health practitioners, or transfer unauthorized commands to the devices. These
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Research questions and contribution
2
situations may result in fatal consequences for the users of health and medical technol-
ogy. Developers and the health technology organizations they represent must consider
cybersecurity throughout the entire development life cycle [10]. The need to continually
produce more products and new features removes focus from securing the devices that
ensure the user’s health. The technology and knowledge of how to secure health technol-
ogy systems already exist [11], so the challenge is not how to secure health technology
but establishing the weighing of cybersecurity concerns as part of the developer culture
[1].
Many current proposals to enhance cybersecurity use a top-down approach, wherein
cybersecurity researchers or organizations propose solutions, which organizations then
implement [12] [13] [14]. Top-down approaches are also seen prominently in medical reg-
ulations such as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the
EU Medical Device Regulation (MDR) [15] [16]. Some have criticized this top-down ap-
proach, however, as it does not take into account the unique challenges faced by startups
and particularly startups within health technology [17] [18]. For this reason, the authors
sought to explore in this thesis whether a developer-centric design approach might prove
able to better support the needs and unique characteristics of health technology startups.
1.2
Research questions and contribution
The goal of this project is to research and investigate the current processes, workflows
and issues for consideration of security risks and concerns in the development of digital
health technologies and subsequently leverage these insights for the development of novel
design concepts for new tools, methods and materials in support of a security-conscious
approach to health technology development. The thesis addresses the following research
questions to support this goal.
• What existing methods, processes and challenges related to the integration of cy-
bersecurity within health and healthcare technology design are prevalent according
to the organizations developing said technologies?
• How might we design to support the integration of cybersecurity considerations into
the development of health and healthcare technologies in startups?
The project aims to answer these questions via a mixed-methods, co-design research ap-
proach. The authors conducted a series of interviews with health technology developers
to gain an understanding of the prevalent challenges and methods. Thematic analysis
of the interviews was then employed to identify the issues, which were then used to
determine the possible solution space for design (see Section 4.2). After which, com-
bined concept prototype validation and co-creation workshops with the participating
companies were held to improve the concept proposals (see Section 4.4). A cybersecu-
rity self-assessment concept was selected and iterated upon based on the participant
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Research questions and contribution
3
workshops (see Section 4.5). Finally, interviews were held with cybersecurity experts to
validate the feasibility and potential for real-world impact of the design (see Section 4.6).
The resulting final cybersecurity self-assessment platform is a novel, expert-validated de-
sign created in close collaboration with health technology startups that aims to support
the integration of cybersecurity concerns in their development processes (see Section 5).
The contribution of this project is threefold. The first is a literature review of existing
research into cybersecurity in startups and the health technology space. The second
contribution is the identification of the prominent cybersecurity issues, processes and
methods in health technology design, achieved via the aforementioned mixed-methods
approach. The final contribution is the design and prototype implementation of a cyber-
security self-assessment tool, developed via co-design with health technology startups,
to facilitate the improvement of cybersecurity within the health technology domain (see
Section 5). The authors believe the use of a mixed-methods co-design approach pro-
vides a novel cybersecurity solution not yet identified within security research in health
technology.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
Digital health technologies promise more effective and user-friendly healthcare for all [19]
[20]. Cybersecurity attacks are considered the top hazard for emerging health technology.
Therefore, ensuring coverage of cybersecurity concerns during the development of health
technology is extremely important [21]. Many researchers have already highlighted the
lack of security aspects within health care technology and Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) research in general [22] [23] [24].
One of the challenges in cybersecurity in health technology, according to literature, is
that the values of security developers and practitioners/users have shown not always
to match.
Some, like Loi et al.
[22] as well as Dewitt and Kuljis [25], argue that
security and usability are inherently incompatible. Akama et al. recently began efforts
to generalize and pinpoint the design practices within security research for specifically
HCI practitioners and researchers. The results of these efforts allow for a clearer idea of
which areas need further contribution within the area of security in HCI [14]. Another
major challenge is the security of the health technology devices themselves. Tabasum
et al. present different problems in designing implantable medical devices as well as
reviewing possible attacks and their mitigations. They further stress the importance of
considering device security as an essential design goal [24]. As the computing powers
of pervasive devices increase, so does the ability of complex malware to infect these
devices [26]. Dragoni et al. have also highlighted the more precisely, sometimes lethal,
consequences and issues of the increased usage of pervasive computing used within health
care. Not ensuring the security of devices can compromise very sensitive health data
or cause the malfunctioning life-maintaining devices such as insulin pumps [1]. More
general literature reviews on security in health care technology have also been performed,
like Nurgalieva et al. [27] and Aljedaani and Babar [23], which provide insight into
the general challenges within the domain. These contributions highlight the need and
importance of further, specific research on security in health care technology. They also
highlight the need for targeted solutions to these key and pressing problems in the design
of effective and ethical health technologies.
Several applied actual methodologies and techniques exist for developing specific, tan-
gible solutions within health care and technology. George Chalhoub, for example, used
a parallel-step mixed-methods approach involving different stakeholders (designers and
users) to successfully link security in the development of User Experience (UX) design
for smart home devices [28]. Bowie et al. used a mixed-method design approach with
expert interviews to identify system hazards and held several participatory workshops
==PAGE:12==
2 Related Work
5
to thoroughly validate the developed solution [29]. Mixed-methods approaches involving
both interviews and design workshops seem to provide good depth in the understanding
of the problem domain as well as openness to pivot and iterate upon solution proposals
during the design period.
Researchers use many different approaches to discover the security requirements, meth-
ods and processes developers use. One prominent method is qualitative research per-
formed in collaboration with developers [30] [31]. Mixed-methods approaches, for ex-
ample, performed by Wu et al., have also been successful at discovering the developers’
security patterns [32]. Hala Assal and Sonia Chiasson conducted an online survey of
software developers to identify and highlight the reasoning behind the many vulnerabil-
ities found in software security. The paper concludes that developers are self-motivated
toward software security, but organizational issues prevent individual contributions to
security [33]. Likewise, Gorski et al. concur that involving and listening to developer
feedback is paramount in establishing tools and processes to support security [34]. This
research shows that the diverse participation of key stakeholders, cybersecurity prac-
titioners [31], developers [33], end-users [28] and company directors [30] can provide
more holistic solutions to the cybersecurity issues in question. Previous work has not
quite reached the stage of employing co-design methods to further this cooperation be-
tween stakeholders. The authors strive in this work to cover this through our unique
interdisciplinary approach.
In summary, health technology has the potential to provide significant improvements
to the health sector, but deficits in and challenges implementing cybersecurity threaten
these innovations. The challenges range from security restricting usability, device se-
curity and securing emerging architectural patterns [19] [21] [1]. There has been much
work on improving cybersecurity practices, yet less has focused on health technologies
specifically, and even less on health technology startups [23] [30]. Much research has
also focused on identifying problems in practice, yet few have attempted to design solu-
tions to overcome these barriers [33] and almost none have attempted to design solutions
with startups in mind [31] [34]. The authors strive in this work to address these gaps
in knowledge and practice through mixed-methods co-design with health technology
developers.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The project’s primary approach centered around design thinking, where the authors em-
ployed a mixed-methods approach for both problem identification and problem-solving.
The authors identified the important role of human stakeholders and cultures in realizing
more secure health technologies based on prior research. The project was therefore built
upon a user-centered design approach with the users closely involved by holding inter-
views and workshops. This thinking went hand-in-hand with the previously mentioned
mixed-methods approach, as the authors collected both quantitative and qualitative
data from the interviews and workshops.
For the project structure, the authors decided to use the double diamond model, which
has two main modules that each comprise a divergent and convergent phase [35] [36].
This model supported the user-centric mindset. The framework facilitates the explo-
ration of the wider problem and solution space and then scopes and focuses on the
core problem/final concept. It further highlights the focus on the project’s problem and
solution, respectively, while allowing for an iterative approach throughout the process,
adding up to a total of 4 iterative phases during the project. Figure 3.1 below shows
the modeled project structure using the double diamond. To reflect the project’s em-
phasis on user involvement during the concept development, the last phase was further
illustrated to show the iterative processes.
The use of double diamond also ties in with how the authors planned the project and how
the project arranged sprints. A Gantt Chart [37] was used for the project planning in this
thesis. It was used to facilitate an overview by breaking down the main activities into
smaller sprints, estimating their duration, and setting up milestones and deliverables.
The Gantt Chart can be found in Appendix A.3. SCRUM was used to facilitate sprint
planning. It is a lightweight framework that is good at addressing complex and adaptive
problems, emphasizing an agile approach to delivering results with the highest value [38].
SCRUM was, in particular, also used to improve the design process iteratively via sprint
retrospectives. Tools such as Trello [39] and Planning Poker [40] were used to support
SCRUM during the project by aligning expectations for work needed for each sprint and
documenting them as tasks.
==PAGE:14==
3 Methodology
7
Figure 3.1: The project uses Double Diamond as the basis for its planning. This diagram shows the sprints, methods and
activities of each phase.
==PAGE:15==
3.1 Phase 1 – Discover
8
3.1
Phase 1 – Discover
The first phase focused on exploring the broader problems and better understanding
the cybersecurity challenges faced by health technology startups. The first task in this
project was then to carry out initial research on the topic to identify areas of interest,
which was subsequently used as a basis for the semi-structured interviews with the
startups. The authors held these interviews to better emphasize with the startups and
reach a deeper insight into their challenges.
3.1.1
Sprint 1 – Research
3.1.1.1
Preliminary Preparation
First, ensuring the startup companies’ involvement was essential to gain insight into
the real-world challenges they faced. Preparation for the project was therefore started
ahead of time. This preparation helped to get an early outreach to potential startups
for the planned interviews, as it was expected for the startups to have tight schedules
and be unavailable at spontaneous notice. Mail was the primary recruitment tool, while
various health tech startups were found through DTU, Health Tech Hub Copenhagen
[41], Nordic Health Tech Hub [42], and personal networks. Additionally, the authors
prepared a participant information sheet to communicate more detailed information
about the project, as well as relevant GDPR handling procedures for the startups to
ensure their confidentiality. The participant information sheet can be found in Appendix
A.4.
3.1.1.2
Literature review
The authors first conducted a literature review to ensure the interviews were grounded
in the research questions and knowledge gaps in current research. This review centered
around papers about cybersecurity for health and medical technology companies and the
health sector in general. The authors used a systematic approach to identifying relevant
literature to identify existing challenges in health and medical technology mentioned by
literature [43]. Initially, it started with a comprehensive search of relevant papers using
literature search engines DTU FindIt [44], Scopus [45], and Google Scholar [46]. The
authors followed the following process:
1. (The authors) independently searched for literature based on keyword searches of
the combinations: ”cybersecurity”, ”health”, ”technology” and ”security”.
2. Excluded or included papers based on a title and abstract review.
3. Split the included papers between both authors.
==PAGE:16==
3.2 Phase 2 – Define
9
4. Reviewed the introduction and conclusion of the included papers and gave the
papers a priority rating of either ”low”, ”medium” or ”high”.
5. Performed a full-text review of the individually allocated papers with a priority of
”medium” and ”high” as well as papers of ”high” priority from the other author.
6. Individually wrote down summaries of the papers.
7. Collaboratively sorted the summaries to create themes for the interview questions.
3.1.1.3
The Interviews
The interviews aimed to gain insight into how health technology startups handle cyber-
security, from processes and workflows to common issues. After sending many emails to
health tech startups related to DTU, Health Tech Hub Copenhagen, Nordic Healthtech
and many more, the authors recruited eight health tech startups of various sizes to par-
ticipate in the project. The interviews lasted around 1 hour, where they were either held
online through Microsoft Teams or offline at the startups’ oﬀices.
The interviews were conducted using a semi-structured approach while basing the ques-
tions around prompts and probes.
It encourages and facilitates the participants to
provide more detailed answers while allowing the researchers to control the intended
direction when needed [47].
All interviews were recorded in audio temporarily and deleted after completing anonymiza-
tion of the resulting transcripts to ensure GDPR compliance in the project. The fi-
nal transcripts were made manually, occasionally with some assistance from Microsoft
Teams for drafts, as it provides a meeting transcript. The authors performed anonymiza-
tion of transcripts by removing all names and relevant startup-specific information. Star-
tups and participants were given a specific number for the interview and a unique iden-
tifier inside the transcripts to ensure means of differentiating participants.
3.2
Phase 2 – Define
The second phase built upon the interviews conducted in the previous phase with the goal
of scoping down and identifying the most important problems. The authors performed
thematic analysis as the primary method of analysis, where the findings came in the
form of identified themes [48].
3.2.1
Sprint 2 – Emphasize
As there are multiple ways of conducting thematic analysis, formalizing the approach
was essential to ensure consistency between the authors. The authors decided to use the
guidelines provided by Braun and Clarke, where they had outlined a holistic walkthrough
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Phase 2 – Define
10
of thematic analysis [48]. In their explanation, Braun and Clarke recommended that sev-
eral decisions about the thematic analysis methodology should be explicitly considered
and discussed. These are listed below:
• What counts as a theme?
A grouping of related ideas based on the codes that encompassed a general theme
within the interview context.
• How data is described
Data should focus on a rich description and be handled more holistically rather
than specific to cover a wider picture of the interview. It was decided to go with
this approach due to its advantage in investigating under-researched areas.
• How thematic analysis is performed
A theoretical top-down approach should be taken where the data was coded and
framed in the analytical interest of the thesis research questions.
• How themes are understood
Data should be understood semantically with an overall generalized broader view
due to the interest of attaining a wider coverage of themes.
• How the data is analyzed
The authors should employ an essentialist/realist mindset when analyzing the data,
practically taking it at face value as it was assumed to have a unidirectional re-
lationship between meaning, experience, and language. This enabled the focus to
be on the interviewed startups as the approach scopes the data to their context.
The thematic analysis was done on the digital platform ATLAS.ti [49], where the inter-
views were split between the authors to code separately. Due to the multidisciplinary
nature of the project, the authors decided to code separately to gain an overall broader
perspective, a method recommended by Braun and Clarke [50].
After coding the health technology startup interviews, the authors conducted the rest of
the analysis collaboratively by going through all codes and considering how they might
form overarching themes. Braun and Clarke outline this process as ”sorting the different
codes into potential themes, and collating all the relevant coded data extracts within the
identified themes” [48]. The next step was conducting a reviewing process to ensure
that the themes and their connected codes still made sense. The outcome of this would
determine whether further categorization into sub-themes, relocation, or removal was
necessary.
Subsequently, the authors refined the themes to ensure simplicity and what Braun and
Clarke describe as ”identifying the ’essence’ of what each theme is about (as well as
the themes overall)” [48]. The authors achieved this by going through the naming and
formulation of the found themes. Lastly, a concept map [51] was also created of the
themes to create a visual overview.
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Phase 3 – Develop
11
3.3
Phase 3 – Develop
The third phase was the start of concept development, where the first step was to
organize the themes, brainstorm ideas, and assemble them into concepts. The authors
then created a design specification [52] based on the previously identified main challenges
mentioned by the health technology startups. Selected concepts were delivered to the
startups in the form of a workshop, where they would validate the proposed design
concepts while giving suggestions and feedback.
3.3.1
Sprint 3 – Ideate
This phase was arranged with exercises in both the problem and solution space to support
a more holistic approach while also stimulating a creative focus on solving the right
problems when creating solutions. For this reason, the authors structured this phase as
an internal workshop using Miro [53] to better support the creative development that
this part of the project entailed. The startups mentioned throughout the interviews
that they had many things to do (see Section 4.2.5). Both authors, therefore, decided
early on that, while ideation should be kept as a creative exercise, the design concept
proposals resulting from the ideation should be able to be prototyped. As a sign of
mutual respect, the authors decided to provide the startups that participated in the
workshops the prototypes as something tangible that was a result of their participation
in the earlier interviews.
Firstly, before starting the development of concepts, various problem space convergent
activities were carried out to get into the mindset of solving the challenges found during
the interviews.
Generally, they focused on visualizing, reframing, externalizing and
categorizing the problems in various ways to get more perspectives and deeper insights.
Selected methods and the motivation behind them are explained below:
• 5 whys [54]
The 5 whys was chosen as the first exercise as it is a simple and fast way to identify
the root causes of the problems, as well as map out their occurring process. This
exercise was very beneficial as a starting point for the ideation process and worked
well in setting a direction for the following activities. It was also very flexible and
could work well in conjunction with other exercises, which was another reason it
was placed at the start.
• User journey [55]
User journeys were great for getting a general overview of a selected process and
all the parameters that were involved in each step. The authors decided to use
this exercise as it is often valuable to identify specific steps where problems occur
and their underlying causes. Moreover, the mapping also enabled the investigation
of startup-specific processes to scope the solution domain further. A hypothetical
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Phase 3 – Develop
12
feature request case was chosen to reflect the experiences of startups from the
interviews.
• Empathy map [56]
Empathy mapping helped to see the problems from the startups’ perspective and
get into their mindset. It was a great way to visualize the knowledge into categories
and allowed the authors to understand the startups better. The primary purpose,
in this case, was to synthesize the interview observations to reveal possible deeper
insight into the startups’ challenges and needs.
• How might we [57]
How might we was a good way to reframe the found problems into opportunities
for design. It complemented the previous exercises as a more convergent problem
space exercise to start thinking about solving the problems.
• Design hypothesis [58]
Lastly, the design hypothesis was selected to support thinking about achieving the
intended outcome and which objectives would need to be fulfilled. It was effective
for aligning the goals of the development and gave clear directions to take. This
exercise was placed as the ending exercise as it built up to the next step of the
process, the design specification.
The exercises supported a more structured approach to the ideation. The authors then
established areas of improvement or points of design that would support the health
technology startups in security-conscious development based on the results of the exer-
cises. A design specification was then created to encompass these identified qualities
to establish some guidelines when brainstorming concepts while also functioning as a
framework for evaluating them. In addition, each characteristic of the design specifica-
tion was quantified and given a weighted value based on the important themes noted
during the interviews. The authors decided on this approach to highlight the priorities
of the aforementioned characteristics better while also adding more means of grading to
the evaluation.
Brainstorming [59] and mind mapping [60] were the main methods used for identifying
design concept ideas due to their compatibility with the divergent part of the creative
process. The authors expanded upon these ideas individually by developing three de-
tailed concept proposals each, which were assessed afterward using a modified version
of the weighted decision matrix [61].
This approach was used to take advantage of
the project’s interdisciplinary nature, allowing the authors to focus on their individual
strengths when detailing the solution. Both authors, therefore, agreed not to set any
constraints otherwise and write any ideas down to keep up the momentum of innovative
thinking.
The three best concepts were to be prototyped for a workshop session with the startups
to test out their functionality. The authors felt that having interactive prototypes would
==PAGE:20==
3.4 Phase 4 - Deliver
13
give the participating startups a feeling of value having been created by their participa-
tion. The prototypes were first sketched as wireframes to agree on a general structure
and flow. Then a higher fidelity version was created using Figma [62] as proposals for
interactive web applications. Additionally, both authors decided that the focus of the
prototypes was the communication of the overall concept. Specific content on the pro-
totypes was therefore scoped down in favor of taking a more holistic perspective, such
as showing more features and functionality.
3.4
Phase 4 - Deliver
The fourth stage in this user-centered design process strove to engage health technology
startups in the design process with the aim of creating a more tailored and meaningful
concept. Involving the startups was important to ensure that the developed concept
proposals would support the goal of security-conscious development for them. Feedback
and suggestions from the startups would also enable the authors to select the most
suitable concept proposal as the final design for further development and adapt it more
to their needs.
To ensure the design was properly grounded in terms of cybersecurity, the authors also
decided to contact experts for feedback on the final design. Both authors believed that
getting other external stakeholders, such as experts within the field, to evaluate the
concept proposal would be meaningful. They had the possibility of providing a fresh
perspective, giving critique or validation that could enable the authors to improve the
concept even more.
3.4.1
Sprint 4 - Prototype
The first part of the deliver phase of the project was to hold workshops with the startups
to get feedback and suggestions for the developed concept proposals. The authors created
a workshop plan ahead of time to ensure good facilitation. The plan was based on the
”Create comfort, Stage discussion and Develop together” model [63] and has three main
stages:
• Create comfort
The first stage of the workshop was about creating a comfortable environment
for participants.
Conducting workshops included a lot of human factors, so it
was, therefore, important to remove any potential barriers to co-creation, such as
confusion, fear of speaking up, or awkwardness among participants. Thus this
stage started with an overview of the workshop to clarify the purpose and then
facilitated introductions between participants to get everyone familiar with each
other.
==PAGE:21==
3.4 Phase 4 - Deliver
14
• Stage discussion
The second stage was about introducing the participants to the main subject of
the workshop. In the earlier phases of a project, this took the form of a problem
that the participants needed to explore more in-depth, while in later phases, it
could be the introduction or testing of concepts.
• Develop together
The last stage took all the input from the previous stages and aimed to produce
an output. This was primarily the development of concept proposals depending
on the previous activities. These could, for example, be concepts for solving the
identified problems or suggestions for improvements to existing proposals.
Workshops lasted two hours, engaging participants in activities designed to support the
goals of each of these three phases. A detailed explanation of the workshop sessions with
all activities and practicalities can be found in the Workshop Program: Appendix A.5.
3.4.1.1
Workshop analysis
The overall method for evaluating the findings of the workshops was mainly split into
a quantitative and qualitative approach. In activities such as the ranking of problems
and dot voting [64], it was possible to measure and compare the results for those in a
quantitative way. However, for the bigger activities, such as the testing of prototypes
and brainstorming, the collected data was more qualitative by nature. This part of the
evaluation was done by collaboratively discussing the findings and categorizing them
into general overarching themes for all concepts and suggestions and feedback for specific
concept proposals. Impressions and thoughts about the concepts were split into pros
and cons to create an overview for the authors. During the discussion, the authors also
attempted to further analyze the data in the context of the specific startups and their
participants. This analysis included how their role or the organization’s maturity had
affected their feedback. This was important to gain insight into why specific concepts
would work better or worse for some startups and how that would affect the feasibility
of the final solution on a more holistic plan for supporting cybersecurity considerations
in health tech startups.
3.4.1.2
Selection of final concept
The selection of the final concept was based on both the quantitative and qualitative
findings from the workshops. New evaluation criteria were discussed and based on pre-
vious findings from the workshops, interviews, and design specific, where the assessment
itself was a qualitative discussion of each point. They can be summarized as:
• Results of dot voting
==PAGE:22==
3.4 Phase 4 - Deliver
15
• How well does the concept align with the research question: ”How might we design
to support the integration of cybersecurity considerations into the development of
health and healthcare technologies in startups?”
• How feasible is the concept? Would it work in practice and help health technology
startups?
• How mature does the concept need to prove valuable? Can the concept still work
well in a limited scope, or is it dependent on many other features to be helpful?
• Inclusivity of the concept, how many kinds of roles in the startups can benefit from
it?
These factors were part of a holistic approach to determining which of the concept
proposals was best aligned with the research questions and provided the most expected
value to the startups.
3.4.2
Sprint 5 - Iterate
After identifying the concept proposal, the next sprint focused on improving and iterating
on the final concept to apply the improvement points mentioned by the health technology
startups.
3.4.2.1
Iteration of the final concept
The previously categorized suggestions and feedback were used as a basis for the iteration
of the final concept. This session worked as an informal brainstorm to develop ideas
for practical implementation. First, the authors discussed and identified how to reframe
these proposals into functions or features of the prototype. The next step was identifying
the modularity in the features because of the abundance of suggestions but the limited
time and resources to develop them. The ideas would often be comprised of multiple
components, so structuring them in main- and sub-functions was a valuable method of
getting a holistic overview of the potential new features. Many sub-functions were often
not critical and might be left out of the Minimum-Viable Product (MVP). For that
reason, the MoSCoW analysis method [65] was used to assess all the features to identify
and prioritize the important ones. The method framework is split up into the following
four categories:
• Must have
These must be fulfilled in the prototype.
• Should have
These should also be part of the MVP if possible.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Phase 4 - Deliver
16
• Could have
Low priority criteria that had a small expected impact on the MVP, could be
considered if there was enough time.
• Will not have
Out of scope criteria.
Narrowing down the many specific characteristics of the features was a very iterative
process, especially considering there are often multiple ways of implementing them. Like
the earlier concept proposal prototypes, the authors decided to conduct an internal work-
shop and used low-fidelity wireframes again to sketch out the rough visualizations of the
new features. Miro was also used again to move post-its around to their respective wire-
frames and served well as a platform to facilitate collaborative development in general.
Inspiration was also sought from existing websites and their method of implementation.
Finally, the MVP prototype was again created in Figma, where the authors decided to
use Google Material Design [66] to have a standardized design language framework and
UI.
3.4.3
Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize
Following the selection and iteration of the final design based on the workshops with the
health technology startups, the last task was to ensure the feasibility and potential for
real-world impact of the design.
3.4.3.1
Expert interviews
For the project’s final sprint, the authors contacted a variety of cybersecurity experts to
get feedback on the newly iterated concept proposal. The plan was to conduct a semi-
structured interview, which consisted of a testing session and a verbal questionnaire.
Inspired by the previously used methods during the workshops and interviews, the first
part was a think-out-aloud testing session with guiding questions like the workshops.
There were also some specific tasks for the experts to complete related to the newly
implemented features. The second part included more specific questions, like in the
interviews, where the experts were asked about their thoughts on the concept’s usefulness
and also specifically on how feasible they would rate it.
The more detailed verbal
questionnaire program can be found in Appendix A.6. It was important for the authors
to get feedback from experts to obtain more potential validation and suggestions for
improvements.
3.4.3.2
Topic summary analysis
After holding the interviews, the authors organized the collected data by sorting out writ-
ten notes taken throughout talking with the experts. They performed a topic summary
==PAGE:24==
3.4 Phase 4 - Deliver
17
analysis on the feedback, where the authors identified overarching relations between
the gathered data and categorized them into topics. The topic summary analysis was
split into two parts to match the verbal questionnaire. The first part was analyzing the
think-out-aloud session when the experts tested the prototypes. The second part then
analyzed the experts’ answers to the prepared verbal questionnaire. Like previous ses-
sions, such as the workshop analysis, this was done collaboratively between both authors
through discussion.
3.4.3.3
The final design
The authors defined the final design elements similarly using an internal workshop ap-
proach similar to the early concept proposals and the concept iteration. The internal
workshop mainly consisted of deciding on a visual presentation of the identified improve-
ment points for the final design. Moreover, it also entailed the design of new features
to address selected feedback from the experts. The authors again used Miro to create
low-fidelity wireframes for fast mockups. New features and flows were also visualized
with post-its to communicate their properties better. These activities supported a more
eﬀicient creation of the final design prototype in Figma.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
This section describes the results of the initial literature review performed at the begin-
ning of the project and how it helped shape the interview guide.
4.1.1
Literature review
Starting the project, the authors first sought to gain a better understanding of contem-
porary research. The authors conducted a literature review to broaden the authors’
scope of knowledge. The research questions, as well as the identified areas of interest in
the literature review, were used as a basis for creating the interview guide. This review
ensured that the interview guide had proper coverage of not just areas of interest to the
research questions but also gaps in knowledge identified in contemporary research.
A total of 47 papers were included in the review after passing an initial title and abstract
review.
The authors then excluded 16 papers as a reading of the introduction and
conclusion did not provide value to this study, for a total of 31 included papers in this
sprint. Of these 31 papers, the authors rated 16 as ”high” priority for full-text review
by both authors and the remaining 15 as ”medium” priority for a single full-text review.
The literature review identified six general themes in healthcare and health technology
security that helped scope the interview guide. These themes were:
• The need for cybersecurity in healthcare and health technology
• Cybersecurity concerns during health technology development
• Privacy concerns with the introduction of health technology
• Awareness and human factors in health technology cybersecurity
• Regulation as an inhibitor to innovation and a solution
• Challenges of the increased use of pervasive computing
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
19
4.1.1.1
The need for cybersecurity in healthcare and health
technology
This review highlighted, first and foremost, the essential role of cybersecurity in health
technology development and use. Many authors in contemporary literature stated that
the health and medical sectors were of particular interest to cyber criminals [67] [68].
Coventry and Branley argued that healthcare and health technology were inherently
attractive targets for financial cybercrime due to a large amount of sensitive data and
generally weak defenses. They noted that the increasingly widespread adoption of smart-
phones for health apps and lack of funding for cybersecurity concerns were the main
reasons for this. The organizations that developed new technology, therefore, needed
to make cybersecurity part of the safety of the patient [69]. A 2021 study by Geor-
giadou et al. about the cybersecurity culture in hospitals during COVID-19 agreed that
the transition to the always-online approach to healthcare increased the importance of
cybersecurity in healthcare [70].
Researchers also wrote about the consequences and general lack of cybersecurity in
the health technology industry. Magrabi et al. wrote that software bugs, user errors
and the lack of cybersecurity could cause clinical errors, worsening patient outcomes.
Ineffective processes in the design, building and implementation of health technology
were determined to be the root cause of their errors [71]. Luna et al. stated that the
digitization of healthcare also increased meant risk of denial of service and data breaches
[68]. According to Koppel et al., introducing too much cybersecurity in hospitals could
conversely also cause reduced patient outcomes. They noted that clinical workers were
often overwhelmed by too many cybersecurity controls in digital health systems, making
the clinicians attempt to circumvent the controls [72].
These points informed the authors include interview questions about what the startups
thought about the need for cybersecurity and the current cybersecurity level of the health
technology sector. The intent was to verify if the developers agreed with the researchers.
How the startups weighted cybersecurity concerns with the user experience was also of
interest.
4.1.1.2
Cybersecurity concerns during health technology
development
The review also showed how researchers thought health technology developers should
ensure cybersecurity concerns during the development process. Jones and Katzis wrote
that cybersecurity concerns should be part of a risk assessment strategy performed
continuously throughout the development process [10].
Regarding the low priority of cybersecurity during development, Wirth and Grimes
argued that the reason was that the development cycles of medical devices were too
long. The expected lifetime of medical devices was long in general and the deployment
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
20
of updates was therefore slow [73]. Developers and cybersecurity departments were often
disconnected as their processes were siloed within organizations, making it harder for
them to collaborate and tackle the problems.
This siloing was an issue since many
identified breaches happened at the application layer. The high development costs of
implementing cybersecurity were also noted as a reason, according to Bhuyan et al.
[74]. For example, Klonoff et al. stated that the lack of demand for cybersecurity and
increased implementation costs hinder cybersecurity from being implemented in diabetes
devices [20].
Others, such as Fotios et al., argued that human errors were some of the most common
causes of security vulnerabilities, which could be traced back to a lack of cybersecurity
culture [75]. Alhuwail et al. noted that larger organizations such as hospitals were more
likely to have better cybersecurity systems in place due to having more resources and
valuable data to protect [76]. Kaila and Nyman mentioned that resources were only one
part of the equation and agreed with the idea that cybersecurity awareness was the most
crucial factor in the proper implementation of cybersecurity [8].
Research also discussed how to introduce cybersecurity elements in product development
best. Thieme et al. presented the challenges of introducing new technology in complex
mental healthcare contexts. They touted an end-user-centric approach as enabling more
holistic solutions [77]. Kim et al. concurred with this statement and added that new
solutions should adhere to the existing workflows of doctors using health technology.
Health practitioners were noted to have very practiced workflows and that any technical
solution needed to add to, not break existing workflows [78]. The transparency of solu-
tions was also stressed as a critical factor, according to Yang et al. [79]. Brantly and
Brantly remarked that other stakeholders, such as patients, should also be included in
the implementation of cybersecurity concerns [12].
Based on the existing research, how organizations integrated cybersecurity concerns
during development and what apparent challenges they faced specifically as health tech-
nology startups were, therefore, interesting areas to investigate during the interviews.
Likewise, how the startups considered end-user workflows and existing processes in their
products was also an interesting point to discuss during the interviews.
4.1.1.3
Privacy concerns with the introduction of health
technology
The privacy concerns of patients and health practitioners were another oft-mentioned
theme in research [4]. As new technologies were introduced and health became increas-
ingly digital, how to protect user data was also of concern. Meingast et al. viewed
the areas of data storage and data mining to be areas where privacy must be consid-
ered. Data access control was seen as the solution to privacy issues, with well-defined
rules and policies for data access necessary to protect patients’ data [80]. Mantas and
Liaskos likewise agreed that authentication, authorization and access control were nec-
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
21
essary technical controls to protect health data [81]. Ryu and Kim also stressed the
importance of considering security and privacy concerns in health technology [82].
Some researchers also tried to model how to ensure privacy in health. Jara et al. created
a cybersecurity maturity model for organizations in the health sector. Factors such as
how organizations handled information privacy and other organizational factors such
as processes, reports, policies, roles, and responsibilities were identified as factors of
cybersecurity maturity [83]. Another study performed by Burke et al. found that while
some generalized cybersecurity assessment indexes existed in research, a minimal number
of these addressed the unique challenges of digital health, such as the sensitivity of health
data [84].
Prior research then highlights the need for startups to consider approaches on how to
ensure the privacy of end-users. The concrete technical and organizational controls that
the startups introduced to address privacy concerns were areas that had not been covered
in existing research. The use of existing cybersecurity frameworks or indexes was also
of interest.
4.1.1.4
Awareness and human factors in health technology
cybersecurity
During the analysis, another noteworthy observation in research was the awareness of cy-
bersecurity and the human factors that impact the security of health technology. Many
researchers, including Bhuyan et al., classified non-malicious end-users of health as a
critical gateway for cyber attacks. The paper emphasized the importance of creating
a cybersecurity culture of awareness with the buy-in of end-users [74] [85]. Other re-
searchers, such as Alhuwail et al., detailed the need for not just developers but also
health practitioners (nurses, doctors) to be aware of the cybersecurity risks involved
with using health technology. They note that the human, organizational and strategic
elements of cybersecurity in health are lacking in research [76].
Awareness of cybersecurity in hospitals was also mentioned in research quite often. Fotios
et al. wrote that a lack of dedicated cybersecurity personnel and employee training was
identified in many healthcare institutions [75]. Nifakos et al. agreed in their systematic
review of the influence of human factors in healthcare cybersecurity that the lack of
employee awareness training was the main driver of cybersecurity risk [75]. Awareness
was a necessary component of avoiding risky behavior, as was shown in a case study
of Portuguese healthcare institutions by Nunes et al. [86]. An intervention study by
Alvarez et al. about the privacy of wearable health devices noted that future health
practitioners were unsure of the risks involved with wearable health devices. The study
concluded that users actively requested more awareness when faced with the privacy
issues of personally identifiable data in health devices [87].
Prior research then underlines the need for the authors to investigate how the startups
handled cybersecurity awareness internally and with their customers. In particular, how
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
22
the startups approached awareness of customer and end-user data with their customers
was of interest to the authors.
4.1.1.5
Regulation as an inhibitor to innovation and a solution
The review showed regulation and compliance as facts of life for developers of health
technology. Researchers saw regulation as both an opportunity for standardizing cy-
bersecurity requirements and an inhibitor to innovation [88] [13]. Researchers such as
Magrabi et al. argued for the use of further cybersecurity regulation in health technol-
ogy to improve oversight and minimize patient risks [71]. This viewpoint was echoed
by Bhuyan et al., with the caveat that policymakers should introduce cybersecurity
regulation in cooperation with healthcare organizations not to hinder innovation [74].
On the other end of the regulation spectrum, Beth Ann Fiedler stated in her work that
regulations such as HIPAA set the entry bar for medical device products very high. The
health sector’s restrictions on operating system patches and malware protection updates
prevented the continuous improvement of cybersecurity in devices, according to Fiedler
[88]. Other researchers, such as Brantly and Brantly, rejected regulation as a top-down
approach that generally did not consider end-users and patient concerns. They did note
the EU GDPR as one example of regulation built with the protection of end-users in
mind [12].
Deborah R. Farranger further elaborated on this argument, stating that
no one-size-fits-all regulatory approach was possible due to the vast difference between
health organizations [13].
Based on these findings, the authors decided to add questions to the interview guide
related to the startup’s opinions and experiences with regulation. Of particular inter-
est was whether the startups felt regulation was a barrier to entry or a guarantor of
cybersecurity quality.
4.1.1.6
Challenges of the increased use of pervasive computing
The last prominent observation perceived in health technology research was the effect of
pervasive computing paradigms such as the Internet of Things (IoT). Some researchers
saw IoT as an enhancer for existing healthcare systems [89]. Thomasian and Adashi
noted how the introduction of IoT allowed for greater capabilities in sensing and actua-
tion. The negative consequences were increased surface areas for cyber attacks, common
IoT vulnerabilities such as default passwords as well a lack of computing power to en-
force encryption schemes [90]. Deborah R. Farringer also mentioned the wide variety
of IoT systems, providers and standards as a driver for incompatibility hell, further
increasing cybersecurity risks [13]. Daniele Giansanti mentioned the homogeneous IoT
environments as the”challenge of the millennium”. In her paper, she described homo-
geneous systems of wearable medical devices such as pacemakers to be under increased
cybersecurity scrutiny due to their essential functions [85].
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Sprint 1 - Research - Literature review
23
For the interviews with the startups that developed medical devices, the concerns of
IoT security were something that was discussed. Of particular interest was how they
approached device security and the security of the data transmitted wirelessly by the
IoT devices.
4.1.2
Interview guide
After identifying the relevant themes in cybersecurity in health technology, the next step
was for the authors to create an interview guide based on the gaps in current research and
the research questions. The interview guide aimed to uncover how the health technology
startups addressed the concerns noted in research while also containing questions related
to the research question on the relevant cybersecurity challenges and processes of the
health technology startups.
The final interview guide contained the following primary structure:
1. Opening questions
2. Implementation of cybersecurity aspects during development
3. Use of security frameworks in startups
4. Effect of regulation (GDPR) in development
5. Designing cybersecurity systems with the end-users in mind (customers/businesses)
6. Ending questions
The interview structure was very flexible and the structure could be changed to match
the flow of the interview. This was done to ensure a natural flow of conversation that
could adapt to the topics discussed at hand. Additionally, it also accounted for the
varying background of the participants, as they were likely to have different fields of
expertise depending on their role in the startup. This structure could potentially lead to
some areas being discussed more or less than others. The authors included some open-
ended world-building questions like ”What would you change with regards to regulation if
you could choose?” in the interview guide. These questions helped provide more thought-
provoking answers from the participants to complement some of the more technical or
specific questions, like questions about the startups’ use of security frameworks.
The interview guide can be found in Appendix A.7. Transcripts of each interview can
be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
24
4.2
Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
The next step of the process was to perform interviews with the health technology
startups after doing the literature review and research. The aim was to gather qualitative
data to perform a thematic analysis in order to find common themes for developing a
concept proposal.
4.2.1
Interview recruitment
The authors’ first action was to recruit health technology startups to participate in the
interviews. The recruitment drive for the interviews resulted in a heavy representation of
medical technology startups compared to digital health startups. A total of 57 startups
were contacted for interviews, with 28 startups operating broadly within digital health
(fitness apps, health trackers) and 23 within medical technology (disease symptom recog-
nition, medical scanners). Of those participants, 7 out of the eight interviewees were
medical technology startups. This distribution is visualized in Figure 4.1 below.
Figure 4.1: Distribution of contacted and recruited interview participants based on
their primary product area.
One reason for this might be the extensive focus on organizational cybersecurity through
regulatory compliance as required by hospitals and MDR as mentioned in the thematic
analysis in Section 4.2.7.1 and 4.2.6.2. Medical technology startups were more likely
to create products that need to be certified in at least Class IIa of MDR, requiring
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
25
a certified QMS, which introduces some cybersecurity aspects. This requirement was
because Rule 11 of MDR states that any software used to make decisions with diagnosis
or therapeutic purposes was classified as class IIa [16]. Digital health apps generally did
not fall under this category and could operate under the simpler Class I license.
4.2.2
The Interviews
The interviews were held both online and on-site at the startups’ oﬀices. There were
considerable differences in the startups’ sizes and maturity as all the startups were at
different phases of development. Some were still developing their MVP and others were
already well-situated on the market.
This diversity was also shown in the startups’
business areas and the members participating in the interview, as the business areas
determined the kind of members needed on the team. This diversity resulted in the
interviews covering cybersecurity from the viewpoint of multiple stakeholders, which
was mentioned as an important point in Section 2. A list of the participants and their
startup type can be found in Table 4.1.
Interview number
(startup type)
Roles participating
Interview 1 (Digital health
app)
Project Lead (P1)
Interview 2 (Medical AI
diagnostics)
Clinical Operations Director (P2)
Interview 3 (Medical AI
diagnostics)
CTO (P3)
Interview 4 (Medical AI
diagnostics)
CTO (P4), Project Manager (P5) and
Software Developer (P6)
Interview 5 (Medical
devices)
CTO (P7) and CIO (P8)
Interview 6 (Medical
devices)
Founder (P9)
Interview 7 (Medical
devices)
CEO (P10) and Engineer (P11)
Interview 8 (Medical
devices)
CTO (P12)
Table 4.1: Overview of interviewed startups and participants’ roles within the startups.
The description of the companies and participants has purposefully been phrased broadly
to protect their anonymity.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
26
4.2.3
Identified themes
Thematic analysis of the eight interviews led to the development of 7 key themes re-
flecting the challenges and opportunities of cybersecurity in health technology startups.
These are listed below and explained more in the following sections.
1. Cybersecurity is many things
2. Cybersecurity prioritization in startups is low
3. Regulatory compliance: a clear and present danger
4. Customers: both a weak link and a heavy burden
5. Uncertain risk, uncertain damage liability
6. Cybersecurity in startups: informal and iterative
7. Cybersecurity is hard to face alone
4.2.4
Cybersecurity is many things
The companies participating in the interviews mentioned cybersecurity as being multi-
disciplinary, multi-faceted and not limited to purely technical aspects.
4.2.4.1
Cybersecurity is technical
Cybersecurity is technical by its nature, as its name suggests. A majority of the startups
interviewed shared the opinion that the cybersecurity of a product was closely related to
the technical implementation of security within that product. ”... cybersecurity related
to our products, it is, you know, [the] technical implementation of things that ensure
we are not breaching anything” (P4). The project manager of a medical AI diagnostics
startup mentioned the CIA triad of ”Integrity, Confidentiality and Availability” (P5) as
being the foundation for cybersecurity.
Technical cybersecurity was pretty standardized in terms of implementation. However,
interviewees noted many different examples of implementing cybersecurity during actual
development. Some mentioned cybersecurity as just part of developing a piece of code.
In contrast, others focused more on backup strategies, ensuring infrastructure allowed
for reliable access and ensuring the confidentiality of any sensitive data regarding GDPR.
For many companies, the availability of systems was essential for doing their work. ”Yeah,
well, we don’t have a need for our programs to crash as it would make us unable to work”
(P10).
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
27
4.2.4.2
Cybersecurity is organizational
Companies were aware of security risks related to employees through social engineering,
which they hear about from their peers. ”I know D****** does a lot and also works
a lot with data security.
Many larger companies do it to see if their employees are
aware. Do they click links they shouldn’t?” (P9). Creating a company culture around
best practices within cybersecurity was something many companies spoke of striving to
achieve in order to improve overall security. ”Even the sales personnel should make sure
their passwords and usernames are hard to get into, as they also have access to our
customers for example” (P3).
Ensuring that processes were also clearly defined in case of cybersecurity incidents was
also highlighted by participants as important. Most of the participants had some kind
of formalized process in case something happened, which was both seen as best practice
but also as a requirement according to regulations such as GDPR. ”I mean in terms of
GDPR, we have to follow certain regulations. ... This is something we have to have in
place if there are, for example, they see a bug in the product” (P2). Having organizational
processes also meant that top-level management had to be involved in the creation of a
cybersecurity strategy as ”It encompasses the whole remit of security” (P2).
Many participating startups shared their perception that their customers required stan-
dards such as ISO27001 to check for cybersecurity maturity and readiness. From the
customers’ viewpoint, ensuring a high level of compliance and cybersecurity awareness
was also increasingly seen as a selling point and a prerequisite for doing business. ”For
sure it is also something that is beginning to be requested. Back when we started they
just asked, ’is your system secure?’ and we just said ’yes’” (P3). Depending on the
company’s size, this could be seen as either an opportunity or a roadblock. ”Today it
becomes a competition parameter that distinguishes you from other organizations that
do the same as you” (P3).
4.2.4.3
Cybersecurity is about managing risks
The consequences of a data leak or security compromise are incredibly high when working
with hospitals and health data in general. Interviewees mentioned that customers, par-
ticularly within public health, feared the consequences of being the victims of a security
breach. ”They’re not incentivized by technology adoption. So they, of course, they don’t
want to create any mess. So they’re very reluctant to adopt anything that they’re not ex-
tremely familiar with.” (P6). Not just the customers but the companies themselves were
also worried about not just data but also the compromise of their intellectual property.
The proper introduction of risk management was therefore seen as paramount. Many
participants mentioned using risk assessments to guide their cybersecurity strategies in
terms of implementing controls to mitigate the fallout of any incident. ”They only have
access to what has ever been sent to our system, and only the last 30 worth so. So that
went into the risk assessment to sort of reduce the risk of a data leak” (P2). The project
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
28
lead of a digital health app also mentioned the privacy of end-users and patients as a
motivational factor to reduce the damage of a data leak.
4.2.4.4
Learnings
Cybersecurity contains many related aspects, not just technical but also organizational.
The health technology startups who took part in these interviews spoke of cybersecurity
in terms of processes, technical implementation of security as well as in terms of risk
management.
4.2.5
Cybersecurity prioritization in startups is low
All startups expressed challenges with prioritizing cybersecurity higher in the interviews.
They frequently mentioned being busy with all kinds of tasks while also talking about
the diﬀiculty of getting started.
4.2.5.1
Prioritization of R&D over cybersecurity
The startups were often still working on getting their MVP out, sometimes still living
off investor money. Consequently, this led to the main prioritization being R&D in all
startups, as they wanted to make their product and business successful before dealing
with anything else. All interviews had this point, one example being mentioned by a
medical device CEO: ”That is, because one place or another, our products need to be
able to, most importantly, attain a kind of function that is able to solve the problem we
want to solve, that’s not cybersecurity, no” (P10).
This prioritization was also heavily tied to the need to attract funding and investors,
which meant the startups would need something to show for it. The incentive for star-
tups’ decisions was therefore very driven by economics as was well described by the
founder of a medical device startup: ”When you are a startup, then you need money,
and if there isn’t money in it, and this is the honest version, then you would not priori-
tize it. Because if you do not get the money, then you are forced to close and what you
rather? Close or risk having a cyber-attack?” (P9).
Additionally, startups were already very limited in their resources, such as time, money
and personnel, making it even harder to set aside some for cybersecurity. Startups were
often small and low on employees while at the same time having a significant number
of tasks to work on. One of the participating medical device startup CTO described
this as: ”What can you say, when you start out at our size, then there are plenty of
headaches already, so I think this cybersecurity part, it’s something, what can you say,
expect, but do not set any requirements for” (P7).
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
29
4.2.5.2
What do you do if you don’t know what to do
It also became clear over the course of these interviews that startups’ prioritization and
focus on other things had led to insecurity and uncertainty about cybersecurity resources
and when they actually needed them. The startups often described this as a challenge
of finding good cybersecurity resources, generally making cybersecurity harder for them
to deal with as they did not know how and where to start. A medical device startup
founder voiced examples of these frustrations: ”It’s inexperience. So it has been like:
Who do you find to do it? To the best price? Who is the most competent? So it’s pretty
much been, what do you do if you don’t know what do to?” (P9).
This issue was also further highlighted in Interview 2, where the clinical operations direc-
tor expressed much uncertainty and needed to start from scratch looking for resources
by Googling: ”At the moment, we are very naive on a lot of the cybersecurity issues.
No, I can’t remember the names of these websites now. But I might be able to find them
if you, if you wanted me to. So that will be, you know, I would go to them or I would
go to Google in that is, uh, that’s about my limit” (P2).
As a result, it was possible to see that startups would regularly turn to external help for
cybersecurity, as it was often too overwhelming for them to handle themselves. The clin-
ical operations director of a medical AI diagnostics defended this approach: ”Otherwise
I would have to if there was something serious then I would have to call in consultants.
As we just do not have the knowledge in house” (P2).
Startup teams were mostly centered around developing their product and business; in
many cases, they did not have dedicated personnel or the right competencies to tackle
the issues. Many of them acknowledged this fact and willfully outsourced cybersecurity
to externals as a part of their overall strategy. An example could be found from this
dialogue with the project lead of a digital health app startup: ”And we’re not going
to invest in cybersecurity or doing that by ourselves because we’re not specialists, not
confident enough in that. So, it’s better to go for vendors and yeah. That would be initial
plan” (P1).
4.2.5.3
Learnings
Many startups prioritized R&D due to the need to attain a sustainable business model,
and therefore prioritized cybersecurity less, as it was seen as an overhead. Due to being
new and inexperienced, they were also insecure about where they could find reliable
cybersecurity resources and how to use them.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
30
4.2.6
Regulatory compliance: a clear and present
danger
Most participants mentioned having trouble with regulation, notably that the material
was hard to understand and implement in practice. Regulations acted as a bar of entry
to their development, which consumed much of their already limited resources.
4.2.6.1
Regulation: expensive and time-consuming
The perceptions of regulation were varied, but most trend negatively. Many startups
point out the cost of compliance and certification as being a barrier for startups. Getting
certified not only had a high up-front cost in terms of man-hours but also operating costs
in terms of continued compliance. ”It is more important for us to develop some products
we can sell, but we need CE marking before we can sell it. But it is expensive as hell
and can take a really long time” (P11). The relevance of regulation for startups was
questioned by some participants, who feel that it was hard to create standards that
fit companies of all sizes equally. Another participant acknowledged the importance of
regulation in securing the patient’s rights and reducing risks in the public’s interest.
Many participants pointed out the diﬀiculty of understanding regulations to be the
main problem. They especially mentioned ISO27001 as being particularly heavy, as the
CTO of a medical AI diagnostics startup put it: ”If you go through ISO27001 you quickly
become tired” (P3). The startups believed the standard to only introduce more processes
and documentation without providing actual cybersecurity value. One participant with
experience in the certification process described how different people read the same
standard differently, introducing yet more confusion. Participants agreed on the value
of the certification as proof of having attained a certain standard of cybersecurity when
talking to customers.
4.2.6.2
No template for compliance
The interviewed startups had taken different approaches to address regulation related to
cybersecurity. Certification, especially ISO27001 for information security and ISO13485
for Conformité Européenne (CE) marking of medical devices, were the most prioritized
according to the participants. Some had already achieved some certification and oth-
ers claimed to be compliant. Many also wanted to be certified, as there were strict
restrictions on the statements a product could make about a patient’s health without a
certification. ”We started out by saying that we wanted Denmark’s first ’type of scanner’
to help you ’improve health’. We can’t say that, because you need all kinds of certifications
and approvals from the health authority” (P9).
Regarding GDPR, some startups created simple data processor agreements with cus-
tomers, who were responsible for handling the data. Others stored data themselves so
they could make more informed decisions on how to improve their product. ”Purely
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
31
GDPR compliant is also, there are many who misunderstand GDPR in that they think
you can’t have any data. You can have all the data you want...” (P9).
One common initiative within organizational cybersecurity was the implementation of
a quality management system (QMS). QMSs were mandated by medical regulation for
CE marking, which also involved introducing processes for handling cybersecurity. ”The
quality management system has to define how we operate inside the company in terms
of cybersecurity” (P1). Participants noted that the introduction of such a system also
showed how addressing business requirements could improve cybersecurity processes.
However, most of them also expressed that implementing such a system was not trivial,
as each company was unique and had different processes to support and manage. ”But I
think what people are most surprised about is that you cannot take a template somebody
else have made, run it into our own QMS and then everything is running smoothly”
(P3).
4.2.6.3
Learnings
Startups in health tech were uniquely affected by strict regulations to which they needed
to comply. This requirement proved to be an expensive and time-consuming obstacle for
many startups and they addressed this regulation in both creative and different ways.
4.2.7
Customers: both a weak link and a heavy burden
Many interviewed startups showed frustration when talking about collaboration with
the health sector. The startups criticized hospitals for executing things at a slow pace,
for which the startups did not have the time.
4.2.7.1
The public health sector is challenging to work with
The startups spoke of public health as being more conservative, which greatly impacted
their ability to work and collaborate. The adoption of new technology was also men-
tioned to be slow and there was a significant disparity in IT knowledge between different
staff and department members in the health sector, such as different workers at the hos-
pitals. One of the subsequent consequences was the general lack of cybersecurity and
patient data awareness, as described by a medical device CEO: ”Like, I am pretty sure
like, if you asked the individual clinicians, doctor, nurse, or someone else, then they
DON’T THINK about it at all. They have NO IDEA what it is” (P10).
The challenges were only made worse by the significant amount of bureaucracy seen
in the hospitals, making the approval process very long and tedious for startups and
companies in general. This problem significantly affected the health technology startups
as they often could not afford to wait so long, as they needed to progress their businesses
in order to be sustainable. A medical AI diagnostics CTO explained the challenges as:
”For a lot of hospitals it is the bureaucracy, it needs to go through a lot of steps, and you
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
32
need to approve, and you need to know a lot of departments it has to go through before
you can get the approval to actually do the installation. It’s not like a single person you
can contact” (P4).
Depending on the contact person at the hospital and their background, the problem
could also be made worse. For personnel with less technological knowledge, it often
resulted in less constructive discussions and cooperative behavior; ”It’s not easy to work
with them. Like, you really need to come with something concrete before you can open
up for something” (P7). Due to the high confidentiality of patient data and general
concerns about regulation, hospitals could also be very strict in their approach; ”The
only thing, what can you say, cared about, was that we made a data processor agreement”
(P10).
Even working with the IT department itself was often mentioned to be a challenge,
and most of the time, startups expressed wanting to avoid having to work with them as
much as possible. The startups spoke of the IT department having stringent certification
requirements if they wanted to, for example, integrate their system into the hospitals’,
while simultaneously also needing to go through many procedures in terms of compliance
and regulation. This slowness led to very long waiting times. It resulted in some startups
choosing to work around the bureaucracy by deploying their own network and platforms,
such as the CTO of a medical device startup: ”But generally at hospitals, if you can
completely avoid having to talk to the IT department. You just get put at the back of the
line when they have such a stack of requests waiting for them” (P12).
In addition, hospitals were also very different and could vary in their rules, especially
across different regions and municipalities in Denmark. This variance made it hard for
startups to work with hospitals, as they would need to account for the differing policies
of different hospitals. There were also no clear guidelines for working with hospitals,
which meant all this knowledge needed to be learned from experience, which was highly
time-consuming and resource intensive. A medical device startup CEO described these
frustrations as: ”What to say, there are no guidelines, and if you go to one hospital or
another hospital, then there are big, what to say, variations of what they would be willing
to share with startups like us” (P10).
Lastly, hospitals were generally pressed for resources too. Like startups and other com-
panies, they needed to invest resources into their primary business, treating the patients.
That meant mainly spending on medicine, equipment for operations, et cetera, which
could be very expensive. As a result, startups with unproven solutions would get priori-
tized much less. This problem was expressed by a medical device startup CTO: ”This is
their, this is their attitude since the healthcare sector is already under pressure, what to
say, the budget is going more towards medicine, so there is not money for, what to say,
competence development, no money for nurses, no money for doctors, there is generally
not money available for many things” (P7). This was just one of many examples brought
up during the interviews, which showed the diﬀiculty of working with the health sector.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
33
4.2.7.2
It is hard to catch up with new technology
As hospitals were large organizational entities, implementing new technology would often
need significant changes across the whole hospital, which was very expensive and time-
consuming. Coupled with their conservative attitude, the adoption of newer technology
was only getting harder as it kept evolving. This attitude had resulted in many hospitals
being very ”old school” in their tools, such as using pen and paper, fax or legacy software;
”But they are also known to be conservative branch. I can come with many examples of
all of the things that has been said by doctors and cardiologists we have talked to, who
just say, well, what do we even need this for. We like paper and fax” (P7).
This kind of conservative attitude also made it hard for the hospitals to see the value
in new technology. A medical device startup CEO further highlighted this during the
interviews: ”It was like, I was met with a wall with some lawyer that didn’t get the
point at all, the purpose of the product, they couldn’t see the profits in the product at all”
(P10).
The disconnection with the newer technology made the inevitable implementation harder,
as hospitals were not prepared for the new responsibilities that came with it. This un-
preparedness was especially visible when digital health records and GDPR became more
prevalent, as much consideration was needed to handle these new responsibilities. The
previously quoted medical device startup CEO experienced this unprepared impression
first-hand: ”If we, if we called them up and asked them where we should put our data so
they, uh, wanted to receive them, then they, they didn’t know” (P10).
A project manager from one of the startups mentioned that a notable cause of this con-
servatism was the generation gap in hospital workers. This conservatism was because
they often tended to lean towards the older side, especially those high up in the hierarchy
making critical decisions. Other than the acceptance and implementation of new tech-
nology, this could also affect their proficiency in using it on a more general level. The
CTO of a medical device startup described a conversation with less technically inclined
personnel who had challenges adopting new technology: ”I would say that she might
also be a bit older, the older generation. But again, it these kind of challenges we have
experienced. There is a bit of, what to say, generation gap on how good one is at using
technology” (P7).
4.2.7.3
Learnings
Some customers, especially the public health sector was seen as old-fashioned by some of
the startups and were slow to catch up with new technology. Cybersecurity and privacy
were relatively new phenomena, to which customers took a conservative approach. This
created challenges for startups to build relationships with customers and hospitals due
to the many layers of bureaucracy.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
34
4.2.8
Uncertain risk, uncertain damage liability
The risk of cybersecurity was often expressed as an uncertainty by the startups during
the interviews. They often mentioned being diﬀicult to assess their own situation, which
made other cybersecurity-related decisions harder.
4.2.8.1
Assessment of risks
The health technology startups experienced uncertainty about cybersecurity consequences
and how to properly mitigate risks was observed as one of the main themes. ”Because
our main subject is health data and we don’t know how attractive it is to steal the data,
or in breach for that data, what value it can bring to the ones who are interested in that?
(P1)”. Companies did agree that having a low level of cybersecurity was seen as both a
hacking risk and a data leak risk. The cybersecurity of the cloud was also contentious,
with different interviewees having different opinions on the topic. Some touted the cloud
as being ”More secure than on-premise” (P3), while others believed it to be less secure.
The lack of resources and common standards on how to approach cloud development
could be seen as an area of improvement.
Another general subtheme within risk assessment was the practical application of risk
management or analysis to limit the consequences and liability in the case of a breach.
As one medical AI diagnostics CTO put it, assessing cybersecurity risks was done to:
”Ensuring that we minimize risks of being hacked, leaking data” (P4). Unauthorized
access to patient and customer data within the space was particularly important to
prevent, as health data was a special category that required additional protection ac-
cording to the EU GDPR [2]. As one medical device engineer put it: ”I think it is the
biggest risk we have, that someone comes and obtains access to this data and shares it
without consent” (P11), regarding patient health data. The companies were, therefore,
very aware of the risks involved and actively attempted to mitigate these risks through
technical and structural risk mitigation.
4.2.8.2
Avoiding cybersecurity doomsday
In order to mitigate the risk, both technical and structural risk mitigation methods
were used.
The most used technical implementation of risk mitigation was network
security, either through application firewalls or isolating the product within an isolated
section of the customer’s network. ”So in an on-premises [deployment], the service is in
a very, usually a very tightly separated, isolated environment.” (P4). One startup that
shared oﬀices with other startups brought their own internet connection to avoid leaking
confidential data to the other oﬀice tenants. Another method that companies chose to
mitigate risks was to perform more structural risk mitigation. Some had brought in
external help to audit and test their cybersecurity; ”I started with a consultant that
did have a vulnerability test of our externally facing IP addresses” (P2). Some others
mentioned the use of penetration testing tools by their own staff. Others re-assessed
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
35
their access control management internally within the company, particularly regarding
how they shared confidential files and other data. A medical device CIO also mentioned
how they attempt to simplify their solution to mitigate potential user risks. ”You could
say our mission is to make it so simple that it becomes hard to mess up.” (P8).
4.2.8.3
Learnings
Risk management was a big part of the organizational aspects of cybersecurity. Multiple
startups performed extensive risk assessments and audits and implemented technical
initiatives to mitigate health data risks and intellectual property risks.
The worries
about cybersecurity risks particularly stemmed from the multitude of security breaches
reported in the news.
4.2.9
Cybersecurity in startups: informal and iterative
Startups often mentioned best practices as their guideline for cybersecurity. Most par-
ticipants expressed that learning about cybersecurity was a gradual process that kept
evolving as they gained more knowledge about it.
4.2.9.1
Best practices are the way forward
The participants often mentioned best practices during the interviews, and the startups
mentioned them as a core part of their approach to cybersecurity; ”I would mean it has
influence on the development, but that is that we follow these best practices within the
various methods” (P8).
Across these interviews, startups spoke of possessing broad awareness in terms of cyber-
security. They were already preparing and planning these considerations as part of their
development. Best practices could be many things, but certain notable topics had been
brought up more frequently:
• Anonymization of data
• Standard Operating Procedures
• Access control
• Company awareness and culture
• Validation with third party
• Secure service providers
• Management system for security (ISMS)
• Two Factor authentication
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
36
• Password managers
• Backups
• Work mail
• Activity logs
• Single sign-on
4.2.9.2
Standardizing the how-to cybersecurity
As listed above, Standard Operating Procedures were one of the ways startups ap-
proached cybersecurity on a more organizational level. The procedures ranged from
onboarding new employees to lists of advice for how they could protect themselves; ”So
we’ve produced some list of advices how to protect themselves, their computers, how not
to share information? Yeah, what protection measures needs to be taken into account”
(P1). Having these standardized processes made it easier for startups to streamline their
workflow while being prepared to react quickly in case any incidents happen.
Access control was also one of the most brought up practices during the interviews: ”So
everything is managed. It’s all it’s all single sign on via Azure AD. And from there, we
can do all the access control of who can control each resource who can access it, etc.”
(P6). Many of the startups were very aware of how they managed access, both internally
and externally, trying to control access very carefully. Internally, it was often seen as a
measure in case employees got their accounts compromised, which meant that restricted
access would serve as preventative damage control. Externally, in the case of clients,
access control was the way to manage the users to ensure they had access to the correct
data and not potentially more. For partners and collaborations, it was mainly limiting
access in a way so they could not accidentally harm or modify the systems and also as
a security measure to protect company IP.
Startups often left cybersecurity to external expertise, either due to a lack of compe-
tencies internally or for third-party validation. Depending on the sizes of the startups,
some had also chosen to outsource cybersecurity in general as a strategic choice, as it
could be hard to acquire enough suﬀicient internal competencies and resources. ”Yeah,
it’s initial plan is to go for when there are companies who are doing cybersecurity jobs,
also consultations. And we’re not going to invest in cybersecurity or doing that by our-
selves because we’re not specialists, not confident enough in that. So, it’s better to go
for vendors and yeah” (P1).
Outsourcing also meant that startups expected a decent degree of cybersecurity, both
for services and partners. This outsourcing further highlighted how cybersecurity was
recognized as a burden, yet also a selling point. Startups would often express being
conscious of the security features that were provided, as well as how transparent they
were with their data storage. A medical device CTO described this as: ”My impression
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
37
is also that Microsoft has a bit more focus on security and data location. Like, while
Google, what to say, the agreements made with them are a bit more random, while at least
Microsoft market themselves being more like, our data is more secured than other places”
(P12). Therefore, cybersecurity had become a primary consideration when choosing
services and partners, which was well aligned with their best practice approach and
limited internal resources.
4.2.9.3
Learning by doing
Startups were very iterative in their development approach, and many cybersecurity
learnings ended up being self-taught during various processes throughout the develop-
ment. This was especially notable when it concerned compliance and regulations since
the startups had often expressed those as mandatory requirements they needed to ful-
fill. As startups were diverse, it was also common to see the employees that brought
practices from their previous workplaces into the startup; ”There are some people in the
company that had, like, experiences from other jobs, and like, it’s just something they
know” (P10).
Learning from incidents was also a repeatedly seen pattern during the interviews, as
specific incidents would raise awareness about cybersecurity problems more clearly. De-
pending on the sizes of the startups, these incidents varied from cloud storage problems
and server breakdowns to misconfigurations of servers. To prevent the same problem
from happening again, startups would take certain initiatives to solve it; ”Yes, so like,
but like, sometimes you just discover some problems that, that makes you take initiative,
that’s fine” (P10).
The digital health startups were more focused on product security. Product security,
especially software security, was primarily based on best-practice implementation and
design as described in Section 4.2.9.1. The more widespread knowledge of best-practices
product cybersecurity meant that cybersecurity challenges likely became less of a concern
for digital health startups. The group’s pre-interview meeting with a potential digital
health startup confirmed this theory. The CTO of the company specifically mentioned
that they were interested in new encryption methods or other novel methods to improve
product security rather than known best-practice approaches.
Lastly, another interesting observation from the startup learnings was how they learned
to ”work around” systems and regulations.
A commonly seen approach was either
anonymizing the data or being a data processor such that there would be no data that
needed to be protected. Another example related to CE marking was that classifying
a product as a medical device would result in a very long list of compliance and re-
quirements, which could be too resource-intensive for startups. A medical device CTO,
therefore, explained why they classified their solution as an electrical device instead;
”We develop and sell it as an electrical device. This is especially our hardware units
because we couldn’t have been medical class, but we are not, because we say, we cannot
say that we can reduce hospital- acquired infections. But we can say that we provide
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
38
data that can do it. Yeah, so if you claim you can reduce it, then it’s medical, and if you
don’t claim anything, then you can avoid it, so we are completely on the edge in terms
of being one or the other” (P12).
Therefore, the startups knowingly limited the scope
and functionality of their products to avoid being applicable by regulation.
4.2.9.4
Learnings
The startups applied technical and organizational best practices as their general ap-
proach to cybersecurity. Startups created and applied procedures on how to handle
cybersecurity, both to comply with regulation but also to enforce best practices. The
startups actively learned and iterated upon their processes based on learnings from pre-
vious experiences.
4.2.10
Cybersecurity is hard to face alone
Many startups expressed having diﬀiculty dedicating staff to cybersecurity due to limited
personnel. For that reason, they often mentioned a general lack of expertise in the area
resulting in cybersecurity being hard to approach.
4.2.10.1
No go-to cybersecurity guy
Due to the nature of startups, they were often small initially and mainly grew organically
over time. The participants in this study had been varied in age and size, but around
half of the partaking startups had under ten employees. This size restriction meant for
the health technology startups that most of the staff had to take on multiple roles; ”Yes
for sure, like, when we started this, how do you say it, you had to do everything” (P3).
While startups generally had expressed having a more informal approach to the different
roles and responsibilities compared to more prominent companies, all of them recognized
the importance of cybersecurity. Many of them expressed the desire to have dedicated
cybersecurity personnel as well as various diﬀiculties with their current approaches: ”Uh,
that is needs more dedicated people to handle rather than it being split across many groups,
and this is, of course, the nature of all startups. We have to share all these different
jobs and not having a dedicated cybersecurity team” (P2).
The responsibilities of cybersecurity were therefore usually handled by the more techni-
cal people inside the startups, which was often seen to be the IT or software responsible:
”Like, you could say, I got the classic one-man responsibility for both roles, where cyber-
security is of course the most relevant” (P8). Depending on the team size, it was often
left to a few people and sometimes just one person. Therefore, the person attending to
cybersecurity matters might not have much experience in the design or technical imple-
mentation of cybersecurity. The reasoning behind these choices was driven by the type
of tasks startups had to deal with. As the startup was still growing and developing its
product, cybersecurity-related work would be more infrequent as there was nothing to
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
39
protect yet. That also went back to the best practices approach stated numerous times
by the startups, where they tried to develop their product and processes in a secure
way from the start to prevent potential security issues later on; ”There is not a lot to
delegate there, if best practices are followed, then everything will largely come by itself”
(P8).
4.2.10.2
Cybersecurity is not an entry-level discipline
Startups had all agreed that having external consultancy is a good idea and have men-
tioned plans about hiring them at some point in the future; ”But then you know, having
an external company reviewing the whole thing, like looking at it from another perspective
it could be quite good” (P4).
The startups often mentioned not having enough resources to spare for consultancy or
had expressed not being ready yet. The heavy focus on features in the startup space
might mean that startups use R&D prioritization as an excuse not to implement cyber-
security. Consequently, startups had tried to improve the awareness and competencies
for cybersecurity through other means, such as engaging actively with the digital health-
care space. Some startups had participated in various events hosted by Cyber Hub [91],
including workshops or talks, while others had tried to create community initiatives
by holding meetings with both startups and clients in the healthcare space; ”M*****
(Guest) and I, we sat down and tried to research, held meetings with CMT, and people
from the region, and with other startups, also with startups that weren’t from our region”
(P10).
Lastly, building upon startups’ iterative nature and learning from experience, many of
them had talked about testing plans and how they planned to learn from that. This
was both in terms of the development of the product but also in terms of security
implementations.
Participants explained that such testing would require an intense
collaborative effort with the clients, whether it was hospitals or individual consumers.
They would need to test various end-user features and their integration with the whole
system. Getting this feedback was vital for the startups, and the participating digital
health app project lead had explained their plans for testing: ”Well, it needs to be done
multiple times and different levels of sophistication, first level would be just trying to use
prototypes and see whether the data can be transferred somehow. Another thing is to you
to have a test where we see in real life situation how people would use… To see how well
it works in the real life for all those tests, what we expect is to find those weaknesses.
What we need to fix, improve or enhance. Yeah, and that would be also not a testing,
but learning experience as well” (P1).
4.2.10.3
Limited by not having the right skills
A particular takeaway from the interviews was that most of the startups, regardless
of size, experienced the same kind of cybersecurity challenges, particularly within reg-
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
40
ulation and hospital collaboration. The specific cybersecurity challenges mostly varied
based on the individual startup’s available competencies and the funds they had avail-
able. All startups noted regulation as one of the main pain points of working within
health tech. For some of the smaller startups, the need for compliance with MDR had
meant that they were not able to launch their product independently as planned. They,
therefore, bundled their software solution together with a larger company’s hardware.
The further we came, we saw that certification requirements for medical devices especially
are extremely high. At that time we had to say, okay, if we are going somewhere we can
test our hardware or solution, you need to go to the education sector, because they do not
have the same requirements... We were lucky to find this supplier who actually supplied
some hardware we could use off-the-shelf. (P7).
Some startups also decided to reduce the feature set of their product due to not wanting
to apply to specific regulations. The larger startups were specifically targeting certifica-
tions such as ISO27001 and ISO13485 in order to comply with customer requirements.
Others stated intention to comply but not certify (particularly with ISO27001).
The immediate cybersecurity challenges the participants faced were defined chiefly based
on their available competencies.
Some larger startups had specific product security
challenges for which smaller startups already had solutions. When asked about why
these specific challenges come up, the startups mentioned that it mostly came down
to what competencies were available in that startup at the time. One newly started
startup had an employee with experience in certifying others for ISO27001, while one
of the large startups had ISO27001 certification as their most significant immediate
task. These examples highlighted the scale of individuality across startups and how the
challenges they faced were defined by the background of their founders and employees,
not their size. How to solve a particular cybersecurity challenge and where to obtain
the necessary knowledge was something that multiple startups requested designs for.
4.2.10.4
Learnings
As most startups started with a small team of key personnel, the roles and responsibilities
related to cybersecurity were not always clearly defined and the employees wore many
hats at the same time. Startups planned to engage in multiple activities with external
consultants in order to further their understanding of cybersecurity.
4.2.10.5
Concept map
After identifying the themes and keywords of the interview responses, the authors at-
tempted to create a concept map of cybersecurity and how it is defined based on the
themes and concept of health tech. This concept map can be found in Figure 4.2 below.
The externalization of concepts within the concept map created the foundation for the
direction of the ideation phase described in Section 4.3 later. A higher definition version
of the concept map can be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Sprint 2 - Emphasize - Startup interviews
41
Figure 4.2: Concept map of cybersecurity based on the themes identified during the interviews.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
42
4.3
Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal
ideation
After performing the thematic analysis, the authors then engaged in ideation activities to
identify possible concept proposals for further design. The goal was to complement the
scholarly approach of thematic analysis with familiar design-oriented methods, enabling
the authors to enhance their understanding of the solution domain based on the identified
themes.
4.3.1
Internal ideation workshop - Problem space
analysis
First, the authors held an internal ideation workshop to externalize the ideas and themes
identified during the previous sprint. This externalization consisted of routine workshop
activities employed in design. This approach worked to align the authors’ understanding
of the cybersecurity challenges faced by the startups and to emphasize with the problems
in the context of a busy up-and-coming health technology company.
A summary of the phase 3 activities can be found below.
• 5 whys
Doing the 5 whys helped sort the various problems found during the analysis and
map out the structure of how the problems occur.
It was possible to identify
two main lanes of problems, diﬀiculty in obtaining knowledge and insuﬀicient re-
sources, where the two root causes were identified as ”Cybersecurity is complex”
and ”Startups lack funding” respectively.
• User journey
To complement the root causes identified in the 5 whys exercise, a hypothetical user
journey for a feature request development was mapped and was very insightful for
discovering how problems occur at each step, as well as how and which problems
are connected to. Furthermore, the effect of various variables and their constraints
during the process was also highlighted, especially knowledge and resources as
previously discovered in the 5 whys. Generally, this activity was beneficial for
mapping out the knowledge of the development process gained from the interviews
and attempting to create a holistic connection between the problems.
• Empathy map
Following the user journey mapping, the authors performed empathy mapping to
organize their insight into the startup’s experiences and concerns. The mapping
revealed the conflicting behavior of the startups who wanted better cybersecurity
and compliance but instead prioritized R&D and other aspects. The reasoning
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
43
behind these actions was shown in the form of confusion and uncertainty around
cybersecurity, but also their focus on the business and the challenges of acquiring
more resources.
• How might we
After the authors described the conflict in priorities during the empathy mapping,
the how might we exercise was performed in order to frame the challenges as oppor-
tunities for improvement. Opportunities such as (how might we?) Ensure startups
are compliant? Promote cybersecurity culture? Make sure startups have the nec-
essary knowledge? and more were used to facilitate the final design hypothesis
exercise.
• Design hypothesis
Building on top of the ”How might we” activity that identified the opportunities;
the authors generated hypotheses that focused on the outcome of solving those said
problems. This exercise was very useful for identifying criteria and parameters
to consider for the design proposals, especially in conjunction with the planned
ideation phase afterward.
The results of each internal workshop activity can be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
4.3.2
Design specification
Based on the problems identified in the problem space analysis, the authors identified
ten different areas for improvement. These areas of improvement formed the base for a
design specification to target design proposals that would support the startups in the
best way possible. The following points were identified as potential points of design:
1. Increases overall understanding of what cybersecurity is, business risks and conse-
quences related to cybersecurity
The awareness and understanding of cybersecurity and its aspects vary widely be-
tween startups. The design should seek to align and improve that understanding
to support decision-making based on security-conscious design. This includes un-
derstanding business risk assessment, security consequences and related relevant
laws/regulations (GDPR/MDR). A clearer understanding of threats to cybersecu-
rity is also needed.
2. Increases overall cybersecurity level of product
Promoting cybersecurity best practices improves the overall cybersecurity level of
the product. Understanding and analyzing new and existing technical controls to
improve cybersecurity should be part of the design.
3. Increases overall cybersecurity level of business/organization
Organizational cybersecurity is also important in ensuring a high level of cyber-
security. The design should support risk mitigation strategies through employee
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
44
awareness and transparent security processes. The design should help companies
identify which roles exist and where responsibilities lie within their organizations.
Enhancing organizational security controls and security review processes is also
considered.
4. Create awareness of relevant regulatory compliance
It is hard for startups to know and comprehend the vast number of regulatory
requirements and initiatives needed to comply with relevant standards, such as CE-
marking. These standards and regulations are seen as either business requirements
or unique selling points. Patient privacy is also an important area that should be
considered. The design should therefore help startups make informed decisions
about relevant cybersecurity and regulatory standards within health tech.
5. Create awareness of how startups handle their data
Creating products for improving patient outcomes results in handling highly sen-
sitive health data, which GDPR and HIPAA heavily regulate. Knowing when to
be a data processor or data owner per GDPR in which situations is, therefore,
something startups often need external help for. The design should help create
awareness within the topic of handling health data and support companies in
choosing the right approach for handling sensitive data.
6. Defines cybersecurity considerations which enable tactical and strategical business
initiatives
The design should facilitate startups to make tactical and strategic business initia-
tives by showing how cybersecurity can support organizational goals. This could
be how cybersecurity can be used as a selling point for startups when establishing
their business case. The design should provide various suggestions for different
cybersecurity and regulatory directions startups can take, as well as the pros and
cons involved. Using the design should therefore enable startups to decide on ac-
tivities and initiatives for handling their data in addition to their general approach
to cybersecurity.
7. Low time commitment or does not sacrifice R&D too much
Startups have few resources, so the design should not introduce too much overhead
before providing value to them.
The solution design should be easy, fast and
simple to use to reduce the possible concerns for the startups about their time
commitment, aiming to remove the barrier of entry for using the design.
8. Fun and engaging
The design should be fun and engaging to make the overall experience of learning
cybersecurity more pleasant, especially considering how most startups consider it
a nuisance currently. The design should therefore employ elements that can make
it more enjoyable to use, such as being more visual, interactive, or gamified.
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
45
9. Clear business case, clearly understandable results or reduce cybersecurity uncer-
tainty
Companies should feel that using the design provides a tangible improvement in
cybersecurity which supports their businesses. It should be clear to see the value
of the design at first glance, so communicating how the design is especially benefi-
cial for startups is important. The design should therefore address startup-specific
issues clearly while showing the potential results in an understandable way.
10. Supports unique startup processes
Startups have very different conditions, competencies, sizes, roles, responsibilities
and processes. The design should be compatible with a wide array of startups
and support, not hinder, their uniqueness. The design should therefore be very
informative without being too technically challenging, as the authors discovered
during the interviews that not all startups have in-depth technical cybersecurity
knowledge. It should also cover a wide scope of health technology use cases as the
startups vary in their field.
The overall weighting of each criterion is seen in Table 4.2 below:
Criteria
Weight
1
2
2
1
3
1
4
2
5
1
6
2
7
3
8
1
9
3
10
2
Table 4.2: Weighting of different criteria when selecting proposed designs.
4.3.3
Design proposal candidates and selection
The next step was for the authors to identify and select design proposals to support the
health technology startups in empowering their cybersecurity.
4.3.3.1
Idea mapping
After describing the potential areas of improvement in the design specification, the au-
thors performed brainstorming and mind mapping exercises to identify potential design
proposals. The authors did not limit themselves to what could be considered ”feasible”
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
46
ideas in this exercise (based on the design specification). The authors instead focused
on more holistic ideas, which they believed in providing any cybersecurity support for
the health technology startups. The results were placed into a map of ideas as shown in
Figure 4.3 below.
Different media, including apps, flyers, workshops and physical media, was used as the
starting point for idea generation. By using media as the root, it was possible to observe
how the media’s inherent properties supported brainstormed ideas, as shown by the
difference in the possibilities for physical and digital media in Figure 4.3. For example,
if a solution’s intended purpose was spreading cybersecurity knowledge or improving
awareness in an organization, both physical and digital media could be considered. The
figure showed digital media such as app/website to have more options when compared
to physical media. Overall, the exercise produced some good results for further concept
development and fulfilled its purpose of generating a diverse list of ideas. All of the
results of the internal workshop can be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
47
Figure 4.3: Mind map of possible ideas for concept proposals.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
48
4.3.3.2
Design proposal candidates
Based on the map of potential ideas, the authors identified five different design candi-
dates for further consideration. Not all of the ideas contained within the ideas map,
such as physical goods and the hacking game, were considered as proposed design can-
didates. The authors put weight on enabling ideas that could be prototyped to promote
the feeling of attaining tangible value for the participating startups (which the design
specification also deemed the most important factor, see Table 4.2). The identification
and selection of the design proposal candidates were therefore grounded in both the
design specification and design hypothesis exercise. The identified candidates were:
Business toolkit: The first idea was a curated list of different business tools (like
collaboration tools and cloud providers) that supported the process of health tech de-
velopment. The toolkit allowed for the comparison of similar business tools in terms of
cybersecurity features, features and integrations with other business tools. The descrip-
tion of each business tool also contained cybersecurity best practices meant for existing
users of the business tool in question. The idea was that the toolkit could support star-
tups in selecting the most secure tools when looking for new ones or, alternatively, to
help startups improve the security of their existing business tools via the best practice
recommendations.
Risk assessment framework: The second idea was a lightweight framework that
helped startups assess their own IT and business security risks. This framework enabled
startups to go in-depth into their own IT landscape and map the relevant risks for their
organization. Compared to known risk assessment frameworks such as ISO27001 and
NIST Risk Assessment Framework, the design candidate would target areas that the
health technology startups mention, such as regulation and patient security risks, in a
more lean manner. This idea was expected to support more insightful decisions about
cybersecurity while developing health technology solutions.
Course base: The third candidate was a learning platform for increasing cybersecurity
awareness through traditional course material and more health technology-specific cy-
bersecurity cases. The interviewed startups often mentioned being unsure about what
to protect against and how (see Section 4.2.5). This design’s goal was to provide a
known knowledge-transfer approach to increase the availability of quality cybersecurity
knowledge. To support health technology startups, in particular, much of the initial
course material would concern the significant challenges identified during the previous
sprint of the project.
Cybersecurity video guides: The penultimate idea was a list of video guides (anima-
tions, live videos, classroom or whiteboard-style videos) covering different cybersecurity
topics. The topics ranged from basic knowledge to more in-depth guides on how to
approach health technology specific cybersecurity challenges, like regulation. Like the
previous design, this idea would help make cybersecurity knowledge more broadly avail-
able.
==PAGE:56==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
49
Self-assessment tool: The last proposal was a web-based self-assessment tool, where
startups would start by answering a short questionnaire about their cybersecurity goals,
available time for cybersecurity and cybersecurity expertise. The tool then compiled a
list of recommended cybersecurity initiatives based on the questionnaire. The tool would
support startups by allowing the startups to discover impactful cybersecurity initiatives
that are the most relevant to them.
4.3.3.3
Ranking of proposed design candidates
The authors used a weighted decision matrix based on the weighting criteria in Table
4.2 to rank each design candidate based on the perceived importance of the criteria.
Additionally, a feasibility multiplier was introduced to the final scores of each candi-
date based on the perceived feasibility of creating a Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
for the startups that participated in this project. The authors performed the ranking
by discussing until a mutually accepted relative ranking of the candidates within each
criterion was agreed upon. The final scores can be seen in Table 4.3 below:
Criteria
Business
toolkit
Risk
assess-
ment
Course
base
Video
guides
Self
assess-
ment
Increase
understanding
2
4
10
6
8
Increase product
security
5
3
1
4
2
Increase
cybersecurity level
2
5
3
1
4
Create compliance
awareness
2
6
8
4
10
Create data
handling awareness
1
5
3
2
4
Enable tactical and
strategic plans
2
8
6
4
10
Low time
commitment
15
3
6
9
12
Fun and engaging
2
1
4
5
3
Clear business case
12
9
6
3
15
Startup
compatibility
5
1
3
4
2
Feasibility
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.5
0.8
Total score
38.4
31.5
40
21
56
Table 4.3: The scores of each design candidate based on the design specification criteria.
Each score, excluding feasibility, has been multiplied by the weight of each criteria from
Table 4.2.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
50
4.3.4
Conceptualizing the selected design proposals
As shown in Table 4.3, the three designs with the highest combined scores are Self-
assessment tool, Course base and Business Toolkit.
The authors chose these
three for prototyping together with the startups for the workshops. The selection process
allowed the authors to save time in developing prototypes for the workshops and to focus
on the designs that best supported the startups based on the problem space analysis.
Before creating prototypes, an additional internal workshop session for the tools was
held to define each design’s specific functionality and create wireframes for their use.
The full process of each conceptualization activity can be found in the Appendix ZIP
file.
4.3.4.1
Self-assessment tool
The user flow of the initial questionnaire and the list of recommended initiatives were
the primary focus areas when conceptualizing the self-assessment tool design. Figure
4.4 shows two proposed questionnaire approaches, one being a classic one-page survey
form and another with an interactive ranking of goals. The authors decided to go with
the second one as it would both be easier to prototype and add more questions to the
questionnaire if the workshop participants requested it. This decision was also based
on the previous finding that each health technology startup was unique. Therefore a
one-size-fits-all approach to the questionnaire might not make sense depending on which
startup was using the tool. The questionnaire asked about the user’s goals, time available
for cybersecurity initiatives, areas of expertise within cybersecurity and how confident
the user felt about cybersecurity. These answers would be used to rank recommended
initiatives and show the most relevant ones to the user.
==PAGE:58==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
51
Figure 4.4: Wireframes of self-assessment questionnaire and initiative recommendation
flow.
For the initiatives themselves, it was decided to go with a checkmark list of subtasks
to complete in order to achieve the initiative. Having some interactivity and the ability
to track the progress of an initiative was added as the authors felt it would make the
completion easier and more bite-sized, which startups revealed as a key consideration.
Wireframes for this particular flow is shown in Figure 4.5 below. During the initial
design, it was also decided that topics would be color-coded to more easily discern
between initiatives and their main topics. This design also allowed for the introduction
of a topic page to get an overview of all initiatives within a topic. Potential topics such as
securing data, logging, access control, compliance-related topics, awareness training and
risk management were considered good initiative topics. Based on their questionnaire
answers, the startups would use this tool to identify what parts of cybersecurity to
improve upon and why.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
52
Figure 4.5: Wireframes for content of self-assessment initiatives and topics.
4.3.4.2
Course base
The initial concept for the course base consisted of a traditional e-learning flow with
a simple 1-page introduction, some learning activities (reading, exercises) and a final
quiz as shown in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 below.
The reason behind the use of a well-
known learning structure is to allow the design to focus mostly on the content itself
and the goal of improving cybersecurity understanding. This would also enable startups
to attain more cybersecurity knowledge at a pace they would feel comfortable with,
knowing from the thematic analysis that they have known budget and time limitations.
Another important highlight was the use of hypothetical examples of cybersecurity, as
shown in Figure 4.6. The authors intended these examples to provide the startups with
more specific context on how cybersecurity could be introduced in health technology
development.
==PAGE:60==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
53
Figure 4.6: Initial concept of course base flow.
Figure 4.7: User flow of course base concept.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
54
4.3.4.3
Business toolkit
Figure 4.8: Initial concept wireframe of business tookit navigation and features.
Figure 4.8 above shows the initial idea for the business toolkit design. The tools overview
was shown as a graph, with the tools node in the center and the following categories of
tools as other nodes linked by vertices to the main tools node. The authors chose to
design the tool in such a manner to emphasize the interactive user experience better. The
user could click a specific tool to get more detailed information about security features,
best practices, known tool integrations and a comparison of alternatives. The purpose of
this toolkit was to enable more security-conscious decision-making when selecting new
business-critical tools for the health technology startups. Moreover, a motivation for
this concept was also to simplify and gather all relevant in a centralized database to
make the process of selecting a tool easier in general. This is shown in Figure 4.9 below.
==PAGE:62==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
55
Figure 4.9: Wireframe of details page when selecting a tool.
During the initial conceptualization, the authors brainstormed different categories of po-
tential tools. These include Instant Messaging, Identity Providers, Wikis, Collaboration
Tools, Cloud Providers, IDS/IPS, File Sharing Services, Password Managers, Client OS,
Planning Tools and Source Control. These tools were based on the list of best practices
mentioned by the health technology startups during the interviews.
4.3.5
Design proposal prototypes
The authors used the prototyping tool Figma to develop each design proposal prototype
[62]. The goal of the prototypes was to get a representation of the overall flow of each
design concept as possible. This was to allow for concrete suggestions and feedback.
The content for the self-assessment tool and course base focused primarily on the topics
of access control and ISO27001, as they were some of the prevalent topics throughout
the interviews (see Section 4.2). This section summarizes the concepts first, followed by
figures on the following pages to show the concepts visually.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
56
Links to prototypes can be found in the Appendix A.8.
4.3.5.1
Self-assessment tool
Many parts of the initial design concept for the self-assessment tool changed during the
prototyping. The authors decided to keep the basic flow and questionnaire questions
as-is (see Figure 4.10). However, the visual presentation of the list of initiatives and the
layout for initiative contents were changed to make them easier to read. This change
was visible in the color coding and card design, which was used for the initiatives as seen
in Figure 4.11.
The authors decided to do content examples within ISO27001 for the suggested initia-
tives, as seen in Figure 4.11. The startups mentioned this regulation in the thematic
analysis (Section 4.2.6.2) as an important standard that many health technology star-
tups’ customers requested.
4.3.5.2
Course base
The authors decided to go with access control as the prototype course topic, as the
startups mentioned the topic as one of the main topics within the best practices sub-
theme in Section 4.2.9.1 of the interview analysis.
As shown in Figure 4.12, a few
additional features were added to ease navigation compared to the wireframes, such as
a personalized dashboard, menus and a more clearly defined linear flow. Achievements
were also added as gamification elements to make the design more interesting. All quiz
answers were shown at the end of a course topic in order to show why the correct answer
was the right one. This can be seen in Figure 4.13.
4.3.5.3
Business toolkit
The business toolkit prototype enabled the end-user to click through the different busi-
ness tools (see Figure 4.14). Due to the nature of the toolkit, only a few business tools
(Microsoft 365 and Slack) had actual content added, as the authors felt that adding more
content would not increase the workshop participants’ understanding of the concept of
the toolkit itself. The authors chose the two business tools specifically due to frequently
mentioning these during the interviews.
The toolkit compared different business tools by comparing certain touted features of
well-known competitors to the business tool in question. The content for security features
and recommendations were mostly based on recommendations from Microsoft and Slack,
as seen in Figure 4.15.
While creating the prototype of the business toolkit, some
questions for the workshops, such as what kind of categories the participants’ felt were
missing and whether the content categories were useful, came up. The authors then
added those questions to the testing phases of the workshops.
==PAGE:64==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
57
Figure 4.10: Self-Assessment Tool Part 1/2 - The Assessment.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
58
Figure 4.11: Self-Assessment Tool Part 2/2 - The Initiatives.
==PAGE:66==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
59
Figure 4.12: Course Base Part 1/2 - The Courses.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
60
Figure 4.13: Course Base Part 2/2 - The Quiz.
==PAGE:68==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
61
Figure 4.14: Business Toolkit Part 1/2 - The Overview.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Sprint 3 - Ideate - Design proposal ideation
62
Figure 4.15: Business Toolkit Part 2/2 - The Tools.
==PAGE:70==
4.4 Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the startups
63
4.4
Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the
startups
In order to identify the strengths, weaknesses and opportunities for improvement of
each design proposal, the authors held four workshops with a total of nine participants.
The workshops allowed the authors to test further their understanding of the health
technology startup context via collaboration with the startups.
The goal of the workshops was to achieve a combination of co-design and validation of the
previous concepts. Problem-solving and ideation exercises facilitated co-creation, while
more concrete prototype testing allowed for more concrete solution validation. Both of
these aspects were important to create relevant solutions and show startups the tangible
results of the insight they provided during the interviews (see Section 4.3.3.2). Two of
the workshops were online workshops, one workshop was hybrid and the last workshop
was offline. The authors facilitated exercises using Miro for both the online and hybrid
workshops. In the hybrid workshop, one participant was online on video conferencing
during the hybrid workshop, while the others were active in a meeting room with the
authors. A set of templates and post-its were printed beforehand for the purely offline
workshop. These templates can be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
The participants’ role distribution of the workshops plus the workshop numbering scheme
can be found in 4.4 below.
Workshop number (startup
type)
Participants
W1 (Medical devices)
CEO (P1), CTO (P2) and CIO (P3)
W2 (Medical devices)
Project Manager (P4) and Software Engineer
(P5)
W3 (Telehealth provider)
CTO (P6)
W4 (Medical devices)
CTO (P7), Software Engineer (P8) and
”IT-guy” (P9)
Table 4.4: The numbering of each workshop and the roles of the participants.
4.4.1
Ranking exercise
A ranking exercise was performed for the warm-up, asking participants to discuss and
rank eight different cybersecurity challenges and potentially add more challenges to the
board. As the exercise acted as a warm-up, the results were not used for other activities
or designs. It is worth mentioning that ”limited resources” was by far the highest-rated
challenge. ”working with health sector” and ”implementing cybersecurity” were also
prevalent challenges for most of the startups. These responses reinforced the results of
the ideation exercises, such as empathy mapping, and suggested that the major startup
challenges in the health technology sector are somewhat quantitatively uniform. The
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the startups
64
ranking of the challenges was more varied between the different startups and can be
found in Table 4.5 below.
Challenge
W1
W2
W3
W4
Mean
Limited resources
1
2
1
1
1.25
Working with health sector
2
1
4
4
2.75
Implementing cybersecurity
6
3
2
2
3.25
Attaining Compliance
4
5
5
4
4.5
Facilitating cybersecurity culture
7
7
3
1
4.5
Understanding Compliance
3
8
5
3
4.75
Not sure what to secure against
8
4
4
4
5
Lack of outsourcing options for startups*
N/A
5
N/A
N/A
5
Attaining relevant security knowledge
5
9
4
3
5.25
Table 4.5: Challenges vs. relative scoring of each challenge. Lower score means higher
priority. Lack of outsourcing options for startups was added as an additional challenge
by the Workshop 2 participants.
4.4.2
Concept testing sprints
This section describes the general feedback that the health technology startups had for
each of the design concepts.
4.4.2.1
Self-assessment tool
Feedback for the self-assessment tool was pretty positive in general. Most participants
liked the card-based User Interface (UI) design and the ability to select the priorities that
mattered for the company in question. The startups likened the design to contacting
external consultants, as they would usually also ask questions about the company’s
specific cybersecurity setup and goals and then come up with a list of recommendations.
The startups had a mixed critical response to the cybersecurity initiative contents them-
selves. Most participants liked the topics and the structure of each cybersecurity initia-
tive. However, some felt the design lacked more specific instructions on how to achieve
the sub-tasks of an initiative. Some minor tweaks to the numbering scheme of topics
and time estimate questions were also requested, with many participants being confused
about what the numbers meant and having diﬀiculty allocating time for cybersecurity
in daily hours.
Multiple (W2, W3) companies asked for an option to be compliant with a specific region
or country rather than specific regulations to make it easier to pinpoint what cyber-
security initiatives the startups needed for business operation. They also requested a
more apparent distinction during the goal prioritization between organizational security,
compliance-related security and technical security. The participants also requested some
==PAGE:72==
4.4 Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the startups
65
changes be made to the UI to more easily move between menus and pages from within
the tool. Finally, the startups also wanted a dashboard to see the current progress of
their tasks and a landing page to see how to use tools before jumping straight into the
questionnaire that determines the initiatives.
4.4.2.2
Course base
All startups agreed that the idea of a course base itself was not new, and a CTO of
a telehealth provider mentioned that ”hundreds of e-learning platforms already exist” -
(P6). For this reason, it was generally agreed upon that the course base design had high
potential if quality, curated content was available on the platform. However, the idea
itself was not new enough to warrant using it over other platforms. Some (W4) also
felt the content was too text-heavy. The startups liked the dashboard and clear topic
selection structure compared to the self-assessment tool. The introduction of some basic
gamification with levels and achievements was also positively received.
Suggestions for improving the course base included removing some text-heavy content
and focusing on more interactive learning, videos and team-based activities. The CIO
of a medical device startup (P1) proposed merging the course base with the informa-
tion available in the self-assessment tool to have the self-assessment tool as a ”ground
truth” or knowledge base, with the course base simply referencing knowledge in the
self-assessment tool. Additional information in the dashboard, such as currently active
topics and course progress, was also requested.
4.4.2.3
Business toolkit
The participants viewed the tool as simple and easy to use, especially the tree structure
received positive remarks from all participant groups as being intuitive. The startups
disputed the value of the tool, however. Multiple (W2, W3) participants noted that tools
were usually chosen based on other factors such as features, regulatory certifications and
staff experience with existing tools rather than security. They also questioned the tool’s
feasibility, as it would take much effort to update this kind of tool database regularly.
Overall, the business toolkit was rated as ”nice to have” but not a necessary tool.
The CTO of a telehealth provider (P6) proposed a community-driven approach as a
potential solution to the issue of updating the toolkit.
The startups also suggested
adding filters and search options based on existing tools, compliance requirements for
different countries or recommending tools based on the self-assessment questionnaire.
A more generalized ”security score” or something was also requested to get a more
accessible overview of what tool to select. In general, the startups requested ways to
make selecting a tool easier based on factors other than cybersecurity.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Sprint 4 - Prototype - Co-design with the startups
66
4.4.3
Other general suggestions
The startups mentioned some cross-cutting feature requests throughout the workshops
that did not target one specific design proposal. These are listed below:
Gamification (W1-W4) - One suggestion that all participating companies made was
the introduction of gamification to the self-assessment and course base designs.
All
startups mentioned competition across companies and within individual teams except
for W3, ”Competition is the driver of engagement” - CIO of medical device startup (P3).
Adding achievements, intra/inter-company rankings, badges, titles, profile pictures and
other visual indicators to the designs were ideas the startups suggested to make the
concepts more attractive.
Integration with existing tools and workflows (W1-W4) - Another suggestion
that all participants noted was to find ways to integrate the designs into existing tools
and workflows. The startups were reluctant to introduce stand-alone tools but stated
that if the designs could function together with existing tools, it would be much easier
to implement. Examples of integration include email or message-client notifications for
new activities or reminders (self-assessment, course base) or browser plugins to scan
systems for tips on how to improve the cybersecurity of existing tools (business toolkit).
Team-driven interaction (W1, W2, W4) - The self-assessment and course base tools
both had very individualized prototype flows, which did not support any kind of team
or social interaction with other employees. Participants during workshops 1, 2 and 4
mentioned how it would be nice to have team activities or more team-based engagement.
The participants claimed that both cybersecurity initiative implementation and learning
were more effective in teams.
Visual representation (W1, W3, W4) - The interactivity and visual representa-
tion of the business toolkit inspired participants to request similar, simple and visual
structures for the self-assessment tool and course base.
4.4.4
Dotmocracy / Dot voting
Each participant received five dots (votes) that they would be able to distribute between
the different design proposals. While placing their votes, the participants discussed why
they believed the designs deserved each dot.
Dots were given based on the designs’
immediate value and short-term potential. The results of the voting are seen in Table
4.6 below.
==PAGE:74==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
67
Self-assessment
Course base
Business Toolkit
Workshop 1
8
2.5
4.5
Workshop 2
5
4
1
Workshop 3
3
0
2
Workshop 4
1
9
5
Total
17
15.5
13.5
Table 4.6: Dotmocracy scores of each design proposal.
The detailed voting of each participant can be found in Appendix A.9.
4.4.5
Selection of final design
Based on the feedback and suggestions received during the workshop, the authors decided
to use the self-assessment tool as the final design proposal to iterate. The participants
generally preferred the self-assessment tool, with three companies rating it the highest
out of the design proposals and having the highest cumulative score. Both the course
base and business toolkit scored similar absolute points but had very mixed responses
throughout the workshops, as mentioned in Sections 4.4.2.2 and 4.4.2.3 respectively.
Selection of the self-assessment tool was not only based on the dotmocracy votes. In
terms of the project’s expected contribution (design to support cybersecurity-conscious
development), the authors deemed the self-assessment tool as having the lowest floor of
feasibility and the highest ceiling in terms of usefulness. The tool also had the highest
rating according to the initial design specification used during ideation, which in turn
meant that it covered the most significant number of identified themes in the thematic
analysis.
The participants also noted the self-assessment tool during the workshops
as being most valuable to new and smaller startups, supporting the goal of making
cybersecurity more accessible.
For these reasons, the authors decided upon the self-
assessment tool as the final design.
4.5
Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
After selecting the self-assessment tool as the final design proposal, the authors used the
feedback and suggestions gained from the workshops to iterate upon the design. This
design iteration was then used for the following cybersecurity expert feedback interviews.
To enable the experts to give feedback on the design regarding feasibility and potential
for real-world impact, the iterated design, therefore, focused on introducing and polishing
elements from the workshops rather than completeness. The authors felt that selecting
and introducing too many new ideas in the design would detract from the intended
polish that the startup workshops provided.
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
68
4.5.1
Selection of iteration features
The startups that participated had many suggestions on how to improve the design.
Because the suggestions and feedback came in different ways, the authors mapped these
different suggestions into general features. A short description of the identified features
can be found in Table 4.7 below.
Feature
Description
Landing page
Landing page with descriptions of the tool’s features and
possibilities.
Tutorial
Interactive tutorial of tool at the beginning of login.
Topic Groups
Color-coded topic groups containing initiatives. Was present
in solution proposal prototype
Initiatives
The cybersecurity initiatives with short descriptions and
subtasks.
Knowledge base
A knowledge base containing the ground truth of why and
how to implement an initiative’s subtasks.
Questionnaire
The questionnaire that recommended initiatives are based
off.
Gamification
Achievements, points and other competitive elements, both
within and against other organizations.
Platform
integration
Integration of tool with other platforms, such as instant
messaging and e-mail
Dashboard
A dashboard showing an overview of current maturity and
initiative progress
Team
collaboration
Ability to work on initiatives with other members of your
organization
Framework
A framework, ranking startups’ cybersecurity maturity, for
which the initiatives are recommended. Provides
transparency to the selection of initiatives.
Table 4.7: List of possible features for the iteration of self-assessment tool.
An image of the complete list of sub-features within each feature can be found in Ap-
pendix A.10. Detailed information about the exact iteration can be found in Section
4.5.2. As mentioned in the Methodology in Section 3.4.2, the authors employed the
MoSCoW method to select which features to introduce or rework in the design. The
results can be seen in Figure 4.16 below.
==PAGE:76==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
69
Figure 4.16: Each feature ranked according to their importance via the MoSCoW
method.
The most important features (Must and Should in MoSCoW notation) were selected for
implementation in the MVP prototype for the expert feedback interviews. The remaining
features in Should and Could were candidates for further development. The MoSCoW
method results prioritized the main features of supporting startups in assessing their
own cybersecurity and identifying impactful cybersecurity initiatives.
The startups’
most requested features, such as leaderboards, dashboards and a landing page, were also
added as must-haves for the MVP. All of the results of the internal workshop can be
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
70
found in the Appendix ZIP file.
4.5.2
Prototype iteration
This section details some of the changes made to the self-assessment prototype during
the first iteration and the underlying reasons. Based on the feedback described in Section
4.4.2.1, the authors focused on playing to the strengths of the initial design (structure
and topics) while attempting to improve the confusing layout. The basic functionality
of the self-assessment tool did not change, as the tool’s primary purpose was still to
allow startups to discover impactful cybersecurity initiatives that are the most relevant
for them.
A link to the design iteration prototype can be found in Appendix A.8.
4.5.2.1
Graphical interface and navigation
Some changes to the graphical user interface and user experience design were made to
improve the reported navigation usability issues. The new user interface is shown in
Figure 4.17 below. Compared to the first prototype, the new design allowed the user
to change between different pages rather than enforcing a linear questionnaire flow to
initiatives. The top menu allowed for non-linear navigation within the self-assessment
tool and made the current navigation clearer to the end-user. This design change was
inspired by the workshop participants’ request to ”play around” and explore the different
initiatives before taking the questionnaire.
Figure 4.17: The new graphical interface of the self-assessment prototype.
==PAGE:78==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
71
Another change related to non-linearity was mentioning explicitly that the questionnaire
could be taken at any time (see the mid-upper section of Figure 4.17 above). This change
aimed to support the ability of the user to continue changing the recommendations based
on the challenges that were relevant to them at the time.
The design framework was also changed to use Google’s Material Design components.
The reasoning for this was to provide standardized guidelines on how to integrate UI
elements.
4.5.2.2
Questionnaire and recommended initiatives
The authors changed the initial question about the user’s/organization’s goals from a list
of rank-able goals to more broad categories, with specific subtopics within each category.
As described in Section 4.2 and the original list of goals, the health technology startups’
cybersecurity goals lay within three categories: Regulation, Technical/Product Security
and Organization Security. These three categories shown in the questionnaire in Figure
4.18 below allowed the organizations to more explicitly specify which organizational
goals the recommended cybersecurity initiatives should support. Based on the workshop
results, the question about how much time a user had available for cybersecurity was
changed from daily to monthly.
It represented more accurately how much time the
companies actually had to implement cybersecurity initiatives.
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
72
Figure 4.18: The new questionnaire flow showing first a category of goals (top image)
and then more specific goals (bottom image).
==PAGE:80==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
73
Figure 4.19: Example of cards describing initiatives.
Finally, the numbering scheme of each card was changed, as shown in Figure 4.19 above,
to show a relatively scaled value between 0-10 for each initiative. The numbers rep-
resented an impact factor based on the questionnaire, which allowed the user to more
easily identify which initiative to do next, another criticism mentioned during the work-
shops. The impact factor defined how initiatives were ranked relative to each other,
with initiatives with a higher impact factor being considered more relevant for the user.
This impact factor was based on the questionnaire answers. For example, suppose a user
selected previous existing competencies in access control. In that case, the time rating
of an initiative might be lower, increasing the impact factor due to lower expected time
commitment. The impact factor was, therefore, a holistic interpretation of the value
of the initiative, based on factors such as previous knowledge, time commitment, diﬀi-
culty and a base cybersecurity value. Using an indirect, calculated value allowed the
authors to tweak the algorithm dynamically while giving users an easy-to-understand
number to consider. The card-style visual components and colors that associate each
initiative with a cybersecurity category were positively received during the workshops
and therefore kept but stylized to Material Design.
4.5.2.3
Dashboard
Multiple participants noted the diﬀiculty of what to do next and to get an idea of the
bigger picture of where they stood concerning cybersecurity. A central dashboard, shown
in Figure 4.20 below, showed information about the user’s current progress and what
initiative the user should take next. This dashboard was the last prominent feature
requested by the workshop participants. The dashboard showed the user’s questionnaire
answers to be more transparent about how the tool recommended initiatives to the user.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Sprint 5 - Iterate - Design iteration
74
The initiative’s impact factors was shown together with its title, which also was intended
to make the recommendation explicit.
Figure 4.20: Dashboard showing the current initiative completion and the next initia-
tives that are recommended to the user.
4.5.2.4
Other changes
Some minor quality-of-life changes discussed during the workshops were also imple-
mented as part of the first iteration.
A landing page with information about the
self-assessment tool and its features was introduced to combat some of the workshop
participants’ initial confusion about the tool’s features and functions.
The authors also added a ”why you should do this” section to the content pages of each
==PAGE:82==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
75
initiative to give additional reasoning as to why it was helpful to implement a specific
cybersecurity initiative. This minor tweak was selected to inform less technically inclined
users as to why they should care about the specific cybersecurity initiative. This addition
supported the authors’ findings from the initial interviews, highlighting the importance
of attending to diverse users, as found in Section 4.2.10.1. The authors also introduced
texts touting the potential financial gain of implementing cybersecurity initiatives to
support the aforementioned point.
Lastly, a simple leaderboard was added to the tool to implement some of the gamifi-
cation and competitive elements discussed during the workshops. This leaderboard is
shown in Figure 4.21 below. The leaderboard showed the popular initiatives and topic
groups completed by other organizations. It displayed which users had the most points
based on the completion rate of the initiatives and their relative impact factor. The
authors introduced this element both to help the companies get a sense of what other
organizations were doing and to provide a psychological incentive to continue working
on the cybersecurity initiatives.
Figure 4.21: Leaderboard showing information about popular initiatives and topics.
Detailed scores of the top-10 self-assessment tool users are not shown in this figure.
4.6
Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert
interviews
With the new iteration of the prototype completed, the next step was to get feedback
from experts in the field of cybersecurity. This phase was motivated by getting profes-
sional insight into the design’s feasibility in terms of supporting more cybersecurity-
conscious development.
The authors initiated contact with various people, mainly
through personal networks and some that the startups recommended throughout the
interviews and workshops. The authors analyzed the interviews and found some com-
mon improvement points used to make the final prototype.
==PAGE:83==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
76
4.6.1
Expert interviews
A total of 6 interviews were held with cybersecurity experts of different experience levels
and backgrounds to validate the design’s feasibility and potential for real-world impact.
The different roles and backgrounds of the experts are shown in Table 4.8 below.
Expert number
Current Role
Expert 1 (E1)
Head of cybersecurity organization
Expert 2 (E2)
Jr consultant, cybersecurity firm 1
Expert 3 (E3)
Software developer specialized in cybersecurity
Expert 4 (E4)
Security Architect
Expert 5 (E5)
Software developer, cybersecurity firm 2
Expert 6 (E6)
Cybersecurity consultant and startup founder
Table 4.8: List of experts participating in the interviews.
4.6.1.1
General feedback on the self-assessment tool
In general, the experts liked the tool, with the UI and dashboard elements receiving
the highest praise. The experts saw the use of cards to give a quick overview of each
initiative and the more in-depth information within each initiative content page as an
excellent way to present otherwise dense information. A junior consultant of a cyber-
security firm (E2) praised the time and diﬀiculty estimates in the cards, stating that
it allowed startups to know how challenging and time-consuming an initiative may be
before starting it. The impact factor and relative ranking of the initiatives were ele-
ments the experts received very positively in that regard. The goal-oriented nature of
the questionnaire and the questions themselves were seen as relevant (E4, E5, E6). The
ability to take the questionnaire as often as the user wanted was also well-received, as it
incentivized playing around with the tool, according to a software developer specialized
in cybersecurity (E3).
The experts noted that cybersecurity is not an entry-level discipline and that even though
the tool was simple to use and understand, more should be done to make it more ap-
proachable to complete beginners. While the navigation and purpose of the tool were
clear to understand, some experts (E1, E4) wanted the tool to provide more precise
instructions on how to use it as intended. More detailed step-by-step instructions on
completing an initiative were also requested. Most experts (E2, E3, E4, E5) viewed the
tool’s leaderboard and competitive elements as the tool’s main weaknesses. A security
architect (E4) did acknowledge that some comparison to another competing health tech-
nology startup would provide motivation if the company felt they were behind. Some
(E2) felt that leaderboards have a negative connotation, while others, such as a software
developer (E3), would instead work on self-improvement rather than competing against
others. Two experts (E4 and E5) even saw a potential issue where a hacker would use the
leaderboards to determine which organization had the weakest cybersecurity score and,
==PAGE:84==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
77
therefore, would be the easiest to hack. One suggestion (E4) was to make the leader-
board feature opt-in. The last expert, a cybersecurity consultant and startup founder
(E6), did not have any comments on the leaderboard feature.
The experts also mentioned more specific suggestions for improving the tool. The head
of a cybersecurity organization (E1) felt the tool did not mention the health tech star-
tups as the primary target group explicitly enough. Adding more potential cybersecurity
frameworks such as those created by CIS [92] and NIST [93] could make the tool more
applicable to health tech startups in the US and other regions (E4). Initiatives in em-
ployee awareness training were a topic that was requested (E5), something the startups
also mentioned during the initial thematic analysis in Section 4.2.4.2. Both the junior
consultant and one of the software developers (E2, E3) asked regarding the option to
have recommendations for specific external tools used for completing the initiatives but
noted that this might compromise the integrity of the self-assessment tool.
Finally,
reporting, note-taking options and tracking cybersecurity initiative completion could
be relevant for organizations with compliance requirements, such as health technology
startups (E4).
4.6.1.2
Scores and feasibility
The authors asked the experts to score the design between 1-5 based on how useful they
felt the self-assessment tool would be to startups and its potential for real-world impact.
All of the experts rated the tool favorably, with the lowest score being 3.5. The authors
did not inquire further about the score’s reasoning, focusing instead on the qualitative
feedback mentioned earlier. The experts’ scores can be found in Table 4.9 below.
Self-assessment
Expert 1
3.5
Expert 2
4
Expert 3
4
Expert 4
4
Expert 5
3.75
Expert 6
4
Mean score
3.875
Table 4.9: The scores given by experts on how well they received the self-assessment
tool.
The last factor that the interviews discussed was the feasibility of the tool. The response
was varied; the head of a cybersecurity organization (E1) worried that the space might be
too cramped with alternatives, as described in Section 2 and 6.1.2.2. One scenario they
found feasible was if a startup did not know what they should do about cybersecurity,
a surprisingly common scenario based on our interviews (see Section 4.2.5). Others (E2,
E3, E5) saw the tool in a more positive light and felt the tool was a nice playground for
==PAGE:85==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
78
discovering cybersecurity. A security architect (E4) also thought the design was feasible
but noted the potential copyright issues of showing, i.e., ISO27001 initiatives, as the
standard requires payment to access documentation.
4.6.1.3
Themes of improvement
Based on the general feedback described in Section 4.6.1.1 above, the authors identified
three overall themes of improvement for the final design of the self-assessment tool.
Beginner friendliness and ease of use - make it easier for non-technical personnel to
use the tool, using more descriptive and in-depth guides for completing initiatives. An
interactive tutorial should help users get going using the tool to improve the platform’s
ease of use.
The leaderboard - remove negative and stigmatizing elements from the leaderboard
and incentivize users via achievements, badges and recommended initiatives based on
what others are doing instead. The competitive scoring elements should change from
absolute values to broader percentile groups, like congratulating a user for being in the
top 10%.
Progress tracking - in conjunction with the removal of absolute scoring, progress
tracking should be changed to focus on self-improvement and inside-out motivation
rather than outside-in.
4.6.2
Development of final design elements
After the authors identified the themes of improvement, they commenced the develop-
ment of the final self-assessment prototype elements. Several new elements in the final
design enabled the tool to become more beginner-friendly in order to support the health
technology startups in achieving cybersecurity-conscious development. Achievement and
progression statistics were also introduced, replacing the previous comparative points-
based system to provide a more engaging and less oppressive user experience.
The
introduction of these elements transformed the tool from a simple questionnaire tool to
a more fledged-out self-assessment and self-improvement platform.
4.6.2.1
Beginner friendliness
The complexity of cybersecurity was a topic that was brought up repeatedly throughout
the interviews and workshops (see Section 4.2 and Section 4.6.1.1).
First, users were provided additional context and explanation for complex cybersecurity
terminology via tooltips (shown in Figure 4.22 below) when they hovered over selected
terms. The terms might be simple for a grizzled CTO of a startup with many years of
experience, but for the newcomer who wants to create the next big thing, the tooltips
made the platform more straightforward and approachable. Tooltips were added to not
==PAGE:86==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
79
just initiatives but also to the goals in the questionnaire as well, making it easier for
users to select a relevant goal for their self-improvement.
Figure 4.22: Tooltips made it easy for all users to understand complex cybersecurity
terminology.
Additionally, a knowledge base containing in-depth information about the topics and
initiatives in the self-assessment platform. The knowledge base addressed the health
technology startups’ feedback (see Section 4.4.2.1) about not having enough background
information to complete each subtask within an initiative. The knowledge base pages,
seen in Figure 4.23 below, were based on the initiatives.
Each page contained the
information necessary to achieve an initiative and examples of how to complete them.
Figure 4.23: Knowledge base entries allowed curious users and information hoarders
alike to go in-depth with cybersecurity.
==PAGE:87==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
80
Finally, an initial tutorial in the self-assessment platform provided the users with infor-
mation about the different pages within the platform and how to use them, see Figure
4.24 below. This tutorial provided the users with the knowledge they needed to use
the platform and enabled the authors to guide users toward the questionnaire as the
first activity the users would perform. The approach made the platform slightly more
restrictive than letting the user explore the platform alone, but the trade-off of ensuring
the intended use of the platform made this restriction worth it.
Figure 4.24: An example of the tutorial where blue information boxes highlighted
features and explained them.
4.6.2.2
Self-improvement and gamification
The most significant change was the refocus toward a more self-improvement-oriented
user experience.
Pages such as the dashboard reflected these aspects of the design.
New widgets in the dashboard allowed the user to get a quick overview of the current
progress towards their current goal. This can be seen in Figure 4.24 above. Most of the
cybersecurity experts agreed that comparing against other organizations via a points-
based system could be demotivating. Instead of points, the self-assessment platform then
focused on engaging the health technology startup via achievement badges, as shown
in Figure 4.25 on the left. The platform defined three tiers of achievement depending
on the completion of each achievement. The authors decided on a lighter tone for the
achievement names, such as Mr Worldwide for completing compliance initiatives across
regions, to make the heavy cybersecurity initiatives feel less scary and more engaging
for the end-user [94].
==PAGE:88==
4.6 Sprint 6 - Validate and Finalize - Expert interviews
81
Figure 4.25: Achievements (left) provided engagement and helped to keep the user
motivated to keep improving. Comparison (right) with other companies was changed to
focus on recommended initiative completion rather than points.
Not all comparative elements of the platform were removed; however, the platform still
presented the user with a small topic group progress component (see Figure 4.25 on
the right). The startups and experts alike mentioned competition and comparison to
drive engagement (see Section 4.4.3 and Section 4.6.1.1). Instead of the previous points-
based system, the platform showed a percentage value of completed initiatives instead.
In addition, the platform also presented a recommended completion level based on the
goals set in the questionnaire. The authors selected this combined approach to help
make unfavorable comparisons less harsh while giving the user an approachable, visually
indicated goal to strive towards. Favorable comparisons, i.e., as shown in the Access
Control panel in Figure 4.25 on the right, would give the user a feeling of satisfaction,
knowing that they were both further than both their competitors and the recommended
completion rate.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
Final design
The work of this thesis then resulted in a novel solution designed to help startups better
support the integration of cybersecurity considerations into their development. In this
fifth chapter, the authors provide a walkthrough of the features that have been imple-
mented in the prototype. A holistic overview of the general prototype flow can be found
in Figure 5.1. Various aspects of the features are explained briefly with supporting illus-
trations to show the solution’s visual and functional appeal. This section will present
these features while taking the perspective of a software developer at a mobile health
technology startup newly assigned the role of cybersecurity responsible.
When first launching the platform, the developer will be presented with the landing page
(Figure 5.2), where they can read about the solution and how it can help them. After
clicking ”get started”, the developer is greeted by the dashboard on the home page,
as seen in Figure 5.3. Here, they can view a holistic overview of their cybersecurity
maturity progress via many tracking widgets. These widgets also work as shortcuts to
select initiatives, the initiatives the developer is actively working on, or recommended
next ones. This widget makes the platform and initiatives quickly accessible for the
developer, as they mentioned in Section 4.2.5 that they are busy and want to quickly
support their development.
If the developer has not previously used the platform, the platform will take the developer
on an interactive tutorial showing them how to best use the tool. At the end of the
tutorial, the platform will ask the developer to take the self-assessment, which can
be seen in Figure 5.4. The self-assessment will present the developer with a familiar
questionnaire based on the Google Materials Design framework, with many branches
such that they can select the right goals for their organization (see Figure 5.4).
After taking the self-assessment, the developer is nudged to visit the topics page as
seen on 5.5, where the topics and initiatives are tailored based on the self-assessment.
The topics are color-coded and shown in a sliding format with a short description to
make it easier for the developer to differentiate between the topic groups quickly. The
platform presents the developer with initiatives in a card format with clear information
on expected time expenditure and diﬀiculty, as seen in Figure 5.6. The developer sees the
five most relevant initiatives in each group. If they are curious to find more initiatives,
they can click “explore this topic” to see more initiatives. This action takes them to the
specific topic page, as seen in Figure 5.7, where they can find additional initiatives. To
read more in-depth information about a specific initiative, the ”learn more” button on
==PAGE:90==
5 Final design
83
the card will take the user to the initiatives page, as seen in Figure 5.7. The developer is
then presented with short, concise information with a few tooltips to help the developer
get started with the initiative. Should they be curious for more information, they can
visit the knowledge base as seen in Figure 5.8.
Here, they can read more in-depth
explanations and examples on many areas within the topics.
Clicking the last menu on the navigation bar, the developer navigates to the achievements
page, as seen in Figure 5.9, where the developer can track their earned achievements and
completion of the topics. Moreover, they can find an overview of current trends in the
form of popular initiatives and achievements earned by fellow peers. In this overview,
the developer can see not just how they fare against comparative companies but also
view the recommended level of completed initiatives based on their self-assessment.
A link to the final prototype can be found in Appendix A.8.
==PAGE:91==
5 Final design
84
Figure 5.1: Final Design Part 1/9 - The Prototype Structure.
==PAGE:92==
5 Final design
85
Figure 5.2: Final Design Part 2/9 - The Landing Page.
==PAGE:93==
5 Final design
86
Figure 5.3: Final Design Part 3/9 - The Dashboard.
==PAGE:94==
5 Final design
87
Figure 5.4: Final Design Part 4/9 - The Self-assessment.
==PAGE:95==
5 Final design
88
Figure 5.5: Final Design Part 5/9 - The Topics.
==PAGE:96==
5 Final design
89
Figure 5.6: Final Design Part 6/9 - The Initiative Cards.
==PAGE:97==
5 Final design
90
Figure 5.7: Final Design Part 7/9 - The Initiative Page.
==PAGE:98==
5 Final design
91
Figure 5.8: Final Design Part 8/9 - The Knowledge Base.
==PAGE:99==
5 Final design
92
Figure 5.9: Final Design Part 9/9 - The Achievements.
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this section, we will reflect on the findings of the thesis project and how the results
answer the initial research questions set out at the beginning of the project. We will also
discuss the final design, employed methods, and opportunities for further design with
startups and cybersecurity in general. Finally, we identify the potential future work
for not just the final design but also research in cybersecurity for startups and small
organizations.
6.1
Summary and lessons learned
Our first reflection is on the results and how they relate to the research questions we
initially set out to answer. We also discuss the final design, its novelty and how applicable
it is to enable health technology startups for security-conscious development.
6.1.1
Research questions
The overarching of this thesis was to investigate how startups approach cybersecurity
and then use those insights to design for the effective integration of cybersecurity consid-
erations into health technology startup practices. In this section, we reflect on whether
we have answered the research questions and how they allow researchers to design for
cybersecurity in health technology startups.
6.1.1.1
What existing methods, processes and challenges related
to the integration of cybersecurity within health and
healthcare technology design are prevalent according to
the organizations developing said technologies?
Throughout the first 2 phases of the project, we gained much insight in terms of under-
standing the current health technology space and the startups inside. We identified some
key gaps in knowledge in contemporary research. These gaps particularly pertained to
how health technology startups handle regulatory compliance, how to create valuable
designs for startups and how to establish a culture of cybersecurity in startups. These
gaps inspired us to work in close collaboration with health technology startups to both
==PAGE:101==
6.1 Summary and lessons learned
94
gain insight into these knowledge gaps and investigate how best to design cybersecure
health technologies.
After the interviews, we identified current cybersecurity challenges and methods preva-
lent in health tech startups through thematic analysis. The significant challenges were
a lack of resources, both in terms of time and knowledge. Startups tended to focus on
the development of their business, leading them to prioritize cybersecurity lower than
other development activities.
Regulations were another significant, restrictive factor for many startups working in
the medical technology field, with notable examples being MDR, GDPR and ISO27001.
The startups’ effort to attain compliance was challenging and time-consuming, as the
regulations mainly targeted more prominent organizations. Participants often exclaimed
that a top-down approach to regulation failed to take the startups’ circumstances into
account, making it a notable hindrance to implementing cybersecurity. Another notable
mention was the challenge of working with the health sector. The startups often frus-
tratingly spoke about their struggles when describing the process of collaborating with
hospitals. The more conservative mindset of hospitals was often the cause, which was
an obstacle. This mindset made it even harder for the hospitals to catch up with new
technology, creating further distance between them and the startups while also resulting
in many layers of bureaucracy for the startups.
Lastly, we learned that startups were very iterative in their methods, often learning as
they go by using best practices as their guidelines. The acquired experience is stan-
dardized into procedures for the rest of the startup to follow, slowly building up over
time. However, this is often not enough, and many startups still decide to use external
consultants for cybersecurity.
6.1.1.2
How might we design to support the integration of
cybersecurity considerations into the development of
health and healthcare technologies in startups?
After discovering and learning about the startups’ approaches to cybersecurity, the next
step was designing a concept to support cybersecurity considerations in their existing
processes further.
When thinking about how to design for the health tech startups, many prioritized their
time sparingly. This constraint meant that the design needed to focus on providing
tangible business value for the startups while also supporting the unique structures of
the startups. We created multiple concept proposals through an internal workshop with
the startups’ unique structures and product-focused prioritization as guidelines. These
were implemented in Figma as tangible prototypes to enable interaction when brought
out to the startups during the workshops.
Following the workshops, we identified various characteristics that the startups found
==PAGE:102==
6.1 Summary and lessons learned
95
valuable, such as gamification and team-driven interaction. Moreover, the startups also
validated existing design choices, such as designing to support unique processes and
making cybersecurity easier to approach. Lastly, the workshop also allowed the startups
to steer the direction of the development by voting for the concept they found the most
useful.
Based on these findings, we chose the self-assessment platform concept as the best candi-
date for a final design. The self-assessment platform enabled startups to get tailored rec-
ommendations to approach cybersecurity. A flexible questionnaire-based self-assessment
allowed the platform to determine the goals and needs of the startup. The platform
used this questionnaire to recommend relevant cybersecurity initiatives for the startups
to complete, each consisting of small tasks. The bite-sized initiative approach would
support the unique structures and often mentioned resource constraints of the health
tech startups.
Keeping the feedback points in mind, we iterated on the self-assessment platform to
further improve the design. After developing the iterated design, we invited cybersecurity
experts to verify the value proposition of the design and its feasibility. They all agreed the
design was good and provided general thoughts on how to improve it. These primarily
included using self-motivation rather than comparison while further emphasizing the
need to make cybersecurity easier for beginners and how it could be improved even more.
These different, valuable perspectives further highlighted the importance of designing
with all relevant stakeholders (startups and cybersecurity experts) in mind.
To support these observations, we introduced a self-motivation aspect by gamifying the
user’s progress using achievements, creating a highly engaging user experience. Lastly,
we added a tutorial, more detailed descriptions and tooltips around the design to make
it more beginner-friendly. This beginner-friendly approach supported the startups’ con-
cerns of cybersecurity being hard to grasp and allowed them to develop new health
technology solutions with cybersecurity in mind.
6.1.2
The final design
We see the final self-assessment platform as one possible result of the thesis project. As
seen both during the ideation and workshops with startups, developing cybersecurity
solutions can go in many different directions. Whether the final design is applicable to
other kinds of startups that we did not interview and the novelty of the design are two
points that we will discuss in the following subsections.
6.1.2.1
Applicability of the final design
A critical question we have considered is whether the final solution applies to all types
of health technology startups.
Our thematic analysis results focus primarily on the
challenges and motivations of startups working in the medical technology space. As we
mentioned in Section 4.2.1, the fact that most of the participating startups work in the
==PAGE:103==
6.1 Summary and lessons learned
96
medical technology space has meant that the results of the following sprints have been
heavily skewed towards companies in that space. For instance, topics such as ISO27001
and other compliance-related areas may not be as relevant to startups working in the
digital health space. The general focus on cybersecurity best practices as mentioned in
the thematic analysis (see Section 4.2.9.1) and the openness of the design mean more
relevant initiatives can be added if we find other types of startups. Therefore, we believe
that the design is relevant for health technology startups and that researchers can extend
the design to fit the needs of organizations in other fields as well with a few tweaks and
additions. As researchers perform more work to uncover the challenges, methods and
processes of startups in other areas of study, the insights can then be leveraged to extend
the design to those areas.
Such a genre of self-assessment tool could be interpreted in practice as itself permitting
assessment of compliance, and it is thus critical to consider, first, whether this could real-
istically be the case, and second, what the ramifications of such an interpretation could
be. One counterargument that we have considered is that a certified auditor must per-
form certification and regulatory compliance and that the standards are not open to the
public. As one security architect mentioned in the interviews, ISO/IEC has copyrighted
the contents of ISO27001, which are not available without payment. Furthermore, best
practices and standards are continually revised (e.g., ISO27001 was released in 2005 and
revised in 2013) [95]. Therefore, startups need to be careful and aware of these possible
changes, while we also make this clear in our communication. It is also up to us to
clearly communicate the platform’s intent, which in this case is to give startups more
insight into relevant cybersecurity best practices through regulation. International or-
ganizations like ISO create standards such as ISO27001 based on existing best practice
approaches [96]. This best practice approach means that as long as organizations can
prove the completion of the relevant cybersecurity initiatives for certification, they can
claim compliance with the standard. We do believe that the self-assessment platform
can provide the startups with the knowledge and tools necessary to support performing
cybersecurity-conscious development, in ideal cases, even confidently stating their com-
pletion of initiatives in the platform to their customers. For some customers who are less
strict about regulatory certification, the platform can help startups provide meaningful
compliance coverage.
6.1.2.2
Novelty of the self-assessment platform
As we were working on the self-assessment platform, we found multiple alternatives in
Denmark and Europe that also aim to improve cybersecurity in smaller organizations
such as Cyberjuice [97], Hackerstop [98], D-Mærket [99], Cybercompass [100] and Risk.io
[101]. One of our other considerations is whether the self-assessment platform is novel
enough. All of these alternatives have different foci and features, but all are grounded in
the goal of making cybersecurity more approachable for smaller businesses and startups.
We believe that the self-assessment platform has multiple advantages and unique features
==PAGE:104==
6.2 Reflection on the method
97
compared to existing solutions. First, the design is the result of a unique and interdis-
ciplinary mixed-methods approach, which none of the other solutions can boast of. The
design itself enables a tailored, interactive experience based on the prominent challenges
that health technology startups in particular encounter, something that is only present
in Cyberjuice. The platform is not just a one-and-done application or knowledge tool; it
actively encourages health technology startups to continually improve their startups’ cy-
bersecurity via engaging gamification grounded in self-improvement. Educational games
like Risk.io also attempt this strategy but do not target health technology startups in
particular. The platform complements this active user engagement with effective vi-
sual presentation of initiatives together with technical and economic incentivization.
D-mærket attempts to link economic and security incentives but is certification-based
and does not provide any visual engagement. These elements make the complex nature
of cybersecurity more intuitive and simple for the wide variety of roles that exist within
startups. Compared to simple knowledge bases for SMEs like Hackerstop and Cybercom-
pass, the self-assessment platform, therefore, provides a more holistic, fun and targeted
experience for the health technology space. Finally, the design has multiple branches
to develop based on the feedback and feature requests of the startups (see Section 4.4).
These factors combined enable the self-assessment platform to solve challenges not yet
solved within the health technology startup space.
6.2
Reflection on the method
The interdisciplinary aspect of this project was key to the wealth of technical and or-
ganizational insight into how startups approached cybersecurity. How we collaborated
with startups highlighted particular challenges in our facilitation of workshops. Here, we
share our reflections on the choices made in facilitating workshops to support cyberse-
curity solutions with health technology startups and advice for others working in design
research in collaboration with startups.
6.2.1
Workshop 1 as ideation workshop
One scenario we have considered was whether to focus fully on ideation in the first
workshop. We think it is vital to acknowledge the benefits of having a focused ideation
workshop. A purely-ideation-focused workshop may have provided a better solution, as it
would more deeply involve the startups in the preliminary ideation phases. It would have
been possible to explore a more comprehensive solution space with the diverse inputs
from the startups, potentially increasing the overall quantity as well as the novelty of
the early ideas. Our counterargument is that this cannot come at the cost of missing out
on validation. A significant motivation for this project is creating a meaningful solution
that the startups acknowledge as being helpful. In the interest of time and making the
best use of the startups’ engagement, we decided to combine ideation and validation for
the workshops flexibly.
==PAGE:105==
6.2 Reflection on the method
98
We considered an alternative option to reduce the number of participants but increase
their overall involvement using the same amount of time. Suppose we disregard the
challenges of recruiting startups for committed long participation. In that case, this
method will allow for a more in-depth understanding of a specific startup type, allowing
for a better, more tailored design. Despite that, we think that diversity is more important
in supporting health technology startups in general. The experience of working with a
diverse set of participating startups has been essential to gaining insight into the common
elements and unique differences of health technology startups.
6.2.2
Workshop reflections
The participants generally felt that the workshops had been well organized and profes-
sional. The workshop had been ”Very interactive and well-prepared” - W2 with the
interactivity of the prototypes mentioned as useful. The participants had agreed that
health technology is a space that needs more security knowledge and that the presented
concepts had provided good help to achieve that goal. When we held one workshop
(W3) with a company that had not participated in the initial interviews, which accord-
ing to the CTO of that telehealth startup: ”created a bit of a gap in knowledge” - W3.
Examples of the responses we received during this session are in Figure 6.1 below.
Figure 6.1: Post its created by participants during the reflection exercise of Workshop
2.
==PAGE:106==
6.3 Opportunities for design and future work
99
While the workshops had generally been very well received, an interesting note was
that participants differed in their expectations.
As seen in 6.1, one of the startups
had expected to get more feedback in terms of their specific cybersecurity setup. This
expectation gap had both been in terms of giving them feedback from the interviews and
also closer involvement in their specific processes with the solutions. It reiterated one
of the points mentioned in 6.2.1, as this would have been possible if we had engaged in
closer collaboration with a select few startups. In workshop 1, the startup participants
were very creative and suggested many new ideas, some less connected to the 3 concept
proposals. They mentioned that a prior ideation workshop could have been great in
their experience, which again relates to the points discussed in 6.2.1.
These points show that communication can be improved, although both startups had
still ended up very satisfied with the workshops. It also suggests that activity prior to
the workshop may be beneficial to keep the participants more aligned with the project.
We argue that this shows a high degree of involvement from the startups’ side. It not
only demonstrates their involved participation in the workshop itself but also acts as a
critical reflection of their role in the project as a whole. We believe that the tangible
prototypes have functioned as a driver for creativity and engagement, as the participants
have often noted both new ideas and feedback while testing. The prototypes have worked
to both support inspiration and critical thinking during the sessions, demonstrating that
the prototypes had served as a big contributor to the workshops’ success.
6.3
Opportunities for design and future work
Supporting the final design results and discussion of the method, we reflect on the
opportunities of design in the health technology startup space. This section includes
reflections on the limitations and opportunities that exist for design for not just startups
but also cybersecurity in general. Throughout the thesis project, we have identified a
multitude of potential areas for further research and development.
6.3.1
Opportunities in the health technology and
startup space
Designing for health tech startups has been a very unique experience. Compared to
bigger organizations, they do not only differ in size but also in mindset and approach to
development. As stated multiple times throughout the paper, the startups are very busy
and focused on developing their business. Ensuring clear communication and commu-
nicating the value proposition of their participation has therefore been very important
for us whenever they interact with the startups. We have also observed that startups
prefer more informal and direct communication. This applies not only in the interviews
but also during the workshops. Members of startups tend to be very blunt and honest
while also being very open to outside feedback throughout the whole project. Startups
==PAGE:107==
6.3 Opportunities for design and future work
100
are also very competitive by nature, and they are motivated by the progress of their
competitors.
While holding the interviews, startup members often build on top of each other’s conver-
sations and arguments. This resulted in the interviews being more lively, providing the
startup with a comfortable space to talk about their experiences while supporting them
in being more talkative. During the workshops, startups tend to favor performing activ-
ities in a less structured manner but very collaboratively in such a way that highlights
the strength of the existing teamwork between the participants. Therefore, approaches
focusing on the synergy between the startup members showed the best results, and we
have consciously tried to adapt throughout the interviews and workshops. One crucial
learning in this aspect is flexibility since the startups are all unique in their approach
and team composition. Therefore, the user-centered mindset for startups proved to be
good since it supports building up the approach with a focus on the startup.
Regarding opportunities for further design in the health technology startup space, we
consider regulation a significant area. Regulations significantly constrain health technol-
ogy development, especially for startups within the medical space, so designing to better
support them working with regulation has much potential. Another exciting proposal
might be facilitating better collaboration between the health sector and startups. This
issue is a major challenge that the startups revealed multiple times throughout the inter-
views and literature review. This helps not only the startups but also the health sector
in general. It allows researchers to make a big difference for many people, startups and
hospitals alike.
6.3.2
Opportunities in cybersecurity
Throughout the project, we have attained knowledge of both cybersecurity and design.
Our anecdotal experiences show cybersecurity as an area where an interdisciplinary
approach between design and developer backgrounds can provide novel solutions not yet
identified in research. Cybersecurity is heavily affected by the different ways in which
people work and interact with systems. Designing for cybersecurity is, therefore, not
only about designing solutions that protect data, achieve compliance with regulatory
standards or reduce the risk of cyber attacks. Designing for cybersecurity requires both
an in-depth knowledge of the technical aspects and knowing how to best integrate these
cybersecurity aspects in the context of users, developers and other stakeholders. User-
centered design approaches that accommodate all stakeholder concerns can, therefore,
provide comprehensive cybersecurity solutions with these factors in mind.
After going through the whole process, we considered why this design approach has
not been more prominent in the research and development of cybersecurity solutions.
One explanation we have thought of for this question is the traditional perspective of
cybersecurity being primarily a technical discipline, one reserved for practitioners of
cybersecurity and the engineers that develop software and hardware solutions. As this
thesis highlights, cybersecurity is increasingly becoming a matter of user awareness and
==PAGE:108==
6.3 Opportunities for design and future work
101
organizational preparedness. A shift towards a more cybersecurity-aware developer and
user culture is needed to allow for the design of cybersecurity solutions that take all
stakeholders into account. We, therefore, believe that more research in the design of
solutions to improve cybersecurity awareness is necessary.
This future research will
enable startups to integrate cybersecurity concerns into development further.
6.3.3
Opportunities for the self-assessment platform
Finally, we believe the self-assessment platform has more room to grow. Other than
the features already described in the results in Table 4.7, the following features can also
make the platform even better at supporting the needs of the health technology startups:
Supporting more startup types
As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, most of the participating health technology startups work
in the medical space, either developing medical devices or providing AI software for
diagnostics. Therefore, the digital health space (digital health and telehealth) is an area
where researchers can gain further insight in future work. Thinking about the broader
startup space, a community-based approach may be applicable to support not just health
technology but also other innovative areas where startups operate. Communities such as
OWASP [102] have already proven successful in making up-to-date cybersecurity more
available for developers. We believe the self-assessment platform can be an enabler for
this type of collaborative movement. The scope of this study has limited it to only focus
on health technology startups, but we believe that researchers can apply these methods
to achieve great results in other areas of study as well.
Framework for cybersecurity maturity
The self-assessment platform currently employs a simple, non-formalized model for deter-
mining the user’s current and recommended cybersecurity maturity. The cybersecurity-
conscious participants and experts have asked about a more formalized model for the
self-assessment platform. As was highlighted in the initial research (see Section 4.1),
some non-formalized, general models for cybersecurity maturity have already been de-
veloped. More specialized and formal models for startups in the health technology space
and other areas have not yet been proposed in research. This model is a research topic
where more co-design may be possible to develop a relative scale of cybersecurity ma-
turity for startups in health technology and other areas. We also potentially see the
self-assessment platform as one method to facilitate the understanding of cybersecurity
maturity.
6.3.4
Limitations
The final discussion point is acknowledging the limitations of our study, what we have
achieved and what limitations exist that can be the topic of future research.
One of the main limitations of our project is the focus on Danish health technology
==PAGE:109==
6.3 Opportunities for design and future work
102
startups and their particular challenges. It is fair to say that different countries have
different cultures and the way that Danish startups do things may differ from, i.e., other
European or American startups.
We acknowledge that facilitating cross-continental
collaboration can be a definite challenge. Our anecdotal experience with facilitating
partnerships with startups has shown that scheduling can be challenging, as the startups
have their agendas and product releases to prioritize. We believe that the results of such
as study will be worth it, both to identify designs not yet found in security but also to
attain more inclusive solutions.
Secondly, the limited time to complete the thesis also put restrictions on the activities
that we have been able to perform. One time-limited aspect that comes to mind is
more ideation activities in collaboration with health technology startups. As mentioned
earlier in Section 6.2.1, more ideation can provide more comprehensive and diverse opin-
ions, especially when we consider the importance of ensuring buy-in from all relevant
stakeholders. A larger time frame in future research can therefore provide more creative
and diverse results.
Lastly, we recognize that most of the startups had focused primarily on cybersecurity
in software. The startups focus on software, which means that the final design does not
consider the security of the hardware executing that software. This hardware focus is
also an area where further study may be beneficial to ensure cybersecurity concerns also
take hardware security into account.
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The authors initially set out to investigate the cybersecurity challenges, methods and
processes in health technology startups. Through interviews and workshops with the
startups, the authors have managed to discover the unique challenges and approaches
of health technology startups not yet identified in research.
The authors have also
found that designing cybersecurity solutions for startups requires the solution and design
process to harmonize with the distinctive nature of the startups. This process has led
to the co-design of a cybersecurity self-assessment platform in collaboration with the
startups.
A review of the existing literature shows that cybersecurity in the health technology
sector is becoming more valued. This importance is particularly true in the areas of
cybersecurity awareness, data privacy and how regulation acts as both an inhibitor of
innovation and a driver of cybersecurity. The startups mention a lack of resources (time
and knowledge), regulation and diﬀiculty working with the health sector as their biggest
challenges. They find it diﬀicult to introduce cybersecurity concerns when the startups’
primary concern is to develop a product to achieve business continuity. For this reason,
cybersecurity is prioritized lower and handled by whoever has time and experience in
cybersecurity, but it is also often outsourced to external consultants.
When designing for the integration of cybersecurity considerations in the startups, sup-
porting the unique structure and workflows of the startups is paramount. Designs must
clearly market the value proposition, and the pros of using the design outweigh the star-
tups’ reluctance to allocate time away from development. Designs also need to be easy
to understand and engaging for the startups to use, mainly through team collaboration
and self-motivation.
The final result of the collaboration with the startups is the design of a cybersecurity
self-assessment platform to enable security-conscious development in the startups. The
final design enables startups to assess themselves and identify cybersecurity initiatives
relevant to their goals and situation. Several cybersecurity experts have validated this
solution and can attest to the potential for real-world impact of the design.
This work highlights a need for future research into improving cybersecurity awareness in
startups and facilitating closer collaboration with the health sector. The development of
cybersecure health technologies is contingent not only upon technical but also on human
factors, where all stakeholders (users, developers) are involved. The project has shown
that co-design approaches effectively encourage engagement and ensure the acceptance
==PAGE:111==
7 Conclusion
104
of all relevant stakeholders. For this reason, using a mixed-methods, co-design approach
in future work can potentially provide holistic solutions to the cybersecurity challenges
of today and tomorrow.
In conclusion, the authors believe the project is successful, with both research questions
answered to satisfaction. Both authors also believe that more design research can be
done in the area of cybersecurity in startups, particularly in collaboration with the health
sector and cybersecurity awareness. The authors believe that the final self-assessment
platform design is one of many potential options for enabling security-conscious health
technology development. The authors hope that researchers will leverage the identified
findings to design user-centered solutions that both enable the integration of cybersecu-
rity concerns and also support the unique identities and processes of health technology
startups.
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Dragoni, A. Giaretta, and M. Mazzara, “The internet of hackable things,”
Proceedings of 5th International Conference in Software Engineering for Defence
Applications, pages 129–140, 2018, issn: 2194-5365. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
70578-1_13. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
70578-1_13.
[2]
E. Commission, A. Consumers Health, F. E. Agency, et al., Assessment of the EU
Member States’ rules on health data in the light of GDPR. Publications Oﬀice,
2021. doi: doi/10.2818/546193.
[3]
Healthcare data breaches hit all-time high in 2021, inpacting 45m people | fierce
healthcare, https://www.fiercehealthcare.com/health-tech/healthcare-
data-breaches-hit-all-time-high-2021-impacting-45m-people, Accessed:
2022-06-22.
[4]
J. Pool, F. Fatehi, F. Hassandoust, and S. Akhlaghpour, “Health data privacy:
Research fronts, hot topics and future directions,” eng, Studies in Health Technol-
ogy and Informatics, volume 275, pages 167–171, 2020, issn: 18798365, 09269630.
doi: 10.3233/SHTI200716.
[5]
Members - Health Tech Hub Copenhagen, https://www.healthtechhub.org/
members, Accessed: 2022-04-25.
[6]
P. Thiel and B. Masters, Zero to One: Notes on Startups, Or how to Build the
Future. Virgin Books, 2015, isbn: 9780753555200.
[7]
More than half of medical devices found to have critical vulnerabilities, https:
//www.zdnet.com/article/more-than-half-of-medical-devices-have-
critical-vulnerabilities/, Accessed: 2022-04-25.
[8]
U. Kaila and L. Nyman, “Information security best practices: First steps for star-
tups and smes,” Technology Innovation Management Review, volume 8, pages 32–
42, November 2018, issn: 1927-0321. doi: http://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/
1198. [Online]. Available: https://timreview.ca/article/1198.
[9]
E. Pollman, “Startup governance,” eng, University of Pennsylvania Law Review,
volume 168, number 1, pages 155–221, 2020, issn: 19428537, 00419907.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
106
[10]
R. W. Jones and K. Katzis, “Cybersecurity and the medical device product devel-
opment lifecycle,” eng, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, volume 238,
pages 76–79, 2017, issn: 18798365, 09269630. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-781-
8-76.
[11]
D. T. Handler, L. Hauge, A. Spognardi, and N. Dragoni, “Security and privacy
issues in healthcare monitoring systems: A case study,” eng, Proceedings of the
10th International Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Tech-
nologies, volume 5, E. L. van den Broek, A. Fred, H. Gamboa, and M. Vaz, Eds.,
pages 383–388, 2017. doi: 10.5220/0006224603830388.
[12]
A. F. Brantly and N. D. Brantly, “Patient-centric cybersecurity,” eng, Journal of
Cyber Policy, volume 5, number 3, pages 372–391, 2020, issn: 23738898, 23738871.
doi: 10.1080/23738871.2020.1856902.
[13]
D. R. Farringer, “Maybe if we turn it off and then turn it back on again? explor-
ing health care reform as a means to curb cyber attacks,” eng, Journal of Law,
Medicine and Ethics, volume 47, number 4, pages 91–102, 2019, issn: 1748720x,
10731105. doi: 10.1177/1073110519898046.
[14]
S. Faily, L. Coles-Kemp, P. Dunphy, M. Just, Y. Akama, and A. De Luca,
“Designing interactive secure system: Chi 2013 special interest group,” in CHI
’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, series CHI
EA ’13, Paris, France: Association for Computing Machinery, 2013, pages 2469–
2472, isbn: 9781450319522. doi: 10.1145/2468356.2468807. [Online]. Available:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/2468356.2468807.
[15]
L. D. Florman, “Hipaa,” eng, Portable Medical Mentor, pages 139–144, 2014. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-09852-4_24.
[16]
T. E. Parliament and council, REGULATION (EU) 2017/745 OF THE EU-
ROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 5 April 2017 on medical
devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Reg-
ulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and
93/42/EEC. 2017.
[17]
N. Martin, C. Matt, C. Niebel, and K. Blind, “How data protection regulation
affects startup innovation,” eng, Information Systems Frontiers, volume 21, num-
ber 6, pages 1307–1324, 2019, issn: 15729419, 13873326. doi: 10.1007/s10796-
019-09974-2.
[18]
I. Chakraborty, P. V. Ilavarasan, and S. Edirippulige, “Health-tech startups in
healthcare service delivery: A scoping review,” eng, Social Science and Medicine,
volume 278, page 113 949, 2021, issn: 18735347, 02779536. doi: 10.1016/j.
socscimed.2021.113949.
[19]
R. Hodson, “Digital health,” eng, Nature, volume 573, number 7775, S97, 2019,
issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/d41586-019-02869-x.
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
107
[20]
A. N. Klonoff, W. A. Lee, N. Y. Xu, K. T. Nguyen, A. DuBord, and D. Kerr, “Six
digital health technologies that will transform diabetes,” eng, Journal of Diabetes
Science and Technology, page 19 322 968 211 043 498, 2021, issn: 19322968. doi:
10.1177/19322968211043498.
[21]
“Cybersecurity attacks top ecri list of health technology hazards for 2022,” eng,
Reactions Weekly, volume 1892, number 1, pages 1–1, 2022, issn: 11792051,
01149954. doi: 10.1007/s40278-022-09543-2.
[22]
M. Loi, M. Christen, N. Kleine, and K. Weber, “Cybersecurity in health – disen-
tangling value tensions,” Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in
Society, volume 17, number 2, pages 229–245, 2019. doi: 10.1108/JICES-12-
2018-0095.
[23]
B. Aljedaani and A. M. Babar, “Challenges with developing secure mobile health
applications: Systematic review,” volume 9, number 6, 2021, issn: 2291-5222. doi:
10.2196/15654.
[24]
A. Tabasum, Z. Safi, W. AlKhater, and A. Shikfa, “Cybersecurity issues in im-
planted medical devices,” in 2018 International Conference on Computer and
Applications (ICCA), 2018, pages 1–9. doi: 10.1109/COMAPP.2018.8460454.
[25]
A. J. DeWitt and J. Kuljis, “Is usable security an oxymoron?” Interactions, vol-
ume 13, number 3, pages 41–44, May 2006, issn: 1072-5520. doi: 10.1145/
1125864.1125889. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/10.1145/1125864.1125889.
[26]
S. N. Thanh Vu, M. Stege, P. I. El-Habr, J. Bang, and N. Dragoni, “A survey
on botnets: Incentives, evolution, detection and current trends,” Future Internet,
volume 13, number 8, 2021, issn: 1999-5903. doi: 10.3390/fi13080198. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/13/8/198.
[27]
L. Nurgalieva, D. O’Callaghan, and G. Doherty, “Security and privacy of mhealth
applications: A scoping review,” IEEE Access, volume 8, pages 104 247–104 268,
2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2999934.
[28]
G. Chalhoub, “The ux of things: Exploring ux principles to inform security and
privacy design in the smart home,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, series CHI EA ’20, Hon-
olulu, HI, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pages 1–6, isbn:
9781450368193. doi: 10.1145/3334480.3381436. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/3334480.3381436.
[29]
P. Bowie, J. Ferguson, M. MacLeod, et al., “Participatory design of a prelim-
inary safety checklist for general practice,” British Journal of General Prac-
tice, volume 65, number 634, e330–e343, 2015, cited By 23. doi: 10 . 3399 /
bjgp15X684865.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
108
[30]
D. J. Sedlack, “Understanding cyber security perceptions related to information
risk in a healthcare setting,” in Understanding cyber security perceptions related to
information risk in a healthcare setting, series AMCIS 2016, San Diego, CA, USA:
Association for Information Systems, 2016, pages 1–10, isbn: 9780996683128.
[31]
T. W. Thomas, M. Tabassum, B. Chu, and H. Lipford, “Security during appli-
cation development: An application security expert perspective,” in Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pages 1–12, isbn:
9781450356206. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
10.1145/3173574.3173836.
[32]
M. Wu, R. Aranovich, and V. Filkov, “Evolution and differentiation of the cyber-
security communities in three social question and answer sites: A mixed-methods
analysis,” eng, Plos One, volume 16, number 12, A. Haldorai, Ed., e0261954, 2021,
issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0261954.
[33]
H. Assal and S. Chiasson, “’think secure from the beginning’: A survey with soft-
ware developers,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machin-
ery, 2019, pages 1–13, isbn: 9781450359702. [Online]. Available: https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/3290605.3300519.
[34]
P. L. Gorski, Y. Acar, L. Lo Iacono, and S. Fahl, “Listen to developers! a par-
ticipatory design study on security warnings for cryptographic apis,” series CHI
’20, Honolulu, HI, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pages 1–
13, isbn: 9781450367080. doi: 10.1145/3313831.3376142. [Online]. Available:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/3313831.3376142.
[35]
A. Caulliraux, D. Bastos, R. Araujo, and S. Costa, “Organizational optimization
through the double diamond - applying interdisciplinarity,” Brazilian Journal of
Operations & Production Management, volume 17, January 2020. doi: 10.14488/
BJOPM.2020.025.
[36]
D. Council, The double diamond: A universally accepted depiction of the design
process, https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our- work/news- opinion/
double-diamond-universally-accepted-depiction-design-process/, Ac-
cessed: 2022-06-20.
[37]
Gantt, Gantt chart, https://www.gantt.com/, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[38]
L. Gonçalves, “Scrum,” eng, Controlling and Management Review, volume 62,
number 4, pages 40–42, 2018, issn: 21958270, 21958262. doi: 10.1007/s12176-
018-0020-3.
[39]
Trello, Trello, https://trello.com/, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[40]
scrumpoker-online, Planning poker, https://www.scrumpoker-online.org/,
Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[41]
H. T. H. Copenhagen, Health tech hub copenhagen, https://healthtechhub.
org/, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
109
[42]
N. H. T. Hub, Nordic health tech hub, https://healthtechnordic.com/, Ac-
cessed: 2022-06-20.
[43]
R. F. Baumeister and M. R. Leary, “Writing narrative literature reviews,” eng,
Review of General Psychology, volume 1, number 3, pages 311–320, 1997, issn:
19391552, 10892680. doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.1.3.311.
[44]
DTU Findit, https://findit.dtu.dk/, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
[45]
Scopus, https://www.scopus.com/home.uri, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
[46]
Goolge Scholar, https://scholar.google.com/, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
[47]
J. Rowley, “Conducting research interviews,” eng, Management Research Review,
volume 35, number 3-4, pages 260–271, 2012, issn: 20408277, 20408269. doi:
10.1108/01409171211210154.
[48]
V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology,” eng, Qualitative
Research in Psychology, volume 3, number 2, pages 77–101, 2006, issn: 14780895,
14780887. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
[49]
ATLAS.ti - The Qualitative Data Analysis & Research Software, https : / /
atlasti.com/, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
[50]
V. Clarke and V. Braun, Thematic Analysis: A Practical Guide, First. 2021, isbn:
9781473953239.
[51]
B. Martin, B. Hanington, and B. Hanington, Universal Methods of Design: 100
Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas, and Design Effec-
tive Solutions. Rockport Publishers, 2012, isbn: 9781592537563. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://books.google.dk/books?id=uZ8uzWAcdxEC.
[52]
S. Direct, Design specification, https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/
engineering/product-design-specification, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[53]
Miro | Online Whiteboard for Visual Collaboration, https://www.miro.com,
Accessed: 2022-06-10.
[54]
Mindtools, 5 whys, https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_5W.
htm, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[55]
S. D. Tools, User journey, https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/journey-
map, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[56]
B. Ferreira, W. Silva, E. Oliveira, and T. Conte, “Designing personas with em-
pathy map,” eng, Proceedings of the International Conference on Software En-
gineering and Knowledge Engineering, Seke, volume 2015-, pages 501–505, 2015,
issn: 23259086. doi: 10.18293/SEKE2015-152.
[57]
D. Kit, How might we, https://www.designkit.org/methods/3, Accessed:
2022-06-20.
[58]
Design hypothesis - 18F Methods, https://methods.18f.gov/decide/design-
hypothesis/, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
110
[59]
Mindtools, Brainstorming, https://www.mindtools.com/brainstm.html, Ac-
cessed: 2022-06-20.
[60]
——, Mind maps, https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newISS_01.
htm, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[61]
——, Weighted decision matrix, https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/
newTED_03.htm, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[62]
Figma, https://figma.com, Accessed: 2022-05-13.
[63]
D. Valgeirsdóttir, 4 creativity and workshop design 2021, https://learn.inside.
dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/80736/viewContent/327291/View, Accessed: 2022-
06-15.
[64]
Dotmocracy, Dotmocracy, https://dotmocracy.org/, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[65]
A. Cline, Agile Development in the Real World, eng. Apress, 2015, isbn: 1484216784.
[66]
Material Design, https://material.io/design, Accessed: 2022-05-24.
[67]
C. S. Kruse, B. Frederick, T. Jacobson, and D. K. Monticone, “Cybersecurity
in healthcare: A systematic review of modern threats and trends,” eng, Technol-
ogy and Health Care, volume 25, number 1, pages 1–10, 2017, issn: 18787401,
09287329. doi: 10.3233/THC-161263.
[68]
R. Luna, E. Rhine, M. Myhra, R. Sullivan, and C. S. Kruse, “Cyber threats to
health information systems: A systematic review,” eng, Technology and Health
Care, volume 24, number 1, pages 1–9, 2016, issn: 18787401, 09287329. doi:
10.3233/THC-151102.
[69]
L. Coventry and D. Branley, “Cybersecurity in healthcare: A narrative review
of trends, threats and ways forward,” eng, Maturitas, volume 113, pages 48–52,
2018, issn: 18734111, 03785122. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2018.04.008.
[70]
A. Georgiadou, A. Michalitsi-Psarrou, F. Gioulekas, et al., “Hospitals’ cyber-
security culture during the covid-19 crisis,” eng, Healthcare (switzerland), vol-
ume 9, number 10, D. Giansanti, Ed., page 1335, 2021, issn: 22279032. doi:
10.3390/healthcare9101335.
[71]
F. Magrabi, M. S. Ong, and E. Coiera, “Health it for patient safety and improv-
ing the safety of health it,” eng, Evidence-based Health Informatics: Promoting
Safety and Eﬀiciency Through Scientific Methods and Ethical Policy, volume 222,
pages 25–36, 2016. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-635-4-25.
[72]
R. Koppel, S. Smith, J. Blythe, and V. Kothari, “Workarounds to computer
access in healthcare organizations: You want my password or a dead patient?”
eng, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, volume 208, pages 215–220,
2015, issn: 18798365, 09269630. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-488-6-215.
[73]
A. Wirth and S. L. Grimes, “Medical device cybersecurity-at the convergence of
ce and it,” eng, Clinical Engineering Handbook, Second Edition, pages 253–258,
2019. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-813467-2.00040-7.
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
111
[74]
S. S. Bhuyan, U. Y. Kabir, J. M. Escareno, et al., “Transforming healthcare
cybersecurity from reactive to proactive: Current status and future recommen-
dations,” eng, Journal of Medical Systems, volume 44, number 5, page 98, 2020,
issn: 1573689x, 01485598. doi: 10.1007/s10916-019-1507-y.
[75]
F. Gioulekas, E. Stamatiadis, A. Tzikas, et al., “A cybersecurity culture sur-
vey targeting healthcare critical infrastructures,” eng, Healthcare (switzerland),
volume 10, number 2, D. Giansanti, Ed., page 327, 2022, issn: 22279032. doi:
10.3390/healthcare10020327.
[76]
D. Alhuwail, E. Aljafar, Y. Abdulsalam, and S. AlDuaij, “Information security
awareness and behaviors of health care professionals at public health care facili-
ties,” Applied Clinical Informatics, volume 12, pages 924–932, August 2021. doi:
10.1055/s-0041-1735527.
[77]
A. Thieme, J. McCarthy, P. Johnson, et al., “Challenges for designing new tech-
nology for health and wellbeing in a complex mental healthcare context,” eng,
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, pages 2136–
2149, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858182.
[78]
Y. Kim, E. Heo, H. Lee, et al., “Prescribing 10,000 steps like aspirin: Designing
a novel interface for data-driven medical consultations,” pages 5787–5799, 2017.
doi: 10.1145/3025453.3025570. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3025453.3025570.
[79]
Q. Yang, A. Steinfeld, and J. Zimmerman, “Unremarkable ai: Fitting intelligent
decision support into critical, clinical decision-making processes,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, series CHI
’19, Glasgow, Scotland Uk: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pages 1–
11, isbn: 9781450359702. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300468. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300468.
[80]
M. Meingast, T. Roosta, and S. Sastry, “Security and privacy issues with health
care information technology,” eng, Conference Proceedings, volume 2006, pages 5453–
5458, 2006, issn: 1094687x, 1557170x. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260060.
[81]
J. Mantas and J. Liaskos, “Health data security issues,” eng, Assistive Technology
Research Series, volume 27, pages 27–32, 2011, issn: 18798071, 1383813x. doi:
10.3233/978-1-60750-752-9-27.
[82]
H. Ryu and H. Kim, “Privacy-preserving authentication protocol for wireless
body area networks in healthcare applications,” eng, Healthcare (switzerland),
volume 9, number 9, D. Giansanti and T.-C. T. Chen, Eds., page 1114, 2021,
issn: 22279032. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9091114.
[83]
H. L. S. Jara, H. B. P. Navarro, and J. Armas-Aguirre, “Cybersecurity and pri-
vacy capabilities model for data management against cyber-attacks in the health
sector,” eng, Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, volume 233, pages 359–
367, 2021, issn: 21903026, 21903018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-75680-2_40.
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
112
[84]
W. Burke, T. Oseni, A. Jolfaei, and I. Gondal, “Cybersecurity indexes for ehealth,”
eng, Acm International Conference Proceeding Series, a17, 2019, issn: 21531641.
doi: 10.1145/3290688.3290721.
[85]
D. Giansanti, “Cybersecurity and the digital-health: The challenge of this millen-
nium,” eng, Healthcare (switzerland), volume 9, number 1, page 62, 2021, issn:
22279032. doi: 10.3390/healthcare9010062.
[86]
P. Nunes, M. Antunes, and C. Silva, “Evaluating cybersecurity attitudes and
behaviors in portuguese healthcare institutions,” eng, Procedia Computer Science,
volume 181, pages 173–181, 2021, issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2021.
01.118.
[87]
S. L. Alvarez, S. L. Baller, and A. Walton, “Who owns your health data? two
interventions addressing data of wearable health devices among young adults
and future health clinicians,” eng, Journal of Consumer Health on the Internet,
volume 25, number 1, pages 35–49, 2021, issn: 15398293, 15398285. doi: 10.
1080/15398285.2020.1852386.
[88]
B. A. Fiedler, “Challenges of new technology: Securing medical devices and their
software for hippa compliance,” eng, Managing Medical Devices Within a Reg-
ulatory Framework, pages 315–329, 2017. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804179-
6.00018-6.
[89]
I. Nikolaevskiy, D. Korzun, and A. Gurtov, “Security for medical sensor networks
in mobile health systems,” eng, Proceeding of Ieee International Symposium on
a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks 2014, Wowmom 2014,
page 6 918 926, 2014. doi: 10.1109/WoWMoM.2014.6918926.
[90]
N. M. Thomasian and E. Y. Adashi, “Cybersecurity in the internet of medical
things,” eng, Health Policy and Technology, volume 10, number 3, page 100 549,
2021, issn: 22118845, 22118837. doi: 10.1016/j.hlpt.2021.100549.
[91]
C. Hub, Cyber hub | strengthening cybersecurity in denmark, https://cyberhub.
dk/, Accessed: 2022-06-20.
[92]
Cis Center for Internet Security, https://www.cisecurity.org/, Accessed:
2022-05-26.
[93]
Cybersecurity Framework | Nist, https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework,
Accessed: 2022-05-26.
[94]
K. Doherty and G. Doherty, “Engagement in hci: Conception, theory and mea-
surement,” eng, Acm Computing Surveys, volume 51, number 5, page 99, 2019,
issn: 15577341, 03600300. doi: 10.1145/3234149.
[95]
ISO - ISO/IEC 27001:2013 - Information technology – Security techniques –
Information security management systems – Requirements, https://www.iso.
org/standard/54534.html, Accessed: 2022-06-14.
==PAGE:120==
Bibliography
113
[96]
Forstå arbejdet med informationssikkerhed, https://sikkerdigital.dk/myndighed/
iso-27001-implementering/forstaa-arbejdet-med-informationssikkerhed,
Accessed: 2022-06-14.
[97]
Cyberjuice - Cybersecurity Reimagined, https : / / www . cyberjuice . io/, Ac-
cessed: 2022-06-09.
[98]
Hackerstop - Rejsen til sikker digital kultur starter her, https://www.cyberjuice.
io/, Accessed: 2022-06-09.
[99]
D-mærket - Danmarks nye IT-mærkningsordning, https://d- maerket.dk/,
Accessed: 2022-06-09.
[100]
Cybercompass | security.muni.cz, https://security.muni.cz/en/cybercompass,
Accessed: 2022-06-09.
[101]
Riskio.co.uk, https://www.riskio.co.uk/, Accessed: 2022-06-09.
[102]
OWASP, Owasp foundation | open source foundation for application security,
https://owasp.org/, Accessed: 2022-06-15.
[103]
S. M. Ritter and A. Dijksterhuis, “Creativity—the unconscious foundations of the
incubation period,” eng, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, volume 8, page 215,
2014. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00215.
==PAGE:121==
A - Appendices
==PAGE:122==
Contributions
115
A.1
Contributions
Table 1 shows the individual contribution of the authors throughout this project. X
means the contributing author has had primary contribution to an area, while (X) means
the contributing author has had secondary contribution to an area. The contribution and
work have been distributed and shared in an equivalent manner between both authors.
Through this project the authors have worked together closely and helped each other in
many ways not shown in the contribution table.
Secondary contributions: Ziru implemented the prototype designs in Figma, while
Simon created the content for the prototypes.
Ziru and Simon documented results
for sprint 2 (startup interviews) and sprint 3 (ideate) in collaboration, while Simon
documented the results of the remaining sprints.
Area
Simon
Ziru
Sprint 1 - Research
X
X
Sprint 2 - Interviews
X
X
Sprint 2 - Coding
X
X
Sprint 2 - Thematic Analysis
X
X
Sprint 3 - Ideation
X
X
Sprint 3 - Ideation design implementation
(X)
X
Sprint 4 - Workshops
X
X
Sprint 5 - Iteration design
X
X
Sprint 5 - Iteration design implementation
(X)
X
Sprint 6 - Expert interviews
X
X
Sprint 6 - Final design
X
X
Sprint 6 - Final design implementation
(X)
X
Report - Introduction
X
Report - Related Work
X
Report - Methodology
X
Report - Results
X
(X)
Report - Final Design
X
Report - Discussion
X
X
Report - Conclusion
X
X
Table 1: Individual contributions of the authors.
==PAGE:123==
Acronyms
116
A.2
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
MVP
Minimum-Viable Product
UX
User Experience
UI
User Interface
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
HCI
Human-Computer Interaction
MDR
Medical Device Regulation
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
IoT
Internet of Things
QMS
Quality Management System
CE
Conformité Européenne
CEO
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
CTO
Chief Technology Oﬀicer
CIO
Chief Information Oﬀicer
PM
Project Manager
==PAGE:124==
Gantt Chart
117
A.3
Gantt Chart
==PAGE:125==
Gantt Chart
118
Figure 1: Each feature and sub-feature proposed for each iteration sprint
==PAGE:126==
A.4
Participant Information Sheet
==PAGE:127==
CyberSecure Health Technology Design -
Participant Information Sheet
Research aim and participants
The goal of this project is to research and investigate the current processes, workflows and
issues for consideration of security risks and concerns in the development of digital health
technologies, and subsequently leveraging these insights to support the development of novel
design concepts for new tools, methods and/or materials in support of a security-conscious
approach to health technology development.
Overview of activities
• Interviews - Online or on-site interviews with startups to discuss processes, chal-
lenges, problems and priorities in the context of cybersecurity during development
of health technologies. Interviews will be performed by asking pre-determined open-
ended initial questions. Expected time commitment is around 1-2 hours.
• Workshops - Online or on-site workshops with startups to gain a better under-
standing of the processes collaboratively and understanding the perspectives of the
companies on various problems/solutions. Workshops will also be performed to gain
feedback on concept and concrete solution design.
Expected time commitment is
around 1-2 hours.
What the company gets
• External viewpoint to gain insight into cybersecurity in health technology.
• Novel design concepts to support security in health technology development.
Participant data handling
Anonymized transcripts will be created based on audio recorded during interviews and
workshops. Anonymization of transcripts will fully remove any mention of personally iden-
tifiable information (participant names and company) and associate participants with a
randomly generated ID. Audio recordings will be deleted after the transcripts have been
created, while anonymized transcripts will be kept indefinitely. Participants’ anonymized
data will be used for a thesis and possible future scientific and public-interest publications.
The names of participating companies may be mentioned during the oral defense of the
research.
Your participation is voluntary and you may withdraw from this study at any time without
the need to provide any reason.
Contact information
Msc Student, Simon Vu - s200361@student.dtu.dk
Msc Student, Ziru Li - zirl@dtu.dk
1
Participant Information Sheet
120
==PAGE:128==
Workshop Program
121
A.5
Workshop Program
Workshop practicalities
• Workshop format
The startups who participated in this work were highly diverse in terms of not only
product focus but also location, personnel and work environments. This meant that
both digital and physical workshops needed to be prepared. The digital workshop
was conducted via the whiteboard platform Miro [53], which is a collaborative
platform where users can work with digital tools such as pens, post-its and much
more. Access was shared with the participants while holding a Microsoft Teams
meeting for verbal communication. On the other hand, the physical workshop was
more traditional in the sense that physical tools were brought for the participants
to use as they go through the exercises, moreover also being able to communicate
in person. Snacks were brought as well for a small motivation boost. In case of a
hybrid workshop, facilitation of the workshop was done in Miro for both the offline
and online participant.
• Visual overview
A PowerPoint slide show was prepared for the workshop to give the participants
a visual overview and stimulation when going through each exercise and their
instructions. Relevant iconography was used on each slide to create a better visible
association with the activities at hand. For the online workshop, the slides were
screen-shared when relevant, while for the offline workshop a TV was borrowed.
• Templates
To make data collection more standardized and streamlined, it was decided to
create templates for the exercises. The templates were made mainly in Miro as
most workshops were planned to be digital, while the templates were printed out
for the physical workshop. For the digital workshop, instructions were included in
Miro so participants did not have to switch forth between windows. The templates
used in the workshops can be found the Appendix ZIP file.
• Facilitation
The approach to the facilitation was mainly to put the participants in focus and
support collaboration between them from the side. It was, therefore, important
to ensure simple and fast explanations for the exercises to eﬀiciently make use of
the participants’ time. Due to the different participants and their number, the
authors were also prepared to be flexible and adapt to the circumstances that
might take place during the workshop. The authors would also take notes during
the workshop plus take pictures if relevant and allowed.
==PAGE:129==
Workshop Program
122
Create comfort
Introduction (10 min)
The workshop was planned to start with a short introduction session to the startups
about the work done so far and what the overall purpose of the workshop would be.
During the explanation, the authors also made clear that the workshop is open-minded
and inclusive, reminding the participants to not hesitate to speak up or ask questions,
furthermore that no ideas are bad, and everything was welcome. Next, a short introduc-
tion of the participants and hosts was also planned in case of new participating members
of the startups or new startups for the project. Due to participants being from the same
startup and likely already familiar with each other, it was decided to not include any
team-building exercises to save time.
Tasks
• Introduction of the participants and self-introduction (If relevant, new people are
coming to some of the workshops)
• Explain the work since last the meeting
• Introduction to the workshop agenda (Slides)
Stage discussion
Warm-up (10 min)
As the first activity of the workshop, it was important to start with something relatively
simple while also getting the participants into the context of the workshop subject; sup-
porting cybersecurity for health tech startups. To build on top of the introduction as
well as interviews conducted previously, the chosen exercise was the ranking of the iden-
tified problems throughout the interviews. The purpose was to facilitate the participants
to discuss the problems in the context of their startups and consider how they would
evaluate them. It supports identifying the qualities they would find the most attractive
in the concepts, while also giving some quantitative data for the identified problems.
Tasks
• Rank problems that were identified throughout the interviews
• Facilitate the participants to discuss the problems
==PAGE:130==
Workshop Program
123
Introduction to concepts (5 min)
The next step was giving a quick holistic walkthrough of the design process of the project
after discussing the identified problems. This was done by introducing the participants
to the initial mind map of the internal development, as well as the early low fidelity
sketches and wireframes of concepts. The goal was to give them a quick pitch of each
concept and explain how they originated, while also showing the authors’ sincerity by
sharing the rougher concepts to hopefully make them more open to sharing ideas no
matter how good they are.
Concept testing sprints(15 min x3)
Testing out the prototypes was the core part of this workshop stage, so it was decided
to allocate a lot of time for it. It was structured as 3 sprints with two parts each, the
first half for testing the prototype itself plus the second half for discussing the pros and
cons. The prototypes were made on Figma as interactive mockups and they were shared
with the participants as links to open on their laptops. While going through Figma, the
participants were encouraged to think out loud as well as write down their thoughts on
digital or physical post-its and put them on the designated template depending on the
workshop circumstances. This was done to support the collection of qualitative data
while also enabling the participants to discuss the concept as they go through it. After
going through the prototype the participants were prompted to discuss and elaborate
on the pros and cons together. The intention was to facilitate discussion around how
they might potentially see themselves using the concept from their reasoning behind the
pros and cons, and why it might work well or not.
Tasks
• Concept testing
– Think out aloud
– Get the participants to talk as much as possible during the testing
– Have participants write down their thoughts on post-its and put them on the
template
– Have participants write down pros and cons on post-its for the feedback ses-
sion
– Try to ask some leading questions if participants are silent or stuck
• Feedback
– Present and discuss Pros and Cons
– Ask participants to state a few things about what makes the concept solution
great and what makes it hard to work with / not useful
==PAGE:131==
Workshop Program
124
Break (5 min)
The break was put in between the stage discussion and develop together stages to func-
tion as an incubation time for the participants to get some time off. Incubation can help
boost the creativity of participants [103].
Develop together
Improve concepts (20 min)
Brainstorming was the main exercise used for the improvement of the concepts. It was
chosen due to being one of the most flexible ideation activities, which is important consid-
ering the potentially different roles of the participants. Practically, this brainstorming
was done on post-its, whether it was digitally or physically, although participants were
also encouraged to draw if relevant or find pictures online in case of the digital workshops.
Additionally, the participants were also reminded of the initial ideas mind map if they
should be short on ideas. The time set aside from the brainstorm was 10 minutes max,
but it was flexibly gauged depending on the participants’ work momentum. Afterward
was presenting the proposed ideas, which was done one participant at a time. They were
also encouraged to discuss the ideas and the reason they proposed them to give some
more insight. Lastly, the ideas are grouped up into their respective concepts if relevant,
while also trying to identify functional relations and further categorize the ideas.
Tasks
• Brainstorming
– Brainstorm ideas individually for various suggestions to improve the 3 con-
cepts
– Mash-up suggestion. The internal solution mind map is shown to the partic-
ipants to inspire them to see connections between different solutions and get
some more ideas, as well as showing how to do the next exercise.
– Remind participants no ideas are bad
• Present and Discuss ideas
– Participants discuss the ideas they have created
– While discussing, facilitate participants to try and categorize their ideas to-
gether, such as by features, concept etc.
Evaluate concepts (10 min)
The evaluation was mainly done quantitatively with the dot voting exercise, where the
participants each had 5 votes which they could place however they want between the 3
==PAGE:132==
Workshop Program
125
proposed concepts. They were explicitly asked to vote based on the concepts as shown
during the prototypes, as it is hard to account for the feasibility of the potential of the
proposals were also considered a parameter. Like the previous activities, the participants
were also told to think out loud about their considerations and thoughts to get some
qualitative feedback through their explanations.
Tasks
• Dotmocracy
• Facilitate participants to explain the order of their ranking and the reasoning
behind it
Review, Reflection, Q&A (10 min)
Lastly, the workshop ended with an informal reviewing and reflection session where the
participants had the opportunity to voice their thoughts on the overall project involve-
ment and the workshop. This was mainly used to discuss the expectations of the startups
and whether they were met, while also getting some general feedback on the project and
workshop. Other than ending thoughts, it also worked as a Q&A session in case the
startups had anything to ask before ending the workshop.
==PAGE:133==
Expert Interview guide
126
A.6
Expert Interview guide
• Introduce ourselves, name round - 5 minutes
• Introduce the project - 5 minutes
•
– The purpose of this interview
– The process so far (9 startups with some challenges, then did workshop, now
this prototype is the result)
– Ask if the expert has any questions
• Go through prototype - 10 minutes
•
– Think out aloud
– Planned tasks for them to complete
–
∗Go through the questionnaire
∗See dashboard
∗See the initiative page
∗See leaderboards
• Short questionnaire with simple questions - 5 minutes
•
– How useful do you think this solution is? (1-5)
– Do you think this is a feasible solution?
– What did you like the most?
– What was the worst part about it?
A.7
Interview Guide
==PAGE:134==
Interview Guide
Simon Vu and Ziru Li
February 2022
Introduction
The goal of the project is to gain insight into how cybersecurity is handled in
health technology start-ups, from processes and workflows to common issues.
Our goal is to use this insight to design supporting tools, methods, and materials
to enable security-conscious development in health technology start-ups.
Present data sharing policy (recordings, anonymization, right to stop)
Opening questions
• Can you tell us a little about your company and what you do?
How large is your team? What is your role in the company? What kind
of tasks do you usually work with? How many years of experience do you
have? What kind of other experiences do you have in the field? What is
your background? Are there any significant achievements you would like
to highlight?
• A lot of people talk about cybersecurity, but what exactly does
cybersecurity mean to you? What does it mean to your company and
culture?
• How important is cybersecurity for your company? How much of
the companies’ resources do you spend on it relatively (like man hours)?
Which aspects are most important for you?
Implementation of cybersecurity aspects during
development
• How are cybersecurity concerns handled during the development
process (for example, if you find a security error or a customer is
asking for something specific)? Who is responsible for cybersecurity?
What resources do you use to keep up to date? Is any 3rd party involved in
the development process (with regards to cybersecurity, e.g. consultants).
How so?
• What are the biggest issues/challenges in involving cybersecu-
rity concerns during development? How are these issues/challenges
identified? How are the issues prioritized? How do you plan to handle
1
Interview Guide
127
==PAGE:135==
identified security issues/challenges (internally? Paying for external re-
sources? asking other startups?)? Can you think of any resources that
would have been nice-to-know when faced with these challenges?
• What kind of constraints or systems to prevent risky user cyber-
security behavior do you employ (Such as common passwords,
easy passwords etc.)? What was the thought process when employing
these constraints or systems?
Use of security frameworks in startups
• Are there any frameworks, methods or tools you believe can be
useful for cybersecurity (things like online websites, recommen-
dations from authorities etc.)? What is your strategy for handling
cybersecurity within your company? Which security policies do you have?
Do you perform employee cybersecurity training (GDPR courses etc.)?
How often do you (re-)evaluate cybersecurity in your solutions?
• What challenges related to cybersecurity have you experienced?
Is this affected by your status as a start-up? Lack of manpower? Lack of
information? Lack of time? What is your strategy for handling cyberse-
curity as you grow? If you could start all over again, what would you do
differently?
• How is cybersecurity handled for sharing resources internally
within your company? How do you perform risk analysis of your solu-
tions and internal IT (if applicable)? Are you familiar with any cybersecu-
rity standards (e.g. ISO27001, NIST)? Are you considering implementing
any of these? What do you see as the biggest challenge in achieving this?
Effect of regulation (GDPR) on development
• What is your opinion when it comes to cybersecurity regulation
(GDPR etc.)? What unique challenges or opportunities related to reg-
ulation do you experience as a startup? How so? What would you change
with regards to regulation if you could choose?
• How does cybersecurity and data protection regulation affect
the development process? What is your strategy for handling sensitive
data? Has this had a constraining effect on your product/development?
How so?
How do you inform your customer about how their data is
handled (if relevant)?
Has a customer invoked the right to informa-
tion/amend/delete as per EU GDPR?
2
Interview Guide
128
==PAGE:136==
Designing the cybersecurity systems with the end-
users in mind
• What are the current security measures that involve end-users
directly (logins, data storage, 2-factor)? How is cybersecurity af-
fected by the end-user of your product (i.e. what role do your users play
in the cybersecurity of your platform)? What kind of risk analysis is per-
formed regarding end-users, interaction with your product? Do they have
any options for setting up multi-factor authentication? What kind? What
does the user do in case of an incident? Do you have any form of account
recovery?
• How do you handle weighing cybersecurity concerns vs. usabil-
ity (e.g. requiring 2-factor logins)? What options did you consider
when weighing these concerns? Does any security feature impair the user
experience, such as making the login process tedious or frequently asking
for authentication?
Designing the cybersecurity systems with the end-
users in mind - End-users are Consumers
• How do you perceive users’ opinions on cybersecurity concerns
in your product? What kinds of tests (if any) do you perform with
end-users to test the effect of cybersecurity on the user experience? If not,
if you could choose, how would you consider doing tests with users?
• How much of your user platform is self-contained and how much
is dependent on external (customer or otherwise) services? What
is your approach to integrations to service providers such as Facebook or
Google?
Designing the cybersecurity systems with the end-
users in mind - End-users are Businesses
• How much of your user platform is self-contained and how much
is dependent on external (customer or otherwise) services? How
does your customers’ existing cybersecurity infrastructure affect how your
product works? Who is responsible for cybersecurity concerns if something
has to be changed to comply with partners?
3
Interview Guide
129
==PAGE:137==
Ending questions
• What do you think about cybersecurity in the health sector gen-
erally? What about specifically for health tech? How do you see the
future of cybersecurity in health tech?
• Anything else you would like to add?/Any final thoughts?
4
Interview Guide
130
==PAGE:138==
External Resources
131
A.8
External Resources
Here are the links for the Figma prototypes in the project:
Final
Design
-
Self-assessment
-
https://www.figma.com/proto/
EIDxj1yGLaQeGkClDTxxiQ/Final-design?page-id=0%3A1&node-id=65%3A13332&
starting-point-node-id=65%3A13332
Design
iteration
-
Self-assessment
-
https://www.figma.com/proto/
TlR4pey9KHE6EtrnZmWTaF/Design-iteration?page-id=0%3A1&node-id=65%
3A13332&viewport=2299%2C2654%2C0.26&scaling=min-zoom&starting-point-
node-id=65%3A13332
Concept
Proposal
1
-
Self-assessment
-
https://www.figma.com/
proto/38S3WsKkW6bnIo2KbbER24/Self-Assessment?page-id=35%3A1246&node-
id=35%3A1719&viewport=423%2C440%2C0.05&scaling=min-zoom&starting-point-
node-id=35%3A1719
Concept
Proposal
2
-
Course
base
-
https://www.figma.com/proto/
jYD5q33LaLKEWnQBjom3Kw/Course-base?page-id=0%3A1&node-id=45%3A374&
viewport=446%2C434%2C0.06&scaling=min-zoom&starting-point-node-id=2%3A12
Concept
Proposal
3
-
Business
tool
kit
-
https://www.figma.com/
proto/zB1SJN2kKl41pTgItw3GuV/Business-Tool-Map?page-id=0%3A1&node-
id=43%3A34&viewport=371%2C112%2C0.03&scaling=min-zoom&starting-point-
node-id=43%3A34
Password for all links: 12qwaszx
If any incident should occur such as Figma being down, videos demonstrating the pro-
totypes can be found in the Appendix ZIP file.
==PAGE:139==
Workshop results
132
A.9
Workshop results
Dotmocracy votes
Individual participant votes during the dotmocracy exercise are shown in Figure 2 below.
Self-assessment
Course base
Business toolkit
Participant 1
2
1.5
1.5
Participant 2
4
0
1
Participant 3
2
1
2
Participant 4
3
2
0
Participant 5
2
2
1
Participant 6
3
0
2
Participant 7
1
2
1
Participant 8
0
4
2
Participant 9
0
3
2
Total score
17
15.5
12.5
Table 2: Exact list of dotmocracy votes during workshop
==PAGE:140==
Design iteration
133
A.10
Design iteration
==PAGE:141==
Design iteration
134
==PAGE:142==
Design iteration
135
Figure 2: Each feature and sub-feature proposed for iteration phase
==PAGE:143==
==PAGE:144==
