==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quantification of N2O emissions from wastewater treatment plants 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark  
DTU Sustain 
Department of Environmental Engineering 
Luca Dario Ledermann – s202419 
June 3, 2022 
Supervisor: 
Charlotte Scheutz, Professor DTU 
 
Co-supervisors: 
Anders Michael Fredenslund, Senior Researcher DTU 
Jon Knudsen, CEO Explicit  
==PAGE:2==
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration of Authorship 
I hereby declare that the thesis submitted is my own unaided work. All direct or indirect 
sources used are acknowledged as references. I am aware that the thesis in digital form 
can be examined for the use of unauthorized aid and in order to determine whether the 
thesis as a whole or parts incorporated in it may be deemed as plagiarism. For the 
comparison of my work with existing sources I agree that it shall be entered in a database 
where it shall also remain after examination, to enable comparison with future theses 
submitted. Further rights of reproduction and usage, however, are not granted here. This 
thesis was not previously presented to another examination board and has not been 
published. 
          Copenhagen, June 3, 2022 
 
Place, Date 
 
Signature 
==PAGE:3==
iii 
 
ABSTRACT 
Human activities such as the release of greenhouse gases (GHGs) are warming the 
atmosphere, contributing to climate change. Submitted under the Paris Agreement, 
Denmark’s Climate Programme 2020 sets a near-term target of reducing Denmark’s 
GHGs emissions by 70% by 2030 compared to the 1990 level. To achieve this ambitious 
goal, it is crucial to understand how and why exactly GHGs are produced, where they 
are emitted, and how to measure them to make accurate predictions and control GHG 
emitting processes. This thesis aims for a better understanding on the quantification 
of the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O). A significant source of 
anthropogenic N2O are wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), yet methods on the 
quantification of total N2O emissions from WWTPs are still somewhat scarcely 
available and studied considering the importance of the topic. 
The main objective of this study is to compare three different methods for the 
quantification of total N2O emissions: the novel drone flux measurement (DFM) 
method, the tracer dispersion method (TDM), and an emission model based on N2O 
sensors in the water phase. The comparison includes a presentation of the method 
principles as well as a method comparison through conducted measurement 
campaigns at the Avedøre WWTP. The TDM and DFM methods were also subjected 
to a controlled release test. A particular focus is put on the DFM method of which N2O 
flux calculation was analysed in more detail with the help of a Gaussian plume model. 
Results of the measurement campaigns show that the DFM and TDM methods 
provide comparable results on the total N2O emissions, whereas the emission model 
continuously underreported the N2O emissions. An analysis of the emission model 
equation showed that the output of the emission model does not entirely correlate 
with the measured N2O emission in the liquid phase. Furthermore, the emission 
model showed a strong dependency to a not directly measured parameter. Not 
measuring air flow – one of the most sensitive model parameters – holds potential for 
uncertainty and could be one of the main reasons for the emission model 
underreporting N2O emissions. The DFM has shown to be suitable for the 
quantification of total N2O emissions at a wastewater treatment plant. Results of the 
controlled release test show that the DFM method is able to detect N2O fluxes with a 
precision of about 12%.  
The findings of this thesis support the notion raised in prior research that the 
nitrification processes are the most prominent N2O producing and N2O emitting 
phases, whereas denitrification stages function as N2O sinks in WWTPs. The results 
also revealed that special events, such as maintenance work on the biological nitrogen 
removal stage, can cause immense N2O emission factors of up to 38.7 % kg N2O-N /kg 
T-N inflow.  
==PAGE:4==
iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Throughout my studies, I have had a special interest in residual resource 
management, so I was happy to dive into a topic that resonated with that. N2O 
emissions from wastewater treatment plants is maybe not the sexiest of all master’s 
thesis topics, but it’s an important one.  
During this project, I have been wearing two hats as I am not only a student and thesis 
writer, but also an employee of Explicit. It is often discussed how personal or 
professional relations affect research, so I feel like I need to address that. Thanks to 
my professional relation to Explicit, one of the organisations behind this study, I was 
able to access to places, contacts and resources that might have otherwise been out of 
my reach. Being an insider, so to say, certainly made the process smoother. At the 
same time, of course, I have taken my own position into account and been 
constructively sceptical throughout the conduction of the study, in order to adhere to 
good scientific practice. 
Sincere thanks to my supervisor Charlotte and co-supervisors Anders from DTU and 
Jon from Explicit. Thanks also to Bettina, Jørgen, and other colleagues from Explicit 
for all the guidance and sparring. Thanks to my dear friends and family back home in 
Switzerland and my new friends in Copenhagen for the support and encouragement. 
Thanks, Katja, for standing by my side – and doing everything from sparring to 
proofreading to reminding me about the more important things in life. 
Lastly, I would like to thank the great Nordic educational system and Danish 
taxpayers – without you, it might be that I would have never embarked on this great 
MSc journey. 
Tak and thanks! 
 
Copenhagen, Denmark, June 2022 
Luca Ledermann 
==PAGE:5==
i 
 
Contents 
 
ABSTRACT 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS 
TABLES AND FIGURES 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………… 7 
   1.1 Objectives…………………………………………………………………………….. 9 
   1.2 Context of the Project……………………………………………………………….. 9 
2 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND…………………………………………………... 11 
   2.1 Wastewater treatment and its nitrous oxide contribution ……………………...11 
   2.2 Microbial processes and pathways of nitrous oxide …………………………….13 
   2.2.1 Nitrification ……………………………………………………………………..14 
   2.2.2 Denitrification …………………………………………………………………..15 
   2.2.3 Pathway contribution to total N2O production ……………………………..16 
   2.3 Seasonality …………………………………………………………………………...17 
   2.4 N2O Emission factors and reported values in literature ………………………...19 
3 
BIOFOS Avedøre wastewater treatment plant ……………………………………..24 
   3.1 Nitrous oxide emissions at Avedøre WWTP……………………………………..28 
4 
METHODOLOGY ……………………………………………………………………..29 
   4.1 Nitrous oxide quantification in the water phase ………………………………...29 
   4.1.1 N2O emission model …………………………………………………………...30 
   4.1.2 Uncertainty……………………………………………………………………...33 
   4.1.3 Limitations ……………………………………………………………………...33 
   4.2 Drone Flux measurement method ………………………………………………...34 
   4.2.1 Materials ………………………………………………………………………...35 
   4.2.2 Data collection ………………………………………………………………….36 
   4.2.3 Data treatment and Flux calculation …………………………………………38 
   4.2.4 Uncertainty……………………………………………………………………...45 
   4.2.5 Limitations ……………………………………………………………………...45 
   4.3 Tracer dispersion method ………………………………………………………….46 
   4.3.1 Materials ………………………………………………………………………...47 
   4.3.2 Data collection ………………………………………………………………….48 
   4.3.3 Uncertainty……………………………………………………………………...49 
   4.3.4 Limitations ……………………………………………………………………...50 
   4.4 Measurements and campaign design ……………………………………………..50 
   4.4.1 Sensor pre-calibration ………………………………………………………….50 
   4.4.2 Campaigns at Avedøre WWTP ……………………………………………….51 
==PAGE:6==
ii 
 
   4.4.3 Controlled release test …………………………………………………………51 
   4.4.4 DFM method analysis………………………………………………………….52 
5 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ……………………………………………………….53 
   5.1 Pre-calibration ……………………………………………………………………….53 
   5.2 N2O production and model analysis ……………………………………………...54 
   5.2.1 First campaign ………………………………………………………………….55 
   5.2.2 Second Campaign ……………………………………………………………...59 
   5.2.3 N2O emissions computed with the emission model ………………………..63 
   5.2.4 Extrapolation of total emissions based on model emission data ………….65 
   5.3 First campaign total emissions …………………………………………………….67 
   5.3.1 DFM during first campaign …………………………………………………...68 
   5.3.2 TDM during first campaign…………………………………………………...72 
   5.3.3 Summary of the first campaign ……………………………………………….74 
   5.3.4 Emission factors during first campaign ……………………………………...75 
   5.4 Second campaign total emissions …………………………………………………76 
   5.4.1 DFM during second campaign………………………………………………..77 
   5.4.2 TDM in the second campaign ………………………………………………...79 
   5.4.3 Summary of the second campaign …………………………………………...81 
   5.4.4 Emission factors in the second campaign ……………………………………82 
   5.5 Controlled release test ……………………………………………………………...83 
   5.6 DFM method analysis based on Gaussian plume model ……………………….85 
6 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK …….……………………………………………91 
REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………………………94 
Appendix …………………………………………………………………………………..100 
   A.1 Sensor MIRA Strato by Aeris……………………………………………………... 100 
   A.2 Protocol first laboratory sensor test ………………………………………………101 
   A.3 Protocol Gaussian Plume Model ………………………………………………….106 
   A.4 Results first laboratory test ………………………………………………………..108 
   A.5 DFM detailed flight information ………………………………………………….112 
    
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
iii 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
AMO 
Ammonia monooxygenase 
AOA 
Ammonia oxidicing archea  
AOB 
Ammonia oxidicing bacteria 
BNR 
Biological nitrogen removal 
C2H2 
Acetylene 
CH4 
Methane 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide  
CO2e 
Carbon dioxide equivalence 
COD 
Chemical Oxygen Demand 
DFM 
Drone flux measurment 
DNB 
Denitrifying bacteria  
DO 
Disolved oxigen 
GHG 
Greenhouse gas  
GPS 
Global positioning system 
GWP 
Global warming potential 
HAO 
Hydroxylamine oxidoreductase  
HD 
Heterotrophic denitrification pathway 
IPCC 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
MUDP 
The Danish Government Eco-Innovation Programme  
N2O 
Nitrous oxide 
NAR 
Nitrate reductase  
ND 
Nitrifier denitrification pathway 
NH2OH 
Hydroxylamine  
NH3 
Amminia 
NH4+ 
Ammonium 
NIR 
Nitrite reductase  
NN 
Nitrifier nitrification pathway 
NO 
Nitric oxide 
NO2- 
Nitrite 
NOB 
Nitrite oxidising bacteria 
NOR 
Nitric oxide reductase  
NOS 
Nitrous oxide reductase  
TDM 
Trace dispersion method 
UAV 
Unmanned aerial vehicle 
UN 
United Nations 
WWTP 
Wastewater treatment plant 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
iv 
 
TABLES AND FIGURES 
 
 
FIGURE 1. Nitrogen transformations during nitrification and  
                    denitrification processes. 
13 
FIGURE 2. Seasonal emission pattern a carousel reactor at Avedøre WWTP 
                     (Chen, et al., 2019) 
18 
FIGURE 3. Seasonal pattern at a carrousel reactor at Kralingseveer WWTP. 
19 
FIGURE 4. Flow Diagram WWTP Avedøre 
24 
FIGURE 5. Aerial view on the four carousel reactors at the Avedøre WWTP. 
26 
FIGURE 6. A carousel reactor at the Avedøre WWTP where the left basin  
                    is at a nitrification stage and the right one at a denitrification stage. 
26 
FIGURE 7. Schematic illustration of a BioDeNitro carousel reactor 
                    at the Avedøre WWTP. 
27 
FIGURE 8. The reactor configurations applied in the BioDeNitro stage 
                    are marked with a three-digit code. 
28 
FIGURE 9. N2O liquid sensor by Unisense Environment A/S (Unisense, 2020) 
29 
FIGURE 10. Illustration of the DFM method applied on a WWTP. 
34 
FIGURE 11. UAV equipped with the Aeris Mira Strato N2O sensor. 
35 
FIGURE 12. TriSonicaTM mini wind sensor (Anemoment, 2022). 
36 
FIGURE 13. Vertical plane flight path (wall) of the DFM method. 
37 
FIGURE 14. Inclination of the drone 
38 
FIGURE 15. Horizontal wind speed 
40 
FIGURE 16. Horizontal wind direction 
40 
FIGURE 17. Wind Tool alignment 
41 
FIGURE 18. Trace flux measurement method. 
44 
FIGURE 19. TDM method using a Picarro analyser. 
47 
FIGURE 20. The application procedure of the TDM method. 
48 
FIGURE 21. Layout of the controlled release test. 
52 
FIGURE 22. Calibration curve: Aeris MIRA. 
54 
FIGURE 23. Calibration curve: Picarro. 
54 
FIGURE 24. Reactor 1: first campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
56 
FIGURE 25. Reactor 3: first campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
57 
FIGURE 26. Wastewater feed into the reactor 1 and 3  
                      during the observation period. 
60 
FIGURE 27. Reactor 1: second campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
61 
FIGURE 28. Reactor 3: second campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
62 
FIGURE 29. N2O emission rates grouped into process stages. 
64 
FIGURE 30. Visualization of total emissions calculation through  
                      the option 1 during the first campaign. 
66 
FIGURE 31. Visualization of total emissions calculation through the option 2. 
67 
FIGURE 32. Detailed information on the first flight of the first campaign  
                      in cloudy conditions. 
69 
FIGURE 33. Detailed information on the third flight of the first campaign 
                      in sunny conditions. 
70 
FIGURE 34. Map visualization of the first flight of the first campaign. 
71 
==PAGE:9==
v 
 
FIGURE 35. Map visualization of the tenth flight of the first campaign. 
71 
FIGURE 36. TDM graphical illustration of the first campaign. 
72 
FIGURE 37. Summary of the three methods to obtain total emission  
                      of the first campaign. 
74 
FIGURE 38. The second flight of the second campaign. 
78 
FIGURE 39. TDM graphical illustration of campaign 2. 
79 
FIGURE 40. Measured N2O emissions as well as the tracer gas C2H2. 
79 
FIGURE 41. Summary of the three methods to obtain total emission 
                      of the second campaign 
81 
FIGURE 42. Controlled release of N2O with corresponding DFM flux walls 
84 
FIGURE 43. The first flight of the first campaign, detection of  
                      high concentrations in Trace0. 
85 
FIGURE 44. Visualization of the simulated source pattern (aeration area) 
86 
FIGURE 45. Measured and simulated emissions. 
88 
FIGURE 46. Simulated (grey) and measured (orange) N2O concentrations 
88 
FIGURE 47. Choice of segment taken for the vertical profile 
89 
FIGURE 48. Vertical N2O concentration profile of the simulated first flight. 
89 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
vi 
 
TABLE 1. Reported and relevant N2O emission factors prior to this study 
21 
TABLE 2. Literature values used for the emission model (Unisense, 2020) 
32 
TABLE 3. Process stage with corresponding N2O emission rate 
66 
TABLE 4. DFM flight details and N2O flux results. 
68 
TABLE 5. Summary of the obtained N2O flux values by the DFM. 
68 
TABLE 6. TDM measurement details and N2O flux results. 
73 
TABLE 7. Summary of the obtained flux N2O values by the TDM. 
73 
TABLE 8. Summary of calculated EF based on the average                                                                    
daily flux of each method. 
76 
TABLE 9. DFM flight details and N2O flux results. 
77 
TABLE 10. Summary of the obtained N2O flux values by the DFM. 
77 
TABLE 11. TDM measurement details and N2O flux results. 
80 
TABLE 12. Summary of the obtained flux values by the TDM. 
80 
TABLE 13. Summary of calculated EF based on the average                                                   
daily flux of each method 
82 
TABLE 14. Controlled release test result summary. 
84 
TABLE 15. Summary error in Trace0. 
90 
 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 INTRODUCTION  
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) state in the first part of their 
Sixth Assessment Report (2021) that human activities have unequivocally warmed the 
atmosphere, ocean and land. The release of greenhouse gases (GHG) into the 
atmosphere undoubtedly contribute to such activities (IPCC, 2021). The atmospheric 
concentrations of GHG have dramatically increased from pre-industrial times, from 
around 1750, and were at a record high in 2020. During 2020, the atmospheric carbon 
dioxide (CO2) levels were 149% greater, methane (CH4) levels 262% greater, 
and nitrous oxide (N2O) levels 123% greater than the pre-industrial levels (WMO, 
2021). As a result, the global average temperature has risen by about 1.1°C since pre-
industrial times (United Nations, 2021). 
 
The Paris Agreement goal of limiting the increase in the global average temperature 
to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit it to 1.5 °C 
– adopted in 2015 and reaffirmed at the UN Climate Change conference in Glasgow 
(COP26) in 2021 – calls for action (United Nations, n.d.). To achieve this long-term 
temperature goal, countries have formulated their own long-term low greenhouse gas 
emission development strategies (LT-LEDS) on how to reach global peaking of 
greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible to achieve a climate neutral world by 
mid-century. Submitted under the Paris Agreement, Denmark’s Climate Programme 
2020 sets a near-term target of reducing Denmark’s greenhouse gas emissions by 70% 
by 2030 compared to the 1990 level, to achieve the long-term target of achieving 
climate neutrality by 2050 at the latest. The strategy highlights that 5% of the total 
emissions converted in carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) from the waste sector can be 
attributed to wastewater treatment (Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities 
, 2020). 
When assessing GHG emissions from wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), N2O 
emissions often outweigh CH4 emissions and significantly contribute to the carbon 
footprint of WWTPs (Delre, 2018). This contribution is due to nitrous oxide’s 273-fold 
global warming potential (GWP100) compared to CO2 (IPCC, 2021). For instance, at 
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
the WWTPs in Kralingseveer in the Netherlands and in Viikinmäki in Finland – both 
of which have a conversion rate of nitrogen to N2O of 2-3% - N2O contributes to 78% 
and 86% of the total GHG emissions of the plants, respectively (Daelman et al., 2013; 
Daelman et al., 2015; Kosonen et al., 2016). Similarly, at the Avedøre WWTP in 
Denmark – and which is the research site of this study – N2O emissions account for 
67% of the carbon footprint from greenhouse gas emissions (Delre, 2018). It is therefore 
crucial to understand how and why exactly N2O is produced, where it is emitted and 
how to measure it to make accurate predictions and to control and adjust the process.  
Nitrous oxide emitted from wastewater treatment plants poses many challenges for 
both the operators and reporting, however, as: 
  
• a full understanding of nitrous oxide’s biological formation pathway is still a 
subject of current research  
• the time of production of nitrous oxide is not inevitably the time of its 
emission into the atmosphere 
• nitrous oxide emissions are highly fluctuating, changing every thirty minutes 
with a change in process stage – also a seasonal pattern has been observed 
• nitrous oxide is emitted from a large area and from different process units at a 
wastewater treatment plant, complicating the measurement of emissions 
• due to its high GHG potential, even small amounts of nitrous oxide have a 
large impact. As in certain periods only small concentrations are emitted, 
analytical devices with a correspondingly high resolution are needed to 
measure the total emissions.    
  
This master’s thesis strives to address all these above-mentioned challenges. 
However, the focus is on the quantification of total N2O emissions from WWTPs. 
Methods on the quantification of total N2O emissions from WWTPs are still fairly 
scarcely available and studied considering the importance of the topic. In this thesis 
two existing and one novel method are introduced and compared with each other, 
with the aim of contributing to a better understanding of the best available 
technologies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
1.1 Objectives  
 
The aim of this study is to compare three different methods used to quantify the total 
N2O emissions of a WWTP: Drone Flux Measurement (DFM), Tracer Dispersions 
Measurement (TDM) and a N2O emissions model based on N2O sensors in the liquid 
phase. The comparison includes a presentation of the method principles as well as a 
method comparison through conducted measurement campaigns. The DFM method 
and the TDM method will additionally be subjected to a controlled release test.  
 
A particular focus is on the DFM method, as it has never been used before for the 
quantification of N2O. Therefore, the flux calculation of this method is more precisely 
analysed with the help of a Gaussian plume model.   
 
Additionally, this study aims to provide an overview of the N2O production pathways 
in the biological nitrogen removal (BNR) stage of WWTPs as well as of the historical 
and most recent relevant emission factors used for the reporting of N2O emissions 
from WWTPs. Lastly, with the collected data of both the N2O emissions and process 
parameters of the BNR stage, this study aims for a better understanding of the present 
processes. 
 
 
1.2 Context of the Project 
 
This thesis is part of AWAIRE, a wider two-year project launched in December 2021. 
The project seeks to combine a range of new technologies and methods not previously 
used for the detection and determination of N2O emissions from WWTPs – in 
particular, sniffer drones equipped with state-of-the-art N2O microsensors and with 
the corresponding drone flux measurement (DFM) method, to measure total emission 
rates. Eddy covariance towers will be used in conjunction with the DFM for 
continuous measurement of emission dynamics over longer time periods and remote 
tracer dispersion method (TDM) for cross-verification of the measurement data.   
 
The combination of the multiple measurement techniques will contribute to a 
thorough validation of the emission models currently used on WWTPs in combination 
with liquid N2O sensors. Furthermore, the AWAIRE projects intends to pave the way 
for the use of emission factors based on real air emissions measurements in the Danish 
emissions inventory.  
  
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
The project is led by Explicit ApS, a Danish-based technology firm specializing in 
monitoring emissions using drones, in partnership with BIOFOS A/S, the largest 
WWTP operator in Denmark, scientific experts from the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU), and a leading water treatment specialist from Krüger A/S. The project 
is by the Danish Government Eco-Innovation Programme (MUDP) and Explicit Aps. 
 
The project consists of several work packages such as: proof of technology, proof of 
concept and model validation. This thesis covers several key tasks of these work 
packages, such as a controlled release test, multiple measurement campaigns as well 
as the revision of the emission model.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
 
In this chapter, the theoretical background is presented. Firstly, the function of 
wastewater treatment plants and their role in the nitrogen cycle is described. In 
addition, a closer look is taken at the locations of the formation and emission of N2O 
in a WWTP.  Secondly, an overview of current research on N2O is given. This includes 
microbiological production and the phenomenon of seasonality. Finally, an overview 
of reported national and international N2O emission factors and emission factors 
obtained in research is given. 
 
 
2.1 Wastewater treatment and its nitrous oxide contribution  
 
Wastewater contains nitrogen in the form of organic nitrogen from various sources 
such as human urea, industrial wastewater, and food processing factories. When 
organic nitrogen enters the sewer system in the form of urea, it is immediately 
hydrolysed to ammonia (NH3). In the water phase, ammonia and ammonium (NH4+) 
are in an equilibrium, influenced by the pH (Metcalf & Eddy, 2003).  
 
In sufficient high concentrations, ammonia, nitrite, and nitrate have toxic effects on 
the aquatic life. Furthermore, when released untreated into the environment, such 
nitrogenous material leads to eutrophication via the excessive loss of available 
oxygen. It is therefore essential to prevent the accumulation of nitrogenous 
compounds in aquatic systems (Metcalf & Eddy, 2003). WWTPs use biological 
mechanisms of the nitrogen cycle to reduce the ammonia and nitrate to a low enough 
concentration, so that the wastewater is safe to be released into the environment 
without harming the aquatic life or unbalancing the ecological system. The conversion 
of harmful ammonia into harmless nitrogen is accomplished through nitrification and 
denitrification steps in the biological nitrogen removal (BNR) process of a WWTP 
(Wong et al., 2003; Liu, et al., 2019). 
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
  
During the conversion of ammonia into nitrogen through aerobic (nitrification) and 
anoxic (denitrification) processes of the BNR stage, N2O gets formed and stripped 
from the liquid into the gaseous phase (Foley et al., 2010). The N2O emissions from the 
BNR stage contribute roughly 80% of the total N2O emissions of a WWTP (Baeten et 
al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019). The pathways through which N2O is formed are closer 
described in the subchapter 2.2.  
  
Although the majority of N2O emissions are generated and emitted at the BNR stage, 
there are other WWT process units that contribute to total N2O emissions. Secondary 
clarifiers following the BNR stage pay an important role; with their substantial sludge 
content, received from the BNR stage, denitrification continues to happen (Mikola et 
al., 2009). The nitrogen produced through denitrification causes the stripping of 
dissolved N2O into the atmosphere (Batista et al., 2004). Older research e.g. Siegrist et 
al. (1995)  has shown that up to 30% of the total denitrification can happen in the 
secondary clarifiers.  
  
A further source of N2O could originate from the sludge treatment system present at 
a WWTP. If a WWTP treats the sludge with anaerobic digestion, this is not the case, 
but if thermal oxidation is used to stabilize the sludge, N2O emissions occur (Marias 
et al., 2015; Sänger et al., 2001). In terms of reporting, according to IPCC (2019), N2O 
emissions from onsite incinerated sludge for sludge stabilization, contribute to the 
total emissions of the energy sector and are therefore listed separately in the GHG 
inventory.   
  
When measuring total emissions of WWTP with methods like the DFM or TDM, 
emissions are captured downstream of the plant. It is therefore important to make sure 
the measurements are carried out at the proper location, to allocate the obtained 
emission rates to the contributing process unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
2.2 Microbial processes and pathways of nitrous oxide 
 
As described in the previous subchapter, the main contribution to total N2O emissions 
is created in the BNR phase. This subchapter describes the microbiological processes 
of nitrification and denitrification used in the BNR process in detail. Furthermore, the 
different pathways through which N2O can be formed and the contribution of the 
different pathways to the total emissions of N2O in the BNR phase are explained. 
 
Several studies (e.g. Domingo-Félez & Smets, 2019; Sabba et al., 2018; Todt et al., 2016) 
have shown that within these two processes (nitrification and denitrification) a major 
biological formation of N2O occurs, while abiotic N2O generation has been shown to 
make a less significant contribution (Su et al., 2019). FIGURE 1 shows a modified 
version of production pathways originally developed by Sabba et al. (2018) which has 
been supplemented by the findings of Caranto et al. (2016). 
 
 
FIGURE 1. Nitrogen transformations during nitrification and denitrification processes.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
2.2.1 Nitrification  
 
During the nitrification, as described by Domingo-Félez and Smets (2019), a two-step 
autotrophic process takes place. In the first step, ammonia (NH3) as electron donor is 
oxidized with molecular oxygen (O2) with the help of aerobic ammonia oxidizing 
bacteria (AOB) to nitrite (NO2-) over hydroxylamine (NH2OH) and nitric oxide (NO). 
The hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO) enzyme catalyses the NH2OH oxidation 
and releases four electrons: three of the electors from the oxidation to NO and one 
electron from the oxidation from NO to NO2-. The anabolic process uses two of these 
electrons, whereas the other two electrons sustain the oxidation of NH3 by the 
ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) enzyme (Domingo-Félez & Smets, 2019). The 
second step within the nitrification process is the nitrite oxidation to nitrate (NO3-) 
through nitrite oxidising bacteria (NOB). For successful nitrification, both steps must 
harmonise with each other. A high NH3 load can inhibit the performance of NOB 
promoting alternative pathways (Kits et al., 2019).   
 
N2O production pathways during nitrification:  
 
▪ During the nitrification process AOB can produce N2O from NH2OH. This 
pathway is referred to as nitrifier nitrification (NN) (or NH2OH oxidation) and 
occurs during incomplete oxidation of NH2OH to NO2- via hydroxylamine 
oxidoreductase (HAO) (Caranto & Lancaster, 2017; Domingo-Félez & Smets, 
2019). 
 
▪ The so-called nitrifier denitrification (ND) is an enzymatic pathway and 
dependent on dissolved oxygen (DO) conditions. If there is a lack of DO 
(and/or high concentration of NO2-) AOB reduces NO2- though the NO2- 
reducing enzyme (NirK) to NO and the NO-reducing enzyme (NOR) NO to 
N2O (Hink et al., 2017; Wrage-Mönnig et al., 2001) 
▪ Another pathway shows N2O production from direct oxidation of NH2OH 
during anaerobic conditions through the enzyme cytochrome (cyt) P460 
present in canonical nitrifying bacteria (Caranto et al., 2016). The same research 
group found an additional pathway for N2O formation through the nitrification 
intermediate NO  (Caranto & Lancaster, 2017). 
 
▪ N-nitrosation hybrid reactions form a further pathway, where N2O is produced 
by NH2OH oxidation in combination with the reduction of NO2- (Terada et al., 
2017) free nitrous acid (HNO2) (Soler-Jofra et al., 2017) or NO (Spott et al., 2011). 
  
Ammonia oxidizing archaea (AOA) is believed to play an important role in the process 
of nitrogen removal in WWTPs (Yin et al., 2018) and contributes to the total N2O 
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
production (Yin et al., 2018; Liu, et al., 2021). Even though AOA lacks N2O producing 
enzymes, such as HAO, CycB or NOR, studies suggests that the NO (as an obligate 
intermediate) reacts with NH2OH in abiotic N2O reaction (Stieglmeier et al., 2014; 
Zhu-Barker et al., 2015). However, the exact pathways through which AOAs 
contribute to total N2O still need to be researched in more depth (Sabba et al., 2018; 
Wu, et al., 2020). 
The fairly recently discovered complete ammonia oxidation (comammox) is an 
organism actively contributing to the ammonia oxidation in WWTPs. Very little is 
known about the N2O formation from comammox bacteria, but first studies have 
shown that pure cultures of the comammox organism (Nitrospira inopinata) cannot 
denitrify to N2O and emit N2O on levels comparable to AOA but lower than AOB 
(Sabba et al., 2018; Kits et al., 2019). 
   
Abiotic N2O production. There are five major chemical reactions that can deliver N2O 
production within nitrification reactors:  
  
▪ Oxidation of NH2OH by HNO2  
▪ Oxidation of NH2OH by O2  
▪ Oxidation of NH2OH by Fe 3+  
▪ Reduction of HNO2 by Fe 2+  
▪ Disproportionation of NH2OH  
  
The production of N2O by the above-mentioned abiotic pathways has been shown to 
only account for less than 3% of the total N2O production from the nitrification system. 
Abiotic N2O production would become important within a more acidic environment 
(< 5 pH) (Su et al., 2019). 
 
 
2.2.2 Denitrification  
 
During the denitrification process, a sequential reduction of NO3-, NO2- to NO, N2O 
and N2 takes place under anoxic conditions (Domingo-Félez & Smets, 2019). The 
process, performed by heterotrophic denitrifying bacteria (DNB), uses the previously 
mentioned intermediates (N2O included) as electron acceptors during anoxic 
conditions. This four-step nitrate respiration uses the enzymes nitrate reductase 
(NAR), nitrite reductase (NIR), nitric oxide reductase (NOR) and nitrous oxide 
reductase (NOS). However, there are also DNB cultures in which no NOS enzyme is 
present (Jones et al., 2014).  
  
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
N2O production pathways within denitrification 
 
N2O production within the denitrification process is referred to as the heterotrophic 
denitrification (HD) pathway and consists of the following pathways:   
  
▪ 
Since N2O is a necessary intermediate on the pathway to N2, it is crucial to 
assure complete denitrification. If there is not enough availability of reducing 
power, e.g. carbon source that provides electrons (COD), the denitrification is 
incomplete and stops at N2O. Denitrification can therefore act as a sink though 
the N2O consumption of heterotrophic bacteria and on the other hand, 
denitrification can act as an additional source of N2O in the case denitrification 
process is not complete (Wunderlin et al., 2012). 
  
▪ 
Although some DNBs have the necessary enzyme to degrade N2O, this enzyme 
can also be inhibited to reduce N2O to N2.  The NOS enzyme can be selectively 
inhibited due to its greater sensitivity to:  NO2- (Alinsafi et al., 2008) 
concentration/limitation of carbon and source ( Tallec et al., 2006; Alinsafi et 
al., 2008), pH (Su et al., 2019) and, finally, DO (Pauleta et al., 2013). 
 
 
2.2.3 Pathway contribution to total N2O production  
 
With all the different pathways through which N2O can be formed, the question of 
which pathway contributes the most to the total N2O production remains and has 
proven to be a complicated one. Due to the fact that a molecule of N2O looks identical 
regardless of its origin, it is difficult to track down which pathway it took. This is 
especially challenging when it comes to present bacteria and an archaea mix of a full-
scale WWTP with continuously changing parameters, where some bacteria of the 
same family do, or do not carry a certain enzyme that produces N2O.   
 
A study (Wunderlin et al., 2013) researching microbiological communities within the 
entire biological nitrogen treatment, using isotopic labelling of N, concluded that the 
majority of N2O is produced during nitrification in the nitrifier denitrification 
pathway. However, according to the same study nitrifier nitrification (NH2OH 
oxidation) can account for up to 25% of the N2O production and should not be 
underestimated (Wunderlin et al., 2013).  
 
More recent studies have refined the isotopic approach to a dual method (15N/18O), to 
distinguish NN from ND and HD pathways. By examining biomass from a full-scale 
nitritation-anammox reactor, Ma et al. (2017) concluded that the HD pathway is 
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
negligible, whereas a substantial contribution to total N2O production was made by 
the pathways of nitrification (NN and ND). A very recent publication (Gruber et al., 
2022) using the dual method (15N/18O) on a full-scale (plug flow reactors) WWTP 
concludes that the heterotrophic denitrification pathway is the main contributor in 
N2O production. This underlines the above-mentioned importance of availability of 
COD, as N2O is an intermediate in the denitrification process (Gruber et al., 2022). 
  
How much the known pathways within nitrification, especially within the NN 
pathway, contribute to the total N2O production cannot be answered at the time of 
writing this study. In addition, with more discoveries of other pathways – like the one 
via the AOAs – more research is needed to get closer to answering the question of 
contribution.  
  
It is important to note that N2O is not necessarily emitted when it is produced. The 
majority of N2O emissions occur during the nitrification stage, where air supply 
causes a stripping effect. During that phase a high amount of compressed air is 
pumped into the bacteria / wastewater mixture in order to provide enough DO for 
nitrifiers. The dissolved N2O is then stripped from the liquid phase to the atmosphere 
due to its high mass transfer coefficient, accounting for about 80% of the total N2O 
emissions of a WWTP (Chen et al., 2019; Foley et al., 2010; Baeten et al., 2020).  
 
 
2.3 Seasonality  
 
In this section, the phenomenon of N2O seasonality is explained in more detail. To 
date, however, it is not fully understood what exactly causes the seasonal activity of 
N2O production (Vasilaki et al., 2019). Yet, it is undisputed that N2O formation and 
emissions show a seasonal pattern – this has been reported through several long-term 
monitoring campaigns (Daelman et al., 2015; Kosonen et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2019). 
  
Temperature as a seasonal environmental variability has been shown to influence the 
microbiological community in WWTPs (Flowers et al., 2013). The different 
microbiological communities each have an optimal temperature at which the growth 
rate is the highest: 28˚C for ammonium oxidisers and 35˚C for nitrite oxidisers (pure 
cultures) (Hulle et al., 2010). Adouani, et al. (2015) has shown that a lower 
temperatures (< 20°C) results in increased sensitivity of the N2O reductase enzyme 
which leads to an incomplete denitrification. On the other hand, high temperatures 
lead to a decrease in N2O solubility, which makes it easier to strip the N2O into the 
atmosphere (Reino, et al., 2017). 
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
 
In a previous long-term study at the research site of this study, the highest emission 
rates were reported at an average water temperature of 16.4˚C (May) and were more 
than five times smaller at the highest average temperature of 20.6˚C (August) and 
reached the lowest emission rate at an average temperature of 19.8˚C (September), as 
visualized in the FIGURE 2. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2. Seasonal emission pattern a carousel reactor at Avedøre WWTP (Chen, et al., 2019) 
 
 
These findings are supported by other long-term studies which found a nearly 
identical pattern throughout the year. The emissions at Kralingseveer WWTP 
visualized in FIGURE 3 peaked – similar to Avedøre WWTP – in the springtime 
(Daelman et al., 2015) 
  
 
 
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
FIGURE 3. Seasonal pattern at a carrousel reactor at Kralingseveer WWTP. 
 
Also, a recently published study (Gruber et al., 2021a) ten different WWTPs in 
Switzerland found a reproducible emission pattern with peaking emissions in March, 
April and May. 
 
In an extensive 1.5-year study, using 16s rRNA sequencing for microbiological 
community analysis, Gruber et al. (2021c) found a correlation between a change of 
process relevant species and seasonal N2O emission peaks. During the study, the 
AOBs stock and performance remained fairly stable, whereas the initial NOB 
community vanished entirely and got replaced by a new species of NOB. During this 
transition period, where the performance of the AOB was at its lowest, NO2- 
concentrations in the effluent increased and resulted in the peak N2O emissions 
(Gruber et al., 2021c). This correlation between high N2O emissions and  elevated NO2-  
concentrations has already previously been reported (Daelman et al., 2015; Gruber et 
al., 2020). 
  
In conclusion, the exact cause of the seasonal dynamics of N2O emissions is influenced 
by several factors and shows complex structures. To better understand this 
interconnectedness that drives the seasonal variations, further research – to assess the 
microbiological community, in particular – is needed. To shed more light on the still 
rather unknown change in the AOB community, DTU Environment is currently 
conducting a project (BIOKIN) to examine this phenomenon in more detail.   
 
 
2.4 N2O Emission factors and reported values in literature  
 
WWTPs may all have the same purpose, but they can be built and operated in 
numerous ways. Thus, when it comes to N2O emissions reporting, different kind of 
reporting strategies can also be found. Emission factors (EF) constitute a useful tool 
when one wishes to compare different kind of wastewater treatment systems in 
relation to their N2O emissions. Emission factors provide a value that attempts to 
relate the amount of an emission to an activity associated with the release of the 
pollutant. In other words, emission factors normalise emissions (Danish EPA, 2020). 
  
Some of the most common emission factors (Danish EPA, 2020) are described below.  
  
 
 
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
Relative values, related to load size or efficiency:   
  
▪ % N2O – N / T-N removed  
 
The EF describes the percentage of nitrogen emitted as N2O nitrogen in relation 
to the total amount of nitrogen removed in the wastewater treatment plant. In 
this EF, the treatment efficiency of the WWTP is taken into account. 
 
 
▪ 
kg N2O-N /kg T-N inflow  
 
The EF describes the total amount of nitrogen emitted as N2O nitrogen in 
relation to the received total amount of nitrogen of a WWTP. This EF is often 
represented as a percentage.   
 
  
▪ mg N2O-N/PE/d  
 
The EF describes the amount of N2O emitted per person equivalent (PE) per 
day. The EF is calculated based on % N2O-N/T-N inflow.  
 
  
Absolute values   
  
▪ kg N2O – emitted / year  
 
The EF describes a WWTP’s total amount of N2O emissions in a year. The 
indicator is calculated from the average of the daily mean nitrous oxide 
emissions multiplied by 365 days.  
  
▪ Tonnes CO2 emitted / year  
 
The EF describes the total amount of CO2-equivalent emitted in a WWTP in a 
year. The factor is calculated from the average of the daily mean nitrous oxide 
emissions multiplied by 365 days and the global warming potential (GWP) of 
nitrous oxide. This thesis uses the GWP100,N2O of 273 kg CO2eq/kg N2O (IPCC, 
2021) 
 
  
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
In the IPCC and in the Danish climate inventory, the EF unit kg N2O-N /kg T-N inflow 
is used (or expressed as a percentage). This does not only allow a comparison across 
different plant sizes but also standardises reporting.  The EF used in this thesis has the  
unit of kg N2O-N /kg T-N inflow and is expressed as percentage.  
  
The following TABLE 1 lists and categorises several important emission factors. The 
first category relates to international reporting (IPCC), followed by the national 
reporting of Denmark (Nielsen et al.) and, finally, by a collection of relevant 
experimentally established emission factors.  
 
TABLE 1. Reported and relevant N2O emission factors prior to this study  
 
 
 
In the first category in TABLE 1  – the international reporting – the emission factors 
found in the reports of the IPCC are listed. The emission factor published by the IPCC 
in 2006 is based on one of the first N2O monitoring studies, carried out in 1995, where 
a single WWTP got analysed by a short-term measurement campaign (Czepiel et al., 
1995). The WWTP did not have a biological nitrogen removal stage and is therefore 
not representative for current WWTPs. The IPCC (2006) stated that the large 
uncertainty on the EF of 0.035% is due to insufficient field data. This changed when it 
came to establishing a new EF for the IPCC report published in 2019. As new 
publications were available, the IPCC used EFs of thirty full-scale WWTPs published 
between 1998 and 2018, to dramatically adjust the old EF from 2006. The IPCC lifted 
the suggested EF by a factor of 45 from 0.035% to 1.6%.   
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
 
Specific and new, not yet established treatment processes were excluded to not distort 
the EF of the most used systems. Nevertheless, the IPCC report (2019) states that 
further long-term campaigns are needed, as uncertainties regarding EF – especially 
between different plant types – are still too great.  
  
The second category in TABLE 1 shows the evolution of the emission factors used for 
Denmark’s national inventory. All listed reports are published by Nielsen and his 
team. In Denmark’s national inventory report from 2009, the same EF as suggested by 
the IPCC in 2006 was used (Nielsen et al., 2009). Then again, in Denmark’s national 
inventory report from 2014, the emission factor was considered too low (Nielsen et al., 
2014). This decision was based on a study of Kampschreur et al. (2009). Therefore, a 
new EF was established by taking the average of the two highest reported EFs: 
0.6% (Wicht & Beier, 1995) and 0.035% (Czepiel et al., 1995). This EF of 0.32% stayed 
unchanged for Denmark’s national inventory report in 2019 (Nielsen et al., 2019) and 
was confirmed previously by Thomsen et al. (2015).  
 
For the most recent national inventory report (2021), a new EF was established. The 
EF used the year before and established for the 2014 report got replaced by the EF of 
0.84% (Nielsen et al., 2021). This EF resulted from a MUDP project of the Danish 
EPA. That project, running from 2018 till 2020, included nine different WWTPs in a 
continuous long-term monitoring campaign based on N2O liquid sensors with a 
corresponding emission model (Danish EPA, 2020). The same N2O liquid sensors and 
emission model is used in this thesis and explained in more detail in the subchapter 
4.1.   
  
The third and last category in TABLE 1 represents various experimentally established 
emission factors relevant for this thesis.  In 2014, for the first time ever, the tracer 
dispersion method (TDM) was applied on a WWTP to measure the N2O emissions of 
the whole plant. The same WWTP serves as the research facility of this thesis, and a 
description of it can be found in the chapter 0. Also, the TDM is used in this thesis and 
described in the subchapter 4.3. The EF established in this publication ranged from 
0.15% (detection limit) to 4.27% (Yoshida et al., 2014).  
 
In a study published by Daelman et al. in 2015, a 16-month monitoring campaign at 
Kralingseveer WWTP was performed and an EF of 2.8% concluded. To date, this is the 
only study that covered a plug flow reactor and two parallel carousel reactors for 
continuous monitoring of the N2O concentration in the off-gas.  Moreover, the study 
(Daelman et al., 2015) was the first long-term study in which N2O was continuously 
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
monitored in the off-gas. These results gave a valuable insight into the phenomenon 
of seasonality. 
 
A study published by Delre (2017) applied The TDM method at five different 
Scandinavian WWTPs. The EF ranged from below detection limit up to 5.2% (Delre et 
al., 2017). 
 
In January 2019, a review on the publications from the last decade on N2O monitoring 
campaigns conducted at mainstream WWTPs was published and concluded an EF of 
0.87%. The study suggests that more long-term studies are needed to gain more 
knowledge in the seasonal variations of emissions (Vasilaki er al., 2019). 
 
At the research site of this project, a long-term study (12 months) on N2O emissions 
was conducted using the same N2O sensors with the corresponding emission model 
as used in this study. A final EF of 1.05% was established (Chen et al., 2019).    
  
A more recent publication on EF, established through several continuous long-term 
studies analysing 14 different WWTPs using the flux chamber method, was published 
in 2021 (Gruber et al., 2021a). The study distinguishes three categories based on the 
function of WWTPs and assigned different corresponding EFs:  0.1-8 for carbon 
removal, 1.8% for nitrification only, and 0.9% for complete nitrogen removal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 BIOFOS Avedøre wastewater treatment plant 
The research site where this master’s thesis is conducted is called the Avedøre WWTP 
and located in the Greater Copenhagen Region, in Denmark. The plant is operated by 
the BIOFOS group, the biggest wastewater treatment company in Denmark. 
Annually, the Avedøre WWTP treats wastewater from approximately 350’000 
inhabitants (PE), corresponding to an annual wastewater volume of 22.9 million m3 
(BIOFOS, 2021). 
 
 
FIGURE 4. Flow Diagram WWTP Avedøre  
 
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
Avedøre´s WWT processes are visualized in FIGURE 4, showing the process flow of 
both the wastewater and sludge treatment (A.T. Mielczarek, personal communication, 
March 12, 2022). When arriving at the plant, the wastewater undergoes several 
physical-mechanical treatment steps; Starting with a screen separating branches, 
plastics, paper, and other solids, and followed by a density separator collecting grit in 
the bottom and skims of grease on the surface. The last step before entering the 
biochemical part of the treatment process is the primary settling tanks. The primary 
clarifiers remove settleable solids through gravity. The removed solids – or, the 
primary sludge – is send together with the skimmed grease and the excess sludge from 
the biochemical treatment to the digester. 
 
After the primary clarifiers the wastewater enters the biological stage which aims to 
remove phosphorus, carbon and nitrogen. In the Bio-P tank (shown in the FIGURE 4) 
the enhanced biological phosphorus removal (EBPR) is achieved through 
phosphorous accumulating organisms (PAO) such as accumulibacter phosphatis. This is 
done simultaneously with the BNR stage. Additionally, there is a chemical phosphate 
removal process after the biological stage, just before the secondary clarifiers.  
 
The resulting sludge from the biological stage is then separated from the water in the 
secondary clarifiers. At this stage, some of the sludge is returned to the Bio-P tanks 
and some, together with the primary sludge, is sent to the side stream treatment where 
biogas is produced by anaerobic digestion. The digested sludge is then incinerated for 
additional heat and power generation. The water from the clarifiers is pumped 
underground and discharged into the sea at a distance of about 1 km from the coast.  
  
The BNR stage at the Avedøre WWTP is a BioDeNitro configuration and represents 
the most important section of the treatment plant in terms of N2O emissions, as this is 
where both formation and emissions occur during nitrogen removal. In total, the 
BioDeNitro configuration consists out of four carousel reactors (marked yellow) with 
two basins each as shown in FIGURE 5.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
 
FIGURE 5. Aerial view on the four carousel reactors at the Avedøre WWTP. 
 
FIGURE 6. A carousel reactor at the Avedøre WWTP where the left basin is at a nitrification stage and 
the right one at a denitrification stage. 
 
The two basins of a reactor are operated in tandem. FIGURE 7 shows a carousel reactor 
consisting of two basins and various sensors placed on the bridge where also the N2O 
sensors are positioned (marked with a red star symbol). In the basins, there is a 
continuous inflow and outflow of wastewater. Into which basin the wastewater is 
being fed and from which basin the treated wastewater is leaving, depends on the 
process stage.  Furthermore, there is an exchange of wastewater between the two 
basins. All in all, the wastewater has a retention time of about 24 hours. During this 
time, the wastewater passes through several denitrification and nitrification stages. 
The nitrification stages are achieved by switching on the bottom aeration of the basins 
(blue area in the FIGURE 7).   
1 
2 
3 
4 
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 7. Schematic illustration of a BioDeNitro carousel reactor at the Avedøre WWTP. 
 
Various configurations are used for sequential alternation between denitrification and 
nitrification, as shown in FIGURE 8. Here, DN stands for denitrification, which is the 
anoxic phase, while N stands for nitrification, in which the basins are in the aerobic 
phase. During the aerobic phase, bubble diffusers placed at the bottom of each basin 
provide homogeneous aeration, increasing the dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration 
in the wastewater. The different process stages are labelled with a three-digit code and 
not only regulate the denitrification and nitrification, but also regulate which basin 
receives the feed and at which basin the effluent leaves the reactor.   
 
The entire BioDeNitro configuration is controlled by ammonia and nitrate parameters, 
determining which of the 12 process stages is applied to ensure an optimal nitrogen 
removal performance. Several process parameters are monitored; feed, airflow, NH4+, 
NO3-, N2O, DO and temperature are collected in the STAR Control software. A 
description on how and where nitrous oxides is measured can be found in the 
methodology subchapter 3.1.  
 
 
Influent from 
primary settling 
tank 
Effluent to 
secondary 
clarifiers 
Disc bubble diffuser 
N2O sensor 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
 
FIGURE 8. The reactor configurations applied in the BioDeNitro stage are marked with a three-digit 
code. 
 
 
3.1 Nitrous oxide emissions at Avedøre WWTP 
 
The BIOFOS group has carried out several N2O related projects in the past to shed 
light on the issue of nitrous oxide emissions at WWTPs.   
 
In a study examining N2O at Avedøre WWTP by Yoshida et al. (2014), total N2O 
emissions were determined using the TDM method. There, N2O flux values ranged 
from 0.37 kg/h (detection limit) to 10.5 kg/h, corresponding to emission factors of 
0.15% (detection limit) and 4.2%.  A further study by Chen et al. (2019) conducted at 
Avedøre WWTP provided important insights into the phenomenon of seasonality as 
well as into the correlations between N2O emissions and process variables. The study 
identified an overall EF of 1.05% (Chen et al., 2019). 
  
A more recent study conducted at Avedøre WWTP Faragò et al. (2021) chose the 
approach of a mass flow analysis and determined a theoretical EF of 2.6% for the plant. 
However, by monitoring the real time N2O emissions measured through the 
N2O sensors with the corresponding emission model, the EF was adjusted to 1.6% 
(Faragò et al., 2021). So far no official report has been published by the BIOFOS group 
as the monitoring of N2O through the liquid sensors is still regarded as a research and 
development project.   
 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 METHODOLOGY 
 
This chapter introduces the three different methods used in this thesis for the 
quantification of N2O emissions at Avedøre WWTP.  
 
4.1 Nitrous oxide quantification in the water phase 
 
Avedøre WWTP currently uses four sensors from Unisense Environment A/S to 
measure the N2O concentration in the liquid phase in two reactors (reactor 1 and 3). 
In FIGURE 7, the position of two of the sensors within a reactor can be seen. The 
sensors (visualized in FIGURE 9) are based on an amperometric measurement method 
and generate a continuous electrical signal in mV, which is converted to nitrous oxide 
concentration based on N2O calibration. The sensors have a response time of 45 
seconds and provide a temperature compensated output with the unit of mg N2O-
N/L. (Unisense, 2020). The data is sent to the WWTP’s control system (STAR) for 
monitoring and for the N2O emission calculation through the corresponding emission 
model. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 9. N2O liquid sensor by Unisense Environment A/S (Unisense, 2020) 
==PAGE:34==
30 
 
4.1.1 N2O emission model  
 
Avedøre WWTP uses – as described in the chapter 3 – bottom aeration to perform 
nitrification. Hence, the bottom aeriation emission model developed by Unisense 
Environment A/S is here presented in further detail. 
 
The bottom aeriation model calculation starts with the equation (4.1 that determines 
the superficial gas velocity 𝑉𝑔. The total air flow 𝑄𝐴 at the Avedøre plant is not directly 
measured but calculated by the pressure difference of the air compressor aerating the 
reactors. The aeration field size is the area within the reactor where the aeration 
happens (the blue field in FIGURE 7).   
 
 
𝑉𝑔≅ 
𝑄𝐴
𝐴𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 
(4.1) 
 
Where:  
𝑄𝐴= 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤 [𝑚3 · 𝑠−1] 
𝐴𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒= 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 [𝑚2] 
 
 
 
Based on laboratory experiments of Foley et al. (2010) the emission model calculates 
the N2O mass transfer coefficient 𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 20°𝐶 [𝑑−1], by using the equation (4.2 and 
literature values from TABLE 2 . 
 
 
𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 20°𝐶 = {𝐷𝑅
𝐷𝐿
}
− 0.49
× 34500 × (𝑉𝑔)
0.86 
(4.2) 
 
 
Where:  
𝑉𝑔= 𝑆𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 [𝑚3 · 𝑚−2 · 𝑠−1] 
𝐷𝑅= 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 [𝑚] 
𝐷𝐿= 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 [𝑚] 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
31 
 
The temperature corrected N2O mass transfer coefficient 𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 [𝑑−1] is finally 
calculated with the equation (4.3 that takes into consideration the measured process 
temperature 𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 [°𝐶] and a standard θ  factor of 1.024 (Foley et al., 2010). 
 
𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 = 𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 20°𝐶× (1.024)𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠−20°𝐶 
(4.3) 
 
 
With the N2O mass transfer coefficient from the equation (4.3 and the known total 
airflow through the reactor 𝑄𝐴, the N2O emission rate 𝑟𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 is calculated with 
the help of the measured N2O concentration in the liquid phase 𝑆𝑁2𝑂 and literature 
values listed in TABLE 2. 
 
The following two equations are used to determine the final N2O emission rate. The 
first equation (4.4 is being used when the aeration system is on (nitrification), whereas 
the second one (4.5 is used during the denitrification stage when aeration is switched 
off. 
 
 
𝑟𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 𝐻𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠× 𝑆𝑁2𝑂 × [1 − 𝑒
−
𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
𝐻𝑁2𝑂
 × 𝑉𝑅
𝑄𝐴] × 𝑄𝐴
𝑉𝑅
 
(4.4) 
𝑟𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 𝑘𝐿𝑎𝑁2𝑂 𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
𝑁𝑜𝑛−𝑎𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑×  [𝑆𝑁2𝑂− 
𝐶𝑁2𝑂,𝑎𝑖𝑟
𝐻𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠
] 
(4.5) 
 
Where:  
𝑟𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 [𝑔−𝑁 𝑁2𝑂· 𝑚−3 · 𝑑−1] 
𝐻𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 𝐻𝑒𝑛𝑟𝑦𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 
𝑆𝑁2𝑂= 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 [𝑔−𝑁 𝑁2𝑂· 𝑚−3] 
𝑉𝑅= 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 [𝑚3] 
𝐶𝑁2𝑂,𝑎𝑖𝑟= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑢𝑚 [𝑔−𝑁 · 𝑚−3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
32 
 
To correct the temperature dependent Henry’s constant 𝐻𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠, the emission 
model uses the following two equations (4.6 and (4.7 together with literature values 
listed in TABLE 2. 
 
𝐻𝑁2𝑂,𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 
1
𝑘𝐻 × 𝑅 × (𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠+ 273.15) × 103 𝐿
𝑚3
 
(4.6) 
𝑘𝐻= 𝑘𝐻
𝜃 × 𝑒
(− ∆𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑛𝐻
𝑅
 × (
1
𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠+273.15 − 
1
𝑇𝜃+273.15))
 
(4.7) 
 
Where:  
 
𝑘𝐻
𝜃= 𝐻𝑒𝑛𝑟𝑦′𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑎𝑡 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑡𝑑. 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝. [𝑚𝑜𝑙· 𝐿−1 · 𝑏𝑎𝑟−1] 
𝑇𝜃= 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 [°𝐶] 
𝑇𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠= 𝑀𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 [°𝐶] 
− ∆𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑛𝐻
𝑅
= 𝑇ℎ𝑒 𝑒𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑝𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 [𝐾] 
 
 
TABLE 2. Literature values used for the emission model (Unisense, 2020) 
Parameter 
𝑫𝑳 
𝑻𝜽 
𝒌𝑯
𝜽 
− ∆𝒔𝒐𝒍𝒏𝑯
𝑹
 𝑪𝑵𝟐𝑶,𝒂𝒊𝒓 
𝑹 
𝒌𝑳𝒂𝑵𝟐𝑶 𝑻𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒄𝒆𝒔𝒔
𝑵𝒐𝒏−𝒂𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 
Unit 
[𝑚] 
[°𝐶] 
[𝑚𝑜𝑙
· 𝐿−1
· 𝑏𝑎𝑟−1] 
[𝐾] 
[𝑔−𝑁
· 𝑚−3] 
[𝑚3 · 𝑏𝑎𝑟
· 𝑚𝑜𝑙−1
· 𝐾−1] 
[𝑑−1] 
Value 
0.815 
25 
0.0247 
2675 
0.0003 
8.314 
× 10−5 
2 −4 
 
The following parameters are not constants but are measured inputs into the 
emission model: 
 
▪ Air flow QA 
▪ Temperature TProcess 
▪ Measured N2O concentration in the liquid phase SN2O 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
33 
 
4.1.2 Uncertainty 
 
Unisense Environment A/S has developed four different emission models for four 
different aeration processes: one emission model for bottom aeriated process tanks – 
like at Avedøre WWTP – and three different models for surface aerated process tanks.  
 
A fairly recently published report (Danish EPA, 2020) states that, if the superficial gas 
velocity is determined with reasonable precision, the uncertainty on the Unisense 
Environment A/S emission model for bottom aerated reactors is low. Generally, the 
uncertainty of the models is reduced when a homogeneous oxygen profile within the 
reactors is achieved. Through a homogeneous aeration of the reactors, a homogeneous 
formation of N2O as well as a homogeneous stripping from the liquid to the gaseous 
phase is achieved (Danish EPA, 2020). Thus, the N2O measurement at one point inside 
the reactor can be representative for the whole aerated area. Bottom aerated process 
tanks show a homogeneous aeration of the reactors, whereas the spot aeration of 
surface aerators creates a more heterogenous oxygen profile, making the emission 
model for surface aerated reactors somewhat less certain (Danish EPA, 2020).  
 
4.1.3 Limitations 
 
▪ The N2O emission model requires a homogeneous oxygen profile to keep the 
uncertainty low. This limits the (reliable) use of the sensors and the 
corresponding emission model to bottom aeriated BNR systems.  
▪ As any model, the output quality of the emission model is only as good as the 
quality of the input. Therefore, it is important that all the data needed is 
directly measured with calibrated sensors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
34 
 
4.2 Drone Flux measurement method 
 
The drone flux measurement (DFM) method developed by Explicit ApS (from now on 
Explicit) measures fugitive methane emissions from biogas plants. The method was 
applied in the MUDP Plane project where it was successfully tested and validated 
through a comparison with the tracer dispersion method (TDM) (Knudsen & Rossi, 
2022). Equipped with a state-of-the-art N2O sensor, the same method is now applied 
to measure N2O emissions from WWTPs.  
 
In the DFM method, several sensors attached to an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) 
are measuring the following parameters downwind of an emission source (e.g. the 
BNR stage of a WWTP): wind speed and direction, N2O concentrations, GPS, 
temperature, air pressure and additional UAV related parameters. To obtain high 
quality data, the UAV flies a pre-programmed pattern (referred to as “wall”) at a 
specific angle to the downwind plume. Since the data is collected in time and space, 
this method can provide a consistent representation of the flux density. The method 
is visualized in FIGURE 10. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 10. Illustration of the DFM method applied on a WWTP. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
35 
 
4.2.1 Materials 
 
Unmanned aerial vehicle. The DFM method uses an unmanned aerial vehicle DJI 
MATRICE 300 RTK with a payload capacity of 2.7 kg (DJI, 2022). The UAV is 
visualized in FIGURE 11.  
 
N2O sensor. The MIRA Strato N2O/CO2 sensor from Aeris Technologies is one of most 
sensitive (N2O: < 200ppt/s) sensors on the market for its weight. This laser absorption 
analyser operates in the mid-infrared (MIR) range and has a data update rate of up to 
10 Hz. These characteristics make the sensor a great fit for the DFM method. More 
information on the sensor can be found in the Appendix A.1 Sensor MIRA Strato by 
Aeris.   
 
Wind sensors. To obtain qualitative data on the wind direction and speed, two 3-D 
wind sensors are used. Along with the measurement of the wind speed in all three 
directions, the sensors (visualized in FIGURE 12) measure temperature, atmospheric 
pressure, compass data, and humidity. The two wind sensors are mounted to a boom 
in a way that the wind turbulences from the drone itself only have a minimal effect on 
the measurement.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 11. UAV equipped with the Aeris Mira Strato N2O sensor. 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
36 
 
 
 
FIGURE 12. TriSonicaTM mini wind sensor (Anemoment, 2022). 
 
 
4.2.2 Data collection  
 
When applying the DFM method, a site survey is first carried out to ensure there is 
enough space and safety distance to perform drone flights. Also, possible emission 
sources – other than the target sources – are located. These sources need to be taken 
into consideration when performing the measurements (Knudsen & Rossi, 2022).  
 
To collect high quality data, it is important to, first of all, fly a certain flight pattern 
and, second of all, position the drone in a way that the emissions can be detected 
perpendicular to the mean wind. The preferred flight path for a measurement is 
shaped like a vertical plane, or a wall (as illustrated in FIGURE 13). However, the flight 
path is determined by the mean wind direction and the topography of the area and 
can be straight, segmented, or curved. It is important that the chosen flight path is 
placed as perpendicular to the downwind of the plant as possible and should cover 
the entire downwind plume of the emission.  
 
The pilot should choose a minimum of two waypoints (marked as (0) and (1) in 
FIGURE 13) in a longitudinal direction. Furthermore, the pilot needs to define an 
anchor point, in which the emission source is located. With these three position points, 
the pilot makes sure that the entire plume is covered, and the drone is facing in the 
right direction.  
 
 
 
Wind Speed 
[m/s] 
Wind direction 
[°] 
 
Range 
 
0 – 50 
Horizontal plane: 
0 – 360 
Vertical planes: 
30 
Resolution 
0.1 
1.0 
Accuracy 
0-10 m/s: ± 0.1 
± 1.0 
==PAGE:41==
37 
 
Each horizontal line within the flight path illustrated in FIGURE 13 depicts a trajectory 
(further referred as trace). The drone follows the trajectories with an alternating flight 
direction, gaining height when switching vertically upwards to the next trace within 
the wall. While the wall is being flown, data is collected with a frequency of 2 Hz. Each 
point where data is collected, builds an observation point (Pi) with two coordinates: 
the longitude along the crosswind direction (x) and the hight above ground (z). All 
observation points created in a wall form a grid, as visualized in FIGURE 13. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 13. Vertical plane flight path (wall) of the DFM method. 
 
Since a wall is not always perfectly perpendicular to the wind, the drone corrects its 
position while flying the wall, through inclination (marked “I” in FIGURE 14). The 
correct positioning is important to, firstly, get a good collection of the emission plume 
and, secondly, get the wind speed properly measured. The two wind sensors (marked 
“S” in FIGURE 14) are positioned at the far ends of a boom mounted to the drone. The 
wind sensors should measure the wind with minimal interference from the drone’s 
rotors.  
 
Trace0 
Trace10 
==PAGE:42==
38 
 
 
FIGURE 14. Inclination of the drone  
To reduce measurement uncertainty, the pilot flies a minimum of three walls. After 
each flight, the measured plume is observed. If high emission concentrations are 
detected near the edges of a flown wall, the wall dimensions, alignment, and the 
location of the next flight are adjusted. This is done to capture the entire plume with 
the flown wall.  The target gas concentration at the edges of a wall should only consist 
of atmospheric background concentration.  
 
After a successfully performed flight the following data is collected:  
 
▪ Time 
▪ Geographical coordinates and altitude (GPS) 
▪ Elevation above the ground 
▪ Target gas gross concentration  
▪ Air pressure and temperature 
▪ Spatial wind components: (U, V, W) 
▪ Speed and orientation of the drone in relation to the ground (UG) 
▪ Various parameters for the wind sensors 
 
4.2.3 Data treatment and Flux calculation  
 
Data treatment 
 
Before the N2O flux can be calculated, the collected data must be processed, and its 
quality ensured. To evaluate the N2O flux through a given area, it is important to know 
the true wind passing through the area.  
 
==PAGE:43==
39 
 
The true wind 𝑊𝐴𝑏𝑠
→ is defined as the wind relative to a fixed ground base point in a 
coordinate system (WE,WN,WZ). The wind sensors mounted to the drone measure the 
relative wind 𝑈𝑅𝑒𝑙
→ in a (U,V,W) coordinate system. This coordinate system is 
transformed into the coordinate system (E,N,Z). The transformation is based on the 
orientation and velocity of the drone relative to the E,N,Z – coordinate system and 
results in 𝑈𝑅𝑒𝑙
→ = (URE, URN, URZ).   
The velocity of the drone 𝑈𝐺
→ = (UGW, UGN, UGZ) is continuously (every half second) 
measured in relation to the ground. With this measurement it is possible to calculate 
the true wind 𝑊𝐴𝑏𝑠
→ by vector addition as expressed in equation (4.8 and (4.9.  
 
 
True Wind:  
 
𝑊𝐴𝑏𝑠
→= 𝑈𝑅𝑒𝑙
→+ 𝑈𝐺
→ 
(4.8) 
 
(𝑊𝐸, 𝑊𝑁, 𝑊𝑍) = (𝑈𝑅𝐸, 𝑈𝑅𝑁, 𝑈𝑅𝑍) + (𝑈𝐺𝐸, 𝑈𝐺𝑁, 𝑈𝐺𝑍) 
(4.9) 
 
 
The DFM method uses two wind sensors (referred to as Tool1 and Tool2) to collect the 
wind data. Data from one sensor is enough to perform the flux calculation. The flux 
calculation can be performed with the following four wind data inputs: data from 
Tool1, data from Tool2, average of Tool1 and Tool2 and, finally, a manual input based 
on wind measured with a handheld device (least preferred and applied input).  
 
Which wind data is chosen depends on the quality of the measured wind and is 
influenced by two main quality parameters. The first parameter that influences the 
decision on which of the above-mentioned inputs is chosen, is the true horizontal 
wind component. The more uniform the true horizontal wind speed and direction 
throughout the measurement, the higher its quality. This is illustrated in FIGURE 15, 
which shows two different scenarios related to the horizontal wind speed. 
 
Tool1 shows a wind measurement with an inconsistent horizontal wind speed, 
whereas Tool2 shows the opposite. The two different colours represent the horizontal 
path the drone has flown (from left to right: red, from right to left: blue). The more 
overlapping the collected data, the more consistent the horizontal wind speed.  
 
 
==PAGE:44==
40 
 
 
 
FIGURE 15. Horizontal wind speed 
 
 
FIGURE 16 shows two different scenarios related to the horizontal wind direction. The 
stars within the graphs depict the average horizontal wind direction obtained within 
each trace. The more these averages are aligned over all trajectories, the more uniform 
the wind direction. Here, Tool1 shows a wind measurement with an inconsistent 
horizontal wind direction, whereas Tool2 shows a more uniform wind direction. The 
two different colours represent the horizontal path the drone has flown (from left to 
right: red, from right to left: blue). 
 
 
 
FIGURE 16. Horizontal wind direction 
 
 
The second quality parameter that influences the decision making on the input is the 
alignment of the sensor. If a sensor is not correctly positioned (referred to as 
alignment), the wind generated by the drone influences the measurement of the wind.  
 
 
==PAGE:45==
41 
 
 
 
FIGURE 17. Wind Tool alignment 
 
 
The alignment can be observed in FIGURE 17. If the collected data is outside the 20% 
degrees threshold (yellow lines) defined by Explicit, the wind data is falsified by the 
wind generated by the rotors of the drone. In FIGURE 17, Tool1 is well positioned and 
shows a good alignment, whereas Tool2 shows an alignment that requires adjustment. 
The two different colours represent the horizontal path the drone has flown (from left 
to right: red, from right to left: blue). 
 
 
Flux calculation  
 
The processed data is then used to calculate the mass flux using the equations 
described below. The equation that describes the flux through a given area is used as 
a starting point. The equation (4.10 forms the basis for Explicit’s flux calculation.   
 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑎𝑖𝑟= 𝑈𝑛∙𝐴 ∙ 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟 
(4.10) 
 
Where:  
𝑈𝑛= 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑 𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑡𝑜 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒 [𝑚 ∙ 𝑠−1] 
𝐴= 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑑 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒 [𝑚2] 
𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟= 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 [𝑘𝑔 ∙ 𝑚−3] 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
42 
 
To calculate the mass flux of N2O  𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑁2𝑂 [𝑘𝑔 ∙ 𝑠−1], the weight fraction between 
N2O and air must be considered and is calculated with the equation (4.11.  
 
𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑁2𝑂= 𝑈𝑛∙𝐴 ∙ 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟∙ %𝜔𝑁2𝑂 
(4.11) 
Where:  
%𝜔𝑁2𝑂= 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑑𝑒  
 
 
 
To elaborate the weight fraction %𝜔𝑁2𝑂, following equation (4.12 is used in 
combination with the measured N2O concentration C [ppm] by the N2O analyser:  
 
%𝜔𝑁2𝑂=  10−6 ∙ 𝐶
𝑉𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟
∙ 
𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂
𝑀𝑊𝑎𝑖𝑟
 ∙100 
(4.12) 
 
Where:  
10−6 = 𝑝𝑝𝑚 𝑡𝑜 
𝑚𝑁2𝑂
3
𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑟
3
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 
 
𝐶= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑜𝑛 [𝑝𝑝𝑚] 
 
𝑉𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟= 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑜𝑓 1 𝑚𝑜𝑙 𝑎𝑡 𝑆𝑇𝑃 [22.414𝐿] 
 
𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂
𝑀𝑊𝑎𝑖𝑟
= 𝑀𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 [44.01
28.95]  
The N2O sensor does not distinguish between background N2O or N2O emitted by the 
source. Therefore, the term 𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑡 is introduced, which accounts for the background 
concentration and results from 𝐶𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠− 𝐶𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑. The background is calculated for 
each trace with a statistical method developed by Explicit and is not subject of this 
thesis. Additionally, to obtain the flux emissions in [𝑘𝑔 ∙ ℎ−1], the conversion factor 
of 3600 is added which finalizes equation (4.13.  
 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑁2𝑂= 𝑈𝑛∙𝐴 ∙ 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟∙ 10−6 ∙ 𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑡 ∙ 
𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂
𝑀𝑊𝑎𝑖𝑟
 ∙3600  
(4.13) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
43 
 
To determine the present air density 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟, the atmospheric pressure 𝑝 [𝑚𝑏𝑎𝑟] and 
ambient temperature 𝑇 [°𝐶] are measured by the wind sensors and incorporated in the 
formula (4.14 below. Explicit assumes the air to be dry.  
 
 
𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟= 𝜌0 ∙ 𝑝
𝑝0
 ∙ 
𝑇0
𝑇0 + 𝑇 
(4.14) 
 
Where:  
𝜌0 = 𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑎𝑡 273.15 𝐾 𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑒𝑎 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 [1.293 𝑘𝑔 ∙ 𝑚−3] 
 
𝑝0 = 𝑎𝑡𝑚𝑜𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑐 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑒𝑎 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 [1013 𝑚𝑏𝑎𝑟]  
 
𝑇0 = 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑎𝑡 0°𝐶 [273.15 𝐾] 
 
 
 
Finally, the flux equation can be summarised as follows:  
 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑁2𝑂= 𝑈𝑛∙𝐴 ∙  𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑡 ∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠  
(4.15) 
Where: 
 
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠=  10−6   ∙ 𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂
𝑀𝑊𝑎𝑖𝑟
 ∙𝜌0 ∙ 𝑝
𝑝0
 ∙ 
𝑇0
𝑇0 + 𝑇∙3600 
 
Explicit developed two different methods, the “Trace” and the “Contouring” method, 
to calculate the N2O flux through the flown walls. Both methods are based on the steps 
elaborated above but differ in the way the observation points are implemented in the 
calculation. Several experiments using the TDM method as a comparison have shown 
that the calculation using the “Trace” method gives results that are closer to the TDM 
findings. Explicit therefore decided that the “Contouring” method is only used for 
visualization purposes. In this thesis the “Contouring” method is not further 
described. 
A trajectory or trace, is a drone’s horizontal crossing from one side to the other within 
a wall, as previously shown in FIGURE 13. 
With the “Trace” method, the N2O flux in each trajectory/trace within a wall is 
calculated. To do so, an area element is placed at each observation point. The element 
extends halfway to the direct surrounding (left, right, above, and under) observation 
==PAGE:48==
44 
 
point. The area element of the first trace (referred to as Trace0) also extends halfway 
to the neighbouring observation points but expands all the way down to the terrain.  
With the use of the equation (4.15, the N2O flux is calculated through multiplying  𝐶𝑛𝑒𝑡 
by the area of the underlying element and the corresponding normal wind projection 
of the absolute wind. The normal wind projection is a dot product out of absolute 
wind (𝑊𝐸, 𝑊𝑁, 𝑊𝑍) and the normal vector (𝑁𝐸, 𝑁𝑁, 𝑁𝑍) to the underlying area element. 
The normal vector is determined by the geometry of a flown wall.  This normalisation 
needed to process the wind data perpendicular to the wall.  
Equation (4.16 summarizes the flux calculation through a single trace. The resulting 
graphical output is shown in FIGURE 18. Each trace receives its own flux value, and 
the total net flux equals the sum of all fluxes from each trace. 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑥𝑁2𝑂=  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠 ∙ ∑(𝐶𝑖−𝐶𝑏𝑘𝑔,𝑖) ∙ 𝐴𝑖 ∙ (𝑊𝐸, 𝑊𝑁, 𝑊𝑍)𝑖 ∙ (𝑁𝐸, 𝑁𝑁, 𝑁𝑍)𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1
  
(4.16) 
 
Where:  
𝑁=  𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 
𝐶= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 [𝑝𝑝𝑚] 
𝐶𝑏𝑘𝑔= 𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 [𝑝𝑝𝑚] 
𝐴= 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 [𝑚2] 
(𝑊𝐸, 𝑊𝑁, 𝑊𝑍) = 𝑎𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 [𝑚 ∙ 𝑠−1] 
(𝑁𝐸, 𝑁𝑁, 𝑁𝑍) = 𝑣𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑡𝑜 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑛 𝑎 (𝐸, 𝑁, 𝑍) 𝑠𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚 [𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑠] 
 
 
FIGURE 18. Trace flux measurement method. 
==PAGE:49==
45 
 
4.2.4 Uncertainty 
 
The DFM method is a novel technology and the AWAIRE project is its second official 
project. The first report on a prototype for the quantification of GHG emissions from 
diffuse sources was published by MUDP in 2022 and is called The Plane Project 
(Knudsen & Rossi, 2022). A part of the plane project included the validation of the 
DFM method and the calculation of an uncertainty budget. DTU Environment as well 
as FORCE technology helped establish the uncertainty budget though controlled 
release and comparative tests with the reference method TDM. The FORCE 
technologies assessment concluded that the DFM is a suitable and reliable method to 
monitor emissions from biogas plants. A single measurement uncertainty of 
approximately 21% was concluded. Explicit furthermore states that three flux walls 
are needed to conclude an average flux (Knudsen & Rossi, 2022). 
 
Since the uncertainty mentioned above is based on measurements of methane, the 
method for quantifying N2O is subject to a different uncertainty. As another sensor is 
used and N2O differs from CH4 in several aspects, the DFM method used for N2O 
emissions monitoring has a different uncertainty.  
 
4.2.5 Limitations 
 
▪ The DFM method can only be applied during certain weather conditions: 
- 
Wind velocity between 2 and 12 m s-1 
- 
A consistent wind direction  
- 
High turbulence atmospheric conditions influence the quality of the 
results 
▪ A certain space for a flight path is required.  
▪ To deliver reliable results on total emissions, the entire downwind emission 
plume needs to be captured by the flight path of the drone.  
▪ The DFM method is not suitable for continuous measurement studies and 
only provides a snapshot of emissions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
46 
 
4.3 Tracer dispersion method 
 
The tracer dispersion method (TDM) – like the DFM method – belongs to the family 
of remote sensor methods and is a well-known approach for the quantification of 
fugitive gasses (Lamb., 1995). The Danish Environmental Agency, for instance, has 
adopted the TDM method and uses it to report on CH4 emissions on landfills (Scheutz 
et al., 2011; Mønster et al., 2014). The method has been validated and an error 
assessment has been performed through multiple controlled release tests including 
several analytical instruments (Fredenslund, et al., 2019). Although originally 
developed for the quantification of methane emissions from landfills, the method can 
also be used for various other applications such as CH4 emissions from biogas plants 
or, like in this case, for the quantification of total N2O emissions from WWTPs 
(Yoshida et al., 2014; Delre et al., 2017). In this study, the TDM method is performed 
by the researchers of DTU.  
 
The TDM method assumes that a long atmospheric lifetime tracer gas (acetylene), 
released constantly as close as possible at the emission source (BNR stage), will 
disperse into the atmosphere the same way as the N2O emitted. With the assumptions 
that the wind direction is defined and the air both above and around the BNR stage is 
well mixed, the concentration ratio between tracer gas and emission gas stays constant 
over space. The N2O emission rate 𝐸𝑁2𝑂 [𝑘𝑔 ∙ℎ−1] can therefore be evaluated by an 
integration in space across the downwind plumes of both tracer gas and N2O 
emissions, using following formula (4.17 (Scheutz et al., 2011; Mønster et al., 2014).  
 
 
𝐸𝑁2𝑂= 𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟 ∙ 
∫
(𝐶𝑁2𝑂− 𝐶𝑁2𝑂,𝑏𝑘𝑔) 𝑑𝑥
𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑒𝑛𝑑
𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡
∫
(𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟− 𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟,𝑏𝑘𝑔) 𝑑𝑥
𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑒𝑛𝑑
𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡
 ∙ 
𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂
𝑀𝑊𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟
 
(4.17) 
 
 
 
Where:  
𝑄𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟= 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟 𝑔𝑎𝑠 [𝑘𝑔 ∙ ℎ−1] 
𝐶𝑁2𝑂= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 [𝑝𝑝𝑏𝑣] 
𝐶𝑁2𝑂,𝑏𝑘𝑔= 𝑁2𝑂 𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑑 [𝑝𝑝𝑏𝑣] 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟= 𝐶2𝐻2 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑝𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 [𝑝𝑝𝑏𝑣] 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟,𝑏𝑘𝑔= 𝐶2𝐻2 𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑑 [𝑝𝑝𝑏𝑣] 
𝑀𝑊𝑁2𝑂= 𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑁2𝑂 
𝑀𝑊𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑟= 𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝐶2𝐻2 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
47 
 
 
To ensure that the ratio between the trace and emission gas remains constant, the 
tracer gas needs to fulfil certain requirements such as having a long atmospheric 
lifetime, minimal cross interferences with other sources, and preferably small 
background concentrations in the environment. Finally, a suitable sensor should exist, 
to measure the gas with necessary precision. Acetylene has been proven to fulfil these 
requirements (Mønster et al., 2014).  
 
 
4.3.1 Materials  
 
Sensor. DTU uses a custom-made N2O and C2H2 sensor model G2203, Picarro, Inc., 
Santa Clara (from now on Picarro) visualized in FIGURE 19. The instrument is at the 
rear-end of a vehicle that has been specially modified for this application. The driver 
follows the gas detection in real time over a display. The Picarro measures with 
approximately 2 Hz and with a precision of 7.7 ppb for N2O and 0.6 ppb for C2H2. 
These values were determined by Delre et al. (2017) who used the same sensor for an 
identical application. This study includes a sensor test in the laboratory, where the 
Picarro sensor is examined again and can be found in subchapter 5.1 as well as in the 
Appendix A.4 Results first laboratory test. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 19. TDM method using a Picarro analyser. 
==PAGE:52==
48 
 
4.3.2 Data collection 
 
FIGURE 20. illustrates the main steps of a usual application of the mobile TDM 
method carried out at a WWTP based on Delre (2018).  
 
 
FIGURE 20. The application procedure of the TDM method. 
 
1) Initial screening of the WWTP. The screening starts with an online research of the 
plant with which information on accessible roads, the layout and the (dominant) 
wind direction is obtained. Before starting a measurement campaign, the 
atmospheric concentrations of both tracer gas and target gas are measured up-
wind, down-wind and around the plant to ensure no interfering sources are 
present. A site visit will give information on which process units are emitting the 
target gas and where the tracer gas cylinders should be placed.  
 
2) Placement of the tracer gas and controlled release. When weather conditions are right 
(wind speed and direction), trace gas cylinders are placed as close to the emission 
source as possible to best simulate the emission source. The tracer gas is then 
released continuously through calibrated flow meters on a known rate while being 
quantified in the next step.  
 
1) 
1) 
2) 
2) 
3) 
3) 
==PAGE:53==
49 
 
3) Quantification measurements. Both gases (tracer and target) are measured 
downwind from the plant. The minimum measuring distance is about three times 
the width of the emission source. It is essential to keep the minimal distance to 
ensure proper mixing between target and tracer gas. Additionally, a close enough 
distance should be kept to ensure a suitable signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR). The car 
equipped with gas analysers traverses several times through the downwind 
plume. A traverse is considered complete when the entire plume has been 
detected. The position is tracked with the help of a global positioning system 
(GPS). Background concentrations are obtained upwind of the emission source.  
 
 
4.3.3 Uncertainty 
 
The overall uncertainty of the TDM is a combination of the instrument uncertainty 
and the present measurement conditions. In 2014, an assessment of the analytical 
uncertainty as well as the uncertainty of the flow meters was carried out. The study 
showed an overall analytical uncertainty of less than 10% and an uncertainty of 5% 
for the flow meters used to release the tracer gas (Mønster et al., 2014). 
 
The placement of the tracer gas is of high importance; If the tracer gas is positioned 50 
meters upwind of the source, an overestimation up to 36% can occur, while an 
optimally placed tracer gas only results in an error between -2% and +6% (Mønster, 
Samuelsson, Kjeldsen, & C Rella, 2014). 
 
To establish the overall uncertainty of the TDM, a study (Fredenslund, et al., 2019)  
included five controlled release tests, performed by two teams. The controlled release 
tests were used to systematically analyse each process to later assign an individual 
error. The study finally concluded that the overall uncertainty of the method was 
<20% (Fredenslund et al., 2019). 
 
It should be noted that the studies mentioned above were done on the quantification 
of CH4 emissions. Uncertainties might change when quantifying N2O emissions. 
Furthermore, in the measurements of this study, three tracer gas bottles were used, 
which increases the error caused by the flow meters. Calculated through error 
propagation, an error of 8.7% was identified.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
50 
 
4.3.4 Limitations 
 
▪ Weather conditions such as wind speed and direction, incoming solar 
radiation as well as typography can influence the detection limit (Yoshida, 
Mønster, & Scheutz, 2014). 
▪ Measuring distance to the plume should at least be three times the width 
of the emission source (e.g., aeriation tank width: 100m → required 
distance: 300m) (C. Scheutz, personal communication, May 30, 2022). 
▪ To perform the TDM, suitable roads accessible by car are required at the 
above-mentioned distances downwind of the source. (Fredenslund et al., 
2019) 
▪ The TDM method is not suitable for continuous emission studies and only 
provides a snapshot of emissions.  
 
 
4.4 Measurements and campaign design 
 
In this subchapter, the measurement campaigns performed in this study are 
explained. The campaigns were 1) a laboratory sensor test performed at DTU, 2) two 
field measurement campaigns at Avedøre WWTP, 3) a controlled release test, and 4) 
a DFM method analysis based on a Gaussian plume model. 
 
 
4.4.1 Sensor pre-calibration  
 
The Aeris Mira sensor was acquired for the AWAIRE project and used for the very 
first time in this study. One of the first work packages of the AWAIRE project is to 
build and present a functional drone set-up suitable for the quantification of N2O 
emissions. This includes the integration of the sensor into the drone and a sensor 
test/calibration.  
 
The sensor calibration is performed by FORCE technology, a leading company in 
sensor calibration in Denmark. A pre-calibration was performed in combination with 
the Picarro analyser used by DTU for the TDM.  
 
The performed simplified pre-calibration is based on the “Protocol of evaluation and 
calibration of low-cost gas sensors for monitoring air pollution” issued by the 
==PAGE:55==
51 
 
European Commission (Spinelle et al., 2013). The first laboratory sensor test protocol 
can be found in the appendix A.2 Protocol first laboratory sensor test 
 
 
4.4.2 Campaigns at Avedøre WWTP 
 
For the two-year AWAIRE project, eight measurement campaigns at Avedøre WWTP 
have been planned. Within the time span of this thesis, the first two campaigns were 
carried out. It has been agreed with all the AWAIRE project partners that the first two 
measurement campaigns should be performed during normal operating conditions of 
the WWTP. The results of the two campaigns should help understand the daily 
processes that drive N2O production. Furthermore, comparative data between the 
emission model, TDM and DFM should be generated, which includes enough data 
collection to conclude an emission average. The measurements with the TDM method 
and the DFM method should be conducted simultaneously.  
Further requirements for the two campaigns are as follows:  
 
▪ Taking place during the high N2O emission months: March and April  
▪ Suitable weather conditions (wind speed and direction) for both methods 
▪ WWTP availability, e.g. access to BNR and roads around BNR 
▪ Operating and calibrated N2O sensors at the WWTP 
▪ Availability of both drone pilot as well as TDM method operator  
 
 
4.4.3 Controlled release test 
 
Controlled release tests are a common practice to perform an error assessment of a 
method which can then be used for validation (Fredenslund et al., 2019; Knudsen & 
Rossi, 2022). The controlled release test for this study was designed and conducted by 
DTU and took place in an open area of a former landfill. The controlled release test 
consists of an unknown release rate of N2O which is then captured downwind of the 
plume by the two methods DFM and TDM.  
 
N2O is released at a constant flow rate by a single N2O bottle connected by tubing to 
four outlet nodes about 1-1.5 m above the ground. The outlets are arranged in a square 
25 meters away (as visualized in FIGURE 21, to mimic the emission source at a WWTP. 
It is crucial to keep the flow rate at a constant flow. To determine the flow rate released 
by the N2O bottle, the bottle is weighted with a precise scale (precision of 0.5 g) before 
==PAGE:56==
52 
 
and after the release. In addition, time is recorded when turning the gas on and off. A 
second determination of the release rate is done in the DTU laboratory with a flow 
meter. 
 
FIGURE 21. Layout of the controlled release test. 
 
 
4.4.4 DFM method analysis  
 
As the DFM method still is a novel technology, no detailed error assessments of the 
individual processes have been performed yet. The method analysis presented in this 
thesis is based on a Gaussian plume model with which the intention is to analyze a 
specific process and determine its error contribution. The process to be examined 
emerged during the N2O net flux calculations of the measurement campaigns. The 
analysis addresses the N2O net flux calculation of the first flown trace of a flux wall. 
The issue is further described and analyzed in subchapter 5.6.  
A protocol (Danish) on the Gaussian plume model provided by Explicit can be found 
in the Appendix: A.3 Protocol Gaussian Plume Model.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
This chapter presents and discusses the results of the sensor pre-calibration, the two 
measurement campaigns, the controlled release test and the analysis of the DFM 
method.  
The presentation of the results of the two measurement campaigns begins first with 
an analysis of the observed processes in the water phase within the BNR phase. Next, 
the data collection of the performance of the two remote sensors is presented, followed 
by a comparison of all three methods for quantifying the total N2O emissions. Finally, 
the corresponding emission factors for the two measurement campaigns are 
presented.  
 
5.1 Pre-calibration 
The pre-calibration of both the Aeris MIRA and the Picaro analyser was carried out 
on the 14th of January 2022 in the laboratory facilities of DTU.  
The implementation of the pre-calibration of the sensors proved to be difficult. 
Suitable material, such as standard calibration gases in the relevant concentrations, 
was only available in insufficient quantities. This along with other aspects with 
improvement potential led to the pre-calibration test being declared invalid. A new 
laboratory test was agreed on, and new standard gases and a revision of the laboratory 
protocol were requested and carried out. Unfortunately, the delivery of the standard 
gases could not be completed in time for this thesis, and the second laboratory test is 
still pending. 
 
Despite the fact that the test was declared invalid, FIGURE 22 and FIGURE 23 show 
the calibration curve of both analysers. The maximum N2O concentrations emitted at 
the WWTP are expected to be around 15ppm. That being the case, standard gases with 
concentrations of 70ppm and 150ppm are out of the operation range, and calibration 
concentration points around the operation concentration points are needed. Further 
==PAGE:58==
54 
 
results of the pre-calibration test can be found in the appendix A.4 Results first 
laboratory test  
 
FIGURE 22. Calibration curve: Aeris MIRA. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 23. Calibration curve: Picarro. 
 
5.2 N2O production and model analysis  
 
==PAGE:59==
55 
 
In this subchapter, the data obtained by stationary sensors in the BNR, operated by 
BIOFOS at Avedøre WWTP, is analysed and presented. Each basin of a reactor consists 
of the following sensors: N2O, NH4+, DO, NO3-. Also, information on the estimated 
airflow is given, as well as the N2O emission rate calculated by the emission model. 
Each basin with a N2O sensor is examined in detail and the different processes are 
explained. Lastly, different approaches to estimate the total N2O emissions based on 
the emission model output are presented.   
 
 
5.2.1 First campaign  
The first measurement campaign took place from 10:00 to 03:00 CET on the 29th of 
March 2022. The weather was dry and the water temperature constant at 15°C. All 
four carousel reactors of the BNR stage were actively operating and being fed with the 
same fluctuation in the loading volume. Average influent into all four reactors 
combined was 2407 m3/h.   
==PAGE:60==
56 
 
 
FIGURE 24. Reactor 1: first campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
 
==PAGE:61==
57 
 
 
FIGURE 25. Reactor 3: first campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
 
Several processes can be observed in both reactor 1 and 3 visualized in FIGURE 24 
and FIGURE 25. Both reactors undergo stages of nitrification and denitrification and 
over time, multiple alternations between the two stages are performed. 
Each time a basin is fed with new wastewater with high NH4+ (brown line) content, a 
nitrification stage is applied after approximately 15 minutes. During the nitrification, 
ammonia is oxidised to nitrite through AOB under aerobic conditions. Nitrite is then 
oxidised to Nitrate (NO3 -, grey line) through NOB as described in subchapter 2.2.1.  
 
To provide enough oxygen, the aeration is switched on. This is indicated by the 
airflow (blue line). Shortly after the aeration system is switched on, the dissolved 
oxygen level (yellow line) rises. As the nitrification is happening, N2O is being 
produced (green line) and builds up even after the aeration system has been switched 
off. While the nitrification phase is present, the calculated N2O emissions from 
emission model (black line) are at their peak. After a nitrification stage, a 
denitrification stage follows, indicated by a switched off airflow. During this 
denitrification period, the produced NO3- is reduced under anoxic conditions all the 
way to nitrogen (N2) and leaves the system through the air as described in the 
subchapter 2.2.2.  
 
Comparing basin 1 and basin 2 of the two reactors, the two different phases 
(nitrification/denitrification) are operated in an offset to each other, i.e. when basin 1 
is in nitrification (N) phase, basin 2 usually is in denitrification (DN) stage.  
When analysing in which process stage (three-digit code) the reactors are operated the 
most within 24 hours, 70% of the time the reactors are either in stage 112 (DN/N) or 
==PAGE:62==
58 
 
321 (N/DN) – see FIGURE 8.  Making the most common process stage a configuration 
where one basin is in nitrification stage, while the other is in denitrification stage.  
 
Regarding the N2O formation, several observations can be made. As seen in both 
reactors – yet clearer in FIGURE 24 showing reactor 1 – N2O formation starts during 
the nitrification phase indicating N2O production through N2O forming pathways. 
During the nitrification phase several major N2O forming pathways such as nitrifier 
nitrification or nitrifier denitrification are present.  
 The substantiality of N2O pathways within the nitrification phase is confirmed by 
multiple studies (Wrage-Mönnig et al., 2001; Wunderlin et al., 2013; Caranto et al., 
2016; Ma et al., 2017). 
Interestingly, the N2O concentration in the liquid phase continues rising through the 
first half of the denitrification stage. This activity can be explained by two possible 
reasons; Firstly, a time shift is present – when switching off the aeration system, 
several intermediates continue their reaction for a while. A good indicator for 
denitrification successfully taking over is the NO3- concentration starting to decline, 
i.e. more NO3- is being reduced through the denitrification then produced through the 
nitrification. Until then, N2O is most likely produced through the nitrification 
pathways. Secondly, N2O is an obligatory intermediate of the denitrification process, 
meaning its production is essential for a successful performance of the denitrification 
phase. The production of N2O during the denitrification phase is another explanation 
for the initial holding of the N2O concentration at a certain level before N2O is reduced. 
The elimination of N2O distinctly happens during the denitrification phase; this is a 
sign that enough BOD is available to reduce N2O to N2. If this was not be the case, the 
denitrification step would not act as a sink but as a contributor to N2O as shown in the 
studies of (Wunderlin et al., 2012; Gruber et al., 2022). 
 
When comparing the N2O concentrations of the reactor 1 and 3, it is detectable that, at 
times, twice as much N2O is produced in reactor 1 (FIGURE 24) as in reactor 3 
(FIGURE 25). By scrutinizing the NO3- concentrations of the two reactors, it can be 
noticed that reactor 1 has a rather low concentration – even with a comparable NH4+ 
load, as in reactor 3. This is an indication that the nitrification phase does not 
successfully reach its final product NO3- but, instead, produces N2O via the NN 
and/or ND pathway. Inhibition of NOB, which is responsible for the final production 
of NO3-, promotes such alternative pathways leading to increased production of N2O, 
as shown in several studies (Kits et al., 2019; Gruber et al., 2021a). 
 
By looking at the emission model, the switch between the two equations used to 
calculate the emission rate can be observed. As described in the subchapter 4.1.1, the 
emission model uses the aeration equation (4.4 while the aeration is switched on 
==PAGE:63==
59 
 
(nitrification), and switches to the equation without aeration (4.5, when in the 
denitrification phase. This switch can be observed in both basins of the reactors but is 
more prominent in the reactor 1 (FIGURE 24). The calculated emissions immediately 
decline with the aeration being switched off, indicating that the emission model 
strongly depends on the total airflow 𝑄𝐴 used in the equation (4.1. When N2O 
concentrations are high enough, the emissions calculated through emission model – 
using the equation without aeration – start to pick up again.  
 
Another interesting observation regarding the emission model can be made right 
when the calculated emissions begin to rise. Surprisingly, the emission model 
calculates an emission rate while the N2O concentration is 0 mg/L. When looking at 
both equations used to calculate the emission rate (4.4 and (4.5, the emission rate 
calculated with an input of 0 mg/L is 0 kg/h. Neither BIOFOS nor Krüger (BIOFOS 
consultant) could explain why an emission rate is still calculated but will investigate 
the issue and approach the manufacturer.  
 
One point to keep in mind is that, while aeration is switched on, N2O is rapidly being 
stripped into the atmosphere after its creation (Foley et al., 2010; Chen, et al., 2019; 
Baeten et al., 2020). It may be that the emission model takes this into consideration. 
With the information available for this study, this could not be confirmed however, 
and no response was received by the time this study was completed. Another theory 
explaining why the emission model calculates emissions when no N2O is measured is 
that the data obtained to carry out this work, does not show the precise concentrations. 
When looking at the N2O concentration in all four reactors, the visualised data jumps 
from one concentration to another with 0.1 mg/L concentration steps resulting in a 
phased visualisation most likely not fully representing how the concentration changes 
in the water phase. This could be a matter of resolution or system setting, among other 
things. In any case, the manufacturer specifies a detection limit of <0.005 mg N-N2O 
per litre (Unisense, 2020).  
 
 
5.2.2 Second Campaign  
The second campaign took place between 09:00 and 14:10 CET of the 26th of April 2022. 
The weather was dry and the water temperature constant at 15°C. Due to maintenance 
on the inflow flowmeters, reactor 1 was not in operation as the influent visualized in 
FIGURE 26 shows. Average influent into the three reactors combined was 2981 m3/h.  
Initially, the campaign was supposed to be carried out on a day with normal process 
conditions. This was not the case, however. In order to understand the particular 
==PAGE:64==
60 
 
situation during this event, the following graphs of this subchapter cover the period 
from 25 April at 14:30 to 26 April at 00:00.   
 
 
FIGURE 26. Wastewater feed into the reactor 1 and 3 during the observation period. 
 
 
The Reactor 1 (visualized in FIGURE 27) did not receive any influent, as shown in 
FIGURE 26. Nevertheless, an increase of NH4+ can be observed at around 05.45, 
leading to the performance of a nitrification and denitrification phases. The emission 
model calculated peak emission of up to 3.2 kg/h. Interestingly, the process stage of 
reactor 1 did not change half an hour before or after the increase of NH4+. The increase 
in NH4+  in reactor 1 can most likely be linked to the current maintenance work. 
 
==PAGE:65==
61 
 
 
FIGURE 27. Reactor 1: second campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
 
In the fully operational reactor 3 (visualized in FIGURE 28), several things can be 
observed. The biggest difference to the first campaign is the steadily increasing NH4+ 
load, which leads to exceptionally high N2O concentrations – higher than the STAR 
system is expected to indicate. In both basins of reactor 3, the N2O concentration is 
above 2.1 mg/L but the STAR system stagnated the N2O output concentration at 2.1 
mg/L. After observing the output, BIOFOS is going to adjust the STAR system to 
receive all the data from the N2O sensors. Another observation is the NH4+ load in 
basin 1, where the NH4+ sensor fell into a false mode several times and did not show 
the correct current concentration. It is therefore preferable to focus for the discussion 
of the results on basin 2.  
 
==PAGE:66==
62 
 
 
 
FIGURE 28. Reactor 3: second campaign. Top basin 1, low basin 2. 
 
In reactor, 3 shown in FIGURE 28, between 18:15 on the 25th of April and 06.00 on the 
following day, a fixed DO was used to control the reactor, i.e. the aeration system (blue 
line) was switched on until the desired dissolved oxygen concentration was reached. 
After that, a denitrification phase continued. It seems that during the period with a set 
DO value, the N2O concentration was kept under control with alternating nitrification 
and denitrification phases, regardless of the continuous influent. However, when the 
reactor was no longer operated with a fixed DO and an exceptionally long, seven-hour 
period of nitrification was used to manage the high present NH4+ concentration, the 
N2O concentration dramatically increased. By the end of the campaign day, N2O 
concentrations were still closely present at the maximum system output. 
 
==PAGE:67==
63 
 
The continuous feed, resulting in steadily increasing NH4+ concentrations that only 
started to decrease when the actual influent rate was reduced, (see FIGURE 26) was 
not the only issue in regard to the high N2O formation. A much greater effect was 
caused by seven hours of aeration without a denitrification phase. During this time, 
there was no possibility for the N2O to be processed by the current biology; the only 
way it could leave the system was to be stripped into the air, resulting in exceptionally 
high emission rates (analyzed in subchapter 5.4.3).  
 
As already observed in the first campaign, the strong influence of the airflow can also 
be identified in the calculations of the emission model during the second campaign. 
Looking at the period after 09:00 on the 26th of April, the calculated emissions precisely 
mimic the airflow. This, once again, underlines the airflow’s importance within the 
emission model described in subchapter 4.1.1.   
 
It should be noted that the BNR stage was under maintenance, and BIOFOS employee 
ensured that these were special circumstances (A.T Mielczarek, personal 
communication, May 31, 2022). Nevertheless, N2O emission rates of over 10 kg/h per 
basin do have an environmental impact, given N2O’s high global warming potential.  
 
 
5.2.3 N2O emissions computed with the emission model 
 
The following diagram groups the calculated emission rates with the respective 
process stages during the first campaign (29th of March 2022, 10:00–15.00 CET). Each 
process stage, labelled with a three-digit code, represents a specific reactor 
configuration as presented in the subchapter 2.3.  
 
==PAGE:68==
64 
 
 
FIGURE 29. N2O emission rates grouped into process stages. 
When looking at the FIGURE 29, it is evident that the highest calculated emissions 
occur in the process stage 122. Process stage 122 contains a nitrification phase (N/N) 
for both basins, which means that aeration is active in both basins. As shown in the 
graphs of reactor 1 and 3 in the first campaign in the subchapter 5.2.1, N2O is formed 
during nitrification. This diagram (FIGURE 29) demonstrates that it is also emitted the 
most during the nitrification phase; this is partly due to N2Os presence in the water 
phase as well as due to the stripping effect of aeration. The finding of nitrification 
being the process phase when N2O is emitted into the air is supported by previous 
research e.g. (Chen, et al., 2019; Gruber et al., 2021b). Then again, the double 
denitrification process stages 111 and 211 show the lowest emissions. The fact that not 
a lot of emissions are calculated during the denitrification is due to the emission 
equation (4.5 which does not calculate a high emission rate when no high N2O 
concentrations are present in the water phase. As seen in both reactors of the first 
campaign, denitrification acts as a sink for N2O.  
 
As can be seen in the FIGURE 29, the stage 311 (DN/DN) shows higher emissions than 
stages 111 and 211 although, in all three, both basins are in denitrification. A possible 
explanation to this could be that a previously operated stage was an intensive N2O 
production stage (e.g. 112 (N/N) which passed on the high N2O concentration further 
to stage 311 (DN/DN)). Due to the high concentration present, the model still 
==PAGE:69==
65 
 
calculates emissions through the non-aerated equation. Furthermore, stage 311 was 
only operated for 12 minutes in total and often used for a transition period between 
the two stages most often applied 112 (DN/N) and 321 (N/DN), which were operated 
for over 70% of the time. Such a short period is not a long enough time to reduce the 
high N2O concentration through denitrification. 
 
When calculating total emissions, it is important to know which stages are the main 
contributors. This is especially relevant if not all reactors are equipped with N2O 
sensors and a corresponding emission model. The information obtained by grouping 
the emission rates with the corresponding process stages can help in extrapolating the 
emissions to the reactors without sensors. As only two of the four reactors at Avedøre 
WWTP are equipped with N2O sensors, the extrapolation to total N2O emissions is 
part of the next chapter. 
 
 
5.2.4 Extrapolation of total emissions based on model emission data  
 
At Avedøre WWTP, the N2O emissions are calculated by the implemented emission 
model for four of the eight basins. An accurate estimate of the emissions generated in 
the other four basins is difficult and is not included in the emission model. Neither 
BIOFOS nor Krüger have a method for extrapolating the total emissions. 
 
This thesis presents two options for extrapolating the emissions to determine the total 
emissions from the BNR of the WWTP. This step is crucial for a method comparison, 
as both the TDM method and the DFM method provide total emissions.  
 
The first option for calculating the total emissions is to assume that the two reactors 
without an N2O monitoring run the exact same process steps at the same time and 
have the same parameter values as the reactors with an N2O model. The data from the 
four basins with N2O emission values are projected onto the other two reactors which 
do not have N2O monitoring. The total emissions are then the sum of all four basins 
multiplied by two. FIGURE 30 shows the total emissions calculated through the option 
1 over the time of the first campaign. Option 1 results in a total N2O emission average 
of 1.28 kg/h with a standard deviation of 0.72 kg/h.  
 
 
==PAGE:70==
66 
 
 
FIGURE 30. Visualization of total emissions calculation through the option 1 during the first 
campaign. 
 
The second option for calculating total emissions considers the respective (known) 
process stages of all four reactors. As shown in the subchapter 5.2.3, the calculated 
emission rates are present in different rates in the process stages. Assuming that the 
reactors are loaded equally, and their sequence of process stages is the same, it is 
possible to assign an emission rate to each process stage based on the grouping in 
FIGURE 29.  
 
TABLE 3 was created with the same data set as the grouping in FIGURE 29. The table 
shows the average emission rates obtained during the process stages. These emission 
rate values are then assigned to the corresponding process stage of all reactors during 
the first campaign.  
 
TABLE 3. Process stage with corresponding N2O emission rate 
Process stage 
111 
112 
122 
221 
311 
321 
322 
412 
Average emissions [kg/h] 
0.06 
0.12 
0.44 
0.03 
0.10 
0.19 
0.14 
0.09 
# Runs 
14 
114 
17 
10 
6 
126 
12 
11 
 
 
The total N2O emissions present is calculated through the sum of all assigned emission 
rates of all four reactors. The process stages are logged once every two minutes and, 
if a stage changes, the total emission rate changes as well. FIGURE 31 shows the total 
emissions during the first campaign, calculated through the option 2 with a total N2O 
emission average of 0.62 kg/h and a standard deviation of 0.12 kg/h.  
 
==PAGE:71==
67 
 
 
 
FIGURE 31. Visualization of total emissions calculation through the option 2. 
 
 
In general, the average emission rate of the option 1 is twice as high as that of the 
option 2. Furthermore, the emission pattern of the option 2 is fairly flat, while strong 
fluctuations can be observed with the option 1. 
 
The highest possible emission calculated with the option 2 would be reached if all 
eight basins were nitrified in stage 122, resulting in an N2O emission rate of 3.52 kg/h. 
It is therefore possible that the option 2 achieves high N2O emission levels. However, 
in the next chapter which is dealing with the comparison of total emissions between 
the emission model and the two remote sensing methods, the option 1 will prove to 
be more representative of N2O emission dynamics and levels.  
 
 
5.3 First campaign total emissions  
 
The total emissions chapters (5.3 and 5.4) of the first and second campaign introduce 
the obtained results of the DFM and the TDM in separate subchapters, which are then 
followed by a subchapter summarizing all obtained total emissions. Lastly, the 
corresponding emission factors of the present measurement campaign are presented 
and discussed. 
 
As mentioned earlier, the first measurement campaign was carried out on the 29th of 
March. On that day, a mean wind speed of 3 m/s and a mean wind direction of 280 
degrees were observed. The weather conditions were changing between sunny and 
cloudy. Prior to taking the measurements, the WWTP was screened using both the 
==PAGE:72==
68 
 
TDM and DFM to ensure that no N2O emissions from sources other than the BNR 
stage were affecting the measurement. No other sources contributing to the N2O 
emission were found. Special attention was given to the secondary clarifiers as they 
are located downwind of the BNR stage and between the measurement points of the 
DFM and the TDM. 
 
 
5.3.1 DFM during first campaign  
 
The collected flux values and other observed values are summarized in TABLE 4 and 
TABLE 5. In total of nine valid measurements were collected which had an average 
N2O net flux of 3 kg/h.   
 
 
TABLE 4. DFM flight details and N2O flux results. 
Flight 
nr 
Time 
start 
Time 
end 
Flux 
N2O 
[kg/h] 
Wind 
speed 
[m/s] 
Mean 
direction 
[°] 
Notes 
1 
10:10:04 
10:21:46 
2.7 
3.20 
275 
clowdy 
2 
10:28:15 
10:42:55 
2.1 
3.00 
288 
clowdy 
3 
11:08:43 
11:23:24 
2.8 
3.30 
282 
sunny 
4 
11:28:38 
11:38:33 
3.5 
3.30 
288 
sunny 
5 
11:53:31 
12:08:12 
4.3 
3.80 
286 
clowdy 
6 
12:11:08 
12:18:01 
2.4 
3.80 
283 
clowdy 
7 
12:58:39 
13:13:20 
2.8 
5.10 
286 
clowdy 
8 
13:36:16 
13:45:16 
1.2 
6.20 
286 
incomplete wall 
9 
14:00:35 
14:12:02 
4.1 
5.60 
291 
sunny 
10 
14:23:46 
14:40:44 
2.6 
6.90 
292 
clowdy 
 
 
TABLE 5. Summary of the obtained N2O flux values by the DFM. 
 
All flights 
Average flux [kg/h] 
3.0 
Highest [kg/h] 
7.3 
Lowest [kg/h] 
2.1 
Std.dev. 
0.7 
# measurements 
9 
==PAGE:73==
69 
 
Examples of detailed DFM results  
 
 
FIGURE 32. Detailed information on the first flight of the first campaign in cloudy conditions. 
In FIGURE 32, the top-left graph shows from an aerial point of view both the start and the end point of the drone, the mean wind 
speed and direction. The top-middle graph shows a flux wall depicting the detected N2O gross concentrations in different colours. 
The top-right graph shows the vertical N2O background profile of the flown wall. The bottom-left graph shows a vertical profile of 
a flown wall, visualizing the net flux calculated by Explicit’s contouring method (outside of the scope of this thesis). Lastly, the 
bottom-right graph shows the N2O total net flux (2.7 kg/h) as well as the net flux calculated in each trace by Explicit’s trace method. 
The majority of N2O got detected in the first trace (Trace0) at a height of 3 meters. This observation and the possible methodological 
constraints are discussed in more detail in the chapter 5.6.
==PAGE:74==
70 
 
 
FIGURE 33. Detailed information on the third flight of the first campaign in sunny conditions.  
 
Compared to the top-middle graph in FIGURE 32, the top-middle graph in FIGURE 33 shows the detected N2O concentration more 
evenly distributed over the flown wall. This could be attributed to three different components; Cloudy conditions (present in the first 
flight) create more stable weather conditions, while sunshine (present in the third flight) creates more turbulent conditions that 
disperse the emissions over a larger area (Pashkevich et al., 2017). The second component is the natural motion of the plume. As a 
measurement is taken at a specific location at a specific time, it may be that, shortly after the measurement, the plume moves to 
another point. The third and last component, that influences N2O distribution is the plume rise. The remaining flights and flux 
calculations from the first campaign can be found in the appendix A.5 DFM detailed flight information.
==PAGE:75==
71 
 
Examples of different flight distances to the source  
 
 
FIGURE 34. Map visualization of the first flight of the first campaign. 
 
The orange lines in  FIGURE 34 and FIGURE 35 depict the mean wind direction during 
the measurement. This helps the pilot determine the coverage of the wall downwind 
of the source, to capture the whole plume. The indication of the mean wind direction 
is especially helpful if a flight path has to be flown further away from the source. As 
can be seen in FIGURE 35, although the orange lines connected to the waypoints (star 
0 and star 1) cover the source, this does not mean that the wall entirely captures the 
plume downwind. This is due to the dispersion of the plume, which increases with its 
traveled distance (Pashkevich et al., 2017). 
 
 
FIGURE 35. Map visualization of the tenth flight of the first campaign. 
==PAGE:76==
72 
 
5.3.2 TDM during first campaign  
 
The TDM method was carried out by DTU on the same day as the DFM, and the 
resulting N2O flux values were provided for this thesis. In total three tracer gas 
(acetylene) bottles were placed as close to the source as possible. Their final position 
is indicated by yellow stars in FIGURE 36. The measurement was then taken (red line) 
approximately 200 meters downwind of the source.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 36. TDM graphical illustration of the first campaign. 
 
In total of 31 measurements were collected, which resulted in an average N2O net flux 
of 6 kg/h. Out of the 31 measurements, fourteen were carried out at the same time 
with the DFM method making a measurement. All measurements of the TDM method 
are listed in TABLE 6 and TABLE 7, whereas the values marked with the asterisk (*) 
are measurements which were conducted simultaneously with the DFM method.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
73 
 
TABLE 6. TDM measurement details and N2O flux results. 
 
Peak time 
Flux N2O 
[kg/h] 
Peak time 
Flux N2O 
[kg/h] 
12:14 
3.4* 
13:50 
9.1 
12:35 
4.0 
13:58 
7.0 
12:38 
4.8 
14:01 
8.0* 
12:41 
8.6 
14:08 
4.2* 
12:44 
7.1 
14:18 
7.8 
12:48 
5.8 
14:21 
5.6 
13:06 
5.3* 
14:24 
4.0* 
13:09 
7.0* 
14:26 
3.9* 
13:14 
8.0 
14:28 
8.3* 
13:16 
3.7 
14:31 
3.4* 
13:19 
7.6 
14:33 
4.5* 
13:25 
4.6 
14:35 
4.7* 
13:27 
5.9 
14:39 
4.6* 
13:31 
7.1 
14:40 
4.7* 
13:45 
8.0* 
14:42 
6.3 
13:48 
9.0 
- 
- 
 
 
TABLE 7. Summary of the obtained flux N2O values by the TDM. 
 
All measurements 
Average flux [kg/h] 
6.0 
Highest [kg/h] 
9.1 
Lowest [kg/h] 
3.4 
Std.dev. 
1.8 
# transects 
31 
Measurements during DFM 
Average flux [kg/h] 
5.3 
Highest [kg/h] 
8.1 
Lowest [kg/h] 
3.2 
Std.dev. 
1.8 
# transects 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
74 
 
5.3.3 Summary of the first campaign  
 
FIGURE 37 summarizes the campaign day and visualizes the three methods (DFM, 
TDM, and the option 1 from the emission model) used to evaluate the total emissions.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 37. Summary of the three methods to obtain total emission of the first campaign.  
 
In FIGURE 37, the 31 measurements of the TDM method are grouped, each group 
consist of the average of five measurements taken successively. The TDM method 
suggests for measurements taken at a steady release rate, that the average of ten 
individual measurements should be taken to unsure the overall method uncertainty 
of < 20% (Fredenslund, et al., 2019). Since the N2O emissions of the BNR stage are not 
a constant emission but can fluctuate considerably, DTU decided to average five 
measurements instead of ten. Strong flux fluctuations have been shown for both 
remote sensor methods even in short periods of 20 minutes (e.g. at 12.00, DFM 
measures over 4 kg/h and 15 minutes later half as much). These strong fluctuations 
in N2O emissions are also reflected in the calculation of the standard deviation of the 
individual methods. The determined standard deviation should therefore not be 
misinterpreted as uncertainty of the methods.  
 
Looking at the average flux values in the first campaign (FIGURE 37), it can be seen 
that the DFM method gives a flux twice as high as the emission model (the option 1) 
==PAGE:79==
75 
 
and the TDM method results in an average value twice as high as the DFM. Given the 
discrepancies in the emission model's calculations of N2O emissions (when no N2O is 
present in the water phase), as noted earlier in this thesis, it is unclear how accurate 
the calculated emissions are. In addition, it has repeatedly been shown that the 
emission model has a strong dependence on the airflow parameter. As described in 
subchapter 4.1.1, it is not possible for BIOFOS to measure the airflow directly. Its 
estimation is based on the measurement of pressures before and after the air 
compressor, and there may be some deviation in this conversion. The estimation on 
the air flow parameter as well as the discrepancies between measured N2O in the 
liquid phase and the emission model output are the main reasons that may indicate 
the emissions model is reporting lower total emissions.  
 
What is noteworthy is that the option 1 assumes that the reactors that do not include 
N2O measurements behave the same as the reactors with N2O measurements. This 
uncertainty cannot be avoided with the current set-up, however. To overcome the 
uncertainty, BIOFOS and Krüger are working on a solution that would relocate the 
four N2O sensor of the two reactors to all four reactors for the remaining campaigns 
of the AWAIRE project. Another addition to the future campaign design involves the 
synchronisation of the reactors. Now peak or low emissions could not be assigned to 
a process stage by measuring total emissions as, first of all, the reactors are not in the 
same process stage and, second of all, the process stages change at different times. 
 
When comparing the N2O flux values of DFM (3 kg/h) and TDM (5.3 kg/h) – with 
both measurements made at the same time – a N2O flux difference of 2.3 kg/h can be 
observed, corresponding to a difference of 43%. One explanation for this discrepancy 
could be that both methods have measurement uncertainties of about 20% 
(Fredenslund et al., 2019; Knudsen & Rossi, 2022). Furthermore, the measurements 
were not taken directly at the same location and, with such a highly fluctuating source, 
small differences can have a big impact.  
 
 
5.3.4 Emission factors during first campaign  
 
During the 29th of March, operators of Avedøre WWTP measured a total nitrogen 
content of 69.6 mg/L upstream of the BNR stage. With a daily influent average of 2407 
m3/h to all four reactors combined, the emissions factors listed in TABLE 8 below 
were calculated.  
 
==PAGE:80==
76 
 
TABLE 8.  Summary of calculated EF based on the average daily flux of each method.  
First campaign 
DFM 
TDM 
Option 1. 
Average N2O Flux [kg/h] 
3.03 
6.00 
1.28 
EF % [kg N2O-N /kg T-N inflow] 
1.15 
2.28 
0.49 
Highest 
1.63 
3.47 
1.25 
Minimum 
0.80 
1.28 
0.08 
Std. dev. 
1.04 
0.68 
0.27 
# measurments 
9 
31 
152 
 
The emission factors of 1.15% obtained by the DFM and 2.28% obtained through the 
TDM are supported by previous reported EFs at Avedøre WWTP. In March 2018, an 
average EF of approximately 1.25% and, a month later, an average EF of 
approximately 2.25% was reported for the reactor 3 (Chen et al., 2019). As the first 
campaign of this study was conducted right at the end of March, the obtained values 
seem reasonable.   
 
At the Kralingseveer WWTP in the Netherlands the highest emissions with an EF of 
11% were obtained on the 31st of March 2011 (Daelman et al., 2015).  
 
When comparing the two options (the option 1 and 2) on extrapolating the total 
emissions from the output of the emission model, the two options result in the 
following emission factors: 0.49% for the option 1 and 0.38% for the option 2. When 
looking only at the reactor 3, where no extrapolation with one of the two options is 
needed, the daily EF was only 0.25%. Compared to the previously reported EF of 
1.25% for reactor 3 during March, the in this campaign observed EF by the liquid 
sensors seems very low (Chen et al., 2019).   
 
 
5.4 Second campaign total emissions 
 
The second campaign took place from 09.00 to 14:10 CET on the 26th of April. From 
14:10 on, the wind conditions were no longer stable, and the measurements had to be 
stopped. As in the first campaign, the weather conditions were changing between 
sunny and cloudy, with a mean wind speed of 2.8 kg/h. Prior to taking the 
measurements, the WWTP was screened using both the TDM and DFM to ensure that 
no N2O emissions from sources other than the BNR stage were affecting the 
measurement. No other sources contributing to the N2O emission were found. 
==PAGE:81==
77 
 
 
Contrary to what was intended, normal process conditions did not prevail. On that 
day, only three out of four reactors were operated and, in addition, the reactors' 
influent valves were under maintenance which, according to the plant operators, 
could lead to high NH4+ loadings. The high loading resulting of the maintenance 
work, already has been analysed in the subchapter 5.2.2.  
 
 
5.4.1 DFM during second campaign  
 
Due to a different wind direction compared to the first campaign, the flux walls were 
chosen to fly at a different location. At the new location, the walls flown were larger 
in size than in the first campaign and had a different shape as shown in the top left 
graph of FIGURE 38. 
 
A total of three measurements (listed in TABLE 9) were conducted, corresponding to 
the minimum number of measurements required, where Explicit concludes an 
average N2O flux (listed in TABLE 10).  
 
TABLE 9. DFM flight details and N2O flux results. 
Flight 
nr 
Time 
start 
Time 
end 
Flux 
N2O 
[kg/h] 
Wind 
speed 
[m/s] 
Mean 
direction 
[°] 
Notes 
1 
12:24:03 
12:40:49 
99.80 
2.9 
218 
sunny 
2 
12:45:14 
13:01:35 
85.23 
3.2 
221 
sunny 
3 
13:07:59 
13:27:52 
99.78 
2.3 
244 
cloudy 
 
TABLE 10. Summary of the obtained N2O flux values by the DFM. 
All flights 
Average flux [kg/h] 
95.27 
Highest [kg/h] 
99.80 
Lowest [kg/h] 
85.23 
Std.dev. 
6.86 
# measurements 
3 
 
==PAGE:82==
78 
 
Examples of detailed DFM results  
 
 
FIGURE 38. The second flight of the second campaign.  
In the top-left graph in FIGURE 38, it can be seen that the pilot flew a different pattern as in the first campaign. The flight path has 
been chosen according to the wind direction and present obstacles. As shown in the top middle graph, the size of the flown wall 
captures the entire N2O plume. On the sides of the wall, background concentrations are measured, whereas a small concentration 
can still be detected in the upper traces. The remaining flights and flux calculations from the second campaign can be found in the 
appendix A.5 DFM detailed flight information.
==PAGE:83==
79 
 
5.4.2 TDM in the second campaign  
 
Identically to the first campaign, the TDM method was carried out by DTU on the 
same day as the DFM, and the N2O flux values measured were provided for this thesis. 
A total of three tracer gas bottles (acetylene) were placed as close as possible to the 
source. Different to the first campaign, the tracer gas bottles were placed closer to the 
centre of the BNR stage, as this position was more favourable for the analysis. Their 
final positions are marked with yellow stars in FIGURE 39. The measurement (red 
line) was taken approximately 150 meters downwind of the source. 
 
 
FIGURE 39. TDM graphical illustration of campaign 2. 
 
Despite the short measuring distance of 150 meters to the source, a good correlation 
between N2O and C2H2 was found, as visualized in FIGURE 40.  
 
 
FIGURE 40. Measured N2O emissions as well as the tracer gas C2H2. 
==PAGE:84==
80 
 
In TABLE 11, all the collected measurements by the TDM method are listed. The 
values marked with an asterisk (*) are measurements taken simultaneously with the 
DFM method. A summary of the results of the second campaign is shown in TABLE 
12.  
 
TABLE 11. TDM measurement details and N2O flux results. 
Peak time 
Flux N2O 
[kg/h] 
Peak time 
Flux N2O 
[kg/h] 
Peak time 
Flux N2O 
[kg/h] 
11:31 
87.3 
12:06 
90.0 
12:48 
68.2* 
11:33 
98.5 
12:08 
85.7 
12:51 
66.1* 
11:35 
98.0 
12:09 
129.7 
13:09 
95.9* 
11:36 
74.6 
12:12 
193.0 
13:11 
68.9* 
11:38 
111.6 
12:14 
196.7 
13:15 
51.0* 
11:40 
142.7 
12:16 
163.1 
13:16 
47.0* 
11:41 
180.2 
12:18 
217.9 
13:18 
64.2* 
11:43 
194.6 
12:19 
157.6 
13:19 
63.5* 
11:44 
106.2 
12:21 
185.1 
13:20 
68.3* 
11:46 
93.0 
12:27 
101.0* 
13:22 
75.3* 
11:47 
107.3 
12:28 
84.2* 
13:23 
76.4* 
11:51 
177.5 
12:30 
86.8* 
13:24 
70.1* 
11:53 
182.1 
12:32 
53.4* 
13:57 
120.0 
11:54 
274.8 
12:35 
129.4* 
14:03 
125.0 
11:56 
192.5 
12:37 
96.4* 
14:05 
202.1 
12:00 
135.0 
12:39 
155.1* 
14:06 
74.0 
12:03 
99.7 
12:40 
141.7* 
14:09 
77.3 
12:05 
109.7 
12:46 
90.6* 
- 
- 
 
TABLE 12. Summary of the obtained flux values by the TDM. 
All measurements 
Average flux [kg/h] 
117.7 
Highest [kg/h] 
274.8 
Lowest [kg/h] 
47.0 
Std.dev. 
51.4 
# transects 
53 
Measurements during DFM 
Average flux [kg/h] 
83.5 
Highest [kg/h] 
274.8 
Lowest [kg/h] 
155.1 
Std.dev. 
48.8 
# transects 
14 
==PAGE:85==
81 
 
5.4.3 Summary of the second campaign  
 
FIGURE 41 summarizes the campaign day and visualizes the three methods (DFM, 
TDM and the option 1 from the emission model) used for the evaluation of the total 
emissions.  
 
 
 
 
           
 
FIGURE 41. Summary of the three methods to obtain total emission of the second campaign  
 
As in the first campaign, DTU grouped five measurements into one in the second 
campaign (displayed in FIGURE 41). The TDM method obtained a flux average of 
117.7 kg/h for the entire campaign and a N2O flux average of 83.5 kg/h when 
conducting measurements simultaneously with the DFM method. The DFM 
concluded a N2O flux average of 95.3 kg/h. This corresponds to a N2O flux difference 
of 12% between the two methods.  
High fluctuations occurred in the second campaign – just like in the first campaign. 
Differences in N2O fluxes of over 70 kg/h within approximately 20 minutes were 
detected by the TDM method between 12:20 and 12:40. Given the high fluctuations, 
the simultaneously observed N2O fluxes of two remote sensor methods are close 
together and do not show the same discrepancy as in the first campaign. The high 
==PAGE:86==
82 
 
fluctuations also underline the importance of performing several measurements 
during a campaign to get enough observations to conclude a daily N2O emission 
average. 
The emission model behaved similar in both campaigns. The total N2O emission 
average of 34.95 kg/h in the second campaign is not even half as much as the average 
obtained by the DFM. It must be noted that, due to its inactivity, the reactor 1 was 
excluded from the calculations. Had the inactive reactor 1 been included, the total N2O 
emission calculated by the emission model would be lowered due to the small 
contribution of reactor 1. The total N2O emission rate would only be 24.1 kg/h. Based 
on the results, it would be worthwhile to revise and analyse the emission model in 
more detail.  
 
 
5.4.4 Emission factors in the second campaign  
 
Avedøre WWTP does not analyse the incoming total nitrogen content on a daily basis. 
Unfortunately, on the 26th of April, no measurement was taken. The next analysis was 
conducted on the 28th of April and resulted in a total nitrogen content of 64.9 mg/L, 
upstream of the BNR.  
 
With a daily influent average of 2982 m3/h to all four reactors combined, the following 
emission factors (TABLE 13) were calculated. 
 
TABLE 13. Summary of calculated EF based on the average daily flux of each method 
Second campaign 
DFM 
TDM 
Option 1 
Average N2O Flux [kg/h] 
95.27 
117.65 
34.95 
EF % [kg N2O-N /kg T-N inflow] 
31.34 
38.70 
11.50 
Highest 
32.83 
90.41 
19.55 
Minimum 
28.03 
15.47 
5.22 
Std. dev. 
2.26 
15.83 
3.15 
# measurments 
3 
53 
157 
 
 
The DFM method concluded an EF of 31.34% and the TDM method an EF of 38.70%. 
These emission factors are very high, and no comparable emission factor was found 
in literature.  
==PAGE:87==
83 
 
 
The TDM method highest observed N2O emission rate corresponds to an emission 
factor of 90.4%, meaning that 90.4% of all the nitrogen entering the BNR stage left as 
N2O emissions through the air. As this is an extremely high ratio, it reasonable to 
average 5 individual measurements  (as shown in the summary subchapters 5.3.3 and 
5.4.3) to conclude a more supported emission rate. 
 
WWTPs with emission factors of 38.70% have a high impact on the environment. 
Converted to CO2e, the Avedøre WWTP releases 32.1 tonnes of CO2 every hour – 
originating from N2O alone. To put it into perspective, a Danish citizen emits an 
average of 8.2 tonnes CO2e in a year (EPRS, 2021). If the Avedøre WWTP runs 24 hours 
with the observed emission rates, this corresponds to a yearly environmental footprint 
of 94 Danish citizens. BIOFOS assured that such high N2O emission events occur only 
once every ten years. Yet, Explicit could still measure total N2O emissions of up to 76 
kg/h on the 17th of May. The ecological impact of such high N2O emissions is 
unquestionable. But high N2O emission rates could also have a high economic impact.  
In April 2022, the Danish government proposed a new CO2 taxation which states that 
companies outside the EU quota system would be taxed with DKK 750 per tonne of 
emitted CO2 (Skatteministeriet, 2022). If the Avedøre WWTP were to fall under this 
taxation system and N2O emissions were attributed, the Avedøre WWTP N2O 
emissions would correspond to CO2 taxes of DKK 17.92 million per month if the 
emission factors remain this high. The CO2 taxes of the second campaign would be 
nearly 20 times higher as when the emission factor of 2.28% from the first campaign 
would be kept, which would result in CO2 taxes of 0.91 million DKK per month.  
 
 
5.5 Controlled release test 
 
The controlled release test was carried out on the 21st of April, at the planned location 
with the planned set up, as visualized in FIGURE 21. An average wind speed of 4.7 
m/s and sunny weather conditions were present.  
 
The DFM method conducted six measurements visualized in FIGURE 42 and 
concluded an average N2O emission rate of 1.47 kg/h with a standard deviation of 
0.23 kg/h. All the results obtained by using the DFM method can be found in detail 
in the appendix A.5 DFM detailed flight information. 
 
According to DTU, the N2O release rate was below detection limit for the TDM 
method. Thus, the TDM method was not able to perform an N2O flux analysis. The 
==PAGE:88==
84 
 
detection limit of the TDM method is dependent on the present weather conditions. 
During the controlled release test, high solar radiation prevailed causing the N2O 
plume to rise, which affected the detection limit of the TDM method.   
 
 
FIGURE 42. Controlled release of N2O with corresponding DFM flux walls 
In the first minutes of the N2O release, a slightly higher release setting was used 
compared to the release setting used when the measurements were taken. According 
to DTU, this problem was compensated for in the calculations of the release rate. 
The N2O release rate, determined by the release time and the weight of the gas bottle, 
was 1.32 kg/h. A subsequent analysis of the release rate in the DTU laboratory using 
a flow meter confirmed the flow rate established on-site. The difference between the 
on-site established N2O release rate and the laboratory established N2O release rate 
(1.35kg/h) is 2%, which is within the uncertainty of the flow meter reading (5%). The 
error on the release rate established on-site is based on the precision (0.5g) of the scale 
to weight the gas bottle before and after the release. Calculated through error 
propagation the final error on the release rate is 0.02%. It has to be noted that the stated 
precision of the scale only applies for a levelled scale.   
 
TABLE 14. Controlled release test result summary. 
Controlled release test  
DFM average N2O [kg/h] 
1.47 
Std. dev. 
0.23 
# of measurements 
6 
N2O release rate [kg/h] 
1.32 
% error  
0.02 
% error DFM 
+11.99 
==PAGE:89==
85 
 
The controlled release test showed that the DFM method can detect N2O emissions 
with a corresponding error of +11.99 %, as shown in TABLE 14. The error has been 
defined as the difference between measured N2O emission and controlled N2O release 
rate, divided by the controlled N2O release rate (Fredenslund, et al., 2019). The DFM 
method measurement error established through this study is consistent with 
previously reported errors established through a similar test set-up (single source 
error: +4%, double source error: -16%) (Knudsen & Rossi, 2022). 
 
5.6 DFM method analysis based on Gaussian plume model 
 
The process of the DFM method analysed in this chapter is the N2O flux calculation of 
the lowest trace (referred as Trace0) and indicated in FIGURE 43. When evaluating 
where exactly the N2O concentrations are detected in a flown wall, high 
concentrations (50%+ of the total flux) are often measured in Trace0. The measurement 
of the first flight of the first campaign at Avedøre shown in FIGURE 43, presents such 
a case. 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 43. The first flight of the first campaign, detection of high concentrations in Trace0. 
==PAGE:90==
86 
 
The N2O concentration measured in Trace0 is of high importance. As the area between 
terrain and Trace0 is not measured, the DFM method uses the measured 
concentrations from Trace0 and projects them onto the unmeasured area all the way 
down to the terrain, as described in the methodology subchapter 4.2.3. The DFM 
method therefore assumes the same concentration for an unmeasured area. Since this 
might lead to an over- or under-estimation of the N2O flux, this chapter analyses the 
vertical plume distribution of the above-mentioned first flight using a Gaussian plume 
model. The Gaussian plume model was provided by Explicit; its protocol can be found 
in the Appendix A.3 Protocol Gaussian Plume Model.  
 
Simulating the plume of the first flight of the first campaign  
 
To analyse the calculated N2O flux in Trace0 of the first flight, a simulation of the then-
present emissions needs to be made. The first step in this simulation is to introduce a 
pattern of possible emission sources represented as point sources.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 44. Visualization of the simulated source pattern (aeration area) 
 
FIGURE 44 shows the source pattern consisting of 40 N2O point sources. Each reactor 
basin is represented with five point sources. All five point sources have been placed 
in the coordinate system where the bottom aeration system is located (blue zone in 
==PAGE:91==
87 
 
FIGURE 7). No point sources were distributed on the far left or far right of a basin 
where no aeration happens, as no emissions are expected from this area. 
 
With the potential N2O point sources in place, the second step in the simulation is to 
reproduce as similar conditions (wind speed/direction, weather conditions, etc.) to 
those present when conducting the measurement. For this simulation, the following 
parameter inputs were chosen: wind direction 275 °, wind speed 3.2 m/s, and vertical 
wind speed (responsible for plume rise) 0.25 m/s. These parameter values were 
measured during the first flight and are therefore used as model input values.  
 
As it was cloudy during flight 1, turbulence class C was chosen as an input class 
(Pashkevich et al., 2017). The next important value that needs to be inserted to simulate 
the conditions during flight 1 is the amount N2O emitted from the source. For this 
simulation a N2O flux value of 2.8 kg/h was chosen. To create the same emission 
patter as measured during flight 1, the majority of the total flux was chosen to be 
emitted by the point sources placed in reactor 3 and 4.   
 
A further input parameter is the emission release height. In this simulation, the height 
of three meters was chosen as this is approximately the hight difference between 
terrain and the elevated water surface in the BNR stage.  
 
 
Error calculation  
 
With all the input values for Gaussian plume model now in place, the simulated N2O 
emission and the measured N2O emissions of the first flight can be compared. The 
bottom graph in FIGURE 45 shows the simulated N2O emission plume projected to 
the flown wall of the first flight. The top graph in FIGURE 45 shows the measured 
N2O concentration during the first flight. It should be noted that the colour scale, 
indicating the N2O concentrations in the two graphs of FIGURE 45, are not identical, 
this makes the simulated concentrations appear higher as they are.  
 
 
==PAGE:92==
88 
 
 
FIGURE 45. Measured and simulated emissions. 
 
Another way of visualising the simulated and measured N2O concentrations is shown 
in FIGURE 46. Here, the N2O concentrations of the entire flight path, from starting 
point A to the end point B is shown. The orange line corresponds to the N2O 
concentration measured during the campaign, while the grey area represents the N2O 
concentration simulated by the Gaussian plume model.  
 
It should be noted that the measurement of the first flight is a snapshot of the plume's 
behaviour. Since the Gaussian plume model is a statistical simulation of thousands of 
such snapshots, the grey area shown is more uniform and distributed as the orange 
line. However, for this analysis it is important that the highest N2O concentrations are 
found in the lowest traces 0, 1 and 2 – which is the case.  
 
 
FIGURE 46. Simulated (grey) and measured (orange) N2O concentrations 
 
==PAGE:93==
89 
 
With now a simulation mimicking the measured N2O emissions of the first flight in 
place, the concentration profile from the terrain to the altitude where the flight ended, 
can be analyzed.  
 
To evaluate the vertical profile of the plume, a vertical segment straight through the 
simulated plume is taken, as visualized by the purple line in FIGURE 47.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 47. Choice of segment taken for the vertical profile 
 
The terrain point A was selected at -1 meter due to the unevenness of the terrain 
present in the measurements, as can be seen in FIGURE 43. The chosen vertical 
segment, showing the vertical N2O concentration from point A to B is finally 
visualized in FIGURE 48. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 48. Vertical N2O concentration profile of the simulated first flight.  
 
With regards to the uneven terrain, the DFM method takes the measurement at an 
altitude of 4 meters, which results in a simulated value of 0.1367 ppm. The DFM 
method uses the concentration at four-meter altitude for the flux calculations of the 
entire area from 5 meters to 0 meter. 
Trace0 
==PAGE:94==
90 
 
 
Looking at the vertical concentration profile to the simulation, the concentration at 0 
meter is lower than at 4 meters, namely 0.0887 ppm, meaning that the calculated N2O 
flux in Trace0 of the first flight is overestimated. For simplicity reasons, it is assumed 
that the concentration profile between the terrain and 5 m altitude is linear. In FIGURE 
48 a rough linearity can be observed between the 0m and 5m. With this assumption, 
the correct concentration that should have been used for the N2O flux concentration 
is the average N2O concentration of 5 meters and 0 meter, namely 0.1163 ppm. The 
average  TABLE 15 summarizes the above-mentioned values and lists the 
corresponding error.  
 
TABLE 15. Summary error in Trace0. 
Error Trace0 
X [m] 
Y [ppm] 
0 
0.0887 
4 
0.1367 
5 
0.1438 
Average 
0.1163 
Absulute error 
0.0205 
% error 
15 
 
 
The method analysis based on a Gaussian plume model concludes an error of 
approximately 15% for the lowest trace. The analyzed first flight from the first 
campaign calculated a N2O flux of 1.5 kg/h in the lowest trace. With the error found 
in this analysis, the lowest trace has an absolute N2O flux error of 0.22 kg/h. In terms 
of the total N2O flux (2.7 kg/h) of the first flight, the error of Trace0 corresponds to 
8.1% of the total N2O flux of the measurement.  
 
It should be noted that in this chapter only a specific event has been analyzed. The 
results of the error contribution of 8.1% on the total N2O flux by the flux calculation 
of the lowest trace is not applicable to all other measurements. This method analysis 
has shown that there is an error potential for measurements where the majority of the 
emission is detected in the lowest trace.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK  
 
In this final section, the findings of this study will be concluded, and the thesis 
objectives addressed. Furthermore, suggestions for optimisation as well as for future 
research will be proposed.  
 
The main objective of this study – a comparison of the three different methods (DFM 
method, TDM method, and the emission model) used for the quantification of total 
N2O emissions of a WWTP – was achieved. This study showed through on-site 
measurement campaigns that the two remote sensor methods (DFM and TDM) are 
suitable quantification methods for N2O emissions from WWTPs. The magnitude of 
the determined daily N2O flux values is comparable with each other. In the second 
campaign, simultaneously conducted measurements with the DFM and the TDM 
method showed rather impressive comparable results with an N2O flux difference of 
only 12%. This is especially notable if the strong fluctuations of N2O emissions from 
the source are taken into account. 
  
In quite a contrast to the obtained results with the two remote sensor methods, the 
emission model repeatedly underestimated the total N2O emissions with a magnitude 
of over 50%. This study presented two ways for the extrapolation of the N2O emissions 
calculated by the emission model to whole plant emissions, but no extrapolation 
provided comparable results to the two remote sensor methods.  
 
This thesis has shown that the output of the emission model does not entirely correlate 
with the measured N2O concentration in the liquid phase. The equations used to 
calculate N2O emissions do not allow a calculation of N2O emissions without a 
presence concentration of N2O in the liquid phase. The results presented in this thesis 
show, that the emission model indeed calculates an N2O emission rate, without any 
N2O present in the liquid phase. Furthermore, the emission model shows a strong 
dependency to its parameter input total airflow. This is a major drawback as the total 
airflow at research site is not directly measured but calculated through a pressure 
==PAGE:96==
92 
 
difference. Not measuring one of the most sensitive model parameters holds great 
potential for uncertainty and could be one of the main reasons for the emission model 
underreporting N2O emissions.  
 
The conducted controlled release test on the DFM and the TDM method showed that 
the DFM method can detect N2O fluxes released from several sources, with a precision 
of 11.99%. The TDM method, on the other hand, reached its detection limit with the 
controlled N2O release rate of 1.35 kg/h and could not conclude any N2O fluxes. 
 
Another objective of this study was to examine the novel DFM method in closer detail.  
The method analysis comprised a comparison between a simulated plume, based on 
the Gaussian plume model and a measurement taken in one of the measurement 
campaigns. The exact process analysed within the DFM method deals with the 
calculation of the N2O flux, more specifically the N2O flux calculation of the first trace 
of a conducted N2O flux wall. This process has been selected due to its possible 
uncertainty potential based on the applied assumptions in the flux calculation.  
The DFM method analysis conducted in this study an N2O flux calculation error of 
14.96% in the lowest trace of the DFM method; this corresponds to a total N2O flux 
error contribution of 8.1% for the measurement.    
 
In the theory section, the current knowledge regarding N2O in WWTPs was presented 
and microbiological pathways responsible for the N2O production identified. 
Through the analysis of the processes present in the measurement campaigns, the 
major N2O producing phases were identified and proved consistent with the findings 
in previous research; Nitrification stages are the most prominent N2O producing and 
N2O emitting phases, whereas denitrification stages function as N2O sinks.  
Particularly strong accumulations of N2O were observed during nitrification periods 
without interposed denitrification periods at high NH4+ loads.   
 
On a more general level, this study has also shown how challenging it is to establish 
a representative N2O emission factor for WWTPs. The emission factors presented in 
this study are snapshots and do not represent the N2O emission situation during the 
entire year. High N2O fluctuations occurring within a day, present process stages,  as 
well as unusual occurrences caused by maintenance work are just few factors that 
need to be considered when wanting to determine emission factors. In any case, 
emission factors of 31.3% (DFM) and 38.7% (TDM) determined in the second 
measurement campaign are to date the highest reported N2O emission factors from a 
WWTP. 
 
==PAGE:97==
93 
 
This thesis took the first step in closer evaluating the novel DFM method. As said, only 
one process in certain conditions has been evaluated and its error contribution 
determined. To establish a complete DFM method error budget, each process that 
could potentially contribute to the error budget would need to be identified and 
analysed. The following processes could be of relevance: 
 
▪ plume coverage of a flown wall 
▪ data treatment, e.g. selection of wind data 
▪ the impact of atmospheric turbulences, and 
▪ background determination. 
 
The TDM method is a well-established method. However, in the set-up used in this 
project, the method reached its detection limit. A repetition of the controlled release 
test on the TDM method is required to fully interpret the obtained results. If the TDM 
method is to be used for year-round monitoring of N2O emissions from WWTPs, it 
would be advisable to consider updating the set-up currently in use. With a more 
sensitive N2O analyser, the signal-to-noise ratio could be improved, which could be 
advantageous for measurements in the N2O "off-season".    
 
It would certainly be advantageous if both remote sensors could be retested in the 
DTU laboratory with suitable calibration concentrations. 
 
This study has shown that the currently used N2O sensors at the Avedøre WWTP 
provide valuable information on N2O and give important insights into the water 
phase. Nevertheless, to receive even more valuable information, especially regarding 
the the behaviour of the emission model, it would be beneficial to adjust the sensors’ 
resolution as well as their maximum output.  
 
As said, the N2O emission rates calculated with the emission model revealed 
inconsistencies with the relevant formulas and showed a strong dependency on a 
parameter whose value cannot be fully assessed with the necessary degree of 
certainty. Since the results of this study were based on only two measurement 
campaigns, it would be essential to conduct further measurement campaigns. More 
simultaneous observations on the total emissions of N2O can contribute to a clearer 
overall picture which could serve as a basis for adjusting the emissions model if 
necessary. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
94 
 
REFERENCES 
Adouani, N., Lendormi, L. L., & Sire, O. (2015). N2O and NO emissions during 
wastewater denitrification step: influence of temperature on the biological 
process. Comptes Rendus Chimi, 18, 15-22. 
Alinsafi, A., Adouani, N., Beline, F., Lendormi, T., Limousy, L., & Sire, O. (2008). 
Nitrite effect on nitrous oxide emission from denitrifying activated. Process 
Biochemistry 43, 683–689. 
Anemoment. (2022, march 18). Anemoment TriSonica Mini. Retrieved from 
https://anemoment.com/features/ 
Astrup, T. F. (2021, October 5). Incineration III: Solid residues . Lygnby, Denmark. 
Baeten, J. E., Loosdrecht, M. C., & Volcke, E. I. (2020). When and why do gradients of 
the gas phase composition and pressure affect liquid-gas transfer? Water 
research, 178. 
Batista, J., Becker, J. R., Unz, R., & Johnson, W. (2004). Phosphorus release in the 
secondary clariﬁer of a full-biological phosphorus removal system. WEFTEC 
200578th Annual Technical Exposition and Conference of theWater Environment 
Federation, (pp. 2 - 6 October). New Orleans. 
BIOFOS. (2021). Miljøberetning 2020. Copenhagen: Biofos Group . 
Caranto, J. D., & Lancaster, K. M. (2017). Nitric oxide is an obligate bacterial 
nitrification intermediate produced by hydroxylamine oxidoreductase. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 8217-8222. 
Caranto, J. D., Vilbert, A. C., & Lancaster, a. K. (2016). Nitrosomonas europaea 
cytochrome P460 is a direct link between nitrification and nitrous oxide 
emission. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 14704-14709. 
Chandran, K. V. (2016). Experimental Methods in Wastewater Treatment. London: IWA 
Publishing. 
Chen, X., Mielczarek, A. T., Habicht, K., Andersen, M. H., Thornberg, D., & Sin, G. 
(2019). Assessment of Full-Scale N2O Emission Characteristics and Testing of 
Control Concepts in an Activated Sludge Wastewater Treatment Plant with 
Alternating Aerobic and Anoxic Phases. Environmental Science & Technology 
53, 12485 - 12494. 
Czepiel, P., Crill, P., & Harriss, R. (1995). Nitrous oxide emissions from municipal. 
Environmental Science and Technology 29, 2352-2356. 
Daelman, M. R., Voorthuizen, E. M., Dongen, L. G., Volcke, E. I., & Loosdrecht, M. C. 
(2013). Methane and nitrous oxide emissions from municipal wastewater 
treatment – results from a long-term study. Water Science Technology. 67, 2350-
2355. 
Daelman, M. R., Voorthuizen, E. M., Dongen, U. G., Volcke, E. I., & Loosdrecht, M. 
C. (2015). Seasonal and diurnal variability of N2O emissions from a full-scale. 
Science of Total Environment, 536, 1-11. 
Danish EPA. (2020). MUDP Lattergaspulje Dataopsamling på måling og reduktion af 
lattergasemissioner fra renseanlæg. Copenhagen: Miljøstyrelsen. 
Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities . (2020). Climate Programme 2020. 
Copenhagen : Danish Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities . 
==PAGE:99==
95 
 
Delre, A., Mønster, J., & Scheutz, C. (2017). Greenhouse gas emission quantification 
from wastewater treatment plants, using a tracer gas dispersion method. 
Science of the Total Environment, 605–606, 258–268. 
Delre, A. (2018). Greenhouse gas emissions from wastewater treatment plants: 
measurements and carbon footprint assessment. Lyngby: Technical University of 
Denmark: Department of Environmental Enginneering. 
DJI. (2022, March 18). DJI Matrice 3000. Retrieved from 
https://www.dji.com/dk/matrice-300/specs 
Domingo-Félez, C., & Smets, B. F. (2019). Regulation of key N2O production 
mechanisms during biological water treatment. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology 57, 119-126. 
EPRS. (2021). Climate action in Denmark. Brussels: European Union. 
Faragò, M., Damgaard, A., Madsen, J. A., Andersen, J. K., Thornberg, D., Andersen, 
M. H., & Rygaard, M. (2021). From wastewater treatment to water resource 
recovery: Environmental and economic impacts of full-scale implementation. 
Water research, 204, 117554. 
Flowers, J., Cadkin, T., & McMahon, K. D. (2013). Seasonal bacterial community 
dynamics in a full-scale enhanced biological phosphorus removal plant. Water 
research, 47, 7019-7031. 
Foley, J., Haas, D. d., Yuan, Z., & Lant, P. (2010). Nitrous oxide generation in full-
scale biological nutrient removal wastewater treatment plants. Water Research, 
44, 831-844. 
Fredenslund, A., Rees-White, T., Beaven, R., Delre, A., Finlayson, A., Helmore, J., . . . 
Scheutz, C. (2019). Validation and error assessment of the mobile tracer gas 
dispersion method for measurement of fugitive emissions from area sources. 
Waste Management, 83, 68-78. 
Giraldo. (2009). Nitrous oxide emissions from wastewatertreatment plants. A 
balancing act. Proceedings of Nutrient Removal 2009 Conference, (pp. 28 June - 1 
July). Washington, DC. 
Gruber, W., Villez, K., Kipf, M., Wunderlin, P., Siegrist, H., Vogt, L., & Joss, A. 
(2020). N2O emission in full-scale wastewater treatment: Proposing a refined 
monitoring strategy. Science of the Total Environment 699. 
Gruber, W., Känel, L. v., Vogt, L., Luck, M., Biolley, L., Feller, K., . . . Joss, A. (2021a). 
Estimation of countrywide N2O emissions from wastewater treatment in 
Switzerland using long-term monitoring data. Water Research X, 13, 2589-9147. 
Gruber, W., Magyar, P., Mitrovic, I., Zeyer, K., Vogel, M., Känel, L. v., & Biolley, L. 
(2021b). Long-term N2O emission monitoring in biological wastewater treatment: 
methods, applications and relevance: Chapter 7. Zuerich: Technische Hochschule 
Zuerich. 
Gruber, W., Niederdorfer, R., Ringwald, J., Morgenroth, E., Bürgmann, H., & Joss, A. 
(2021c). Linking seasonal N2O emissions and nitrification failures to microbial 
dynamics in a SBR wastewater treatment plant. Water Research X, 11, 100098. 
Gruber, W., Magyar, P. M., Mitrovic, I., Zeyer, K., Vogel, M., Känel, L. v., . . . Mohn, 
J. (2022). Tracing N2O formation in full-scale wastewater treatment with 
natural abundance isotopes indicates control by organic substrate and process 
settings,. Water research X, 15. 
==PAGE:100==
96 
 
 
Hanaki, K. H. (1992). Production of Nitrous oxide gas during denitrification of 
wastewater. Water Science & Technology 26, 1027-1036. 
Hink, L., Lycus, P., Gubry-Rangin, C., Frostegård, Å., Nicol, G. W., Prosser, J. I., & 
Bakken, L. R. (2017). Kinetics of NH3-oxidation, NO-turnover, N2O-
production and electron flow during oxygen depletion in model bacterial and 
archaeal ammonia oxidisers. Environmental Microbiology 19, 4882-4896. 
Hulle, S. V., Vandeweyer, H., Meesschaert, B., & Vanrolleghem, P. (2010). 
Engineering aspects and practical application of autotrophic nitrogen removal 
from nitrogen rich streams. Chemical Engineering Journal, 162, 1-20. 
IPCC. (2006). Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Japan: 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
IPCC. (2019). Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories. Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
IPCC. (2021). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Sixth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Jones, C., & Spor A, B. F. (2014). Recently identified microbial guild mediates soil 
N2O sink capacity. Nature Climate Change, 801-805. 
Kampschreur, M., Temmink, B., Kleerebezem, R., Jetten, M., & Loosdrecht, M. 
(2009). Nitrous oxide emission during wastewater treatment. Water research, 
43, 4093-4103. 
Kits, K., Jung, M., & Vierheilig, J. (2019). Low yield and abiotic origin of N2O formed 
by the complete nitrifier Nitrospira inopinata. Nature Communication, 1836. 
Knudsen, J., & Rossi, L. D. (2022). The Plane Project Mapping and quantification of GHGs 
form diffuse emission sources using drone technology and vertical measuring walls. 
Copenhagen: Danish Environmental Protection Agency. 
Kosonen, H., Heinonen, M., Mikola, A., Haimi, H., Mulas, M., Corona, F., & Vahala, 
R. (2016). Nitrous Oxide Production at a Fully Covered Wastewater 
Treatment Plant: Results of a Long-Term Online Monitoring Campaign. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 5547-5554. 
Lamb., B. K. (1995). Development of Atmospheric Tracer Methods To Measure 
Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Facilities and Urban Areas. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 29, 1468-1479. 
Lisa Y. Stein, M. G. (2021). Comment on“A Critical Review on Nitrous Oxide 
Production by Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea” by Lan Wu, Xueming Chen, 
Wei Wei, Yiwen Liu, Dongbo Wang, and Bing-Jie Ni. Environmental Science & 
Technology 55, 797-798. 
Liu, G., Wu, X., Li, D., Jiang, L., Huang, J., & Zhuang, L. (2021). Long-Term Low 
Dissolved Oxygen Operation Decreases N2O Emissions in the Activated 
Sludge Process. Environmental Science & Technology, 6975-6983. 
Liu, Y., Ngo, H. H., Guo, W., Peng, L., Wang, D., & Ni, B. (2019). The roles of free 
ammonia (FA) in biological wastewater treatment processes. Environmental 
Internationals, 10-19. 
Ma, C., Jensen, M., Smets, B. F., & Thamdrup, B. (2017). Pathways and Controls of 
N2O Production in Nitritation–Anammox Biomass. Environmental Science & 
Technology 51, 8981-8991. 
==PAGE:101==
97 
 
Marias, F., Benzaoui, A., Vaxelaire, J., Gelix, F., & Nicol, F. (2015). Fate of Nitrogen 
during Fluidized Incineration of Sewage Sludge. Estimation of NO and N2O 
Content in the Exhaust Gas. Energy & Fuel, 29, 4534-4548. 
Metcalf, & Eddy. (2003). Wastewater Engineering Treament and Reuse 4th Edition. 
McGraw Hill Companies. 
Mikola, A., Rautiainen, J., & Vahala, R. (2009). Secondary clariﬁerconditions 
conducting to secondary phosphorus release in a BNR plant. Water Science 
Technology, 60, 2413-2418. 
Ministry of Climate. (2020). Climate Programm 2020. Copenhagen: Danish Ministry of 
Climate, Energy and Utilities. 
Mønster, J., Samuelsson, J., Kjeldsen, P., & C Rella, C. S. (2014). Quantifying methane 
emission from fugitive sources by combining tracer release and downwind 
measurements – A sensitivity analysis based on multiple field surveys. Waste 
Management, 34, 1416-1428. 
Nielsen, Lyck, Mikkelsen, & Hoffmann. (2009). Denmark’s National Inventory Report 
2009. Emission Inventories 1990-2007 - Submitted under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Aarhus: National Environmental 
Research Institute, Aarhus University. 
Nielsen, Plejdrup, Winther, Nielsen, Gyldenkærne, & Mikkelsen. (2014). Denmark's 
National Inventory Report 2014. Emission Inventories 1990-2012 - Submitted under 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto 
Protocol. Aarhus: Aarhus University, DCE – Danish Centre for Environment 
and Energy. 
Nielsen, Plejdrup, Winther, Nielsen, Gyldenkærne, & Mikkelsen. (2019). Denmark's 
National Inventory Report 2019: Emission Inventories 1990-2017 - Submitted under 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto 
Protocol. Aarhus: Aarhus Universitz. DCE - Danish Centre of Environment 
and Energy. 
Nielsen, Plejdrup, Winthe, Nielsen, Gyldenkærne, & Mikkelsen. (2021). Denmark's 
National Inventory Report 2021. Emission Inventories 1990-2019 - Submitted under 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto 
Protocol. Aarhus: Aarhus University, DCE – Danish Centre for Environment 
and Energy. 
Pashkevich, A., Beliakova, M., Ivanov, A., & Purju, A. (2017). Development of 
Interactive Monitoring System for Urban Environmental Impact Assessment 
of Transport System. Procedia Engineering, 178, 42-52. 
Pauleta, S., Dell’Acqua, S., & Moura, I. (2013). Nitrous oxide reductase. Coordination 
Chemistry Reviews 257, 332-349. 
Qingxian, S., Domingo-Félez, C., Zhang, Z., Blum, J.-M., Jensen, M. M., & Smets, B. F. 
(2019). The effect of pH on N2O production in intermittently-fed nitrification 
reactors. Water research 156, 223-231. 
Reino, C., Loosdrecht, M. V., Carrera, J., & Perez, J. (2017). Effect of temperature on 
N2O emissions from a highly enriched nitrifying granular sludge performing 
partial nitritation of a low-strength wastewater. Chemosphere, 185, 336-343. 
Sabba, F., Terada, A., & Wells, G. (2018). Nitrous oxide emissions from biofilm 
processes for wastewater treatment. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 102, 9815–9829. 
==PAGE:102==
98 
 
Scheutz, C., Samuelsson, J., Fredenslund, M., & Kjeldsen, P. (2011). Quantification of 
multiple methane emission sources at landfills using a double tracer 
technique. Waste Management, 31, 1009-1017. 
Siegrist, H., Krebs, P., Bühler, R., Putschert, I., Röck, C., & Rufer, R. (1995). 
Denitriﬁcation in secondary clariﬁers. Water Science Technology, 31, 205-214. 
Skatteministeriet. (2022, 04 20). The government is putting the turbo on green transition 
with ambitious green tax reform. Retrieved from 
https://www.skm.dk/aktuelt/presse-
nyheder/pressemeddelelser/regeringen-saetter-turbo-paa-groen-omstilling-
med-ambitioes-groen-skattereform/ 
Smets, B. F. (2022, March 16). Lecture_7_GHG_2022_final_p36. Lyngby, Denmark. 
Soler-Jofra, A., Stevens, B., Hoekstran, M., Picioreanu, C., Sorokin, D., & Loosdrecht, 
J. P. (2017). Importance of abiotic hydroxylamine conversion on nitrous oxide 
emissions during nitritation of reject water. Chemical Engineering Journal, 720-
726. 
Spinelle, L., Aleixandre, M., & Gerboles, M. (2013). Protocol of evaluation and 
calibration of low-cost gas sensors for the monitoring of air pollution. Luxenbourg: 
Office of the European Union. 
Spott, O., Russow, R., & Stange, C. F. (2011). Formation of hybrid N2O and hybrid 
N2 due to codenitrification: First review of a barely considered process of 
microbially mediated N-nitrosation. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 1995-2011. 
Stieglmeier, M., Mooshammer, M., & Kitzler, B. (2014). Aerobic nitrous oxide 
production through N-nitrosating hybrid formation in ammonia-oxidizing 
archaea. ISME J 8, 1135–1146. 
Su, Q., Domingo-Félez, C., Jensen, M. M., & Smets, B. F. (2019). Abiotic Nitrous 
Oxide (N2O) Production Is Strongly pH Dependent, but Contributes Little to 
Overall N2O Emissions in Biological Nitrogen Removal Systems. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 3508-3516. 
Sänger, M., Werther, J., & Ogada, T. (2001). NOx and N2O emission characteristics 
from fluidised bed combustion of semi-dried municipal sewage sludge. Fuel, 
80, 167-177. 
Tallec, G., Garnier, J., Billen, G., & Gousailles, M. (2006). Nitrous oxide emissions 
from secondary activated sludge in nitrifying conditions of urban wastewater 
treatment plants: effect of oxygenation level. Water research 40, 2972–2980. 
Terada, A. S. (2017). Hybrid Nitrous Oxide Production from a Partial Nitrifying 
Bioreactor: Hydroxylamine Interactions with Nitrite. Environmental science & 
technology, 51(5), 2748-2756. 
Thomsen, M., Ottosen, T., & Drejer, L. (2015). Analyse af potentialer for 
ressourceudnyttelse i vand- og spilde vandsforsyningen. Copenhagen: 
Miljøstyrelsen. 
Todt, D., & Dörsch, P. (2016). Mechanism leading to N2O production in wastewater 
treating biofilm systems. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 15, 355-378. 
Tumendelger, A. A. (2019). Methane and nitrous ocide emissions from different 
treatment units of municipal wastewater treatment plants in Southwest 
Germany. PLos ONE, 14. 
==PAGE:103==
99 
 
Unisense. (2020). N2O Wastewater System User Manual. Aarhus: Unisense Enviroment 
A/S. 
United Nations. (2021). Glasgow Climate Pact. Glasgow: United Nations Climate 
Change conference in Glasgow. 
United Nations. (n.d.). COP26: Together for our planet. Retrieved May 29, 2022, from 
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/cop26 
Vasilaki, V., Massara, T., Stanchev, P., & F. Fatone, E. K. (2019). A decade of nitrous 
oxide (N2O) monitoring in full-scale wastewater treatment processes: A 
critical review,. Water research, 392-412. 
Wicht, H., & Beier, M. (1995). N2O‐Emissionen aus nitrifizierenden und 
denitrifizierenden Kläranlagen (N2O emissions from nitrifying and 
denitrifying wastewater treatment plants). Korrespondenz Abwasser 41, 404-406. 
WMO. (2021). WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin. Geneva: World Meteorological 
Organization. 
Wong, C. H., Barton, G. W., & Barford, J. P. (2003). The nitrogen cycle and its 
application in wastewater treatment. In N. H. Duncan Mara, Handbook of 
Water and Wastewater Microbiology (pp. 427-439). Academic Press. 
Wrage-Mönnig, N., Horn, M. A., Well, R., Müller, C., Velthof, G., & Oenema, O. 
(2001). Role of nitrifier denitrification in the production of nitrous oxide. Soil 
Biology and Biochemistry, 1723-1732. 
Wu, L., Chen, X., Wei, W., Liu, Y., Wang, D., & Ni, B.-J. (2020). A Critical Review on 
Nitrous Oxide Production by Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea. Environmental 
Science & Technology 54, 9175-9190. 
Wunderlin, J., Mohn, A., Joss, L., Emmenegger, L., & Siegrist, H. (2012). Mechanisms 
of N2O production in biological wastewater treatment under nitrifying and 
denitrifying conditions. Water research, 1027-1037. 
Wunderlin, P., Lehmann, M., Siegrist, H., Tuzson, B., Joss, A., & Emmenegger, L. 
(2013). Isotope Signatures of N2O in a Mixed Microbial Population System: 
Constraints on N2O Producing Pathways in Wastewater Treatment. 
Environmental Science & Technology 47, 1139-1348. 
Yin, Z., Bi, X., & Xu, C. (2018). Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea (AOA) Play with 
Ammonia-Oxidizing Bacteria (AOB) in Nitrogen Removal from Wastewater". 
Archaea, 9. 
Yoshida, H., Mønster, J., & Scheutz, C. (2014). Plant-integrated measurement of 
greenhouse gas emissions from a municipal wastewater treatment plant. 
Water research, 61, 108-118. 
Zhu-Barker, X., Cavazos, A., & Ostrom, N. (2015). The importance of abiotic 
reactions for nitrous oxide production. Biogeochemistry 126, 251–267. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
100 
 
Appendix 
A.1 Sensor MIRA Strato by Aeris   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
101 
 
A.2 Protocol first laboratory sensor test   
 
==PAGE:106==
102 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
103 
 
==PAGE:108==
104 
 
==PAGE:109==
105 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
106 
 
A.3 Protocol Gaussian Plume Model  
 
Der er tale om et simuleringsprogram, der udregner forventede gasconcentrationer (’prognose’) i 
givne punkter (en tænkt eller faktisk flyveflade, et tænkt/planlagt liniestykke i rummet) hidrørende fra 
stationære kilder af kendte positioner og styrke. Endvidere kan prognosen sammenholdes med 
resultaterne af en faktisk flyvning med bane nogenlunde cross-wind, dvs med en ’mur’-flyvning som 
foretrukket model. 
I programmets start vælges en række styre-informationer og nøgleparametre:: 
- 
Fil med liste over placering og styrke af diskrete (punkt) kilder.  
 
- 
Fil med datastrømmen txt/csv fra faktisk flyvning. Filen indlæses, hvis der ønskes 
sammenligning mellem prognosen og de målte concentrationer ved en faktisk flyvning. Hvis 
ingen sådan fil, foretages ingen sammnligning med målte data. 
 
- 
Fixpunkt: geografiske og kartesiske koordinater for et fixpunkt (helst i nærheden af 
flyvningen eller kilden). Herved sammenknyttes de to koordinattyper: geografiske 
koordinater med et (nær) UTM system med koordinatakser (E (øst), N (nord)).  
 
- 
Fastlæggele af kildefeltets placering og udstrækning. Fixpunktets kartesiske koordinater skal 
vælges, så at kildefeltets center ligger i (0,0) 
 
- 
Ud over de diskrete kilder kan en yderligere kildestyrke fordels jævnt over hele kildefeltet 
(der bidrager som en  jævn fordeling af mange punktkilder) 
 
- 
Evt tilføjelse af flere diskrete kilder, der kan indtastes i selve programmets styredel. 
 
- 
Middelvind: størrelse og retning. Anvendes til at bestemme Gauss-plumens styrke og til 
diverse projektioner, herunder fastlæggelse af down-wind og cross-wind retninger.  
 
- 
The Model assumes horizontal wind. If the wind has a vertical component, z has to be 
adjusted accordingly. 
 
- 
Baggrund: fast værdi  
 
- 
Datavindue: hvis der indlæses datastrøm med måling fra flyvning fastsættes min/max for 
koordinaterne t,z. Herved identificeres traceerne fra flyvningen. 
 
- 
Valg af turbulensmodel 
 
- 
I stedet for faktiske flyvedata kan der indlægges en lineær tænkt flyvekurve ved fastlæggelse 
af koordinaterne for start- og slut-punkt  
 
 
Prognosen beregnes ud fra Gaussian-plume model, hvor (middel)concentrationen i et givet obspunkt P 
hidrørende fra stationære (punkt) kilder Q,  udregnes ved (summering over alle kilder Q): 
==PAGE:111==
107 
 
 
      C(P) =  ∑(𝑄/2πUσ tσz) ∙ [ exp{-½(t /σt)2}] ∙[ exp{-½((z-h) /σz)2} +  exp{-½((z+h) /σz)2} ] 
 
t er cross-wind distance i P ifht kilden Q (cross-wind projektion af QP) 
z er højde over terræn af obspunkt P 
h er højde over terræn af kilden Q. 
 
σt  er transversal dispersions koefficient,  
σz  er vertikal dispersionskoefficient 
 
U er middelvindhastighed 
Dispersionskoefficienterne σt  og σz  er funktioner af down-wind afstand fra kilden Q til 
observationspunktet P (down-wind projektion af QP). I programmet arbejdes med to modeller: σt  og 
σz  fastlægges ud fra turbulensmodeller A-F eller med frit valgt åbningsvinkler θt og θz  af plumen. 
Kildefeltets lay-out med kildernes polacering og styrke præsenteres sammen med enten den faktiske 
flyvning eller med den tænkte flyvekurve PstartPslut. 
Hvis datastrømmen fra en faktisk flyvning (’mur’) er indlæst, så sammenlignes beregnet og målt 
concentration for hver trace samt for den samlede flyvning. Contourplot af concentrationen i en 
vertikal cross-wind plan ( (t,z)-plan) for flyvningen sammenlignes med det tilsvarende contour-plot 
for prognosen. 
Hvis i stedet en tænkt kurve PstartPslut er indlagt, præsenteres den forventede koncentration langs 
denne. Bemærk, at den tænkte kurve kan vælges vandret, lodret eller kombineret (’skråt’), og kan 
derved benyttes ifbm planlægning af en flyvning, såfremt man har en rimelig forventning til antal, 
placering og styrke af kilderne. 
 
==PAGE:112==
108 
 
A.4 Results first laboratory test 
 
==PAGE:113==
109 
 
==PAGE:114==
110 
 
==PAGE:115==
111 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
112 
 
A.5 DFM detailed flight information 
 
Flight 2, first campaign  
 
 
==PAGE:117==
113 
 
 
 
Flight 4, first campaign  
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
114 
 
 
 
 
Flight 5, first campaign  
 
 
==PAGE:119==
115 
 
 
 
 
 
Flight 6, first campaign  
 
==PAGE:120==
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flight 7, first campaign  
==PAGE:121==
117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
118 
 
Flight 8, campaign 1 – invalid measurement due to missed plume 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
119 
 
 
Flight 9, first campaign 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
120 
 
 
 
Flight 10, first campaign  
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
121 
 
 
 
Flight 1, second campaign  
 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
122 
 
 
 
 
Flight 3, second campaign  
 
 
==PAGE:127==
123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flight 1, controlled release test  
 
==PAGE:128==
124 
 
 
 
Flight 2, controlled release test  
 
==PAGE:129==
125 
 
==PAGE:130==
126 
 
 
 
Flight 3, controlled release test  
 
==PAGE:131==
127 
 
Flight 4, controlled release test  
 
==PAGE:132==
128 
 
 
Flight 5, controlled release test 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
129 
 
 
Flight 6, controlled release test  
 
==PAGE:134==
130 
 
 
