==PAGE:1==
Automated testing pyramid for microservices
in practice
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Sofia Bogdanova
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute, at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, DTU and at School of Science, at Aalto University, in partial fulfilment
for the Joint Master’s Programme in Security and Cloud Computing (SECCLO).
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
software development.
Sofia Bogdanova - s213181
Signature
Date
ii
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
24.06.2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Microservices are an architectural pattern that aims to improve software scalability and
autonomy through leveraging low coupling and high cohesion of the system components.
This approach is currently gaining attention from both industry and academia, and one
of the most discussed aspects is the automated testing of the microservices. Previous
works reveal that traditional approaches, such as automated testing pyramid model, are
not always suitable for the microservice solutions and need to be adjusted. However,
there is still no consensus on what testing strategies companies should adopt. Moreover,
there is little understanding of how well the proposed solutions fit the distributed nature of
the microservices and the industry requirements.
This study investigates the compliance of the industry testing practices in the microservice
architecture with the theoretical model of the automated functional testing. The thesis
approaches the problem with an exploratory case study that comprises a quantitative
research of the testing practicalities in the real microservice application. Furthermore, it
uses incident report system to study the correlation between the system quality and the
test structure used in the service. Additionally, it investigates the influence of the team
practicalities on the adherence to the testing theoretical guidelines.
The results of the research present automated testing trends identified in a real microservice-
based application, as well as the correlation between those and the quality of the system
in terms of user experience. Finally, the outcomes provide some insights into the impact
of the team on the adherence to the theoretical model.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Nicola Dragoni and Professor Mario Di
Francesco, for guiding me throughout the thesis and providing valueable and constructive
feedback. Also, I would like to express my gratitude to the SECCLO coordinators for being
supportive and encouraging throughout the Master’s program.
June, 2022
Espoo
Sofia Bogdanova
iv
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
UI
User Interface
API
Application Programming Interface
TDD
Test Driven Development
MVP
Minimal Value Product
SUT
System Under Test
CI
Continuous Integration
CD
Continuous Delivery
MVP
Minimum Viable Product
POC
Proof of Concept
gRPC
Google Remote Procedure Call
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
SPA
Single Page Application
MPA
Multi Page Application
TDD
Test Driven Development
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
SOA
Service Oriented Architecture
SRP
Single Responsibility Principle
ORM
Object–relational mapping
MSA
Microservices Architecture
CRUD
Create, Read, Update, and Delete
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Approval
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Abbreviations and Acronyms
v
Contents
vi
List of tables
viii
List of figures
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Problem and Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Microservices architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Microfrontends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4
Testing in microservices architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Literature review
26
3.1
Automated testing pyramid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Testing of the microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Testing of the microfrontends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Research materials and methodology
32
4.1
Defining the research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Design phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Data collection phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4
Data analysis phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.5
Reporting phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.6
Research methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Design
36
5.1
Case project overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Data selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Evaluation
40
6.1
Microservices data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.2
Microfrontends data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
vi
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:9==
6.3
Incident monitoring system data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Discussion
46
7.1
Research questions revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7.2
Comparison between results and literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7.3
Study limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
52
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
6.1
Median and average values for different test types used in microservices
. 40
6.2
Median and average values for different test types used in microfrontends . 42
viii
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Comparison of the monolith and the microservice-based applications . . . .
5
2.2
Internal structure of the microservice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Architecture layout of an SPA frontend on top of a microservice backend . . 12
2.4
Architecture layout of a microfrontends, where colors represent micro ap-
plications, each owned by a dedicated team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.5
Defect fix cost along with phases of software development life cycle
. . . . 14
2.6
Testing quadrants by Brian Marick
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.7
White, Grey, and Black Box Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.8
Mike Cohn’s automated testing pyramid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.9
Automated testing pyramid for microservices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.1
Automated test type distribution for microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Automated test type distribution for microservices aggregated by team . . . 42
6.3
Automated test type distribution for microfrontends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.4
Incidents values for the major trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
ix
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
This chapter presents a short introduction to the current thesis. Section 1.1 provides an
overview to the topic of microservices and reflects on the challenges of the automated
testing of the microservices. Section 1.2 defines the research problem and the research
questions that guide the thesis. The scope of the research is discussed in Section 1.3.
Finally, Section 1.4 concludes with the outline of the study.
1.1
Background and Motivation
A Microservice Architecture (MSA) has recently become one of the leading software de-
sign patterns for large scale systems. It is a decentralized strategy that implies that an ap-
plication consists of small, independent, and loosely-coupled parts called microservices.
Each microservice is built around some business capability and has a well-defined busi-
ness goal and boundaries. Key benefits of MSA are easy scalability, shorter development
cycles, flexibility, and modularity [1]. These features benefit business and engineering
needs, because they allow developers to separate product concerns and responsibilities
among the teams, as well as provide faster evolving of the application both in terms of
functionality and scalability.
Some companies escalated these concepts to the frontend layer as well, giving rise to
new, even more granular architectural approach called microfrontends. According to the
microfrontends, User Interface (UI) of web application consists of independent, loosely-
coupled and separately deployed modules that can be maintained by different teams.
Similarly to microservices, microfrontends provide many benefits, such as faster develop-
ment and deployment, maintainability, freedom to adopt different technologies, and easy
scaling up to more teams. Microfrontend architectural style has just started gaining popu-
larity among the developers. InfoQ reported microfrontends to be amongst the top newly
developing software architecture trends to follow in their 2020 yearly report. Hence, the
topic has a large research potential, and there are a lot of gaps to cover with regards to
both technical and business concepts of the microfrontends.
Teams that build microservice-based applications often follow Agile iterative approach,
which implies that new features are shipped to production in fast, continuous, and in-
cremental manner. One of the key tasks of the software development cycle that helps
to mitigate the risk of potential regression along the development process is automated
testing. Modern software development is a complex and sophisticated process where all
activities need to be strictly synchronized in order to deliver a high quality product that
meets the desired requirements. The quality assurance is not a single phase but rather
an ongoing procedure comprising constant verification and validation that spans through
the development life cycle. Hence, it is essential that testing activities fit the specific daily
development practices and meet cost and timing requirements. Building such process
requires deep analysis of the system architecture.
A model describing the most efficient distribution ratio of automated tests was introduced
by Mike Cohn [2] and is called The test automation pyramid. Initially, it was proposed for
the systems that follow a traditional monolithic architecture, and the model received wide
coverage in academic and practical literature over the years. Eventually, it became one
of the most fundamental automated testing practices. However, with the evolution of the
architecture approaches, more and more proposals to adjust the model to changing archi-
tectural strategy started to appear. Naturally, microservice architecture also contributed to
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
1
==PAGE:13==
the trend, as testing of MSA solutions differ from testing of the traditional monoliths due to
various factors, such as multiple autonomous teams, small cohesive services, continuous
integration and delivery processes, the variety of different tools used across the teams,
and etc.
1.2
Research Problem and Research Question
The area of the test automation in MSA currently lacks academic studies due to its nov-
elty. Even more limited research is performed on the topic of the microfrontends, since
this architectural style is especially new and only beginning to gain popularity among soft-
ware architects. Analysis of the related literature revealed that traditional approaches,
such as automated testing pyramid model, are not always suitable for the MSA appli-
cations and require modifications. Additionally, there is no industry or academic report
that would analyze whether the model is relevant and widely used in real-life software
microservice-based projects. As a result, there is little understanding to what extent real
companies follow the proposed guidelines. Furthermore, research on the previous work
showed that the topic lacks papers that would evaluate the impact of the team on testing
practicalities and strategies, although some claim that such influence may take place. Fi-
nally, this thesis aims to provide hypotheses for the future research that would establish
some research-backed guidelines on the microservice automated testing via analysing
the reports of the incident tracking system and comparing them with the testing strategies
used within each microservice.
The main research problem of this thesis is: Do industry microservice software projects
follow the theoretical automated testing model?
The following research questions aim to guide the thesis:
• RQ1: Do industry microservice-based projects follow the theoretical model of auto-
mated testing?
• RQ2: How strong is team’s influence on testing practicalities in polyglot microservice
architecture?
• RQ3: What is the correlation between the system quality and how precise the ex-
isting test guidelines are followed?
1.3
Thesis Scope
The scope of the study is restricted to an industry microservice-based business-to-business
solution that belongs to a dynamic market where development process is fast and mostly
driven by continuous changes in consumer behaviour. Such rapid pace of the market
requires engineering team to work in an agile manner to combine development and main-
tenance activities to fulfil business needs and provide smooth user experience. With re-
gards to testing, this thesis only focuses on automated functional testing that ensures an
appropriate functionality of the product. Nonfunctional testing types (e.g. security testing,
stress testing, etc.) are not included in the scope of current thesis.
1.4
Thesis Outline
The thesis has the following structure. Chapter 2 introduces the theory and the back-
ground on the topics of microservices and automated testing. Chapter 3 provides litera-
ture review on the existing research regarding the adoption of automated testing theoret-
ical models in microservice-based solutions. It presents previous related research done
in the area of this study and identifies debates, gaps, and weaknesses that need to be
2
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:14==
addressed. Moreover, it defines the contribution of this study. Chapter 4 elaborates on
the research methodologies used in the thesis. Chapter 5 describes the design of the re-
search and provides a case project overview. It includes architectural and organisational
structure of the product, as well as its business requirements. Results and evaluation of
the outcomes are presented in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 revisits the research questions and
reflects on the literature review and the outcomes of the study. It also discusses study
limitation and grounds for the future work. Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the thesis with
the main findings and results of the study.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
3
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
2.1
Microservices architecture
Microservices architectural style allows to build an application comprised from small,
modular, and loosely tightened services. This approach has been inspired by service-
oriented architecture (SOA) [3], but modern implementations take service-oriented com-
puting ideas to the new limits by aiming at solutions being easily scaled and services being
effortlessly interchangeable [4]. The services communicate through lightweight and well-
defined mechanisms, and each microserver runs independently in its own process [3].
Hence, it becomes possible for teams with different skills (e.g. programming languages)
to work on different services within one application and contribute to a common business
goal together.
2.1.1
Differences between microservice and monolithic architecture
This section will elaborate on major differences between the microservice and the mono-
lithic architecture styles that are vital to understand prior to proceeding to different ap-
proaches to software testing. Before the microservice approach became popular, a mono-
lithic architecture was a default choice when building applications [5]. According to the
monolithic architecture, an application should be built from shared tightly coupled re-
sources as a large single unit.
The monolithic approach provides some significant advantages. To begin with, this way
of building software applications has been a ”golden” standard in the industry for many
years. Thus, any developing team has all the required competence to start building a
monolith solution, since no additional knowledge is required. Furthermore, testing mono-
lithic applications is relatively simple. For instance, end-to-end tests can be executed by
simply launching the solution locally, without any need to deploy all the dependent ser-
vices on a separate test environment. Same applies to debugging; the whole application
can be wired up locally, and all the code is located in one repository. Moreover, deploy-
ment process of the monolith is rather straightforward, as only one deployment unit has
to be maintained. Another advantage is the simplicity of the application expansion and
evolution: new features can be quickly implemented, as all the data is located in one
storage, and all the necessary interfaces are already implemented in a common shared
code base [6]. Finally, various cross-cutting mechanisms, such as caching, logging, secu-
rity and performance monitoring, and handling of environmental variables are only used
once in the monoliths. Hence, changing these functionalities is not as complex as it is
in microservice architecture, where they may be spread all over different services and
codebases.
Generally, in the earliest stages of an application, or during the development of MVP
(Minimum Viable Product) or POC (Proof Of Concept), monolithic architecture is usually
the best option. It allows the engineering team to quickly implement the system and bring
it to the real world with minimal effort. At this stage, technical requirements and business
needs are not clear yet, and it is hard to design an appropriate distributed architecture.
Usually, developers start with the monolith, and try to bring as many customers to the
system as possible. Then, they let the customers decide the product requirements and
the direction the system should be heading to. When the business needs are clearly
defined, and there is an understanding of the technical demands of the application, the
engineers can start migrating the system to the microservices. The earlier this transition
4
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Comparison of the monolith and the microservice-based applications [7]
happens - the better, as problems arise very soon after the application becomes popular
and high load.
2.1.2
Disadvantages of Monoliths
The microservice architecture was designed to address the limitations of the monoliths,
so it is vital to list them in order to better understand the microservices and their major
principles. As the application grows, it becomes more and more entangled. This leads
to many issues with maintaining and scalability, because the advantages of the monolith
solution quickly become its drawbacks with the system evolution. A typical monolithic
software solution usually consists of a server-side application, a database, and a client-
side UI, which together belong to one large repository. Figure 2.1 contrasts a monolithic
and a microservice architecture layout. As seen in the picture, the microservice-based
application has multiple loosely coupled units with multiple storages, some of which might
be shared between different microservices, and a UI. The monolithic solution, on the other
hand, consists of a large common database and tightly coupled services. As a result,
when making any changes, even small or minor, the developer has to build, test, and
then deploy the whole system. These factors highlight the disadvantages of the monolithic
architecture:
• Performance issues. Scaling on demand is costly as it requires significant changes
in the code structure and the architecture. This makes performance issues in mono-
liths hard to cope with. Although it is possible to scale the system horizontally by
using a load balancer and multiple replicated copies of the system, this approach
has its limitations and disadvantages (e.g. the whole system has to be replicated,
even though there is only one high-load endpoint or module). Additionally, a contin-
uously growing single shared database becomes a performance concern over time.
Until some point, it is possible to handle it with query optimization and replication,
however the limits of such optimization mechanisms can be hit rather fast;
• Feature delivery becomes cumbersome. Continuous Integration (CI) and Con-
tinuous Delivery (CD) processes become longer, because a massive codebase re-
quires more time to be built, tested and deployed;
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
5
==PAGE:17==
• Hard to manage. As the monolith evolves, it becomes difficult to maintain. For in-
stance, tracking and fixing bugs requires long and thorough inspection of the code-
base, as well as deep knowledge of business logic;
• Package inconsistency. Monoliths often suffer from a problem called dependency
hell [3], when updating or installing packages cause inconsistency in the system.
As a result, applications misbehave or do not compile, and resolving such issues
can take a lot of time and effort;
• Tools limitations. With monoliths, developers are bounded with the programming
language and frameworks.
Changing those would mean rewriting the solution,
which is not always possible within the budget and the time frame.
Hence, there is a need for a new architectural style that would overcome these issues. The
microservices architecture aims to cope with the drawbacks of the monolithic approach.
2.1.3
Key concepts
Before elaborating on how microservices cope with the disadvantages of the monoliths, it
is vital to highlight the underlying ideology behind the microservice as a unit concept and
the overall architecture in general. The definition of a microservice proposed by Dragoni
et al [3] comprises terms minimal and independent. They indicate the main requirements
that the service should meet.
To begin with, it should only address the functionalities that cover its fundamental concerns
and responsibilities. At the same time, it should be a completely autonomous process.
For instance, a service designed to model a Gaussian normal distribution is minimal if it
does not perform any other functionalities, such as plotting. Plotting, on the other hand,
should be a responsibility of another microservice, or multiple microservices - for each
plot type. This way, a service intended to model a Gaussian normal distribution is inde-
pendent of the services responsible for the representation. Multiple representations could
be easily added if there is a need for it, while the service computing the distribution re-
mains unaware of any of the changes. From this, a further definition of the microservice
architecture can be derived: it is a distributed system with all its subsystems and modules
being microservices.
So, the main characteristics featuring microservices that highlight core ideas behind their
implementation are the terms minimal and independent. Each microservice is autonomous,
self-contained, deployed in isolation, and, typically, has its own data storage. Microser-
vice approach benefits both business and engineers; each service has a bounded context
that represents a division between business entities, as well as sets explicit boundaries for
domain models [8]. The communication between the modules is performed via messages
or APIs, and the contracts should be well-defined and strictly followed by each service in
order to maintain stable functioning of the whole system. Possible communication mech-
anisms are reviewed in more details in Section 2.1.8.
2.1.4
Key benefits
Benefits of the microservices are tightly linked with the mentioned disadvantages of the
monoliths:
• Easy scalability. Scaling becomes more efficient and simple, as each service can
be scaled independently, based on its needs. Each service persists only necessary
data in its own database, which mitigates the risk of performance issues related to
long and complex queries;
6
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:18==
• Fast functionality delivery. Deployment process of each microservice is fast and
simple, and all the services can be deployed independently.
As a result, code
changes do not require a reboot of the whole solution, and new features are easily
tested and shipped to production. This way, CI/CD processes and maintenance of
the whole system are narrowed down to managing and orchestrating small units;
• Small and self-contained codebases. A repository of each microservice is usually
relatively small, and the functionality implemented by each service is limited and
bounded. It limits the amount of bugs and makes it easier to track and locate the
faults. Independence of each unit allows to test microservices in isolation, which
helps to examine the behaviour of each module with respect to the whole system.
• Elimination of dependency inconsistency. The so-called dependency hell prob-
lem is resolved with the possibility of gradual transitions to newer versions [3]. The
idea is that both newer and older versions of the service can be deployed and run si-
multaneously, next to each other. As a result, those parts of the system that depend
on the upgraded service are gradually modified and ensure smooth CI/CD process.
• Team independence in the choice of tools. Microservice architecture neither fa-
vors nor forbids any programming language, patterns, or paradigms. Engineering
teams can choose freely between different frameworks and tools based on their
needs and preferences. The only limitations that are strictly enforced are the con-
tracts according to which services are intercommunicating.
2.1.5
Possible disadvantages
Similarly to the monolithic approach, the advantages of the microservice architecture
quickly become its drawbacks when the architectural style is not suited for the project
needs:
• Added complexity. Splitting a single system into multiple independent submodules
adds complexity into the application structure, and brings all the issues and limita-
tions associated with the distributed systems. For instance, it is essential to handle
possible network failures and network security vulnerabilities, as well as to keep in
mind the rest of the fallacies of Distributed Computing [9];
• Distribution of data storage units. Another aspect that complicates the develop-
ment of the distributed systems is a database partition. Most transactions update
multiple business entities throughout various services, and developers need to keep
in mind possible failures and rollbacks, as well as to maintain data synchronization
between the modules;
• System testing is cumbersome. Although unit testing is easier with the microser-
vices, end-to-end testing is challenging, because it requires deploying all services to
a dedicated test environment. In order to avoid that, developers configure stubs for
each module. Such approach does not fully match the definition of end-to-end test-
ing, however it allows the developers to test the services and their integrations quite
thoroughly, especially if the contracts are respected by all participants. Microservice
testing practicalities are review in Section 2.4.1;
• Teams communication is crucial. Features that cover multiple services are more
laborious to implement as changes need to be thoughtfully planned. One feature
may require multiple planning sessions and synchronization between responsible
teams;
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
7
==PAGE:19==
• Intricate configuration. A microservice-based solution comprises a large num-
ber of services that have multiple runtime instances [10]. Each instance has to be
scrupulously configured to provide smooth and fast deployment and make scaling
and monitoring efficient in the future. This requires high level of abstraction and au-
tomation, and such investment into the infrastructure is only justified when there is
high confidence that the microservice architecture really suits the business needs.
Thus, microservices are not the default solution to every application, and all possible draw-
backs have to be analyzed individually before making a decision to go with this distributed
architecture approach.
2.1.6
Adoption of Microservices
Microservice architecture is a relatively new approach. Hence, many companies that have
their products initially built as monoliths only recently started to migrate to the microser-
vices. According to Fowler, the developers should not start building a new project with the
microservices, even if they are absolutely sure that the application will grow into a large
high-load system [11]. Newman agrees with this strategy by saying that it is rather simpler
to split an already existing application than to do the same with a new, raw system [12].
However, there is no consensus on this aspect. For instance, Tilkov states that the initial
stage of the project is the right time to think about architecture and possible partition of
the application [13]. He believes that it is not only extremely difficult to carve an existing
monolith into pieces, but even impossible in some cases. Although there are controversial
opinions regarding when to adopt the microservices, there are still some signs that clearly
indicate that the microservice-based approach would be beneficial for the project:
• Business requirement to avoid downtime when deploying a new feature. Mi-
croservice architecture is well suited for the use-cases where zero downtime is
needed for business purposes. For instance, SaaS products need to ensure that all
their services are up and running constantly;
• A requirement to isolate particular data. Many products, including healthcare or-
ganizations and financial institutions located in EU, must be compliant with GDPR
standards and protect health data and personal identifiable information of their clien-
tele. Microservices allows to separate and isolate some specific data, which makes
implementing The right to be forgotten [14] possible;
• Striving for team autonomy. As the project evolves, it is vital to encourage teams
to take more responsibility and be independent of each other. Microservice architec-
ture helps to distribute ownership between different teams, and spans the autonomy
throughout the company.
However, with all the signs pointing to the need to migrate a monolith system to the mi-
croservices, it is still important to approach the problem thoughtfully. Many problems may
arise during the migration process, and automated testing of the new distributed system is
one of them. Along with splitting the monolith into multiple services, tests need to be thor-
oughly rewritten in order to retain the same test coverage. It is often the case that during
the migration, a number of tests either gets lost or rewritten in a way that some function-
ality remains uncovered. This happens most often with integration and end-to-end tests,
as these cover the parts that get split during the migration. Writing efficient integration
tests is crucial for developing microservices systems. According to a survey conducted
by Waseem et al [15], 66% of the participants reported that the most important skill that is
required to test microservices is an ability to write efficient integration tests. Furthermore,
it is vital to keep in mind that testing integration between different components inside a
8
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: Internal structure of the microservice [16]
monolith differs a lot from testing the same components when they are split into separate
services. Some teams prefer to limit their service-to-service testing activities to contract
tests, while others choose to automate all possible scenarios via UI and end-to-end tests.
Regardless of the chosen testing strategy, it is vital to ensure that during the adoption of
the microservices, integration between modules is thoroughly tested. Moreover, teams
sometimes face difficulties with integration testing between their services because of dif-
ferent technology stacks. For instance, the same survey by Waseem et al [15] showed
that 15.0% of respondents claimed polyglot technologies to pose a challenge for teams
during testing activities. Systems that are initially developed as loosely coupled mod-
ules set their testing strategies and requirements right at the beginning and avoid such
problems.
2.1.7
Microservice structure
The microservice architecture leverages a Single Responsibility Principle (SRP), which
results in high number of services with similar internal layout that communicate between
each other using different mechanisms and protocols. Hence, a testing strategy for the
distributed systems should aim to guarantee the verification of each component (a mi-
croservice) and the integration paths between them. At the same time, it should also be
relatively lightweight and fast. Microservices imply continuous deployment of the changes,
meaning that each test will be running multiple times throughout the day on both local and
testing environments.
To develop proper testing techniques and notations for the distributed architecture, we
first need to define the structure of a single component of such system - a microservice.
Figure 2.2 represents the layout of a single microservice. Usually, it can be split into a
number of modules, each of which plays a certain role.
A module named Resources mediates between the application protocol that is exposed
by the microservice and messages to the domain objects. This module, or layer, is rela-
tively thin; it provides a so-called sanity check of the requests and returns the response
according to the transaction outcome.
A Domain Model is a conceptual model of the domain. Basically, it is the model of the ob-
jects needed to fulfill the business purpose of the project. The Domain Model incorporates
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
9
==PAGE:21==
rules and logic that describe the relations between the objects and their behaviour.
The coordination between multiple domain activities is done via Services; they define a
set of available operations, encapsulating the business logic.
A Repository layer acts like a mediator between the domain objects and the data mappers.
It isolates the communication with the database and provides its consumers with an easy
to use interface. Such approach allows to achieve a more object-oriented perspective by
utilizing an in-memory collection of the domain objects, which clients use to add, update,
and remove objects from the storage.
A Gateway encapsulates communications with external components and handles possi-
ble issues, like outages of these systems or network issues. The interaction happens via
external service’s API. APIs tend to be complicated, as they follow the shape and nature
of its service resources and domain. To overcome that, Gateways use HTTP clients to
convey the routine of understanding the messaging protocol and handling all the requests
and responses to them.
A Data Mapper creates a linking mechanism between the relational database and objects
of the domain. Some features of the objects, e.g. inheritance, are not implemented di-
rectly in the relational databases. Hence, there is a need for a tool that would transfer
complex business logic rules into relations. Apart from converting object schema into re-
lational schema, Data Mapper also isolates these layers from each other. As a result,
in-memory objects possess no knowledge of the storage or SQL queries, and database
does not know anything about the objects that are built up from its schema.
Finally, Figure 2.2 represents a single microservice layout with an external database and
an external service (usually, there are more than one) that the microservice communicates
with. It is vital to keep in mind that although the database falls into the same logical
boundaries as the service itself, they communicate over the network. Remote systems,
on the other hand, are located outside of the logical and the network boundaries. Hence,
each of the aforementioned internal and external interactions needs to be covered by the
automated tests. For instance, they should provide essential coverage for all the possible
faulty scenarios, such as network issues or inaccessibility of the external component.
Moreover, network partition imposes additional restrictions, such as longer test execution
time. This also affects testing techniques, because automated tests should provide fast
and detailed feedback every time they are run. Another issue is related to the presence of
many small systems managed by different teams. As already mentioned, in microservice
systems, a single request usually travels through multiple services and contexts. Usually,
tests that validate external services are less granular than those testing the parts of the
microservice. That is due to the fact that teams cannot really control something that
falls outside of their responsibilities. To mitigate the risks, developers have to think very
thoroughly of all the possible error cases and document their ideas with the appropriate
tests. Different scopes of testing are described in Section 2.4.1 and Section 2.3.3 further
in the thesis.
2.1.8
Microservices Communications
In monolith systems, communication is inter-process, meaning that the whole system is
running within a single process and functions simply invoke each other via method calls.
The whole system uses shared resources and database, as well as business entities and
context. As a result, all the components are tightly coupled with each other. Thus, any
changes, like introducing new features or scaling, become difficult. With microservices,
each module utilizes its own data model and stores only the information it needs to be a
10
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:22==
cohesive and independent process [3]. Each service operates within a bounded context,
and uses only a certain limited subset of the data model [17]. For instance, a service might
ignore a set of attributes that are out of scope of its business logic. Hence, developers
are able to use lightweight communication mechanisms, which is a significant benefit of
the microservice architecture, as it takes the load off the network.
The main purpose of the service-to-service communication is to maintain a consistent
data state across the whole system. Developers need to synchronize information con-
sisted in different databases in order to provide smooth and troubleproof functioning of
the application.
To elaborate on existing communication protocols, it is better to classify them in two
ways. First category specifies whether communication protocols is synchronous or asyn-
chronous:
• Synchronous communication. The client sends a request and then waits for a re-
sponse. The code on the client’s side will continue its execution only after receiving
the response. For example, HTTP/HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure)
and gRPC (Google Remote Procedure Call) are synchronous protocols that are
widely used in the microservice-based solutions;
• Asynchronous communication. In this case, the client does not wait for a re-
sponse after sending a request. As a result, client’s thread is not blocked and it con-
tinues its execution right after the request is sent. An example of an asynchronous
protocol is AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing Protocol). With AMQP, the client
sends the message using some message broker system (e.g. RabbitMQ [18]).
Another axis to look at communication protocols is the amount of receivers:
• Single receiver. Each request is processed by precisely one receiver. An example
of such communication is one-to-one queue implementation with single producer
and one receiver, or a command pattern [19];
• Multiple receivers. In this case, a request can be consumed by many receivers.
Naturally, such communication must be asynchronous. For instance, event-driven
architecture that utilizes publish/subscribe pattern is the most common example of
such communication.
In large enterprise systems, a combination of different communication protocols is used.
The most common use case is microservices using asynchronous messaging protocols,
while regular Web API HTTP services are invoked via HTTP/HTTPS protocols [20].
2.2
Microfrontends
In general, there are two main approaches to building the frontend of the web applications.
The traditional approach, called Multi Page Application (MPA), implies that a developer
implements a lightweight frontend application that fully relies on the server. According to
this approach, a new page is generated and sent from the server every time the data is
changed or submitted. All the logic is performed on the server, which poses some signif-
icant drawbacks. For instance, rendering the pages and sending them to the client takes
quite a lot of time, naturally affecting loading time and causing poor user experience. Ad-
ditionally, development process becomes rather tedious, as frontend and backend parts
are tightly coupled, and the same backend code cannot be used, for example, for mobile
development.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
11
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Architecture layout of an SPA frontend on top of a microservice backend [21]
Another approach, a Single Page Application (SPA), implies that the logic is performed
in a web browser, and the frontend only fetches the necessary data from the server. In
contrast to MPA, SPA does not require page reloading when a part of a web page needs to
be rerendered. It works faster then the Multi Page Application, as the communication with
the server is significantly more rare. Moreover, SPA allows caching in local storage and
ability to work offline, which naturally improves performance and user experience. Finally,
development process is more friendly for the Single Page Applications, as it allows code
reusability and easy debugging with browsers debugging tools.
The most common scenario nowadays for the development teams is to have SPA as a
frontend on top of the microservice backend, as represented on the Figure 2.3.
The concept of microfrontends is to extend the definition of the microservices to include
the frontend as well [21]. The idea affects both architectural and organizational struc-
ture: according to the microfrontends architecture, the presentation layer is also divided
into small independent units, similar to the microservices, and each microfrontend is only
aware of those backend microservices that it needs to communicate with. As a result, an
application is divided into multiple small full-stack micro applications [21].
Each micro system is an independent unit that has its own CI/CD pipeline that performs
tests and deploys the application. Similar to the microservices, each microfrontend imple-
ments a specific business feature. Additionally, microfrontends are developed by different
teams, who can freely choose between implementation techniques and patterns for their
application. However, all together they compose a fully functioning single web application.
Traditionally, there have always been two teams: one responsible for the frontend and
one for the backend. It is quite natural, as backend and frontend tended to have large
codebases and separate requirements. Moreover, they were implemented using different
technology stacks. Such type of team organisation is called horizontal. Microfrontends,
however, tend to change this pattern. They form vertical teams, where full stack develop-
ers work on a single micro application (see Figure 2.4). Each team is responsible for an
application from both technical and business sides, as each micro application represents
a single business feature within some bounded context. All microfrontends are hosted
via the main application called a host or a container. Some companies prefer to delegate
the maintenance of the host application to a separate team, while others spread this re-
sponsibility across all teams. Latter implies that in case some changes are required to be
made to the main application, the team that needs these changes is responsible for the
implementation and testing. As a result, the host application is well-known for all the de-
velopers in the company. Such organisational decision usually depends on the company
and the product size.
12
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.4: Architecture layout of a microfrontends, where colors represent micro appli-
cations, each owned by a dedicated team [21]
Naturally, advantages and disadvantages of the microfrontends are very similar to those
of the microservices. Benefits of the microfrontends include deployment independence,
good learning curve for new developers, and small codebases that are easy to work with
from both technical and business perspective. As with the microservices, microfrontend
architecture allows engineers to independently choose between preferred technologies
within the teams. However, such architecture requires preliminary work on setting up mul-
tiple CI/CD pipelines, splitting up business context, and necessary knowledge of working
with the distributed systems. Hence, it is vital for managers and architectures to assess
the need for the microfrontends to either benefit from such architecture or avoid unnec-
essary complexity of the system.
2.3
Testing
Previous sections defined the microservice architecture and explained the development
environment for the microservices and their possible extension to the frontend side called
microfrontends. This section focuses on testing methodologies, their advantages and
disadvantages, as well as the impact that testing practicalities have on the business.
2.3.1
Importance of testing in software development
Software testing is a vital process of evaluating the functionality of an application to verify
that it meets business requirements and to ensure that the product is defect-free. Testing
usually comprises both manual and automated execution of the system features in order
to detect any differences between the developed product and the required conditions.
Testing allows to detect and anticipate faults at early stages of the development process
when the cost of fixing them is still relatively low. The majority of defects originate at the
requirement stage, when business starts to form its goals and requirements. It is also the
requirement stage when resolving an ambiguity is cheap and almost effortless, as all it
requires is a better redefinition of the existing business demands. Figure 2.5 represents an
exponential growth of defect fix cost along different stages of the development life cycle.
Here, cost comprises all business resources, such as money, effort, and time. As seen
on the graph, the earlier the bug is detected, the easier it is to fix it. As the development
process moves to the coding phase, it is still rather trivial to fix even complex issues.
However, as time passes and the development moves further, the cost of identifying and
fixing the bugs increases exponentially. Additionally, while obvious misbehaviour is easy
to catch during automated or manual testing, it is hard to uncover more implicit although
fundamental problems, such as race conditions, performance issues, and memory leaks.
When the development reaches production and post-release phases, the price of an error
will not only consist of the hours spent on its fix, but also of the possible damage made
to customers. This is especially true for banking sector, where transactions can be worth
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
13
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: Defect fix cost along with phases of software development life cycle [23]
millions of dollars. For instance, a major U.S. bank experienced a comprehensive fault in
May of 1996, when 823 bank accounts were charged with 920 millions of US dollars [22].
Hence, it is crucial for the product development team to strictly follow testing practises
along the development process to minimize costs and consequences.
This thesis focuses on the automated functional testing. Apart from the advantages de-
scribed above, automated testing allows the business to evolve fast by redeploying their
software multiple times a day. A reference from 2017 [24] on the topic of reliability and
scalability in MSA showed that proper testing allows developers to ship new changes to
production with a high confidence in their product. The study was based on a popular
European e-commerce system that has up to a million visitors each day. The developing
team decided to shift their deployment process and started shipping their software more
often. The number of life deployments per week increased 10 times over two years. How-
ever, the results of the monitoring indicated that the number of live incidents remained on
the same low level. This demonstrates how proper testing allows businesses to constantly
improve their product without their customers noticing that there is an ongoing develop-
ment process.
2.3.2
Types of testing
Testing is an essential step in a product development lifecycle, and all members of the
development team should take part in it. Some tests should be performed by developers,
while others should be done by testers or project managers. Some tests are dedicated
for a product owner (or a customer), so that the quality of product can be assured before
it is finally shipped to production.
Figure 2.6 represents testing classification proposed by Brian Marick. The classification
lists different testing types and groups them by team’s members impact. The list is not
complete, as full classification includes more than 150 [26] different kinds of tests, and the
number is still growing. However, it represents the most common and general categoriza-
tion of testing that is mainly used in software development companies (the numbering is an
arbitrary system used for referring to the classes). Brian Marick suggests looking at soft-
ware tests from different angles to better understand the motivation behind writing them.
For instance, upper and lower faces of the square suggest that tests can be business
facing or technology facing. Business facing tests describe the business requirements
and can be easily explained to the customer or the product owner. Technology facing
tests, on the other hand, aim to check whether the tools and technologies used in the
14
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Testing quadrants by Brian Marick [25]
product implementation function as they should; these tests are usually explained with
the words from the programmers domain. Another way to distinguish between different
kinds of tests is to question whether they aim to support programming (meaning, the engi-
neering team) or to critique the product. Tests that support the programming are usually a
part of the programming act themselves. For example, when following TDD (Test Driven
Development) technique [27], a programmer writes the test first and only then implements
the functionality that will make the test pass. Tests that critique the product, conversely,
intend to look at a finished application in order to discover insufficiency in its behaviour.
Hence, they require a deployable version of a finished product, while tests located in Q1
and Q2 should be written and run during the development. Such classification is useful
for prioritizing different kinds of tests, as it is not always the case that tests from Q1 and
Q2 quadrants are implemented before those from Q3 and Q4. For instance, during the
MVP stage, teams may end up prioritizing tests from quadrants 3 and 4 over tests from
quadrant 1 as it is possible that the test results can change the business requirements
and final goals of the product.
This thesis focuses mainly on the automated testing. As seen on Figure 2.6, automated
tests are programming supportive, which means that they are implemented along with
features implementation and are mainly used for validating that certain functionality works
as expected and satisfies the business requirements. Depending on the test scope, tests
aim to validate different parts of the product. This topic is described more in detail in
Section 2.3.3.
Moreover, software testing can be classified further into Black Box Testing, Grey Box
Testing, and White Box testing [28] (see Figure 2.7):
• White Box Testing Technique. This way of testing assumes that the tester pos-
sesses full knowledge about the code structure and the internal logic of the applica-
tion. Hence, tests of this type are usually performed by the developers. White Box
tests usually belong to the lower levels of software tests, and they refer to structural
testing of the solution. This technique implies analyzing every part of the code-
base in order to test all the possible branches and scenarios. Granularity of such
approach is high;
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
15
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.7: White, Grey, and Black Box Testing
• Black Box Testing Technique. This approach implies that the tester has no knowl-
edge about the internal structure of the System Under Test (SUT), however knowing
the architecture of the application is a requirement. Unlike the White Box tests, the
Black Box tests are usually performed by software testers, not by developers. Black
Box software testing looks at the software from the user’s point of view (e.g. user
acceptance testing [28]). In terms of disadvantages, these tests only help to validate
fundamental functionality of the system by providing coverage of larger code seg-
ments. As a result, it leaves many aspects of the internal functionality (algorithms,
data domains, etc.) out of scope. Naturally, granularity of such approach is low;
• Grey Box Testing Technique.
Some researches distinguish a third technique
called the Grey Box Testing. This method combines features of the Black Box and
the White Box techniques and allows to validate the external behaviour (Black Box
testing) of the system by designing tests cases that would take structural aspects of
the system into account (White Box testing). As a result, developers are able to de-
sign comprehensive test scenarios and perform unbiased testing. Some examples
of the Grey Box Testing are Finite State Machine (State Model) and UML Design
Model. This approach has medium granularity.
Combination of all the methodologies allows the companies to perform testing of the prod-
uct in an effective manner, and, therefore, significantly improve the product efficiency.
2.3.3
Test scope
In order to develop a stable application and mitigate risk of possible failures, developers
need to test their system on different levels. It is achieved by starting from small functions,
and then incrementally scaling up the tests to include larger business scenarios and use
cases. Naturally, it is easier to write small automated tests for granular parts of the code.
However, engineers should not focus on small tests only. Even 100% line coverage does
not guarantee that program will work without errors. Trying to find the best distribution
for different kinds of tests, in 2010 Mike Cohn suggested an idea of a test pyramid in
his book ”Succeeding with Agile” [2]. This concept quickly gained popularity among the
developers and became a visual guide on how to write efficient and assertive tests. Since
then, it has been both criticized and praised, and other pyramids and non-pyramids were
suggested by various experts. However, the original Cohn’s pyramid is still a baseline for
the majority of software applications nowadays. The pyramid focuses on the automated
tests, assuming that software is developed according to agile methodology, and the tests
are run every time before a new feature is deployed.
According to Cohn, there are three main test categories: unit tests, integration tests, and
16
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.8: Mike Cohn’s automated testing pyramid
end-to-end tests (see Figure 2.8). Interpretations may slightly differ from one source to
another, as it is quite difficult to define strict boundaries of what exactly each test type
should be testing since every project has its individual implementation characteristics.
However, general definitions can be applied to the majority of software applications. This
chapter focuses on describing each test category and then discusses the pyramid itself.
Unit tests. Unit tests aim to verify that a small unit of a program is working as expected.
A unit can be anything from a line of code to a class, but the smaller this unit is - the
easier it is to test all possible scenarios. Typically, a single function, a class, or a method
are tested with the unit tests. According to Cohn’s pyramid, unit tests should be the base
of the testing strategy. To begin with, they are easy to write. The behavior of a small
function is clear and uncomplicated; and in case it is not, the method should be split
into several simple functions with clearly defined scope and behaviour. This makes unit
testing a powerful design tool as well. Moreover, TDD encourages programmers to write
unit tests prior to the implementation of the functionality. This approach mitigates the risk
of some features to remain unverified after being shipped to production. Furthermore,
unit tests are fast; modern hardware is capable of running thousands of unit tests per
minute [29]. Hence, it is possible to quickly verify many scenarios of small units of code,
which helps to localize the errors fast. Finally, knowing that each small piece of code works
correctly increases the likelihood that the whole program satisfies business requirements.
Unit tests that treat a module as a black box are called sociable unit tests. They verify the
behaviour of the unit via its interface. Tests that focus on the unit’s interactions are referred
to as solitary unit tests. They utilize test doubles to replace module’s dependencies. This
partition helps to eliminate the possibility of errors in the integrations between the units.
Integration tests. This category is also known as thread testing, as integration tests
involve different units and modules in order to test how they function when combined.
Integration testing checks whether the interaction between components produces the ex-
pected result, as opposed to unit tests, where modules are being run and verified in isola-
tion. Naturally, the scope of such tests is broader than the scope of unit tests. Therefore,
localization of errors is not as fast, as well as the tests themselves are slower to run
and develop. However, broader scope increases the code coverage, which brings more
value to the engineers. Literally, integration tests cover communication between services
(that is the reason why they are also sometimes referred to as service tests). Usually,
services are connected to the databases and/or external services that are developed by
other companies. Some experts believe that these interactions should be tested with real
procedures (not mocks, as they are more suitable for unit tests when modules need to
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
17
==PAGE:29==
be tested in isolation). For these purposes, test databases and external sandbox APIs
are used. Others state that mocks and stubs are also acceptable when writing integration
tests.
End-to-end tests. This category forms the top of the pyramid. Some also refer to them
as UI tests or system tests, as they are mostly driven via UI and aim to exercise the sys-
tem as a whole from the user’s point of view. End-to-end tests aim to verify that the entire
solution, from clicking the button in the browser to saving the entity to the database, be-
haves correctly. End-to-end tests simulate user’s actions in real scenarios. They help
developers to locate bugs in the integration gaps that were not covered by other types
of tests. For example, writing proper system tests mitigate the risk of poorly configured
network infrastructure, such as load-balancers and firewalls. System tests are business-
facing tests, and they should refer to the SUT using the domain language. Thus, they do
not go into details of the implementation and architecture of the system or its individual
components. Successfully passed end-to-end tests are usually taken as acceptance cri-
teria, meaning that the application meets business requirements and provides essential
functionality.
However, there are certain reasons why this category forms the top of the pyramid, thus,
represents the smallest test category of all. These tests are rather slow to run due to
the amount of work and preparations that needs to be done prior and during the testing:
building and running the application, firing up the browser, setting up the database, sim-
ulating user clicks, etc. As a result, a single test suite can easily be running for several
minutes, if not longer. In addition, end-to-end tests are very fragile and fail frequently;
since the scope of such tests is large, even a minor change might cause the failure of the
test. Also, end-to-end tests include many external dependencies (more than integration
tests). Thus, timeouts and external components that can be temporarily down can cause
flaky behaviour, meaning that tests can fail even if the code is correct. Finally, due to a
broader scope, these tests are difficult to write and debug.
To sum up, Cohn’s pyramid encourages the developers to write more small, granular, and
fast tests, and less large and slow test suites. This approach works well with traditional
3-tier web-applications consisting of a presentation (front-end) layer, a server (backend)
layer and a data layer. However, with the rapidly evolving world of software development,
more and more solutions and architectures do not comply well with the original pyramid
pattern. Consequently, developers propose their versions of automated testing pyramids
that work better in their cases. Testing pyramid for the microservices is described more
in Section 2.4.1 further in this thesis.
2.4
Testing in microservices architecture
The microservice architecture differs a lot from the traditional monolith approach. Hence,
when adopting microservices, testing and validation methodologies used in monoliths
need to be reviewed and reconsidered. Microservices move the complexity from the inside
of the service to the infrastructure level [30]. It requires the developers to shift the testing
methods in order to cover architectural changes. The concept of the microservices is still
relatively new, and the topic of microservice validation and testing has not received proper
attention from the academic community yet. However, some ideas and proposals have
already been documented by engineers and researches. This section aims to describe
the pyramid model approach to testing the microservice applications and microfrontends.
18
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.9: Automated testing pyramid for microservices
2.4.1
Test scopes in microservice architecture
Similarly to the traditional applications, automated testing pyramid approach can be ap-
plied to the microservices. However, the layers of the pyramid are adjusted to reflect the
changed architectural layout of the application. This section provides an overview of the
automated testing pyramid for the microservices and explains the additional levels needed
due to changed structure of the microservice-based system.
Unit tests. Similarly to the traditional pyramid model, the basement of the pyramid is
formed by the unit tests (see Figure 2.9). As described in the Section 2.3.3, the defini-
tion of unit tests can be further classified as sociable and solitary tests. Both styles are
widely used in microservice testing. For instance, domain logic (see Figure 2.2) com-
prises complex rules and calculations that rely heavily on the state transformations. Such
dependency on the state makes the domain objects hard to test in isolation. Therefore,
sociable tests are used to provide essential coverage of the domain model and all the
collaborations between its objects. For these purposes, real domain objects should be in
place for every collaborator of the module that is being tested. On the other hand, com-
ponents, which primary responsibilities are data transformation and mapping, are tested
using solitary unit testing techniques. There, real collaborators are replaced with test
doubles. For instance, this applies to gateways and repositories. Test doubles provide
an easy and convenient way to verify that data transformation works as expected in both
successful and faulty scenarios. Same holds for the modules that implement coordina-
tion logic, such as resources and service layers. At this level, the purpose of testing is to
make sure that the message converting and transition logic is correct rather than validate
the communication between the components. Unit tests provide such an assurance in
an effective and fast manner. Some microservices, however, tend to comprise mainly
coordination routine (e.g. adapters and aggregators of any kind). Such cases are hard to
validate with unit testing. Hence, developers need to constantly think whether time and
effort spent on test maintenance and implementation would eventually pay off and bring
value. This helps writing small but focused and sufficient test suits.
However, even 100% code coverage that consists only of unit tests does not guarantee
that all the modules would work together as expected and satisfy business requirements.
Similarly, unit tests do not provide enough coverage of interactions with remote systems.
Hence, there is a need for test suits that are more coarse grained that would cover a work
of the whole service. As stated in 2.3.3, integration tests aim to validate multiple modules
working together as a system.
Integration tests. Unlike sociable unit tests that also utilize real parts of the system, in-
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
19
==PAGE:31==
tegration tests look at the subsystem from a more general point of view. They verify the
data flow of a subsystem by exercising the communication paths and protocols between
its parts. In microservices, however, integration tests are usually used to test the commu-
nication between the microservice and external modules, such as remote services and
databases. The main reason for that is the size of a single microservice. Whilst there is
no strict rule on the maximum amount of lines of codes within a single service, the whole
idea of the microservice architecture is to split a large monolith into small and manageable
subsystems. As a result, microservices are typically small, and unit tests provide enough
coverage to verify that the internal parts of the service work as expected.
Integration tests that exercise communication paths between the data mapper and the
external storage are called persistence integration tests. They aim to verify that the re-
lational database schema matches the object schema from the code. Additionally, inte-
gration tests should take into account possible timeouts and network issues, as typically
data stores and microservices are located within different network boundaries.
Integration tests that validate response-request cycle between the gateway and the re-
mote service are referred to as gateway integration tests. They should provide essential
coverage of any possible protocol level mismatch, like invalid HTTP headers or missing
authentication token. Similarly to the persistence testing, gateway integration tests should
take into account slow responses, timeouts, and network failures. To perform such test-
ing, stubs of remote services can be configured to trigger various abnormalities in the
communication protocol. When using real services for the testing purposes, it is vital to
keep in mind that a test can fail for multiple reasons, and implementation logic error is only
one of them. Other possible reasons comprise regression bugs in the integrating system,
contract changes, and situations when the external system unexpectedly becomes un-
available. Hence, developers need to balance the amount of integration tests to avoid
situations when maintaining them costs more than the value the tests provide.
Properly written integration and unit tests together give high confidence in accuracy of the
behaviour of the microservice submodules. Nevertheless, they still do not test that the
microservice as a whole works as expected. In monolithic applications, end-to-end testing
is used to verify the correctness of the whole system. In microservice-based architecture,
however, end-to-end tests are exceptionally hard to maintain, and the runtime of each
test suit is typically longer then in monolith application. Although end-to-end testing is still
used in the microservices, and it will be described later in this section, there are other
techniques that help engineers to obtain faster and more focused feedback in a more
efficient manner.
Component tests. Another testing technique aimed to limit the boundaries of the test
scope to a holistic meaningful component of the program is called component testing.
As opposed to end-to-end tests, component tests exercise a part of the larger system
by isolating it from the external components. The definition of a component is vital for
understanding the essence of this type of testing. A component is a well-encapsulated
and coherent part of a larger system, which can be independently replaced [16]. In the
microservice-based architecture, a component is represented by a single microservice.
Hence, tests of this granularity aim to verify that a microservice as a standalone unit sat-
isfies business requirements. Naturally, such testing should be done in isolation in order
to narrow down the focus of each test suit to the functionality encapsulated by the compo-
nent. It is achieved by using test doubles, which provide a number of benefits. By isolating
the component, test doubles help to create a predictable environment, which developers
can use to create suitable responses and trigger appropriate faults when needed for the
20
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:32==
testing purposes. This, in turn, helps to significantly improve test performance, because
test doubles have preconfigured behaviour which does not usually have any complex un-
derlying logic. Finally, they eliminate the risk of a test failure in case a remote service is
temporarily unavailable.
Naturally, component tests differ from one service to another, and there are many op-
tions for the developers to consider before implementing the test suits. For instance, the
question of whether a real database should be used, or it should be replaced with some
in-memory storage. Another topic to consider is whether test doubles should be located
within the network boundaries, or outside, so that the communication is more close to the
real-life situation. The answers to these questions typically lie in the characteristics of
the single microservice architecture. In-process tests that instantiate the service fully in-
memory allow in-depth testing without a need to interact with the network at all. This helps
to shorten test suit execution time, as well as to reduce build complexity [16]. However,
such approach is only applicable in cases when the artifact under test is already built in a
way that allows to start a service in a test mode. Another option is to rewrite an existing
implementation by using tools that help to instantiate the service in multiple ways based
on its configuration, such as dependency injection frameworks. Finally, there exist many
libraries that help developers to configure their test doubles in a controlled manner to em-
ulate various scenarios while avoiding the overhead of communication over the network.
In-process component tests should be combined with integration tests to provide suffi-
cient coverage. For instance, in-memory database implementations allow to decrease
test execution time, and there are many ready made tools that mimic external storages
in-memory. However, it leaves the communication with the real storage out of scope.
While in-process component tests are fast and convenient, they are not applicable to all
projects. As noted above, some services are simply not designed in a way that would
allow for running an application in a test mode. In such cases, out of process component
tests can be utilized. As apposed to in-process component tests, out of process testing
can be used to validate fully deployed component. It exercises a microservice with all its
external communications happening via real network, such as integrations with databases
and remote systems. As a result, the complexity is conveyed to the test setup that needs
to handle the routine of wiring up the external stubs and arranging the network ports. Out
of process approach naturally leads to longer test execution time. However, for some
projects this technique eventually pays off, especially for those having complex startup
logic or integration mechanisms that is hard to alter. Additionally, due to leveraging the
real network, out of process tests check the service network configuration. When it comes
to the test doubles, there are many options to provide external stubs. Remote component
stubs can be either programmed through an API in a dynamic manner or fixtured with
some custom data. Some use record-replay tools that copy requests and responses to
the real service instance and then use them for the testing purposes. Sometimes it pays
off for the teams to build and maintain custom stubs for their services themselves in order
to take this routine out of consumers hands. This is naturally the case when a system has
a lot of collaborators. Both in-process and out of process component tests are black-box
tests, which means that they do not focus on service’s internal implementation details or
architecture, but rather exercises it from the business point of view.
A combination of unit (sociable and solitary), integration, in-process and out of process
component tests provides a sufficient coverage of the microservices submodules. When
designed and implemented appropriately, these tests together give a high degree of confi-
dence that the service satisfies business requirements. However, no matter how properly
the microservices are tested individually, the business logic requires the coordinated work
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
21
==PAGE:33==
of all system submodules together. All test types described above do not ensure that the
service matches the expected schema and that all the microservices combined together
work consistently to fulfil business needs. Again, end-to-end tests are able to provide
such confidence, but they lack speed and hard to implement, maintain and debug.
Contract tests. These tests, on the other hand, give fast and detailed feedback on the
contract compliance. Contract testing exercises the code at the boundary of the service to
ensure that it meets the contract and recent changes would have no negative affect on its
consumers. In case of microservice-based architecture, the contract is the API exposed
by each microservice. Team responsible for a consumer service should write tests to
verify only that functionality of the producing microservice that is utilized by the consuming
part. The vital aspect of the contract testing is that it does not test the behaviour or logic
encapsulated by the producing service; it only ensures that both sides follow the same
interface.
The most efficient scenario is when all the tests written by the consumers are combined,
packaged and then integrated into the build pipeline of the producing service (consumer-
driven testing). It allows the owners of the service to immediately see what impact their
modifications have on their collaborators. It also helps to see how much effort it would cost
to introduce changes into the contract based on the number of failed tests. For instance,
in case some API modification causes the failure of all its consumers tests, developers
will instantly know that they would need to notify every team of the upcoming changes
and then wait until they adjust their services accordingly. As a result, the maintainers of
the producer might weigh all pros and cons and come to the conclusion that such contract
change may not pay off, and think of another solution.
Contract tests can act as a powerful design tool when designing a new service from
scratch. Such approach implies that each consumer writes test suits expressing their
needs and expectations from the new service. Then, based on these requirements, own-
ers of the producing service build the API that is already well suited for its collaborators
needs.
End-to-end tests. Finally, end-to-end (or system) testing exercises fully integrated sys-
tem at most coarse granularity [16]. Since end-to-end tests verify real-life user scenarios,
in microservice-based solution one test suit may affect multiple microservices at the same
time. Furthermore, end-to-end testing supports uninterrupted and reliable evolution of the
microservice architecture over time. As business evolves, more and more integrations
are added into the chain of services that make up a system. Each additional integration
presents a risk that can disrupt an already working and profitable business functionality.
The role of end-to-end tests is very important here; they provide additional confidence that
certain architectural adjustments, such as a service split into multiple subsystems or, con-
versely, services merged together, do not have any negative effects on the overall system.
It allows developers to scale their product in a dynamic pace. This is especially useful for
the systems that actively migrate from the monolithic architecture to the microservices.
Naturally, for systems that do not have any user interface, such testing is performed us-
ing their public API. Similarly to the integration tests, end-to-end tests might utilize test
doubles or stubs of different types. External services, or even some microservices inside
the application, may not be suitable for system testing for various reasons. For instance,
a service lacking reliability may cause many failing tests and slow down the development
process.
As mentioned in Section 2.3.3 earlier in this paper, writing, maintaining and debugging
22
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:34==
system tests can be expensive and time consuming. This is especially true with the mi-
croservices. For example, something that does not exist in the monolithic systems, but
might cost a lot of time and effort in microservice-based application, is the distribution of
responsibility between different teams. End-to-end tests have large boundaries. Hence,
in case a test suit fails, it is not always clear from the outcome which service caused the
failure. Furthermore, even if the cause is located right away, the team responsible for
the microservice may be unavailable or have different priorities than fixing the failing test.
In this case, the development process would be blocked until further notice. Moreover,
debugging microservices takes significantly more time than debugging a monolith, as it
is difficult to wire all the necessary services up locally on the developer’s machine. The
amount of services needed to be running can be two-digit or even three-digit number,
and it can take a while just to get the application up and running. As a result, many teams
abandon end-to-end tests in favour of well-balanced combination of more low level tests.
However, due to the novelty of the topic, there is no consensus on whether system tests
worth implementing in the microservice solutions. Some insist on having end-to-end tests
at least for some principal scenarios. It is vital to always weight pros and cons of each
approach, as such decisions need to be taken case-by-case. Naturally, a critical applica-
tion, which failure to function properly can result in significant financial loss, or even cost
people’s health and life, should have end-to-end tests. In such systems system testing is
necessary and cannot be replaced. For less critical systems it might be useful to assess
the amount of money that would be spent in case an application fails, compare it with
the budget and time needed to be spend for implementing end-to-end tests, and make a
decision based on that. Finally, microservice architecture provides more freedom to the
engineers with regards to what and how to test. By splitting an application into smaller
parts with well-defined boundaries, additional partition is revealed that was not visible
before. It helps to highlight the parts of the system that contain the most critical logic,
and thus requires more comprehensive testing. As a result, developers can opt to invest
more time and effort in writing and maintaining end-to-end tests for such resources, and
perform low-level testing for experimental or less crucial parts of the system.
To sum up, the topic of testing the microservice-based application is still rather novel,
and companies and research institutes invest a lot of resources into it. The nature of
distributed systems provides a lot of flexibility in terms of development, whilst imposing
many restrictions on the process of quality assurance at the same time. Section 3 of this
thesis provides a more detailed review on existing literature and research on the topic.
2.4.2
Testing microfrontends
The idea of the microfrontends is even younger than the microservices. Therefore, testing
of the microfrontends has not been extensively reviewed in the research yet, mainly due
to the novelty of the approach. However, existing works and expert articles mostly report
that for a single microfrontend, the strategy to testing does not differ much from what is
already used for testing the monolithic frontends.
The encapsulated logic should be thoroughly tested with unit tests. Next, the main func-
tionality of the frontend application is tested with integration tests. These typically cover
core components of the microfrontend and state changes, but do not include UI testing and
backend integration. Instead of sending requests to a running server, integration tests uti-
lize extensive mocks that mimic the behaviour of the backend. Properly designed mocks
are able to simulate both successful responses from the server and various edge cases,
such as network problems, timeouts, and server unavailability. To ensure the contract
compliance between the frontend and the backend, developers use tools that allow them
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
23
==PAGE:35==
to utilize a contract identical to the one that would be used when running the application
as a whole. This approach has a similar ideology as consumer-driven contract testing
described in Section 2.4.1. The backend provides a contract that mocks must follow,
and developers of the frontend application are responsible to implement them properly.
Sometimes, the backend provides ready-made mocks that are then utilized by the fron-
tend application. Naturally, in cases when the same team is developing both applications,
there is no difference in these strategies.
Finally, end-to-end tests aim to verify that user’s action are handled by the application
correctly, and the system meets the business requirements. As described in the Section
2.3.3, end-to-end tests are notorious for being slow and hard to debug and maintain. To
mitigate the issue, microfrontends take a similar approach to microservice-based systems,
where tests are mostly employed at different levels of the service, but rarely cover the
whole application at once. To achieve that on the frontend side, UI tests can be first
written in isolation, when the server side is replaced with mocks. Often, the same mocks
can be used that were utilized by integration tests, as the scenarios being tested remain
the same. Such approach increases performance, as there is no need to wire up the
server and all its external dependencies, e.g. databases and caches. Furthermore, it
makes writing UI tests faster, as developers do not need to implement test scenarios
on the server side as well. This inevitably leads to easier debugging, as mocks can be
examined and adjusted to ones need. Full integration end-to-end tests, that hit a running
backend, form the very top of the automated testing pyramid for the microfrontends. For
the reasons described in Section 2.3.3, they are mainly used for the acceptance testing.
There are usually few such tests, if not none, because in distributed systems there are
not many scenarios that would capture only single team ecosystem.
Whilst testing strategy for a standalone microfrontend is rather straightforward, it becomes
more cumbersome when it comes to testing all microfrontends together. Similarly to the
microservices, the idea behind microfrontends is that they should be independently de-
veloped and maintained, while at the same time form a cohesive product when working
together. After a single microfrontend goes through its pipeline and passes all the rel-
evant tests, its newer version should be integrated into a host application. There, host
application pipeline must take responsibility to ensure that the upgrade goes smoothly
and doesn’t introduce any regressions. This aspect becomes a stumbling block and the
cause of many misunderstandings. Many questions arise, such as Who should be re-
sponsible for the host application tests? or Who should ensure that interaction between
components that belong to different microfrontends works as expected? These prob-
lems are more acute for the microfrontends than in the case of regular microservices,
as microfrontends have a common environment, a host application. Any agreement or
pattern that require teams to depend on each other inevitably compromises the desired
autonomy that stands behind the core idea of the microfrontends. Microservices have
approached this problem with the help of contract tests, and it can be done in case of the
microfrontends as well. For the microfrontend applications, a contact is formed within the
expectations of state changes, published events, and performance. Similarly to the mi-
croservices, contracts (or even mocks) for such tests are ideally formed by the consuming
components. Then, the tests are integrated into the producing component pipeline, which
provides more confidence that the frontend as a whole would form an appropriate product
experience.
Finally, end-to-end tests for a system that has a microfrontend-based UI does not differ
much from what already exists for a monolith. Such black box tests only mimic user
behaviour and are independent of the internal implementation of the system, so engineers
24
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:36==
can use the same tools as for end-to-end testing of monolithic applications. This, again,
requires the whole application to be up and running on a separate environment, so many
teams tend to abandon this tedious process and lean towards less coarse grained test
suits.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
25
==PAGE:37==
3
Literature review
Although the research on previous works shows that the area of test automation currently
lacks serious large-scale industrial studies, it has recently gained a lot of attention. The
majority of companies adopt the Cohn’s automation pyramid principle without adjusting
it to individual project needs. Whilst the initial model works efficiently for the traditional
monolithic applications and has been time-proven, the architectural styles are evolving
at a rapid pace. Hence, verification approaches need to be adjusted as well to fit new
technical requirements. Using inappropriate mechanisms may cause inevitable regres-
sion of the product and time and money losses. As a result, companies start to invest into
deeper analysis of the product delivery process, while research groups suggest modified
approaches to the automated testing. This section aims to provide a detailed overview
on the existing research regarding the adoption of the automated test pyramid by real
projects to see how accurate the model is being followed in the industry. To begin with,
it focuses on papers that mention difficulties and challenges in adopting the pattern. Ad-
ditionally, it reveals the issues that teams meet when implementing functional test suits
for the distributed systems and microservice-based solutions. Finally, it discusses a few
papers on the topic of the microfrontends.
3.1
Automated testing pyramid
The work presented by Andrei Contan, Liviu Miclea and Catalin Dehelean Armknecht is
very related to this thesis, considering previous works in the literature focusing on test au-
tomation. For instance, Contan et al states that pure quantitative approach of the Cohn’s
automation pyramid might not be sufficient, and more critical approach is needed for each
solution based on various individual factors. Their industrial research Test automation
pyramid from theory to practice [31] aims to determine the gap between the theoretical
models in the literature and the real life projects. The study was applied to a number
of software products in 3 different companies that follow Agile methodology. The result
showed that only 20% of all projects followed a pyramidal shape, although they didn’t
fully comply with the volumes per each layer suggested by the theoretical model. From
the remaining projects, 25% had a trapezoidal approach. Other projects didn’t follow the
pyramid form (e.g. some of them were close to E-shape). For instance, solutions that
hardly rely on 3rd party libraries and contain most of the complexity in communications
between application levels would require more integration tests then unit tests. In this
case, quality of the libraries functionality is addressed to external teams and should not
be questioned by the developers. As a result, the pyramid shape would not reflect the
testing needs of the project and would be violated. After analyzing the collected informa-
tion and conducting the survey with developers from the teams, it was clear that the test
automation pyramid does not always reflect the industry practices.
Instead of pure quantitative approach, Contan et al suggests two modified approaches:
perception of the pyramid as a set of needs (as hierarchy of human needs by Maslow) and
addressing test automation by slices instead of layers. First perspective aligns with Cohn’s
pyramid in a sense that testing activities should be developed in the bottom-up direction.
However, it contradicts with Cohn’s model from a quantitative point of view by stating
that the lower level of the pyramid should not necessarily represent the amount of effort
invested in it. The second suggested approach implies that each of the software layers
should be viewed and tested as a standalone solution, meaning that unit, integration,
26
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:38==
and acceptance test concepts should be separately applied for back-end, representation,
and repository levels. Eberhard Wolff in [32] has echoed this, saying that there may be
multiple test pyramids: one for each microservice and one for the system in which they
are embedded. The research also mentions further studies on mobile applications where
it was shown by [33] that the test automation pyramid model is upside-down due to the
nature of mobile applications. Contan et al suggest that same holds for some non-mobile
(web, desktop) projects as well (e.g. projects with rich UI). However, the research is,
with only 5 projects in 3 companies, quite limited in scope. Additionally, the variety of
the projects is rather poor as they all refer to 3 tiers architecture comprising 3 layers:
database, backend server and user interface. This leaves a vast amount of solutions that
follow other architectural models out of scope. Hence, a larger study is required to be
able to determine to which extend real life solutions follow theoretical models.
Other papers, such as work of Bohdan Oliinyk and Vasyl Oleksiuk [34], touches upon the
issues that may arise during automated testing and pointing that automation should be
done carefully. For instance, developers might experience false sense of product quality
when automated tests pass successfully, even if the pyramid shape is followed properly.
Since tests only validate what they are programmed to validate, it is likely that some
faults would not be identified. Hence, relying entirely on the automated tests is not safe,
and exploratory testing is still needed. Another weak spot of the automated testing is a
constant need for support, as automated checks quickly become obsolete and no longer
relevant. As a result, tests do not correspond to changed implementation and might pass
or fail regardless of whether the functionality is broken or not. Finally, Oliinyk and Oleksiuk
provide results on the distribution of programming languages in automated tests all over
the world, the most popular being Java. However, to our point of view, such a result can
be hardly influenced by the fact that for a long period of time Java itself has been the most
popular programming language (IEEE rankings [35], [36]). Thus, this research does not
classify microservices by the implementation programming language. We believe that the
choice of the tools does not significantly affect the testing strategy, as nowadays there are
plenty of different frameworks and libraries available for the most popular programming
languages that allow to implement any testing model.
The works presented by Adorf et al [37] and Ramler and Felderer [38] offer another risk-
based testing approach or Bayesian Prediction models for risk-based test selection. They
suggest to extend the scope of testing towards ‘risky’ areas where critical problems can
be located. In other words, they propose methods to identify the likely defective parts,
and adjust the focus of testing to them.
Another industry study by Ramler and Felderer [39] critisizes Cohn’s pyramid for discour-
aging and underestimating automated GUI testing. They warn developers from neglecting
this tests and state that in their case it led to major issues as many of the critical bugs
were only found with automated GUI testing.
3.2
Testing of the microservices
Reference [15] from 2021 provides some comprehensive and detailed insights into dif-
ficulties and challenges in testing of the microservices. The results were based on a
mix-method study comprising surveys and interviews. Waseem et al confirmed that they
neither found any existing papers concerning microservice testing from the practitioners
point of view, nor they found any empirical industrial studies. They also highlight that
there is little understanding of the industrial practicalities in this area. The study revealed
that the most popular testing types are end-to-end and unit tests, which violates the pyra-
mid structure. Results of the survey showed that, due to the complexity of distributed
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
27
==PAGE:39==
systems, developers are willing to invest in more systematic testing strategies than inte-
gration tests to exercise the interactions between the services. Another valuable insight
is that consumer-driven contract tests are not commonly used to verify contract compli-
ance within the microservices systems. Among reasons for neglecting this particular type
of tests participants mentioned (1) communication issues between people working on the
application and (2) extensive use of the external systems. The integration contract testing
is, however, frequently used in the industry (47.2% of the participants claimed that they
utilize integration contract testing often or very often). Finally, 50% of the participants con-
sidered manual testing for the microservice-based solutions to be a challenge. Almost a
half of the respondents reported that integration testing (43.3% of the participants) and
debugging microservices running on container platforms (42.4% of the participants) pose
a challenge in testing the MSA systems.
An earlier systematic mapping study conducted by Waseem et al [40] demonstrates inter-
esting findings on the topic of the MSA-based applications. One of the key finding showed
that recently researches put more efforts in developing new automated testing strategies
for the microservice-based systems. Such approaches include the use of DevOps practi-
calities and architectural artifacts, as well as leverage the advantages of CI. Another key
finding, however, revealed that the majority of proposed novel approaches are not actively
used in the industry, partly because of the lack of efficient tools. The authors do not go into
details of what kinds of tools are missing, but the problem is most likely the gap between
academic assumptions and the dynamic pace of the industry. Often, the approaches pro-
posed by researches are difficult to incorporate into the project due to their complexity.
As a result, such strategies must first be adapted to a rapidly evolving industry. These
processes take time, and, hopefully, the approaches proposed by the researchers will be
actively used in real development in the near future. Moreover, Waseem et al highlight
that integration testing prevails over the other types of testing strategies in the MSA-based
applications. However, inter-communication testing is something that the majority of pri-
mary studies emphasises to be a challenge. Finally, the authors report consumer-driven
contract testing being less popular than the regular contract testing.
A comprehensive literature review by Ghani et al [41] touches upon recent MSA prac-
ticalities, such as tools, frameworks and approaches used. It reports that the majority
of papers on the subject of the microservice testing started to appear only in 2017 and
2018, as the topic was not in big demand before. Similarly to [15], authors report that
unit testing prevails over other test types that are more coarse grained. The reason for
that is that a lot of testers prefer to test the deployed product manually instead of au-
tomating the process, due to reliability of services and data sensitivity. According to the
authors, only 5% of the selected literature preferred end-to-end, component, or contract
testing techniques. Around 10% of the reviewed primary studies reported that integration
tests helped to increase service reliability, leaving unit tests to be the most popular testing
strategies of all. Speaking about the classification of tests, the authors give an example
of an automated testing pyramid with integration tests located on a higher level than com-
ponent tests. This contradicts the pyramid model presented earlier in this paper. Such
discrepancies are observed among various academic works and expert articles. This is
due to the relative immaturity of the topic under discussion. Although microservices have
been in the industry for over a decade now (the term microservices first appeared in 2011
at the event for software architects), it is still a short period of time from the research point
of view. Therefore, until notations and terms have acquired a single meaning that is ac-
ceptable to all, researchers should focus on explaining and describing the terms they use
in their works.
28
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:40==
An exploratory case study by Huttunen [29] shows that the testing strategy of the microservice-
based systems depends on the size of a single service. Smaller microservices lean to-
wards more extensive integration testing, as the microservices themselves provide only
trivial functionality (e.g. simple CRUD operations) which is not necessary to test with
unit tests. Hence, such microservices are mostly tested through their API. Additionally,
the work reveals some insights regarding team’s influence on the testing practicalities:
in small scale applications, the testing strategy is highly dependent on the team practi-
calities and dedication, while in more mature systems, testing process is driven via well-
established testing environment and practices. This study, however, has clear limitations,
such as small number of case projects, as well as small sample of case projects by size,
so the study only included one case of each size.
A recent (2020) overview by Nicole Radziwill and Graham Freeman [42] highlights some
of the problems that may arise when blindly following the automated testing pyramid.
They state that such approach is sometimes criticized because the pyramid does not
incorporate market risk into its scope. Radziwill and Freeman also point that for the mi-
croservice architecture, pyramid should be more diamond-shaped since microservices
are already rather small and should be mostly tested with integration tests rather than
unit tests. Lastly, the paper suggests holistic test pyramid that emulates a bridge be-
tween data-centric approach that focuses on data hygiene through the information supply
chain and pure software-centric approach that focuses on UI and API testing and test au-
tomation. This improved model implies that unit testing should be performed at all levels
of the solution (data storage, models, pipelines, APIs, UI), and no differentiation must be
made between a machine (system) user and a user who is essentially a human. It is due
to uncertainty being likely to appear in both scenarios, acknowledging the complexity of
the modern solutions. The authors emphasise the importance of a research that would
reflect high interconnectedness of systems via such holistic relationships.
Furthermore, Mukhin et al in [43] and [44] propose another modification of testing mech-
anism for distributed systems based on Mike Cohn’s Testing Pyramid. In these works,
Mukhin et al states that Cohn’s approach was not developed especially for the distributed
information processing systems and is mainly oriented towards local computer systems.
As a result, advantages of the distributed systems are being overlooked and not taken
into account. These papers propose modifications that would leverage the benefits of
such architecture. For instance, they suggest replacing end-to-end tests with contract
tests, arguing that it is hard to always guarantee smooth and troubleproof deployment of
a new service in microservice architecture, which leads to conflicts with other services
and significantly increases testing time. Additionally, amalgamating changes made to
several services into a single version does not allow to utilize the most valuable feature of
distributed architecture, which is to handle to deployment of a subsystem independently
from the rest of the system. According to the results, suggested modifications led to 9%
decrease of the overall testing time.
Finally, Savchenko et al [30] suggests that some Service Oriented Architecture (SOA)
validation strategies can be applied to the microservices as well, since microservice ar-
chitecture can be considered as a subset, or an inheritor, of the SOA.
3.3
Testing of the microfrontends
While there is a number of works dedicated to testing of the microservices, the topic of the
microfrontends is still underresearched. However, there already exist some works, mostly
introductory and exploratory reviews, that help to outline current situation with testing of
the microfrontend-based applications. In [45], the authors provide a multivocal literature
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
29
==PAGE:41==
review of 173 sources to highlight benefits and issues that companies face when adopt-
ing microfrontends, as well as motivation behind the migration. Among other advantages,
many sources reported easier and faster testability when it comes to functional testing of
a single microfrontend. At the same time, integration testing between different microfron-
tends has proven to be a problem. Moreover, some sources reported dependency redun-
dancy to be an issue and a reason for more extensive test coverage. Another issue that
many teams faced was the difficulty of maintaining multiple environments, which some
companies mitigated by adopting a so-called Production Testing approach. Testing in
production implies deploying an updated microfrontend in production with no live traffic in
order for developers and testers to verify that new module works as expected alongside
the existing application.
Similar thoughts were shared among the interviewees in another exploratory study on the
microfrontends [21], which claimed that testing communication between modules from
different microfrontends is cumbersome. Some participants insisted that testing of the
final version of the MFA should not be omitted, despite the obvious disadvantages of the
end-to-end tests.
Reference [46] from 2021 gives some insights into the adoption of the microservice client-
side approach by several different companies.
Some surveyors claimed that the mi-
crofrontends helped to reduce test execution time. However, similarly to [45], the research
focused more on the adoption process rather than testing practicalities.
However, none of the reviews provided detailed information regarding automated func-
tional testing in the microfrontend-based solutions.
Hence, this area is still to be re-
searched, and more industry case overviews are to appear in the near future.
3.4
Contribution
To sum up, literature review reveals that the established pyramid model of the automated
functional testing is not suitable for all industry projects, and more individual approach
needs to be taken. This is especially true for the modern distributed systems, such as
MSA-based solutions.
Additionally, despite the fact that there is a number of papers
proposing modified solutions, there is still a lack of works that provide a feedback from
the industry regarding the usage of the proposed approaches. Hence, there is a little un-
derstanding of how well the proposed solutions fit the industry requirements, as well as
how convenient and easy it is to adopt them. This gap may prevent companies from re-
viewing and adjusting their testing strategies, as they do not have much evidence of how
valuable such change may be and what benefits it will bring to the product. In the industry,
everything is tightly bound to the budget and time resources, so both managers and de-
velopers need to understand the cost and the outcomes of any new strategy that they are
recommended to follow. Finally, there are only a few works on the topic of microfrontends
testing, mostly due to the novelty of the approach.
Another key outcome of the literature review is the observation that various surveys ([15],
[40]) of the software architects and developers provide different results on some mat-
ters. Although these papers provide the valuable industry feedback that is lacking in other
works, surveys may be not as precise as quantitative data collection. Answers of the sur-
vey participants may deviate from the real situation for many reasons (e.g. a developer
has recently joined the company and possesses little knowledge of the product imple-
mentation, or an architect has not conducted a research on his side and, thus, answers
questions in accordance to his expectations that may differ from the actual situation).
While surveys can provide a comprehensive overview of a general subject, more focused
30
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:42==
topic may require more systematic and precise approach. Hence, a comprehensive quan-
titative study is needed to provide insights on the real testing practicalities adopted by the
microservice-based applications in the industry.
As a result, this thesis aims to contribute to covering the gap between the theoretical test
automation model for the microservice-based applications and the real industry. It will do
so by analysing the testing strategy of a real MSA-based solution that is currently func-
tioning in production. The system has an ongoing failure monitoring process that allows
to track the error statistics across the microservices. It will help to generate possible in-
sights of how successful the testing strategies of various microservices and teams are.
Finally, the UI of the application is built using microfrontends, which testing approaches
will also be analysed in this thesis. This will eventually provide some contribution to the
topic of microfrontend architecture, which is currently underresearched due to its novelty.
We believe that this work is novel with respect to its focus (compliance of testing prac-
tices in microservice architecture with theoretical model of automated functional testing)
and analysis (quantitative study of the testing practicalities in the industry MSA-based
application).
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
31
==PAGE:43==
4
Research materials and methodology
Primary research methodology used in this thesis is an exploratory case study research
[47]. This part aims to describe the reasons behind choosing the research approach, as
well as to reveal the process of planning the research, collecting and analysing the data.
The case study methodology is suitable for the software engineering research, as it al-
lows to study objects that are difficult to study in isolation in their natural context (such
as modern phenomena, e.g. computing and processing systems). For this reason, it is
sometimes called naturalistic design, as it aims to achieve a comprehensive understand-
ing of a subject by observing its natural behaviour.
The case study research mainly consists of five steps [47]:
1. Determining and defining the research question;
2. Planning case selection, analysis method, and data collection;
3. Collecting the data;
4. Analysis and interpretation of the collected data;
5. Reporting.
4.1
Defining the research question
The first step of the case study is to establish the research question. This is preceded by a
thorough scientific literature research. Literature analysis allows the researcher to deter-
mine a solid study focus, as well as to find the sources that can be referred to throughout
the study. Research question(s) should be backed up by existing works and theoretical
concepts.
4.2
Design phase
The second phase is the design phase. It includes describing how case selection and data
collection are done, as well as what analysis methods and instruments are used. For in-
stance, here the researcher outlines whether single or multiple real-life case projects are
chosen as the research subject. For multiple case projects, each project should be treated
as a standalone unique case. In the end, the conclusions of each case study contribute
to the overall findings of the research. The multiple-case design helps to raise the confi-
dence in the previous results by replicating the case via pattern-matching technique [48].
It is obvious that the multiple-case study provides more in-depth understanding of the
phenomenon than the single case study due to using multiple sources of data.
According to Yin [49], there are three main categories of the case study: descriptive,
exploratory, and explanatory case studies. The descriptive case study aims to describe
some phenomena that occur with the data. J. McDonough and S. McDonough say that
the descriptive case studies may even follow a narrative manner [50]. As a result, the
researcher must have a theory in mind to support the phenomena from the beginning of
studies.
The explanatory case study, on the other hand, aims to explain an issue or a phenomenon
by examining the data both at a surface and at a deeper levels [48]. Such category is used
32
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:44==
to explain presumed links that might be too complex for experimentation or questionnaires
[51].
The exploratory case study aims to examine some phenomena that lacks previous inves-
tigations and research, or test some formulated hypotheses. Hence, there is no prede-
termined outcome or presumption that needs to be supported during the research. This
category of case study allows using different data collection methods, such as question-
naires, interviews, or any other sources of relevant information. The exploratory case
study is often conducted prior to some big research (for instance, a pilot study is an ex-
ample of an exploratory case study [48]).
Some researchers state that there are more than three categories of case study. For
example, J. McDonough and S. McDonough [50] posit evaluative and interpretive case
studies. Evaluative approach allows the researchers to express their judgement to the
findings, while through the interpretive method, the researcher interprets the phenomenon
by looking at it from different conceptual angles in order to challenge or to support it
[48]. However, it is vital to keep in mind that regardless the granularity of the case study
categories, they should not be considered a hierarchy [49].
The case study methodology has its advantages and disadvantages that need to be eval-
uated prior to starting a research in order to determine whether it is the correct research
method. To begin with, the investigation of the phenomena is usually conducted in a real-
life environment. Thus, it automatically captures the possible complexity of the context
which may not be taken into account via experimentation [48]. Moreover, case study re-
veals the natural behaviour of the subject, as it does not isolate it from its context. Survey
or experimental research, on the other hand, is limited by a number of variables.
Regardless its benefits, case study method is sometimes criticized for lacking rigour [49].
Furthermore, it does not provide essential evidence for generalisation, especially when
conducting a single case exploration [48]. However, Hamel et al [52] argues that this can
be eliminated by wise and careful choice of the parameters and objective setting of the
study, as these are more significant for the success of the research than a big sample size.
Finally, as explained above, the exploratory case studies often serve as pilot research
prior to big comprehensive study. In this case, moderate sample size combined with a
thorough parameter and settings choice is sufficient.
4.3
Data collection phase
Next step is to collect the relevant data. In multiple (collective) case studies, each indi-
vidual case needs to be handled separately as a standalone subject. It is done to allow
a researcher to formulate unbiased conclusions and develop impartial links in cross-case
comparisons [53]. This step plays a crucial role in the research outcome, as wrong case
selection may lead to inaccurate results. For instance, selecting typical cases with similar
characteristics allows generalisation of the finding to a theory. Yin states that two or three
literal replications can be used for backing up a straightforward and uncomplicated theory,
while for more sophisticated ideas five or more cases with similar results are needed [53].
Another thing that needs to be considered beforehand is how the collected data will be
organized. A case study requires a systematic organisation of gathered information as
the researcher usually needs to handle massive amount of data from multiple sources.
Finally, comprehensively and systematically formatted evidence helps the researcher to
keep in mind the initial research question and follow the study purpose.
The data for the exploratory research can be collected directly from the subject (primary
research) or from already existing sources, such as published papers and online articles
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
33
==PAGE:45==
(secondary research). Although exploratory research is often conducted in qualitative na-
ture, it sometimes has quantitative nature as well. While qualitative approach relies on
non-numerical data (e.g. interviews, observations, focus groups, etc.), qualitative studies
utilize measurable data, such as experiment outcomes, surveys, or statistical reports. Al-
though quantitative and qualitative methods can both be used for exploratory research,
the choice should be made individually as they provide different perspectives on the re-
search subject.
4.4
Data analysis phase
The next phase is to analyze and to interpret the gathered information. Similar to collect-
ing the data, evaluating information should be done individually for each case in collective
case studies before making cross comparisons and coming to conclusions. Moreover, dif-
ferent viewpoints should be taken into account while analyzing raw information, e.g. sort-
ing the data in various ways to expose new insights [54]. Furthermore, case study method
provides the investigator with an opportunity to triangulate data in order to increase the
internal validity of the research [53] and strengthen the findings and the conclusions [54].
It also helps the investigators to see beyond their initial impressions and expectation to
improve the quality and the reliability of the findings. Flowcharts, tables, and other dis-
plays provide visual interpretation that allows to see hidden patterns. Research teams
use quantitative data to back up and corroborate the qualitative data which is used to ex-
plain the theory of the outcomes of the study. Another technique, a cross-case search for
patterns, prevents the researcher from coming to any impulsive and premature assump-
tions by requiring a thorough and deep investigation of each case under the study [54].
This method divides the data by certain types across all units under investigation. Then,
after analyzing the data of this type, a pattern is derived. The corroboration of the pattern
by some evidence from the data of another type increases the confidence in the outcome.
When the pattern is challenged by the evidence from another data type, it is a clear sign
for an investigator that a further probing is required to identify the cause of the difference.
4.5
Reporting phase
Finally, the last step of the exploratory case study is reporting. Here, the researcher aims
to transform the findings into a logical and understandable summary that can be easily
conveyed to a reader. It is essential to present sufficient evidence to ensure the reader
of the quality of findings through showing that data has been examined via all possible
angles. Additionally, it is vital to pay particular attention to articulating the boundaries of the
research. It should be clear for the reader that all the research questions are answered,
as well as what perspectives are open for further investigations. Research is a state of art,
so techniques for creating an illustrative report vary from researcher to researcher. Some
convey their study in a narrative form as a story, while others prefer a more structural
approach. However, the research must ensure these concepts are explicitly covered, no
matter what strategy the researcher has chosen.
4.6
Research methodology
This thesis primary research methodology approach is an exploratory case study research
as it suits both the needs of the research and the nature of the project under this study. To
begin with, the case study methodology is appropriate for real-life situations and industrial
projects, like a distributed system under the study of this thesis. Modern software is evolv-
ing with a dynamic pace, both from technological and business points of view. In terms
of technology, new tools and strategies appear every day. Hence, developers incorpo-
rate them into the existing product in order to keep up with the customers expectations
34
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:46==
and to eliminate the risk of growing technical debt. With regard to business, the product
must meet customers requirements so as to keep them from going to competitors. Such
rapidly changing environment is hard to reproduce with an experimental setup, so case
study methodology suits the nature of the solution under the research.
Literature review conducted in Section 3 revealed that the topic of the microservice testing
lacks the analysis of the practical application of the automated testing in real industry
projects. With regards to the microfrontend architecture, there is even less research on
the topic, due to the novelty of the approach. Hence, findings of the current research can
act as a baseline for a hypothesis of another adjacent research.
Finally, in contrast to the explanatory study, which explores the reasons behind some
well-documented phenomena, exploratory method has no predetermined outcome or pre-
sumption that it aims to support. On the contrary, the study is carried out with an open
mind in order to reveal unknown patterns that the industry solutions follow. These as-
pects combined make the exploratory case study methodology the most suitable for the
distributed system under research of this thesis.
With regards to the methods used, this thesis follows the primary research method by col-
lecting the data directly from the project under the study rather than from already existing
research. This thesis utilizes quantitative research method and expresses the outcomes
using plots and tables.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
35
==PAGE:47==
5
Design
5.1
Case project overview
5.1.1
Business requirements overview
The application under research is a microservice-based business-to-business solution
Smartly.io for automation of the advertisement on various social media platforms, such as
Facebook, Instagram, Youtube, and etc. The platform allows its customers to scale their
advertising in an effective manner with minimum manual work. The application takes all
the routine of creating the advertisements, whilst customers can focus on the strategic
and value-adding work.
The microservice-based architecture serves the requirements of the business well. Each
platform has different advertisement formats, which would be difficult to keep within one
interface, both from the backend and the UI points of view. Therefore, the solution com-
prises dedicated microservices for each of the platforms. Together with the advertise-
ment automation, the application offers various creative tools for designing personalized
images and videos for the social platforms. Additionally, it allows its users to build in-
sightful custom-defined reports and track performance of their advertisement campaigns
with third-party data integrations. Finally, there are services that help to maintain internal
infrastructure, such as billing, admin panel, etc. Each of these functions are implemented
by different microservices.
Typically, there is one team taking care of two to four microservices, depending on their
size and context. The majority of teams are vertical, meaning that each team consists of
full-stack developers. The frontend follows the pattern of the microfrontends, so business
boundaries are strictly defined and maintained by separate teams on both backend and
frontend parts of the subsystem.
5.1.2
Architectural overview
The product is following a polyglot microservices architecture, so the technology stack
varies from team to team. There are 52 services running in production written in 7 pro-
gramming languages. Microservices communicate with each other via queuing mech-
anisms and HTTPS protocol. Apart from dedicated relational databases, services have
more lightweight mechanisms like caches. Each service has many integrations, both inter-
nal and third party. The services are shipped as Docker containers [55] via Kubernetes, a
container orchestration platform [56]. It allows teams to operate their services in an effec-
tive manner, e.g. choose how many replicas or which processes to run. Such approach
makes creating and operating new services easier and less effort and time-consuming.
In Section 2.1.6 earlier in this paper, we discussed various paths to adopting microsrvice
architecture. The project under research was initially build as a monolith. Later, as the
engineering team grew, the company decided to standardise the setup and build better
tooling. It naturally lead to building smaller and more manageable services, and company
shifted their backend to the microservices. After a while, engineering team decided to
manage the complexity of the UI as well. As a result, the platform is strictly partitioned on
both frontend and server sides, and each team has well-defined boundaries within which
they operate.
36
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:48==
5.1.3
Organisational overview
The company does not have separate QA personnel for handling testing, so maintaining
and writing test suits falls within the responsibility of every developer. All new code that
goes to production is expected to be tested prior to shipping. CI/CD pipelines ensure that
no code is deployed unless all tests are successfully passed.
Apart from the automation testing practicalities, teams still use manual acceptance testing,
namely, Production Testing discussed in Section 3. After all automated tests are passed,
an upgraded microfrontend gets released to a private registry. Then, a pull request to
upgrade the microfrontend is opened in the host frontend repository. This repository also
has a number of integration automated tests that aim to ensure that the updated package
works properly with the shared code. Finally, after host’s pipeline processes are finished
successfully, the code from the pull request gets automatically deployed in parallel with
production. A developer is then provided with a link to test the changes manually. It
allows to see how the application would behave with the production data once the code
is merged to the main branch and deployed to a real production environment. There, a
developer is able to verify the correctness of the system using an exploratory software
testing strategy [57].
The company does not have multiple environments (development, testing, staging and
production). The application relies heavily on 3rd party integrations, and the majority of
them do not provide any sandbox environments. Few that offer such opportunity behave
differently on their staging environments, which gives a false sense of confidence in per-
formance due to lack of load. In systems where a large amount of data is processed and
exchanged with the third part integrations, such as an application under research, such
inaccuracy can be especially misleading. However, developers have an opportunity to
deploy the microservices (the whole solution, or just a part of it) to a separate cluster for
development purposes or manual acceptance testing.
5.2
Data selection
In order to keep the study narrowly focused, only the microservices and the microfrontend
applications were selected for the data collection. Each team also develops and maintains
a number of various libraries, such as HTTP clients, middleware packages, etc. Every
library has its own release pipeline with automated tests of different granularity. However,
these codebases are not taken into account in this research, although it is a possible
extension for the future studies.
In total, there are 52 microservices and 14 microfrontends. The numbers are uneven,
since not every microservice has a user facing interface. The stack for the backend repos-
itories comprises 7 different programming languages, whilst microfrontends are all written
using React, an open-source front-end JavaScript library [58]. Services are maintained
by 22 different teams.
5.3
Data collection
For each repository, all tests were manually examined and counted. Test suits from back-
end and frontend repositories were classified according to the pyramid patterns described
in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, accordingly. Then, the repositories were classified by teams
responsible for them in order to identify the dependence of the team’s influence on the
testing practicalities. Finally, data from incident reporting system was gathered and anal-
ysed to study the correlation between single service stability and the testing approach
used within it.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
37
==PAGE:49==
5.3.1
Identified testing scope for microservices
As mentioned in Section 2.4.1, there are still some discrepancies on the notation and the
terms used in the context of testing in MSA due to the novelty of the approach. Hence,
when discussing test classification used in the project, it is vital to highlight what scope
exactly each type covers and how they are implemented. As a result of data analysis of
the backend repositories, the following test types were identified:
• Unit tests. These are extensively used throughout the project. The scope of unit
tests follows the scope described in Section 2.4.1 earlier in this paper;
• Integration tests. These tests cover communication paths with external modules,
such as databases, caches, message queues, and the related logic. Integrations
with other microservices, as well as third party remote systems, are mocked with
HTTP server mocking tools;
• Out of process component tests. Tests of this type aim to exactly replicate the re-
quests that the real server consumers would make. Each test suit instantiates a
server and its dependencies, such as databases, caches, and message queues.
Each test verifies a complete holistic scenario that the microservice is responsible
for via API. Similarly to the integration tests, communication with collaborating mi-
croservices and remote systems are mocked;
• Contract tests. These tests follow the scope defined in Section 2.4.1 and only aim to
verify that the service follows the contract. Database queries and logic are mocked,
so that only interfaces are tested.
Analysis of the automated tests implemented in the backend repositories revealed that
some test types are not utilized by the teams, such as in-process component tests and
end-to-end tests. Instead, engineers aim to have the individual services well tested with
less coarse grained tests and then enforce contracts between the APIs to ensure that
they work well together. The contracts are defined in shared API documentation that
must be kept up-to-date. Some teams use schema generators (e.g. OpenAPI spec client
generator [59]) that help to validate request and response types.
It was also noted that the teams do not use consumer driven contract testing as such; tests
of this type are implemented and maintained by the team responsible for the producer
microservice. Although they are not as effective as the consumer driven tests, they still
give instant feedback to the engineer whether any change violates the contract. However,
it is then up to the developer to fix the implementation so that the contract is met, or inform
the affected teams of the changes and handle the transition.
5.3.2
Identified testing scope for microfrontends
As a result of data analysis of the microfrontend repositories, the following test types were
identified:
• Unit tests. Similarly to the backend repositories, frontend codebases rely heavily
on unit tests. In the context of frontend libraries, unit testing aims to verify that an
individual component renders correctly for some specified properties passed to it by
the parent component, or reacts as expected when some events are fired. Teams
utilize both sociable and solitary unit tests;
• Integration tests. For the frontend applications, this type of tests aim to verify that
multiple components work together and communicate with the backend correctly,
the data flows as expected, and state changes according to the specifications. This
can be done e.g. via calling the parent component. Integration tests do not include
38
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:50==
UI testing, and backend responses are mocked to mimic the behaviour of the back-
end;
• UI tests. Some teams utilize UI tests that imitate user’s actions, such as clicking the
buttons or filling the inputs. UI tests use the same mocks as the integration tests,
so that testing can be performed exclusively for the frontend application, without a
need to wire up the server.
In order to mitigate the risk of the contract failure between the microfrontend and the
server, teams use schema generation tools that make it possible to download an up-to-
date schema from a running server. This way, developers are able to mock the responses
from the backend in full compliance with the contract, maintaining high test performance at
the same time. This combination of UI testing and contract enforcement can increase the
confidence in the application behaviour significantly. Full end-to-end tests between the
microfrontend and its dedicated backend, as well as full system tests, are not implemented
in favor of more granular strategies.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
39
==PAGE:51==
6
Evaluation
In total, 52 microservices and 14 microfrontends were analysed. A 100% stacked column
chart was chosen to show the test type distribution within each service. It represents the
part-to-whole proportions of independent data series, which serves the needs of the re-
search well: it clearly reveals whether the pattern that each independent service follow
aligns with the pyramid model. The vertical axis is represented in percentages, where
100% is all of the tests in the repository, while each column on the horizontal axis corre-
sponds to one of the repositories.
6.1
Microservices data analysis
To begin with, median and mean values were calculated to reveal general trends (see
Table 6.1). Median values play an important role here, as data clearly has some outliers,
sample size is rather small, and we have no reason to believe that the distribution of data
is symmetrical. The table shows that on average, the microservices do not follow pyramid
form due to component tests being extensively used; they form a significant proportion of
all test types and typically take around 30% of all tests. Unit tests form the largest group
and take more than 40% on average, while integration tests are almost twice less popular
(24% on average). Finally, contract tests are only used in a few projects and take less
then 3% on average, while the median value is 0%, meaning that more than half of all
microservices do not utilize this kind of tests.
Table 6.1: Median and average values for different test types used in microservices
Test type
Median
Mean
Component tests
26.17%
30.85%
Contract tests
0
%
2.49%
Integration tests
21
%
24
%
Unit tests
42.97%
42.91%
Figure 6.1 represents test distribution for the backend repositories. Legend shows test
types as they appear in the pyramid, from the base (unit tests) to its top (out of process
component tests). Although the automated testing pyramid model for the microservices
described in Section 2.4.1 does not specify the exact percentage each test type should
take in the pyramid, we can see whether the overall pattern of pyramid shape is followed.
As mentioned earlier in the thesis, the company does not utilize end-to-end system tests,
so the top of the pyramid is omitted.
There are two biggest trends that were identified through the collected data. For 27 repos-
itories, the amount of unit tests is prevailing (around 52% of all the repositories). Then,
for 30 codebases (57.69%) it is true that the proportion of component tests (which should
be the least proportion according to the pyramid) is more than 25% of all test types, which
makes it up to more than a half of all the cases. The chart also reveals that some microser-
vices utilize only a few integration tests (less then 10% of all the test) or do no use them
at all; it is true for 15 cases, which makes it up to more than a quarter of all repositories
(28.85%).
40
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.1: Automated test type distribution for microservices
Moreover, there are 6 microservices with no component tests. However, 2 of them have a
decent amount of contract tests instead (around 12 and 6 per cent, respectfully) and still
follow the pyramid scheme with unit, integration, and contract testing. Among the rest,
3 do not have an API interface as such (they are rather services handling a stream of
incoming messages or running scheduled tasks).
Overall, the figure illustrates that the amount of microservices that follow the theoretical
model precisely is relatively low (3 out of 52, 5.76%). One of the possible reasons for that
is the fact that only slightly more than a third of all repositories contain contract tests (17
out of 52, 32.69%). For the rest of the repositories, where the contract tests are omitted
completely, some still form the pyramidal shape with only unit, integration, and component
tests (8 out of 52, 15.38%). Another category that visually stands out is the microservices
with fewer unit tests than integration tests (13 repositories, 25%). However, 10 of 52
repositories (19.23%) have almost the same amount of unit tests as integration tests (with
difference less than 10%). Finally, the amount of codebases following a reverse-pyramid
scheme without contract tests is significantly low (only 3 cases, 5.76%).
The next step was to aggregate the data based on the team responsible for the repository.
The corresponding proportions are represented on Figure 6.2. This chart only includes
teams that are responsible for 2 or more repositories. Showing teams that only take
custody of a single microservice would not make sense, as it would not reveal any possible
influence of the team on testing practicalities.
The chart seems to suggest that some teams prefer out of process component tests over
the other types of testing. For instance, among the repositories where out of process
component tests take up more than 50 percent (9 repositories out of 38), 4 belong to team-
1, 3 belong to team-6, and the rest 2 to team-10. Although 2 out of 3 microservices with
no component tests at all also belong to team-6, these microservices only run automated
tasks or handle messages from the queue, meaning they do not utilize any accessible
public API. These two repositories, however, are primarily tested by the integration tests.
This gives an impression that some teams, e.g. team-6, favour more coarse-grained test
types.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
41
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.2: Automated test type distribution for microservices aggregated by team
Similarly to the teams that favour component tests, there are some that only implement
a few of them. For example, among the repositories that belong to team team-4 and
team-3, tests of this type make up only 3-14% and 0.84-25%, respectively. Additionally,
the chart reveals that there is no, or little, correlation between the team and the fact that
contract tests are used or not. Apart from team-15, which implements contract testing in
all its services, other teams only write tests of this type in one of their repositories.
6.2
Microfrontends data analysis
Similarly to the microservices, mean and median values were calculated for the frontend
repositories (see Table 6.2), as well as a stacked column chart was built to illustrate test
type distribution within each microfrontend application (see Figure 6.3).
As shown in Table 6.2, generally, microfrontends follow the pyramid model, however the
proportions are significantly shifted towards unit tests. Although the mean value for the
integration tests almost reaches 10%, the median value is low (less then 2%), meaning
that most of the microfrontends either do not utilize this type of tests at all, or only imple-
ment a few of them. Finally, median value for the UI tests is 0%, which means that more
than a half of all repositories do not contain tests of this type at all.
Table 6.2: Median and average values for different test types used in microfrontends
Test type
Median
Mean
UI tests
0
%
5
%
Integration tests
1.66%
9.53%
Unit tests
93.22%
85.14%
Overall, unit testing is the most popular testing category of all in the vast majority of repos-
itories (13 out of 14, 92.86%). The least popular type is the UI testing. It is only used in 5
microfrontends, where it takes no more than 2.35% of all test suits in the majority of them.
42
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.3: Automated test type distribution for microfrontends
As seen from the figure, there is one repository that stands out in terms of using UI tests:
they take up 68.5% of all tests in microfrontend-3 repository. However, this should not be
taken as an exception to the trend, as this particular microfrontend is in the active phase
of development and is not yet deployed to production.
In terms of integration testing, it is more popular then UI testing and used in a half of
all codebases. For some of the repositories, they take no more than 10% of all tests
(3 codebases), while for others (also 3 cases) the share of integration tests is around
one third. There has not been detected a single approach in implementing the integration
mechanisms; implementations varied case-by-case. Generally, three strategies are used:
(1) using generated schemas (especially for microservices that leverage GraphQL [60]
and OpenAPI tools, as these allow to generate precise schemas identical to those used in
production), (2) HTTP server mocking libraries, and (3) mocks developed by the producing
microservices and shipped in easy-to-use packages.
Finally, there is a large proportion of repositories that only implement unit tests (5 out of
14, 35.71%). These codebases are thoroughly covered with tests, however they do not
implement any mechanisms that aim to verify the integration with the backend. Overall,
almost 30% of the microfrontends (4 out of 14) followed the pyramid model, although the
proportions are heavily shifted towards unit tests.
6.3
Incident monitoring system data analysis
In Section 6.1, major trends for the microservice automated testing were identified: for
slightly more than a half of all repositories, unit tests form a base of the automation testing
pyramid (just like the theoretical model proposes) and for almost 58% of all codebases,
component tests take up more than 25% of the pyramid (although they should form the
least proportion, the peak of the pyramid, according to the theoretical model). For these
trends, it was decided to calculate the amount of faults registered by the incident report
system used in the company.
The system tracks the incidents happening in a microservice, such as unexpected unhan-
dled exceptions, schema validation failures, etc. In this paper, only incidents happened
on the backend side are analysed, due to the fact that the frontend parts do not utilize such
a unified approach. Additionally, due to this thesis focusing on studying the correspon-
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
43
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.4: Incidents values for the major trends
dence of real practices to the theoretical automated testing pyramid model, the incidents
were also collected for the microservices that follow the pyramid model and the reverse
pyramid model in their testing strategies. The time frame for collecting the incidents is
6 months. It is a long enough interval to collect the relevant metrics, as it includes both
months with high site traffic (November and December, when the companies tend to pub-
lish lots of advertisements in anticipation of the winter holidays) and periods with relatively
low activity (e.g. months after the holidays).
For all microservices together, as well as for each of the group described above, mean and
median values of incidents registered within the time period of 6 months were calculated
(see Figure 6.4). Both mean and median values were used as there are clear outliers in
the data.
For the microservices that have a significantly larger number of the component tests that
it is intended by the model (more than 25%), the mean number of incidents is 26% less
then the average number of faults for all microservices together; the median value is 40%
less then the median value calculated for all the codebases. For the group of services
with unit tests prevailing over the other type of tests, mean and median numbers were 2%
and 7% higher then those for all microservices, accordingly.
These numbers led to the idea that a higher number of component tests might correlate
with better service resilience. Hence, it was decided to make the classification more
coarse grained: similar values were calculated for the codebases with unit tests taking up
more 50% of the pyramid, as well as for those codebases where component tests took up
more than a half of all the test types. The mean and the median values for the group with
more unit tests were found to be 7% and 43% higher then the corresponding values for all
microservices. The group of the repositories with more component tests, again, showed
better results: mean and median values were lower then those of all the microservices
(165% and 133% lower, accordingly). The results are clearly indicated on the Figure 6.4.
It reveals that the group of the microservices with unit tests taking up over a half of the
pyramid showed worse result than the bigger group of repositories with unit tests taking
up more than 25%. The opposite results were identified for the out of process component
44
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:56==
tests: the smaller group with more than 50% of tests of this type showed better results then
the larger group with component tests taking more than a quarter of the testing pyramid.
Finally, median value calculated for the repositories following a pyramid model were very
close to the median value calculated for all microservices, while the average number
was significantly less then that for all microservices. Codebases that follow the reverse
pyramid model, on the other hand, showed better results: both median and mean values
were found to be the lowest of all groups.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
45
==PAGE:57==
7
Discussion
This chapter presents the results of the current study. First, it provides answers to the
research questions and elaborates on major findings in Section 7.1. Then, Section 7.2
reflects on the literature review and its relation to the outcomes of this paper. Section 7.3
describes the limitations of the study. Finally, Section 7.4 discusses possible grounds for
the future work.
7.1
Research questions revisited
RQ1: Do industry microservice-based projects follow the theoretical model of the
automated testing?
The system under study followed the MSA approach on both frontend and backend sides.
However, the nature of the UI applications differs a lot from the nature of the backend
servers, as well as the testing strategies of the frontend and the backend sides have
many dissimilarities. Hence, we studied the backend microservices and the microfron-
tends separately, which led to the RQ1 being split into two more explicit subquestions
that provide independent answers on the topic of testing practicalities on the client side
and the server side applications.
How do backend microservices in the MSA-based applications follow the theoreti-
cal model of the automated testing?
Overall, data analysis revealed that the proportion of the microservices following the the-
oretical automated testing model precisely is relatively low. It was shown that the devel-
opers tend to either lean towards more coarse grained test types (e.g. out of process
component tests) or put most of their efforts into small unit tests rather than distribute the
load between different test types.
While the tendency to choose unit tests is clear (they are easy to implement and fast to
execute), out of process component tests require some preparation, such as wiring up the
server and the database, setting up stubs for the external dependencies, etc. However,
it was noticed that once the component test is set up, developers tend to treat it as a
grey-box test instead of a black-box test. For instance, engineers chose to verify not
only the result of the API call, but also some internal system aspects, such as changes
in the data storage or performed stub behaviour. This is, most probably, due to the fact
that out of process component tests cover the most functionality of all test types (except
for end-to-end tests, which are often not implemented in the MSA applications). Hence,
they allow the developers to test the contract of the service, the encapsulated logic, and
the communication with the external dependencies within a single test run. This gives
an impression that writing a single out of process component test relieves engineers of
a burden of writing smaller scope tests, such as contract, integration, and in-process
component tests. Hence, once one large test suit is implemented, developers tend to
verify the code paths that it covers in all possible ways. This violates the notation of the
out of process component testing, but most importantly, this increases test runtime and
causes additional cost of maintenance, as a more coarse test is more cumbersome to
debug and adjust if needed.
46
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:58==
Some test types, such as contract tests, are only implemented in a few of the repositories.
One possible reason for that is the out of process tests covering the contract compliance
already. As a result, developers prefer to write a high-level test suit that verifies more
functionality, albeit slowly. Integration tests, however, are implemented in the majority of
the repositories, but the proportion is lower that it is intended by the theoretical model.
This, again, can be explained by the larger proportion of the out of process component
tests that also cover the integration paths between the external dependencies. Finally,
business facing end-to-end tests are omitted in the application under study due to the
difficulties of its implementation in the MSA systems described in Section 2.4.1.
How do microfrontends in the MSA-based applications follow the theoretical model
of the automated testing?
All in all, only a third of all microfrontends followed the theoretical pyramid model. Typ-
ically, the proportion was shifted towards unit testing, and some of the codebases were
tested with the unit tests only. UI tests, on the other hand, were rarely implemented and
took up only a couple percent of all test types. This is, most probably, due to the fact that
these tests have long execution time, as they include integration with the web browser.
Additionally, they are typically harder to write and maintain than more low level test types.
Integration tests were implemented in 50% of the frontend codebases, although they typ-
ically formed smaller proportion than it is intended by the theoretical model. The largest
number of integration tests were implemented in the repositories with an appropriate in-
frastructure, such as generated schemas identical to the ones running in production or
mocks developed by the producing microservices and shipped in easy-to-use packages.
Repositories without such infrastructure contained only a few or no integration tests. This
gives an impression that properly configured and convenient infrastructure encourages
developers to follow test guidelines more precisely.
Finally, end-to-end tests have been omitted in favor of testing in production, a method-
ology described in Section 3.3. It helps to save time and effort needed for setting up
a separate environment, test debugging, and maintenance, as well as to eliminate long
running end-to-end tests from the CI/CD pipeline. Moreover, testing in production is a
pure business-facing testing strategy that allows non-technical team members, such as
managers and product owners, to validate the behaviour of the product. It also allows de-
velopers to perform exploratory testing with the load of real production data, which would
be cumbersome to do with traditional end-to-end testing.
RQ2: How strong is team’s influence on the testing practicalities in polyglot mi-
croservice architecture?
Analysis of the collected data revealed that team does have some influence on the testing
strategy, however it is not always the major influencing aspect. Some teams tend to prefer
more coarse grained tests over low level test types. In case of web servers, these teams
favour out of process component tests, while for the microservices with no public API (e.g.
task runners or scheduled jobs) integration testing was the major test type.
One of the assumptions that came up during the data collection was that only certain
teams would utilize contract tests, as this type of testing was only used in a few of the
repositories. However, this assumption did not prove to be true, and no correlation was
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
47
==PAGE:59==
seen between the team maintaining the microservice and the usage of contract tests. Most
probably, the decision to implement contract testing was driven by individual developer’s
motivation rather than team’s practicalities and guidelines.
Finally, the case project under study did not allow to make any assumptions regarding the
correlation between the team’s practices and the adoption of end-to-end tests. While all
other types of testing were free to implement for everyone and it has been up to a certain
team which testing strategy to adopt, end-to-end system tests need a separate environ-
ment to be set up for the whole solution. This requires a lot of additional efforts, such as
collaboration with DevOps team, allocation of additional resources and handling the ex-
ternal dependencies (e.g. negotiating with third-party services on the use of sandboxes,
which is not always possible or involves financial costs). As a result, such decision would
require major structural changes to the product and cannot be made by the team alone.
However, this opens a lot of possibilities for the future work, where similar research can
be conducted for the products with different company rules and organization.
RQ3: What is the correlation between the system quality and how precise the ex-
isting test guidelines are followed?
Analysis of the data collected by the incident tracking system revealed that there is indeed
a correlation between the amount of faults happened in the microservice and the testing
strategy that this service implements. The larger the proportion of more coarse grained
tests was, the fewer incidents occurred, and vice versa - for the services that were pri-
marily tested with lower level unit tests, both mean and median numbers were higher than
the corresponding values calculated for the whole solution.
The results for the microservices that followed the reverses pyramid testing structure
echoed this trend: the amount of incidents registered by these applications was the lowest
of all. Values for the codebases that followed the pyramid model precisely were around
the average numbers calculated for the whole solution.
These results lead to the assumption that the microservices favour more coarse grained
tests, as they aim to test both the encapsulated logic and the integrations with the exter-
nal dependencies. Since MSA systems are based on small services communicating via
lightweight protocols, where each service has many collaborators, the integration paths
play a crucial role in the proper functioning of the whole system. Hence, thorough testing
of larger code parts that include coverage of multiple communication mechanisms with
the external dependencies can prevent many incidents.
7.2
Comparison between results and literature
Multiple surveys and literature reviews ([15], [40], [42], [29]) stated that the automated
testing pyramid model is not suitable for the MSA-based applications, and developers
tend to prefer more systematic and coarse grained tests over small unit tests. On the
other hand, some sources ([41]) consider unit tests to be the most popular test type in the
microservice system. This thesis echoes both points of view, as the major contradictory
trends that were identified in this paper are repositories that rely heavily on unit tests and
those that prefer out of process component tests, that should form the smallest proportion
of all testing types according to the theoretical model.
In addition, current study echoed [15] and [40] regarding the popularity of the consumer-
driven contract testing. This approach was not commonly used in the project under the
48
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:60==
study as well, and teams preferred to delegate the implementation of service stubs to the
testing side (the producing service).
Analysis of the team’s impact on the testing practicalities revealed that whilst it can indeed
affect testing in some cases, this cannot be treated as the major influencing aspect. How-
ever, as [29] claims, high team influence is mainly observed in young small scale projects,
while in more mature products testing guidelines play a more important role. Hence, this
study does not contradict [29].
Finally, this thesis agrees with the fact that the developers of the microservices tend to
avoid utilising end-to-end system tests that cover multiple microservices at once ([41]
echoes this) due to the complexity and flakiness of these tests.
7.3
Study limitations
Current exploratory study has many limitations that should be kept in mind when referring
to its results. To begin with, although the case project under study is rather large and
consists of 52 microservices and 14 microfrontends implemented by different polyglot
teams, it is still being maintained by a single organization. Moreover, the microservices
vary in size a lot, which is not taken into account in this study. Furthermore, some services
take up more traffic then others, which may also affect the testing strategy used by the
team. Finally, incidents analysis can also be affected by the traffic each microservice
experiences, and this relation is not addressed within this thesis.
7.4
Future work
Overall, the limitations described above highlight the possibilities for the future research.
To increase the generalizability of the results, a larger study with more case projects
should be considered, preferably maintained by different companies. This would also
allow to study the effect of the team practicalities on the testing strategy in more details,
as well as consider how various agile methodologies affect testing. Furthermore, a more
extensive study with incidents analysis similar to the one performed in this paper would
allow to formulate some research-backed guidelines to the automated testing of the mi-
croservices.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
49
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusion
This thesis studied automated testing practices for the microservice software applica-
tions. In particular, it evaluated how the theoretical model is followed by the industry
MSA solutions with microfrontends-based user interface and investigates the correlation
between the service quality in terms of user experience and adherence to the theoreti-
cal guidelines. Literature review showed that the topic of the microserevice testing lacks
production-focused studies that provide a feedback from the industry on the usage of the
theoretical models. This work outcomes contribute to covering this gap and highlight the
real alignment with the academic models in the industry.
The main study problem was approached by the case study research methodology that
was guided by the established research questions. The system under the research is
built according to the polyglot microservices architecture with the client side represented
by the microfrontends. Tests from each of the microservice repositories were collected,
analyzed, and classified according to the theoretical automated testing pyramid pattern.
Graphical representations based on the collected data were made to show the distribution
of different testing types among the repositories. Analyzed data revealed several patterns
that are most commonly followed by the microservices, as well as showed the proportion
of the codebases following the theoretical guidelines precisely. Overall, it was shown that
the developers tend to either lean towards tests with larger scope that allow to exercise
and verify many paths within one run or focus on small unit tests instead of distributing the
load between different test types as intended by the theoretical model. Furthermore, it was
revealed that the amount of the microservices tested accordingly to the pyramid pattern
is relatively low. Similar analysis performed on the client side repositories showed that
the theoretical model is mostly followed by the microfrontends, although the preference
for unit tests is significant.
To study the influence of the team’s practicalities on the testing strategies, the data was
analyzed from the perspective of the team responsible for the microservice. The results
echoed previous related works and revealed that such influence does exist, although it
cannot be claimed as the main decisive factor.
Finally, investigation of the correlation between the system quality and adherence to the
theoretical guidelines revealed that the microservices mostly favour more coarse grained
tests that verify integration paths and contract compliance within its scope. Such trend
corresponds to the nature of the MSA applications that heavily relies on the communica-
tion protocols and the external integrations.
Overall, current study provides an overview on the microservice automated testing practi-
calities in the industry and their alignment with the theoretical models via analyzing a real
MSA-based system testing strategies and the amount of unhandled incidents happened
in it. It confirms some of the related research and echoes the need to develop more appro-
priate theoretical models for the automated testing in modern architectural styles in close
collaboration between industry and academia. Moreover, it challenges the experts to re-
visit some of the existing theoretical concepts and determine how they can be adjusted
to the rapidly evolving microservice architecture style. To better understand the nature of
the industry and its adherence to the academic practices, as well as to increase the gen-
eralizability of the outcomes, practitioners should consider a larger study with more case
projects from different companies. Furthermore, a more extensive analysis on the system
50
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:62==
quality and the amount of incidents happening in the MSA-based systems would allow to
formulate new research-backed guidelines to the automated testing of the microservices.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
51
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Lorenzo De Lauretis. “From Monolithic Architecture to Microservices Architecture”.
In: 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering Work-
shops (ISSREW). 2019, pp. 93–96. DOI: 10.1109/ISSREW.2019.00050.
[2]
Mike Cohn. Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum. 1st. Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2009. ISBN: 0321579364.
[3]
Nicola Dragoni et al. “Microservices: yesterday, today, and tomorrow”. In: (June
2016).
[4]
Alan Sill. “The Design and Architecture of Microservices”. In: IEEE Cloud Computing
3.5 (2016), pp. 76–80. DOI: 10.1109/MCC.2016.111.
[5]
Romana Gnatyk. Microservices vs Monolith: which architecture is the best choice for
your business? https://www.n-ix.com/microservices-vs-monolith-which-architecture-
best-choice-your-business/. Accessed: 2022-04-13. Oct. 2018.
[6]
Oleksii Dushenin. Monolithic Architecture. Advantages and Disadvantages. https:
//datamify.medium.com/monolithic- architecture- advantages- and- disadvantages-
e71a603eec89. Accessed: 2022-04-13. Jan. 2021.
[7]
Martin Fowler James Lewis. Microservices. https : / / martinfowler . com / articles /
microservices.html. Accessed: 2022-04-13. Mar. 2014.
[8]
Microservice architecture style. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/
guide/architecture-styles/microservices. Accessed: 2022-04-15.
[9]
Arnon Rotem-Gal-Oz. “Fallacies of Distributed Computing Explained”. In: Doctor
Dobbs Journal (Jan. 2008).
[10]
Monolithic vs. Microservices Architecture. https://articles.microservices.com/monolithic-
vs-microservices-architecture-5c4848858f59. Accessed: 2022-04-16. Oct. 2015.
[11]
Martin Fowler. Microserice Premium. https://martinfowler.com/bliki/MicroservicePremium.
html. Accessed: 2022-04-16. May 2015.
[12]
Sam Newman. Microservices For Greenfield? https://samnewman.io/blog/2015/
04/07/microservices-for-greenfield/. Accessed: 2022-04-16. Apr. 2015.
[13]
Stefan Tilkov. Don’t start with a monolith. https://martinfowler.com/articles/dont-
start-monolith.html. Accessed: 2022-04-16. June 2015.
[14]
Wikipedia contributors. Right to be forgotten — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = Right _ to _ be _ forgotten & oldid =
1081314918. [Accessed: 2022-04-17]. 2022.
[15]
Muhammad Waseem et al. “Design, monitoring, and testing of microservices sys-
tems: The practitioners’ perspective”. In: Journal of Systems and Software 182
(2021), p. 111061. ISSN: 0164-1212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2021.111061.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121221001588.
[16]
Toby Clemson. Testing Strategies in a Microservice Architecture. https://martinfowler.
com/articles/microservice-testing/. Accessed: 2022-04-30. Nov. 2014.
[17]
Antonin Smid, Ruolin Wang, and Tom Černý. “Case study on data communication in
microservice architecture”. In: Sept. 2019, pp. 261–267. ISBN: 978-1-4503-6843-8.
DOI: 10.1145/3338840.3355659.
[18]
RabbitMQ. https://www.rabbitmq.com/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
[19]
Sagar Gupta. “Command Pattern Design for Web Application”. In: Proceedings of
Fifth International Congress on Information and Communication Technology. Ed. by
Xin-She Yang et al. Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp. 330–338.
52
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:64==
[20]
Communication in a microservice architecture. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/architect-microservice-container-applications/
communication-in-microservice-architecture. [Accessed: 2022-04-20]. 2022.
[21]
Anna Montelius. “An Exploratory Study of Micro Frontends”. MA thesis. Linköping
University, Software and Systems, 2021, p. 88.
[22]
Thomas Hamilton. What is Software Testing? Definition, Basics & Types in Software
Engineering. https://www.guru99.com/software-testing-introduction-importance.
html. Accessed: 2022-03-17. Feb. 2022.
[23]
Sanket. The exponential cost of fixing bugs. https://deepsource.io/blog/exponential-
cost-of-fixing-bugs/. Accessed: 2022-03-17. Jan. 2019.
[24]
Wilhelm Hasselbring and Guido Steinacker. “Microservice Architectures for Scal-
ability, Agility and Reliability in E-Commerce”. In: Apr. 2017, pp. 243–246. DOI:
10.1109/ICSAW.2017.11.
[25]
Lisa Crispin. Using the Agile Testing Quadrants. https://lisacrispin.com/2011/11/
08/using-the-agile-testing-quadrants/. Accessed: 2022-03-17. Nov. 2011.
[26]
Thomas Hamilton. Different Types of Testing in Software. https://www.guru99.com/
types-of-software-testing.html. Accessed: 2022-03-17. Feb. 2022.
[27]
Zeba Khanam and M.N. Ahsan. “Evaluating the effectiveness of test driven devel-
opment: Advantages and pitfalls”. In: International Journal of Applied Engineering
Research 12 (Jan. 2017), pp. 7705–7716.
[28]
Mohd Ehmer Khan and Farmeena Khan. “A Comparative Study of White Box, Black
Box and Grey Box Testing Techniques”. In: International Journal of Advanced Com-
puter Science and Applications 3.6 (2012). DOI: 10.14569/IJACSA.2012.030603.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2012.030603.
[29]
Joel Huttunen. “Micro service Testing Practices in Public Sector Software Projects”.
English. Master’s thesis. Aalto University. School of Electrical Engineering, 2017,
pp. 83 + 9. URL: http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi:aalto-201706135350.
[30]
D Savchenko, Gleb Radchenko, and Ossi Taipale. “Microservices validation: Mjol-
nirr platform case study”. In: May 2015. DOI: 10.1109/MIPRO.2015.7160271.
[31]
Andrei Contan, Catalin Dehelean, and Liviu Miclea. “Test automation pyramid from
theory to practice”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Automation, Quality
and Testing, Robotics (AQTR). 2018, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/AQTR.2018.8402699.
[32]
Eberhard Wolff. Microservices: Flexible Software Architecture. Addison-Wesley Pro-
fessional, Oct. 2016. ISBN: 9780134650449.
[33]
D. Knott. Hands-on mobile app testing. 2015.
[34]
Bohdan V. Oliinyk and Vasyl P. Oleksiuk. “Automation in software testing, can we
automate anything we want?” In: 2020.
[35]
Stephen Cass. The 2015 top ten programming languages. https://spectrum.ieee.
org/the-2015-top-ten-programming-languages#toggle-gdpr. Accessed: 2022-03-17.
2015.
[36]
Kanishk Kunal. Top Programming Languages in 2014 – IEEE Spectrum’s Ranking.
https://superdevresources.com/top-programming-languages-2014/. Accessed: 2022-
03-17. Sept. 2014.
[37]
Hans-Martin Adorf et al. “A Bayesian Prediction Model for Risk-Based Test Selec-
tion”. In: 2015 41st Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced
Applications. 2015, pp. 374–381. DOI: 10.1109/SEAA.2015.37.
[38]
Rudolf Ramler and Michael Felderer. “Requirements for Integrating Defect Predic-
tion and Risk-Based Testing”. In: 2016 42th Euromicro Conference on Software En-
gineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). 2016, pp. 359–362. DOI: 10.1109/
SEAA.2016.62.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
53
==PAGE:65==
[39]
Claus Klammer and Rudolf Ramler. “A Journey from Manual Testing to Automated
Test Generation in an Industry Project”. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C). 2017, pp. 591–592.
DOI: 10.1109/QRS-C.2017.108.
[40]
Muhammad Waseem et al. “Testing Microservices Architecture-Based Applications:
A Systematic Mapping Study”. In: 2020 27th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering
Conference (APSEC). 2020, pp. 119–128. DOI: 10.1109/APSEC51365.2020.00020.
[41]
Israr Ghani et al. “Microservice Testing Approaches: A Systematic Literature Re-
view”. In: 11 (Jan. 2019), pp. 75–80. DOI: 10.30880/ijie.2019.11.08.008.
[42]
Nicole Radziwill and Graham Freeman. Reframing the Test Pyramid for Digitally
Transformed Organizations. 2020. arXiv: 2011.00655 [cs.SE].
[43]
Vadim Mukhin et al. “Modified Method of Software Testing for Distributed Computer
System”. In: 2018 IEEE First International Conference on System Analysis Intelli-
gent Computing (SAIC). 2018, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/SAIC.2018.8516724.
[44]
Vadym Mukhin et al. “The Testing Mechanism for Software and Services Based on
Mike Cohn’s Testing Pyramid Modification”. In: 2021 11th IEEE International Con-
ference on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems: Technol-
ogy and Applications (IDAACS). Vol. 1. 2021, pp. 589–595. DOI: 10.1109/IDAACS53288.
2021.9660999.
[45]
Severi Peltonen, Luca Mezzalira, and Davide Taibi. “Motivations, benefits, and is-
sues for adopting Micro-Frontends: A Multivocal Literature Review”. In: Information
and Software Technology 136 (2021), p. 106571. ISSN: 0950-5849. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106571. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0950584921000549.
[46]
Jonada Ferracaku. “The state of micro frontends: challenges of applying and adopt-
ing client-side microservices”. English. Master’s thesis. University of Oulu, 2021.
URL: http://jultika.oulu.fi/files/nbnfioulu-202106188580.pdf.
[47]
Per Runeson and Martin Höst. “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study
research in software engineering”. In: Empirical Software Engineering 14 (2008),
pp. 131–164.
[48]
Zaidah Zainal. “Case study as a research method”. In: Jurnal Kemanusiaan 9 (June
2007).
[49]
Hans-Gerd Ridder. In: Zeitschrift für Personalforschung / German Journal of Re-
search in Human Resource Management 26.1 (2012), pp. 93–95. ISSN: 01796437,
18620000. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/23279888.
[50]
Jo McDonough and Steven McDonough. Research Methods for English Language
Teachers. London Routledge, 1997. DOI: 10.4324/9781315832548.
[51]
Chapter 3: Method (Exploratory Case Study). https://www.coursehero.com/file/
95314069/DissWB-03-Method-qual-exploratory-case-study-FINALpdf/. Accessed:
2022-03-26.
[52]
Jacques Hamel, Stephane Dufour, and Dominic Fortin. Case study methods / Jacques
Hamel, with Stephane Dufour, Dominic Fortin. eng;fre. Qualitative research meth-
ods ; v. 32. Newbury Park: Sage Publications, 1993. ISBN: 0803954166.
[53]
Sarah Slight et al. “The Case Study Approach”. In: BMC medical research method-
ology 11 (June 2011), p. 100. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2288-11-100.
[54]
Susan K Soy. The Case Study as a Research Method. https://www.academia.edu/
19516262/The_Case_Study_as_a_Research_Method. Accessed: 2022-03-26. 1997.
[55]
Docker. https://www.docker.com/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
[56]
Kubernetes. https://kubernetes.io/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
54
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
==PAGE:66==
[57]
Juha Itkonen. “Empirical studies on exploratory software testing”. English. Doctoral
thesis. School of Science, 2011, Verkkokirja (2236 KB, 74 s.) ISBN: 978-952-60-
4339-5 (PDF), 978-952-60-4338-8 (printed). URL: http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-
952-60-4339-5.
[58]
ReactJS. https://reactjs.org/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
[59]
OpenAPI Specification. https://swagger.io/specification/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
[60]
GraphQL. https://graphql.org/. Accessed: 2022-06-14.
Automated testing pyramid for microservices in practice
55
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
