==PAGE:1==
Design optimization of floating offshore wind
turbine with surrogate models
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
Esha Harshad Biniwale
DTU Wind Energy-M-0523
June, 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Author: Esha Harshad Biniwale
Title:
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine
with surrogate models
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical
University of Denmark with a unique integration of re-
search, education, innovation and public/private sec-
tor consulting in the field of wind energy.
Our ac-
tivities develop new opportunities and technology for
the global and Danish exploitation of wind energy.
Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields,
which are central for the development, innovation and
use of wind energy and provides the basis for ad-
vanced education at the education
DTU Wind Energy-M-0523
June, 2022
Project period:
January-June 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Suguang Dou
Ju Feng
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial
fulfillment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education
at the Technical University of Den-
mark.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind Energy
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
ii
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The rise of floating wind technology in the last few years has been unprecedented. The
main benefit being that it can be deployed in deep waters, alleviating the visual and noise
pollution created by its onshore and fixed offshore counterparts.
Currently, a major setback for floating wind is the excessive operation and maintenance
costs. Reducing the cost of sub-structures would in turn help reduce the over-all costs.
This report provides a framework for the optimization of the material costs of the mooring
lines for a floating offshore wind turbine using surrogate models, a data-driven optimization
project.
The considered system is the DTU 15 MW reference wind turbine installed on the UMaine
VolturnUS-S reference semi-submersible platform. Given the lack of available data, a
population data-set was created by varying the geometrical properties of mooring lines.
A large database of HAWC2 simulations results was generated. A few key responses,
namely tower top acceleration, surge, pitch and tension at the fairlead and anchor, were
chosen to be investigated. The simulation outputs were used as inputs for training the
surrogate model.
A deep neural network was trained to understand the relationship between the geometrical
properties of the mooring system and the motion responses of the structure. These neural
networks were used as the surrogate models within the optimization routine, thus, allowing
the search space to be more thoroughly searched.
For the applied methodology and conditions, it is shown that the required material cost can
be reduced by about 5%, and, at the same time the performance of the ﬂoating system -
expressed by the RMS of the tower-top acceleration, absolute value of maximum surge
and pitch and maximum tension at the fairlead and anchor- improved in some respect.
Keywords: Offshore renewable energy; Floating offshore wind turbines; mooring system
design; surrogate modelling; artificial neural networks; single-objective optimization
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to Ju Feng and Suguang Dou, my supervisors,
for their patient guidance, invaluable feedback and constructive criticism throughout the
course of this thesis. I offer my sincere appreciation for the learning opportunities provided.
I would like to express deep appreciation to Stephan Østergaard for generously providing
his knowledge and expertise whenever needed.
The completion of this thesis would not have been possible without the support of my
family. Their faith has helped bridge the three year gap spent away from home. Last but
not least, special thanks to Asterios Nastas and Theano Anagnostou for the late-night
feedback sessions, moral support and for proof reading this thesis.
iv
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:7==
List of acronyms
ABS
American Bureau of Shipping
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
BV
Bureau Veritas
DNV
Det Norske Veritas
DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
EU
European Union
FOW
Floating Offshore Wind
FOWT
Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
HAWC2
Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code 2nd generation
IEA
International Energy Agency
IEC
International Electro-technical Commission
LCOE
Levelized cost of electricity
ML
Machine learning
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
MLP
Multi-layer Perceptron
NLP
Non-linear Programming
NREL
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
SWL
Sea water level
TRM
Trust Region Method
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of acronyms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background on floating offshore wind
3
2.1
Offshore wind energy in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Floating offshore wind farms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Support structures for floating offshore wind farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Economics for support structures for floating offshore wind farms . . . . . . 12
2.5
Design standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Background on surrogate based optimization
15
3.1
Concept of surrogate optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Surrogate model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Artificial neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Design optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
State of the art in wind turbine design optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Challenges in wind turbine design optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Wind turbine, platform and mooring configuration
23
4.1
IEA Wind 15-Megawatt offshore reference wind turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
UMaine VolturnUS-S reference semi-submersible platform . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Mooring system configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Reference coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Optimum mooring design
31
5.1
Material cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Design criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Bounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.5
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.6
Optimization setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Surrogate model - ANN
39
6.1
Data-set preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Scaling the data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.4
Splitting the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.5
Training the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.6
Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Results
51
7.1
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2
Better design in population data-set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.3
Validation of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
vii
==PAGE:10==
8
Conclusion
66
Bibliography
68
A Data Sampling
72
B Extract data from chosen attribute
73
C Neural Network - Attribute 41
76
D Neural Network - Attribute 95
78
E
Neural Network - Attribute 135, 215, 219, 299, 303 and 383
80
F
Optimization
82
G Time history for pitch displacement
89
viii
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
With the beginning of an oil crisis in the world and an increasing uncertainty in the future of
energy, wind energy is beginning to stand out as an economically viable and non-polluting
source of energy. Harnessing the power of offshore wind in deeper waters is the next
logical step in securing a green future. The proposed workflow helps develop a framework
that will eventually play a role in realizing this green goal.
Although, support structure contribute to about 18% of the total capital costs, there is a
huge potential for cost reduction in this area. For the station-keeping of Floating Offshore
Wind Turbines (FOWTs), the mooring system is required to limit the translational and
rotational motion of the platform. To decrease the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE), is
it essential to decrease the overall cost of the sub-structures, while at the same time
maintaining the stability of the structure.
In this thesis, a data driven framework is created to to minimize the material cost of the
mooring system, by optimising the geometry of the mooring system, while also meeting
the stability requirements of the floating structure. A surrogate based optimization routine
is employed to minimize the length of the mooring lines, in turn reducing material costs,
attached to the UMaine semi-submersible floating platform system supporting the IEA
15 MW wind turbine. The optimized results are then validated by performing a fully coupled
time-domain simulation in HAWC2.
The high-fidelity simulations performed in HAWC2 are accurate, but have a high compu-
tation cost, which makes it difficult to use in design optimization where a large number of
simulations are to be performed. This thesis replaces this high-fidelity simulation with a
surrogate model to decrease the computation cost, thus aiding in the design optimization.
Here, the surrogate model used is neural networks (NNs).
NNs, also called Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), have been used in a variety of ap-
plications, especially in the domain of wind engineering and rightfully so. NNs have the
capability to map any kind of input to an output by adjusting the weights iteratively. This is
particularly useful in FOWTs, where there is non-linearity in the structure. In the context
of this thesis, NNs have effectively reduced the computation cost of the optimization.
Figure 1.1: Surrogate- based optimization workflow
The key stages of the surrogate based optimization followed for this thesis are illustrated
in Figure 1.1. In the first step, a number of combination of decision variables (population
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
1
==PAGE:12==
data-set) was created. Step two consists of running the fully coupled high-fidelity simu-
lation by using the decision variables as input along with a predefined wind input and an
irregular wave input. In step three, i.e, the optimization - an ANN was used to build the
surrogate model, using the decision variables and the selected responses obtained from
the simulation. A gradient-based optimization routine was then implemented to search for
a new, better design.
The implementation of this proposed methodology is presented in five main chapters as
follows. Chapters 2 and 3 presents a brief background on floating wind and surrogate
based optimization, respectively. A detailed description of the reference turbine, the ref-
erence platform and its mooring configuration is presented in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 sum-
marizes the single-objective optimization, objective function and design constraints used
to explore the complete design space. The surrogate model used and its validity is dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. In Chapter 7, the two optimized designs obtained are presented
and validated by running a full simulation in HAWC2. Important conclusions drawn are
summarised in Chapter 8.
The code implemented can be found in my GitHub repository linked here.
2
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:13==
2
Background on floating offshore wind
Globally, there is a growing push for action against climate change as sea levels are
rising, temperatures are increasing and weather events are becoming more extreme. In
response to this climate and environmental emergency, in December 2019, the European
Commission presented The European Green Deal. The main aim of the European Green
Deal is for the EU to cut net emissions by at least 40% as compared to the 1990 level by
2030 and to become climate neutral by 2050 (Fetting, 2020). In December 2020, as part
of the Climate Law, the EU agreed to raise the 2030 objective to reduce emissions to 55%
as compared to the 1990 level.
Becoming “climate neutral” means reducing the emission of greenhouse gasses as much
as possible while also compensating for the amount of greenhouse gasses released into
the air. Greenhouse gas emissions are mostly a result of combustion of fuels in power
plants, automobiles and houses.
Carbon-di-oxide (CO2) is the most abundant greenhouse gas in the Earths atmosphere,
after water vapour. It is also has the largest contribution to the greenhouse effect after
water vapour. Burning of fossil fuels to generate electricity is a major contributor to the
production of CO2 and hence, we need to reduce our dependencies on fossil fuels and
shift towards greener renewable energy sources. The recent geopolitical crises and surg-
ing gas prices in Europe is another motivation to decrease Europe’s dependency on fossil
fuels and accelerate the transition to clean energy.
Figure 2.1: Share of renewable energy sources as a % of the gross electric consumption
in the EU-27. Data obtained from Eurostat SHARES tool (Eurostat, 2022)
Figure 2.1 shows that renewable energy sources made up almost 37.4% of the gross
energy consumption of the EU in 2020, an increase of almost 10% from the previous
year. Out of this, wind power accounted for 36% of the total energy generated from re-
newable sources. The next highest contributor was hydropower with just over 33%. The
remaining one-third of electricity came from solar power (14%), solid biofuels (8%) and
other renewable sources (8%) (Eurostat, 2022). The projected EU total power capacity
scenario suggests that wind and solar are the only two renewable sources that will see an
increased capacity, while the other sources will either see a reduction in capacity or will
stabilize (EC, 2020). With renewable power generation potentially reaching 50% of total
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
3
==PAGE:14==
electricity generation in the EU by 2030, wind energy (both onshore and offshore) could
account for 21% of total power generation (IRENA, 2018).
When looking at the contribution of individual member states in meeting this goal, one
must pay significant notice to Denmark, the leading wind power nation in the world. Due
to the presence of consistent and strong winds over country’s long coat line and no other
natural energy sources to look to, it was natural for Denmark to turn to wind energy as
basis for electrification.
In 2019, wind power accounted for 47.2% of Danish electricity consumption, an 7% in-
crease from 2018. Unfortunately in 2021, wind energy only met 43.6% of the electricity
consumption, well below the record year of 2019, though this is attributed to poor wind
conditions throughout 2021 (WindDK, 2022). As of March 2022, Danish wind turbines
have produced 12% higher energy, for the months of January and February combined,
than for the previous record from 2020 (source : Energinet).
Putting these percentages in values as seen in Figure 2.2, in 2020 Denmark has an in-
stalled capacity of 6235 MW of wind power, a 2% increase from 2019 (IRENA, 2021). This
lead to an output of 16.27 TWh into the electrical grid.
Figure 2.2: Bar chart showing installed wind power capacity in Denmark in the period
2011-2020 (onshore and offshore) in MW (IRENA, 2021)
Renewable energy first gained traction in the 1990 energy plan, which included explicit
wind power targets, to have an installed wind power capacity of 1300 MW by the year
2000. In the 1996 energy plan, the targets were raised to 1,500 MW onshore by 2005 and
4000 MW offshore by 2030. In March 2012, The Danish Energy Agreement was signed
which set 100% renewable energy as the long term goal for 2050.
The recent push for offshore wind farms as compared to onshore wind farms is due to
the presence of higher and more consistent wind speeds offshore. Thus, offshore wind
farms have the potential to generate more electricity at a steadier rate than their onshore
counterparts. Another advantage is that unlike a land-based site, in terms of height and
rotor diameter, there is no restriction on the visual impact of a wind farm (Kaldellis and
Kapsali, 2013). The only down-side to an offshore wind farm is the capital cost involved.
4
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:15==
2.1
Offshore wind energy in Europe
Europe is a world leader in offshore wind energy. Pioneering the art of harnessing the
cheapest and most abundantly available natural resource, thus making use of the largest
maritime space in the world. Most of the initial development has been in European wa-
ters, but now has spread to China, India and the US. The first offshore wind turbine was
installed at Norgersund, Sweden, in 1991. In the same year Denmark became the first
country in the world to erect an offshore wind farm at Vindeby. The wind farm had 11
turbines and had an installed capacity of 4.95 MW (MacAskill and Mitchell, 2013). Since
then offshore wind turbines have continued to grow in power. In 2020, the average in-
stalled capacity of turbines was 8.2 MW. Turbine order in 2020 for projects coming after
2022, had turbines ranging from 10 MW to 13 MW, showing a growing trend towards next
generation size (Ramirez et al., 2021).
As of 2022, Europe has a total installed offshore wind capacity of 28 GW from 5785 tur-
bines in 122 wind farms including sites with partial grid connection (WindEurope, 2022).
Out of this, 2.9 GW was added in the year 2020 that corresponds to 356 new offshore wind
turbines across 9 wind farms. The European Commission expects the EU to produce a
minimum of 300 GW of offshore wind by 2050. To meet this ambitious goal Europe will
have to step up the installation rate of wind farms (Ramirez et al., 2021).
In 2020, UK has the largest offshore capacity in Europe contributing to 42% of all instal-
lations. Germany is second with 31%, followed by Netherlands (10%), Belgium (9%) and
Denmark (7%). The remaining 1% was provided by, in descending order, Sweden, Fin-
land, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Norway and France (Ramirez et al., 2021). Figure 2.3
shows the cumulative installed capacity as a percentage of Europes total offshore wind
installations.
Figure 2.3: Cumulative installed capacity as a percentage of Europes installations. Data
obtained from Ramirez et al., 2021
The offshore wind industry has grown at an exponential rate during the last decade. Tech-
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
5
==PAGE:16==
nological advancements have resulted in considerable cost savings. Offshore wind has
been turned into a safe and financially viable source of renewable energy. One of the
disadvantages to offshore wind farms is finding an appropriate location. Wind farms must
be built in the host country’s territorial seas or exclusive economic zones. They must go
through a lengthy approval procedure that includes environmental impact evaluations that
take into account the influence on maritime ecosystems, migratory birds, and other fac-
tors. Wind turbines must avoid interfering with important shipping routes and other human
infrastructure at sea (such as cables for power and telecommunication and gas pipelines).
Offshore wind turbines are significantly more expensive to install and connect to onshore
electrical systems than their onshore counterparts (Wilson, 2020).
In the long run, however, offshore wind has numerous advantages: it is possible to deploy
a much larger fleet of wind turbines at sea as compared to land; wind power generated
offshore has a higher and more consistent output than wind power generated on land;
and offshore projects are less likely to face opposition from residents concerned about
the impact of wind turbines on their immediate living environment. In shallow seas most
offshore wind turbines are supported by simple monopile foundations, however in deeper
waters, gravity or jacket foundations are employed, which are more complex (and expen-
sive). The expense and complexity of constructing stable foundations at sea depths more
than 50 to 60 m is the main challenge for fixed offshore technology, severely restricting the
number of possible locations. The development of floating foundations might thus prove
to be a game-changing technology, allowing worldwide offshore wind deployment to grow
(Wilson, 2020).
2.2
Floating offshore wind farms
The next phase of the energy transition requires committed implementation of new tech-
nologies. Bottom fixed-offshore turbines has an upper depth limit of 60 m and can there-
fore only be erected in places with relatively shallow sea-beds, whereas, turbines mounted
on floating substructures that are moored to the seabed can be installed in waters as deep
as 800 m, thus unlocking about 80% of the global offshore resources that are found in deep
waters. When compared to its near-shore equivalents, Floating Offshore Wind Turbines
(FOWTs) also avoid the issue of producing visual and noise pollution. Because of its
distance from the shore, it can provide more open and less dangerous shipping routes.
FOWTs have ecological benefits as well - it can easily avoid migratory flight paths and
breeding and feeding sites, and hence decrease bird and bat casualties (Jakobsen and
Ironside, 2021).
In 2017, the first full-scale floating offshore wind farm, Hywind Scotland, was established
29 km off Peterhead, Aberdeenshire. It has five 6 MW turbines on spar buoy substructures
and has had the highest capacity factor in the UK for the years 2018, 2019 and 2020. As
of March, 2021 Europe is currently home to the only three floating offshore wind farms in
the world, The 30 MW Hywind Scotland project in the UK, the 24 MW Windfloat Atlantic
project in Portugal and the Kincardine project in Scotland. By the end of 2020, Europe
had an installed FOW capacity of 62 MW, almost 83% of the global floating wind capacity,
with over 7 GW of planned floating projects over the next decade (Ramirez et al., 2021).
The main concern with FOW is the cost-benefit ratio. Substructures for FOWT’s are cur-
rently far more expensive to produce and assemble than monopiles. Steel substructures
are more heavier and need much more labor to construct, whereas concrete substructures
are less expensive per tonne of material but are much heavier. Mooring lines and anchors
are also required for all floating wind turbines. To solve this issue, the EU funded a project,
COREWIND (COst REduction and increase performance of floating WIND technology),
6
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:17==
which aims to significantly reduce the cost and enhance the performance of floating wind
technology by researching and optimizing the mooring and anchoring systems and power
cables. The project aims to obtain a levelized cost of energy (LCOE) reduction of at least
15% as compared to bottom-fixed turbines. The maintenance demands and lifetime of
the structure in a corrosive marine environment is another cause of concern. Generally
the parts of the structure in the splash zone is more prone to severe corrosion. There has
been current research going on to mitigate this problem.
2.3
Support structures for floating offshore wind farms
The main difference between floating offshore wind and other wind technology (offshore
and onshore) is its use support structures. The two main types of offshore wind turbines
are - fixed-support and floating wind turbines. A fixed-support turbine has its foundation
fixed to the sea bed, while a FOWT makes use of buoyant substructures that are con-
nected to the sea-bed through mooring lines. Figure 2.4 is a visual representation of the
classification of offshore wind turbines with increasing sea depth.
Figure 2.4: Support structures for offshore wind turbines (Adapted from Wind power en-
gineering)
There are two types of fixed support turbines - a monopile and jacket. As the name sug-
gests, a monopile is a single tower like foundation that uses suction and gravity to embed
itself into the sea-bed, whereas, a jacket is a three or four-legged lattice configuration.
The main limitation for these two configurations is that it is commercially unviable in wa-
ters deeper than 60 m (Asim et al., 2022).
In deep waters with more complex offshore environmental conditions, foundation design
plays a key role in the stability of the entire structure. The support structure/substructure
of a FOWT consists of a buoyant floater, ballast and a mooring system. The following
sub-sections will explain in brief about the floater and mooring systems.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
7
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1
Floaters for floating offshore wind farms
There are a broad range of FOWT floaters and they can be classified into three categories
based on the principle that it uses to achieve static stability - ballast stabilised, water-plane
(or buoyancy) stabilised and mooring stabilised. It is worth calling to attention that when
a floating structure is called static, it does not mean that it is absolutely stationary. The
floating structures are allowed to move freely inside a circle called the watch-circle. A
typical diameter for a watch circle is about 180 m.
A ballast stabilized floater has a large ballast weight below the structure. This helps keeps
the centre of gravity of the total system below the centre of buoyancy. This creates a
righting moment and high inertial resistance to pitch and roll. It also normally provides
enough draft to offset heave. Spar buoys, shown in Figure 2.5, make use of this to achieve
stability (Butterfield et al., 2007).
Figure 2.5: The four main FOW floater types: (L-R) pontoon/barge, semi-submersible,
spar buoy and tension leg platform. Figure from DNV.
A water-plane (or buoyancy) stabilised structure uses the concept that the main contributor
to the restoring force is the water-plane area. In case of rotational displacement, the
stabilizing righting moment is provided by a large second moment of inertia with respect
to the rotational axis. This large second moment of inertia can be provided by either a
large water-plane area or by smaller cross-sectional areas at some distance from the
system central axis (Leimeister et al., 2018). A barge and a semi-submersible, shown in
Figure 2.5, are examples of a buoyancy stabilised structure.
The third main mechanism used by structures to achieve static stability is by making use of
the tension in mooring lines. The restoring moment required when the structure is inclined
is generated by the high tension in the mooring lines. A tension leg platform, TLP, shown
in Figure 2.5, makes use of this stabilizing mechanism.
8
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:19==
The overall architecture of the sub-structures are largely determined by the first-order
static stability analysis, though there are many other important factors that impact the
final design. Most of the current FOWT support structures can be assigned to these three
main categories, while some of them are based on a combination of different floater types.
The four main floater types, known as typologies, are as shown in Figure 2.5 and are
pontoon/barge (P/B) systems, semi-submersible systems, single point anchorage (Spar)
buoy systems and tension leg platform (TLP) systems. Each typology has its own advan-
tages and disadvantages, shortly presented below. The most suitable design depends
on the conditions of the site, and the project requirements.
Pontoon/ Barge system : A barge is a water-plane area stabilized floater. It consists of a
steel or concrete hull that makes use of catenary mooring lines to anchor it to the sea-bed.
It maintains its stability through distributed buoyancy and a large weighted water-plane
area. This system has a large sensitivity to pitch and roll movements and is hence better
suited to calmer waters. The hull of the pontoon is capable of carrying multiple turbines
(Jakobsen and Ironside, 2021).
Semi-submersible system : A semi-submersible is a buoyancy stabilized floater that is
anchored to the sea-bed with catenary mooring lines. The floater itself is semi-submerged
in the water. The platform consists of three large columns at the vertices of a triangle
that are connected to each other. The turbine maybe placed on the central column or
even a turbine maybe placed on each column at each vertex. This system makes use
of catenary chain mooring and drag embedment anchors and can be used in most water
depths. This system is also the easiest to install, requiring only tugboats and anchoring
vessels (Jakobsen and Ironside, 2021). Heave plates are often attached to the bottom of
the columns to reduce heave motion.
Spar buoy : A spar buoy is a ballast stabilized floater. To maintain the center of gravity of
the system below its center of buoyancy, the structure is made bottom heavy by having a
long cylindrical structure filled with ballast, while the upper parts are usually lighter. The
spar buoy is commonly anchored with three catenary mooring lines. The structure is
simple to construct and provides good stability. The only downside is the length of the
draft. This makes it difficult to assemble, transport and install and can also only be used
in waters with a depth grater than 100 m (Trust, 2015).
Tension platform leg (TLP) : TLP floater have a submerged central column that is moored
vertically to the sea-bed. The base of the central column has three arms where the moor-
ing lines are connected. The mooring lines are taunt, vertical tendons, which limit motion
during pitch and roll (Jakobsen and Ironside, 2021). The displaced volume should be high
enough to provide excess buoyancy to ensure that the mooring lines are always under
tension (Leimeister et al., 2018). They have been frequently employed in the oil and gas
industry and are ideal for water depths from 70 m to 200 m.
Currently the industry is focusing on designs that are easy to install. Semi-submersibles
have gotten the most interest since they are the easiest to construct. This thesis focuses
on a semi-submersible platform.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
9
==PAGE:20==
2.3.2
Mooring configurations
Apart from the choice of platform, another important support structure is the mooring lines.
The mooring lines hold the floating platform in place by anchoring it to the sea-bed. They
can be made of steel chains, wires, synthetic fibers or a combination of them. The mooring
system is subject to severe wind, wave and current conditions throughout its life-span and
should hence be optimally designed. The mooring system should also be able to limit
horizontal offset of the platform in order to accommodate the power cable to the sea-bed.
The mooring system generally dictates the platform architecture.
The two most common types of mooring systems used in the offshore market, based on
the tension in the line are - catenary system and a taut-leg system as shown in section 5.4.
The catenary configuration is explained more in detail in Section 5.4.
Figure 2.6: Mooring configurations for FOWT. (1) : catenary mooring, (2) & (3) : taut-leg
mooring. Figure reproduced from Davies et al., 2014.
Catenary system : The term catenary refers to the shape the mooring line takes due
to its self-weight. One end of the line is connected to the fairlead and the other end to
the anchor at the sea-bed; the part this is suspended in the water takes the catenary
shape. Thus the line can be separated into two parts, one that is freely suspended in
water, connected to the fairlead and the other that rests on the sea-bed, connected to the
anchor. The point at which the line touches the sea-bed is called the touch down point.
Geometric changes in the configuration produces the required stiffness to the system. At
equilibrium, a large part of the mooring line will lay on the sea-bed. As the floater drifts
away from equilibrium, the length of the suspended line increases, which leads to an
increase in the weight of the suspended part of the mooring line. This increase in weight
acts as non-linear restoring force to the motion of the floater and brings the floater back to
its equilibrium position, thus balancing the environmental load that acts on the structure.
This principle is illustrated in Figure 2.7. Since a part of the line is always resting on the
sea-bed, only horizontal forces are taken up by the anchor (Figure 2.7). To ensure that a
part of the line is always resting on the ground, the length of the line is generally 3-4 times
10
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:21==
the depth of the sea-bed.
Figure 2.7: Principle working of a single catenary mooring line. Illustration from Wang,
2019.
Since no vertical forces on the anchor exist, the anchors have a relatively low cost. On a
wind turbine, the weight and horizontal forces act far above the center of buoyancy and
hence the vertical tension of the line is insufficient in maintaining the stability of the platform
against overturning. To overcome this, a large ballast mass is added below the center of
buoyancy of the structure. A significant part of catenary moored structures lie above the
water line and is thus subject to a higher wave loading. A catenary moored structure thus
experiences a larger base motion in all directions, increasing the complexity of system
integration and adding to turbine costs (Musial et al., 2004).
For FOWTs, spread catenary systems are generally used. A spread catenary system
makes use of multiple mooring lines that attach the floater to the sea-bed. The anchors
are spaced symmetrically around the structure to have stiffness in all directions. A spread
catenary system does not allow the FOWT to rotate in the horizontal plane when subject
to environmental loads.
Taut-leg system : As the name suggests, a taut-leg system has pre-tensioned taut moor-
ing lines, that are normally inclined between 30° and 40° to the sea-bed. Since there is
an angle of inclination with the sea-bed, there will be both, vertical and horizontal loads
acting on the anchor. In this configuration, the restoring forces are generated by the axial
elastic stretching of the mooring line.
As the lines are taut, shorter lines are required for this configuration as compared to the
catenary type, resulting in a smaller footprint as compared to the catenary mooring system.
The main disadvantage is that the anchors have to support vertical and horizontal loads
and thus become more expensive.
A vertical tension leg is a sub-set of a taut leg mooring. In this configuration the the lines
have a vertical orientation. This further decreases the size of the watch circle and will
require the least length of mooring line while simultaneously having the largest vertical
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
11
==PAGE:22==
force on the anchor. The biggest advantage is that it is able to submerge the largest part
of the structure below the water line, thereby reducing the effect of wave action on the
structure and hence maintaining a stable platform (Musial et al., 2004).
To summarize, it is safe to say that the restoring force in a catenary system is weight
dependant, while it is dependant on the Youngs modulus of the line, in a taunt-leg system.
The increase in tension with small displacements in a catenary system is non-linear while
it is linear for a taunt-leg system (Monfort, 2017). Economically, it is a trade off between
both configurations. While for a catenary system, larger length of lines is required which
increases the cost, for a taunt-leg system the line length is considerably lesser, but the
anchor installation will be more expensive.
2.4
Economics for support structures for floating offshore
wind farms
An offshore wind farm requires a larger investment than its onshore counterpart. A signifi-
cant part of the investment goes towards construction and installation of the platform and
the turbine, the laying of the anchors, mooring lines, electric cables and sub-stations. Fur-
thermore, because it functions in a hostile marine environment, control and maintenance
operations are more frequent.
Figure 2.8: Component level LCOE contribution for the 2018 floating offshore wind refer-
ence project. Reproduced from Stehly et al., 2018
The Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) is the price at which the energy generated should
be sold to the system to break even at the end of its lifetime. Having a single metric to com-
12
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:23==
pare all systems makes it easier to compare the relative feasibility of different technologies.
The competitiveness of offshore wind ultimately influences its long-term prospects. Mini-
mizing LCOE is the main goal of the wind sector. As of 2020, onshore wind costs about 45
€/MWh, bottom-fixed offshore wind costs 86 €/MWh and floating offshore wind costs 184
€/MWh. The LCOE of onshore wind is predicted to fall 28% by 2030 to 33 €/MWh. Off-
shore wind will also see significant reduction in cost by 2030. Bottom-fixed offshore wind
costs will fall by 44% to 48 €/MWh and floating offshore wind costs will fall by 65% to 64
€/MWh (Fraile et al., 2021). Thus offshore wind has the potential to compete with onshore
wind. A report published by WindEurope in 2021 further predicts that by 2040, the cost
of fixed and floating wind will converge between 30 €/MWh and 50 €/MWh, depending on
site conditions. The main drivers in reducing the cost of floating energy include optimized
floater and mooring designs, optimized manufacturing and assembly, and starting serial
production .
According to a report published by the NREL (Stehly et al., 2018), for onshore turbines the
turbine itself is a major contributor to the LCOE (49.2 %), whereas the balance of system
(e.g., development, electrical infrastructure, assembly, and installation) is the major con-
tributor for fixed-bottom and floating offshore reference projects, making up (37.1 %) and
(41.9 %), respectively. A detailed breakdown of the LCOE contribution for the reference
FOWT is shown in Figure 2.8.
Operation and maintenance is the largest contributor to the LCOE, with the cost of instal-
lation of substructures coming second and turbine costs coming a close third. Thus work
needs to put in to decrease these costs in order to reduce the LCOE to a competitive
price. This reports deals with optimizing the length of the mooring line, while maintaining
a balance in the system, in order to reduce the cost of substructures and foundations.
2.5
Design standards
The design of offshore mooring systems has to comply with coastal regulations and indus-
try standards. Class societies such as American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) (of Shipping,
2020), Det Norske Veritas - Germanischer Lloyd (DNV GL) (Hopstad et al., 2018) and
Bureau Veritas (BV) have developed specific rules for the design of mooring systems for
FOWTs.
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) prepares and publishes International
Standards for all electrical, electronic and related technologies. In 2019, the IEC published
requirements for assessing the external conditions at a FOWT site to ensure the engineer-
ing integrity of FOWTs, IEC TS 61400-3-2:2019 Wind energy generation systems - Part
3-2: Design requirements for floating offshore wind turbines (Commision, 2019). The
same year, BV published a revision to its previous guidance note (2015), Classification
and Certification of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines (NI 572 R02) that is to be used in
compliance to requirements from the IEC 61400 series (Veritas, 2019).
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:25==
3
Background on surrogate based
optimization
According to Gomez et al., 2004, the easiest way to define optimization is “doing the most
with the least”. In engineering, it means, finding a solution that efficiently locates a design
that meets the objective within the given constraints.
Optimization in itself requires multiple iterations to find the best fit to the problem. Usually
high-fidelity and time-consuming computer simulations are performed in each iteration
to compute the objective function of the current design. If the objective function is com-
plex, this is not feasible as it can take a long time to converge to a solution and is also
computationally expensive.
In FOW, the design of the platform and the mooring system relies heavily on a thorough
analysis of the entire floating structure under various loads (environmental conditions).
Analysing the effect of every response on the overall stability of the structure is math-
ematically difficult. It is cumbersome and highly time consuming to perform computer
simulations in this case due to reasons enlisted in Chapter 3.6. It is of importance to un-
derstand the impact of the design variables on the objective to make an informed decision.
The only way to accelerate product growth in the market is to accelerate this simulation
based analysis. Thus, this data-driven approach, also called surrogate modelling, is gain-
ing popularity.
The following section explains the concepts behind the methods and techniques and the
practical implementation of surrogate-based optimization.
3.1
Concept of surrogate optimization
Optimization analysis is a technique used in engineering to maximize or minimize an ob-
jective function under a set of predetermined physical constraints. The basic idea of sur-
rogate optimization strategy is to replace computationally expensive simulations with pre-
trained statistical models to be able to accurately approximate the objective function. This
pre-trained statistical model is called the surrogate model. The workflow of a surrogate
optimization is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Surrogate based optimization workflow
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
15
==PAGE:26==
The basic idea behind surrogate based optimization is very simple. First, a surrogate
model for the objective function(s) is built with sufficient accuracy, then the optimum is
found by optimizing this objective function(s) by evaluating the surrogate model, rather
than using expensive simulations (Han, Zhang, et al., 2012).
A surrogate model is a statistical model that is used to map input data to output data when
the actual relationship between the two is unknown (Williams and Cremaschi, 2021). The
basic idea is for the surrogate model to act as a “curve-fit” to the input data so that the
output can be predicted without the need to use the expensive simulation (Sobester et al.,
2008). A single surrogate model evaluation is substantially faster than the original time-
consuming and expensive computer simulations. Hence it makes it easier to perform
many output evaluations for various combinations of design parameters. This allows us
to freely explore the objective function’s “landscape”, substantially speeding up the opti-
mization process.
3.2
Surrogate model training
A data-driven approach is used to train the surrogate model. The simulation results are
examined at multiple intelligently selected locations in the design parameter space to
acquire the training data. A complete simulation is run at each of these locations to de-
termine the relevant simulation output. The pairs of inputs (design parameters) and their
corresponding outputs constitute the training data-set which is used to build the statistical
model.
This model, ˆf then tries to emulate this expensive response of the simulation by using
a black box, f. Here, f(x) is the selected response of the FOWT defined by a k-vector
of design variables x ∈D ⊂Rk, where, D is the design space. It is assumed that
f(x) is continuous. The only insight we get into f is through discrete samples, which are
expensive to obtain. Hence, the main task is to use this sparse set of samples to construct
an approximate ˆf to cheaply predict for for any design x ∈D (Sobester et al., 2008).
A simple explanation of a surrogate based optimization is as follows. A sampling plan,
X = {x(1), x(2), .... x(n−1)}T is built for n evaluations of f. The corresponding responses,
y = {y(1), y(2), .... y(n−1)}T, is obtained for these points, and the surrogate model, ˆf, is
fit to this data. ˆf is a stand in for the expensive function, f. A point, x+, is found that is
close to the true minimum of the function, ˆf(x+). The ˆf(x+) is then validated against the
true, expensive function, f, only then the optimization is complete (Sobester et al., 2008).
Popular surrogate model types are polynomial regression, support vector machines, Gaus-
sian processes, neural networks, etc. In this report, an efficient surrogate model based
on the artificial neural network (ANN) is developed to imitate the concerned response
calculation. The following section explains in brief about ANN’s.
3.3
Artificial neural networks
An artificial neural network (ANN) is a type of machine learning model that is used in
supervised learning. It works by imitating the mechanism of the brain. The brain is essen-
tially made up of numerous chemically connected neurons that are part of a larger neural
network (Van Nguyen et al., 2015). Axons and dendrites connect two neurons to each
other across a connecting region called a synapse (Pribram, 2014). A neuron generates
a unique output for every input received and passes it on to other neurons (Berke et al.,
1993).
Following a similar concept, an ANN is built up of nodes the mimics the information transfer
mechanism by using a weight value. These weight values are adjusted automatically as
16
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:27==
the input passes from node to node until a correct output is produced, thus approximating
the implicit relationship between the input the output. The weights are a measure of the
significance of the particular input variable, that is, the input with the most significant
contribution to the output will have a larger weight. Figure 3.2 illustrates a single node
that receives three inputs to produce one output.
In Figure 3.2, the circle represents a sin-
gle node while the arrows represent the
signal flow.
x1, x2 and x3 are the in-
put signals, w1, w2 and w3 are their cor-
responding weights and b is the bias.
Hence the information of a neural net-
work is stored in the form of weights and
bias. The input signal is multiplied by its
corresponding weight before it reaches
the node. At the node the weighted sum
is obtained by adding up the values of
all the weighted inputs and the bias, as
shown in Equation 3.1.
Figure 3.2: A single node with three in-
puts and one output (Kim, 2017)
Weighted sum =
(
n
∑
i=0
xi · wi
)
+ b
(3.1)
This weighted sum is input into the activation function, ψ, at a node to yield its output, as
represented in Equation 3.2. Thus an activation function defines the behaviour of a node
(Kim, 2017).
y = ψ(Weighted sum)
(3.2)
Expanding this concept to represent the network of neurons in a brain, would be a neural
network with a network of nodes. The most commonly used neural network is a Multi-layer
Perceptron (MLP) illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Topology of a multi-layer perceptron
In Figure 3.3, □represents the input layer. The nodes in the input layer transmit the input
signal to the next node without calculating the weighted sum and passing it through an
activation function. The rightmost ⃝represents the output layer. The final result of the
neural network is obtained from the output nodes. The layers between these input and
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
17
==PAGE:28==
output layers are called the hidden layers. When hidden layers are added to a single-layer
network, a multi-layered neural network or MLP is produced. An MLP with two or more
hidden layers is called a deep neural network (Kim, 2017).
Forward propagation
Once the input layer is defined, weights are assigned to each input. Each node also has
a threshold value, and the node is activated only when the output of the node is above
this threshold value. The weighted sum of the inputs is calculated and passed through an
activation function to calculate the output. If the output of the node is above its threshold
value, the node is activated and passes the data to the next layer in the network. This
process of data transfer from one layer to another is defines the NN as a feed-forward
network.
Activation function
The activation of a node when it receives an output signal from the node in the previous
layer is decided by the activation function. It essentially takes in the output signal from
the previous node and converts it to form that can be read as the input for that particular
node. Its most important feature is to add non-linearity to the model and to help restrict
the output from a particular neuron within a specified limit. To make use of stochastic
gradient descent with backpropogation of error, the activation should look and act linear
but should be in fact-linear to learn the complex relationship between the data. Activation
functions are used in every layer of the network and have to be calculated large number
of times in a NN.
For a long time, the default activation function was the sigmoid activation function and
later it was the tanh activation function. The most widely used activation function today
is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) that is defined as f(y) = max(0, y). Thus, it returns a
value of 0 for any negative input and returns the value back for any positive input. The
ReLU function is non-linear around 0 with a slope of 0 for negative inputs and 1 for positive
inputs, and hence has limited non-linearity. The only draw back of ReLU is that as it is
not zero-centered, it suffers from a dying ReLU problem. As all negative input produce a
zero output, some nodes remain inactive and do not contribute to learning.
Back-propagation
The final output (prediction) of the network is compared to the known outcome and the
error is calculated. For the prediction to be accurate, the error needs to be minimized. In
order to do so, the weights and thresholds of the nodes have to altered. This is where
backpropogation algorithms come in. Backpropogation helps minimize the error by recal-
culating the weights array in the last layer and proceeding backwards until reaching the
input layer. In mathematical terms, to minimize the error, the weights have to be moved
in the direction opposite to the gradient vector of the error function. For this it is essen-
tial that the error function is differentiable. Each weight is then updated iteratively and
the gradients are recalculated at the beginning of each training iteration step, until the
error is minimized. After each iteration, the NN becomes more knowledgeable about its
environment (Malik, 2005).
Learning rate
The amount of weights that are updated during the backpropogation of errors is called the
step-size or the learning rate. It is a hyper-parameter that has a small, positive value that
ranges between 0.001 and 1.
18
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:29==
In easy terms, it controls how quickly the model adapts to a problem. If the learning rate is
small, smaller changes are made to the weights at each update and hence more training
epochs will be required. Conversely, if the learning rate is large, the weights are updated
rapidly and it will require fewer epochs to train the model. It is essential to choose an
adequate learning rate as if it is too small, the process can get stuck, and if it is too large,
the model may converge quickly to a sub-optimal solution.
Model build
To build the model, the input and the output to be evaluated are arranged in a population
data-set. The population data-set is made up of two sub-sets : features and target. A
feature is what helps us predict the target. This data-set is then split into two parts, a
training set and a test set. This split allows us to judge how well a model will generalize to
new data. It is important to randomize the data before the split. A training set as the name
suggests is the subset of data that is used to train a model while the test set is used to
test the trained model. The larger the size of the training test, the better the model will be
able to learn, while the larger the test set the better confidence in the evaluation metrics
of the model.
To avoid over-fitting of data, the test set is further sub-divided into a validation set and a
test set. The validation set is used to evaluate the hyper-parameters. The test set is used
to see how the model performs on unseen data.
The features have to undergo some pre-processing before it is fed into the network. This
pre-processing of raw input data is called feature engineering. A good feature should have
more than one non-zero value in the data-set, should not change over time and should
not have outliers. Further, the features should also be scaled to have them all in the
same range. Feature scaling can be done via normalization (when data does not follow
a Gaussian distribution) and standardization (when data follows a Gaussian distribution).
The target is what is to be predicted. This pre-processed data-set is the initial population
set that is then split.
The neural network is then built by choosing an appropriate number of layers and number
of nodes in each layer. A suitable activation function, learning rate and learning algorithm
is then chosen and the model is evaluated.
Model evaluation for regression
It is important to understand the model performance, as well as its strengths and weak-
nesses. The process of using different metrics to to evaluate a models performance is
called model evaluation. It helps in assessing the efficiency of the model in the initial re-
search phase. For regression, the predicted output is evaluated against the test set by
two main metrics for continuous variables. The two main metrics are :
1. Mean absolute error (MAE) : It is the average of the absolute difference between the
predicted values and observed value and is calculated by Equation 3.3. It scales the error
linearly.
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
| yi −ˆyi |
(3.3)
where, y and ˆy are the observed and predicted value of the test set, i, and n is the total
number of samples.
2. R-Squared (R2) : It is a metric that indicates the proportion of variance in the response
variable that can be explained by the predictor variables in a linear regression model. It
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
19
==PAGE:30==
indicates a goodness of fit, which means it can explain the measure of how well unseen
samples are likely to be predicted by the model (Pedregosa et al., 2011). Its value can
range between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates that the predictor variable cannot explain the
response variable, and 1 indicates perfect explanation of the response variable by the
predictor variable. It is calculated by dividing the sum of the squares of the prediction
error by the total sum of the squares of the difference between the observed value and
the mean of the observed values, ¯y. This is then subtracted from one to find the R2, as
shown in Equation 3.4.
R2 = 1 −
∑
i(yi −ˆyi)2
∑
i(yi −¯yi)2
(3.4)
3.4
Design optimization
Design optimization is the process to seek the pest possible design parameters that satisfy
the design requirements. Traditionally, the right combination of design parameters would
have to be identified manually, which is time-consuming. The solution space cannot be
thoroughly explored, resulting in sub-optimal solutions. Thus, the need to implement an
optimization to search for the optimal mooring parameter is essential.
There are two main types of optimization - unconstrained optimizations and constrained
optimization. Engineering design optimization is generally always of the constrained type.
Often it is practical to replace the constraints of an optimization problem by a penalty
function and solve the problem as an unconstrained problem. The process of applying
the penalty term is further explained in Section 5.3.
Most design algorithms use one of two strategies listed below, to move from one iteration
to another :
Line search method : The algorithm modifies the search direction to find a downhill
direction for f. Different step lengths are then tried along this direction, until such a step
is found that decreases f.
Trust-region method : This algorithm constraints the new iteration to stay in the same
local neighborhood as the current iteration.
The two above listed methods are generally used when the number of variables is not too
large. For problems with a large number of variables, truncated Newton methods maybe
used.
In this thesis, a trust-region method (TRM) has been employed in the optimization. TRM
is one of the most important numerical optimization methods used to solve non-linear pro-
gramming (NLP) problems. At each iteration, a region is defined around the current best
solution. The model is meant to be trusted within this region and it is hence called a trust
region. The size of this region depends on the trust radius, which in turn depends on the
performance in the previous iteration. A step that minimizes the function is then chosen.
If the steps taken are in the correct direction, longer steps can be taken. Conversely, if a
step taken is unacceptable, the trust radius is decreased and a new step is found.
3.5
State of the art in wind turbine design optimization
Over the last few years, research in optimization of mooring systems has picked up pace.
Optimizations have been carried out for mooring systems for turbines with tri-floater sup-
port (Benassai et al., 2015), semi-submersible platforms (Brommundt et al., 2012), and
spar-buoy type (Fylling and Berthelsen, 2011).
20
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:31==
Brommundt et al., 2012 develops a tool to optimize the deign of a catenary mooring system
for a semi-submersible platform, similar to the WindFloat design. The tool determines the
optimum mooring line orientations and lengths, constrained by ultimate load conditions,
limits on platform movement and seabed conditions. A frequency domain analysis was
carried out separately for the wind, wave and current loads to determine the minimum
material cost for the catenary mooring system.
Pillai et al., 2019 presents a framework for a multi-objective optimization of mooring sys-
tems using a surrogate assisted method. The surrogate model used was a random forest,
that was coupled to a genetic algorithm. Numerical models were used to train the surro-
gate model, thus decreasing the computation cost, and ensuring a thorough evaluation
of the search space. This framework reduced the cost and cumulative fatigue damage of
the mooring system.
Dimitrov and Natarajan, 2021 describes a methodology for wind farm set point optimiza-
tion. It is a multi-objective optimization that seeks to minimize damage-equivalent loads
and maximize power output. HAWC2, an aero-elastic simulation tool, was used generate
a database, which was then used to train a surrogate model. A feed-forward NN was
used as the surrogate model in the optimization. It was seen that the surrogate based
approach is computationally efficient, once the simulation results were generated. It was
concluded that in power output was obtained for specific mean wind speeds, while fatigue
load could be reduced by maintaining the nominal power output but optimizing the load
distribution.
In Mathern et al., 2022 a multi-objective optimization is performed, using the Kriging
method. The optimum design obtained using the surrogate assisted optimization out-
performed the best designs in the sample space.
The work presented here is a single-objective optimization, that aims to minimize the ma-
terial cost of a singlt-point catenary mooring system for the IEA 15 MW turbine mounted on
the the UMaine semi-submersible. HAWC2 was used to perform the time domain analysis.
The proposed methodology reduces the length of the mooring line while constraining the
tower-top acceleration, surge motion, and maximum tensions at anchor and fairlead of
each line. This tool can be applied during the initial design phase of the catenary mooring
system for floating wind turbines.
3.6
Challenges in wind turbine design optimization
The challenges faced in the optimization of floating wind turbine design are listed and
explained in brief in this section.
Complex environment : The environmental conditions affecting a wind turbine are com-
plex, irregular and are highly fluctuating. Wind in itself is highly turbulent and varies irregu-
larly in speed and direction. There has been active learning in the interaction between the
flow of wind and the complex terrain in the case of onshore wind turbines. Offshore wind
turbines are also subject to waves and currents in addition to the existing wind load, thus
increasing the irregularity of the environmental conditions. This increases the uncertainty
in parameters and coefficients and it becomes necessary to simulate relatively long time
intervals to obtain sufficiently accurate results (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
Normally 10 min load cases are analysed for onshore wind turbines to ensure that the
sampling had enough variation from the stationary loading process, but currently 60 min
load cases have been recommended by the IEC (IEC 61400-3-1:2019) for offshore wind
turbines. As the structure is subject to a large range of loads throughout its lifetime, a
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
21
==PAGE:32==
large number of load cases need to be analysed. The loading maybe further complicated
by scour, marine growth and sea ice (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
Non-linearities : Unsteadiness in flow and non-linearities in the structure are the main
causes of non-linear effects and time-history dependency of wind turbines. Unsteadiness
in flow is due to the development of wake and its effects. The breaking of waves in shallow
waters also induce a non-linear wave load on the structure. The structural non-linearities
for FOWTs are mainly due to the motion of the platform (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
Because of these non-linearities the simulations are typically run in the time domain. This
means that in order to capture the full range and duration of all the stochastic loading from
wind and waves around 20 years of simulations must be run. Even if this was a task that
could be easily done, it must be done multiple times in order to capture the whole range
of statistical possibilities (Butterfield et al., 2007).
Strong coupling and inter-relation between systems : Wind turbines consist of many
different parts and systems. Each of these systems and parts interact and influence each
other in many different ways, thus each part cannot be isolated and designed individually.
This is also noticed when trying to quantify the cost a wind turbine in a bottom-up manner.
While the cost of material is easy to estimate, the actual cost of the installation, operation
and maintenance depend on many other factors which have a significant contribution to
the overall cost (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
Large number of design variables and constraints : There are a large number of de-
sign variables involved that have complex and non-linear relationships with each other.
Determining the constraints for different motions is another added complexity. It is also
difficult to account for the uncertainty in the wind and wave behaviour. While modern opti-
mization algorithms can account for millions of parameters, the time taken to perform the
analysis is a limiting factor. Since structural optimization problems are highly constrained
and non-convex, the objective function generally has many minimas, and the problem is
not straight forward (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
Specialized analysis software : Floating offshore wind technology is in a nascent stage.
At the moment, only a handful of software is available to model the hydrodynamic and
aerodynamic loads and perform coupled analysis of the complete system of the turbine,
floater and mooring.
DNV currently provides a digital tool, Sesam, to model the floater substructure and de-
termine its hydrodynamic properties. This can then be used as an input into Bladed, to
perform a coupled analysis of the tower and floater. It can also be used as an input into
Sima for mooring and cable design. This process is more cumbersome and time consum-
ing as opposed to having one specialized software for the complete analysis. Another
challenge is that the source code is sometimes unavailable and there is a lack of proper
documentation, hence the user finds it difficult to integrate these new systems into their
workflow (Muskulus and Schafhirt, 2014).
22
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:33==
4
Wind turbine, platform and mooring
configuration
The considered FOWT model is based on the International Energy Agency (IEA) 15-
megawatt (MW) reference wind turbine and University of Maine (UMaine) VolturnUS-S
reference floating offshore wind turbine semi-submersible designed to support the IEA
15 MW reference wind turbine. This chapter describes the reference coordinate system,
the turbine, platform and mooring set-up.
4.1
IEA Wind 15-Megawatt offshore reference wind turbine
A 15 MW reference wind turbine was designed by the National Renewable Energy Labo-
ratory (NREL) and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) through a wind task spon-
sored by the International Energy Agency (IEA), in order to encourage active collabo-
rations between the industrial and academic communities in the development of next-
generation large offshore wind turbines. The IEA 15 MW reference wind turbine is an
open source model with specific design characteristics that can be used in benchmark
studies to test new technologies (Mei and Xiong, 2021).
The turbine is a class 1B direct-drive machine with a rotor diameter of 240 m. The tower
is designed as a isotropic steel tube using the Wind-Plant Integrated System Design &
Engineering Model (WISDEM®) and BModes v1.03, with free-free boundary conditions
(Allen et al., 2020). A tower designed with a floating sub-structure requires higher stiffness
due to the inertia and gravity forces that arise due to movement of the platform, hence,
the tower differs from the design of the tower for the monopile substructure. The mass of
the floating tower is about 47% greater than that for the monopile configuration.
The tower base height and hub height was kept the same as the monopile configuration
and were 15 m and 150 m respectively. This resulted in a flexible tower length of 129.495 m.
The floating tower properties can be found in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Key parameters for the IEA Wind 15-MW floating turbine
Parameter
Value
Unit
Cut-in wind speed
3
m/s
Rated wind speed
10.59
m/s
Cut-out wind speed
25
m/s
Mass of tower
1263
ton
Tower base height
15
m
Hub-height
150
m
Flexible tower height
129.495
m
Unless stated otherwise, all values reported in this work are with respect to the coordinate
system defined in Figure 4.1.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.1: Floating offshore wind turbine reference coordinate system. Figure courtesy
of the University of Maine (Allen et al., 2020)
24
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: General arrangement of structure. Figure courtesy of the University of Maine
(Allen et al., 2020)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
25
==PAGE:36==
4.2
UMaine VolturnUS-S reference semi-submersible
platform
For this study, we use the UMaine VolturnUS-S reference semi-submersible.The Univer-
sity of Maine (UMaine) VolturnUS-S reference semi-submersible (Allen et al., 2020) is
a generic steel version of the UMaine patented concrete floating foundation technology
developed in collaboration with the U.S. Department of Energy. It has been designed to
support the International Energy Agency (IEA)-15-240-RWT 15 MW reference wind tur-
bine.
The steel semi-submersible system consists of a semi-submersible platform with four
buoyant columns, three radial and one central, held via a three line catenary mooring
array in a water depth of 200 m. The draft of the platform is 20 m with a freeboard of 15 m
to the upper deck of the columns.
Table 4.2 tabulates the geometric properties of the semi-submersible while Table 4.3 pro-
vides the general properties of the floating platform. Figure 4.2 shows us the general
arrangement of the structure.
The hull is constructed of three 12.50 m diameter buoyant columns that are radially spaced
with centers that are 51.75 m from the vertical axis of the tower. The tower is positioned
atop the central buoyant column that is located at the center of the platform in the surge-
sway plane. Three 12.50 m wide by 7 m high rectangular bottom pontoons and three 0.9 m
diameter radial struts affixed to the bottom and top of the buoyant columns, respectively,
connect this central column to the offset columns.
Table 4.2: UMaine VolturnUS-S reference platform geometry (Allen et al., 2020)
Parameter
Value
Unit
Depth of platform base below SWL (draft)
20
m
Elevation of column (tower base) above SWL
15
m
Length of column
35
m
Radial spacing to offset column
51.75
m
Diameter of central column
10
m
Diameter of offset columns
12.50
m
Pontoon width
12.5
m
Pontoon height
7
m
Strut diameter
0.90
m
Vertical center of gravity (from SWL)
-14.94
m
Vertical center of buoyancy (from SWL)
-13.63
m
The platform weighs 17.854 t on site comprising of 3.914 t of structural steel, 2.540 t of fixed
iron-ore-concrete ballast that is evenly distributed at the base of the three radial columns,
11.300 t of seawater ballast that floods the majority of the three submerged pontoons, and
a 100 t tower interface connection.
26
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.3: Floating offshore wind turbine general system properties (Allen et al., 2020)
Parameter
Value
Unit
Platform mass
17854
t
Hull steel mass
3914
t
Fixed iron-ore-concrete ballast mass
2540
t
Fluid seawater ballast mass
11300
t
Tower Interface Mass
100
t
4.3
Mooring system configuration
This section describes the mooring properties of the UMaine VolturnUS-S reference semi-
submersible platform. Table 4.4 summarizes the mooring system properties, while Fig-
ure 4.3 shows the mooring system layout and configuration.
The mooring system is made up of three 850 m long chain catenary lines spread symmet-
rically about the platform Z-axis. The fairleads, body fixed locations where the mooring
lines are attached to the platform, are located at at the top of the base columns, at a depth
of 14 m below the SWL and at a radius of 58 m from the center-line of the platform. The
anchors are located at a depth of 200 m below SWL at a radius of 837.6 m from the center-
line of the platform. One of the lines is along the negative x-axis in the XZ plane. The
other two lines are uniformly distributed around the platform such that each line is 120°
apart. All three lines are made-up of a studless R3 chain with a nominal (bar) diameter of
185 mm. All properties are relative to the undisplaced position of the platform.
Table 4.4: Mooring system properties (Allen et al., 2020)
Parameter
Value
Unit
Number of lines
3
t
Anchor depth
200
t
Fairlead depth
14
m
Anchor radial spacing
837.60
m
Fairlead radial spacing
58
m
Nominal chain diameter
185
mm
Dry line linear density
685
kg/m
Extensional stiffness
3270
MN
Line unstretched length
850
m
Fairlead pretension
2437
kN
Fairlead angle from SWL
56.40
deg
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Mooring system arrangement within the inertia frame shown in plan (top) and
elevation (bottom) views. Figure courtesy of the University of Maine (Allen et al., 2020)
28
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:39==
4.4
Reference coordinate system
The origin of this coordinate system is taken as the x and y location of the center of gravity
of the floating platform over the calm water surface. The water surface is represented by
the z = 0 plane. For static and dynamic analysis, the wind and wave are assumed to align
and propagate in the positive x direction.
Semi-submersibles are floating platforms that are free to move. A structure that is free to
move can move in six directions (degrees of freedom) when acted upon by external loads.
The six degrees of freedom take place in the vertical and horizontal plane.
The translational response in the X, Y and Z co-ordinate directions are called surge, sway
and heave, while the rotational response about these axes are called, respectively, roll,
pitch and yaw as illustrated in Figure 4.1. Semi-submersibles are designed to remain
very flexible in the horizontal plane and hence significant displacements due to surge,
sway and yaw are enabled (Chandrasekaran, 2020). In the vertical plane it is designed
to be more stiff and thus heave, pitch and roll motions are constrained (Chandrasekaran,
2020). The platform is restrained by mooring lines which also have to provide the needed
flexibility in the horizontal plane without causing undesirably large displacements in the
surge, sway, and yaw motions.
The coordinate system, as well as the modes of motion are shown in Figure 4.1.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
29
==PAGE:40==
30
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:41==
5
Optimum mooring design
In this thesis the geometry optimization of a mooring system for a FOWT is investigated.
The cycles of loads acting on the FOWT arising from wind and waves causes changes
in the dynamic characteristics of the floating structure. Thus, the mooring system has
to be designed in such a way that it achieves the desired stability requirements, without
adversely impacting the reliability of the overall system (Pillai et al., 2019). Good design
must, therefore, take into account the characteristics of the floating platform, turbine and
mooring, as well as the interaction between these elements.
For each mooring line, the optimization routine selects the length of the unstretched moor-
ing line, the radius of the anchor from the center-line of the platform and the z-position of
the fairlead from the SWL. These decision variables are shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Description of decision variables
Variable
Description
Variable type
Lower bound
Upper bound
l
Length of unstretched mooring line
Continuous
800 m
900 m
r
Radius of anchor from CL of platform
Continuous
800 m
900 m
z
z-position of fairlead from SWL
Continuous
0 m
19 m
Figure 5.1: Graphical representation of decision variables
In the current thesis, the length of the line and the radius of anchor from CL of platform
has been limited to be between 800 m and 900 m, while the z-position of fairlead has been
limited between 0 m and 19 m. z = 0 m has been omitted, as it is not desirable to have
the fairlead at the water-air interface, while, z = 20 m has also been left out as having the
fairlead at the lower-most edge will adversely affect the stability of the structure. These
limits have been selected to be in the vicinity of the reference turbine. All the decision
variables are continuous variables. The number of mooring lines are kept to be 3, the
radius of the fairlead is kept to be 58 m, and the angle between the lines is set to be
120 deg. The nominal diameter of the mooring line is also fixed to be 185 mm.
A detailed description of the constraints set on the decision variables, as well as the prob-
lem formulation is described in the following sections.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
31
==PAGE:42==
5.1
Material cost
The optimization is a constrained single objective optimization routine that seeks find the
best combination of decision variables to minimize the material cost, Cm, of the mooring
lines. The material cost is determined by multiplying the unit cost of each line, pm, times
the length of the unstretched line, as shown in Equation 5.1.
Cm(x) =
∑
k
pm,k · lm,k(x)
(5.1)
This objective is necessary to reduce the LCOE of floating wind to make it competitive in
the market.
5.2
Design criteria
The minimization of the material cost of the mooring lines should not affect the perfor-
mance and stability requirements of the FOWT. In order to achieve required wind turbine
performance and to maintain the stability of the platform and wind turbine, certain perfor-
mance criteria have been evaluated, as explained below.
The critical steady-state offset for FOWTs is the offset in pitch, ROTY . A large offset in
pitch compromises the efficiency of the wind turbine by causing the rotor to be at an angle
relative to the inflow, and thus also introducing complicated loading to the turbine (Way-
man, 2006). If pitch offset is too large, it may cause the turbine to capsize, which is not
desirable. Pitch has been limited to have a maximum value 10 deg, as it is speculated that
a pitch larger than this will substantially decrease the efficiency of the turbine (Wayman,
2006).
The translational motion along the x-axis is called the surge motion, Ux, and is another
important criteria that is to be considered. Surge motion is constrained to not cause exces-
sive motions of the platform, so as to not damage the power cable that is used to connect
the turbines to the grid.
Another critical performance criteria which the structure has to be evaluated for is the
motion of the wind turbine nacelle (tower top acceleration), ¨q. Large motions of the na-
celle could cause a degradation of turbine performance and damage to the equipment
in extreme wave conditions (Sclavounos et al., 2008), hence it is desirable to limit the
acceleration as much as possible.
Lastly, the static plus the dynamic line tension, T, in each of the mooring lines should not
exceed the breaking load of the mooring lines. Hence, maximum tensions at the anchor
and fairlead for each line has been limited to be less than the line breaking load, as well
as less than that obtained for the reference turbine.
Each of performance criteria under consideration has been compared to the values ob-
tained from the simulation of the reference turbine and is tabulated in Table 5.2 and Ta-
ble 5.3.
32
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:43==
5.3
Constraints
Mooring cost is directly dependant on the length of the mooring line installed and hence the
shortest length of mooring line is desired in order to reduce the cost. The shortest length
of mooring line may not satisfy all the design criteria defined in Section 5.2. It is essential
to add the constraints to limit the search space to feasible solutions, so as to accurately
represent real engineering limitations on the decision variables. The constraints added to
the design criteria enlisted in Section 5.2 are given in Table 5.2 and Table 5.3.
Table 5.2: Reference values for FOWT response
Tower top acceleration
Surge
Pitch
RMS value
mean of abs (max, min)
abs max(max, min)
￿qRMS,ref
Ux,max,ref
ROTYmax,ref
0.279 m/s2
24 m
0.207 rad
Table 5.3: Reference values for FOWT tension at anchor and fairlead for each line
Line 1
Max tension, Tmax,ref
Line 2
Max tension, Tmax,ref
Line 3
Max tension, Tmax,ref
Anchor
Fairlead
Anchor
Fairlead
Anchor
Fairlead
9.203 MN
10.330 MN
9.842 MN
10.964 MN
9.822 MN
10.997 MN
To make sure that the solver takes into account the design criteria, while simultaneously
searching for the least expensive solution, a cost penalty is added to the inadequate
solutions. A penalty function is generally used to convert constrained optimization, which
is harder to solve, into an unconstrained problem by introducing an artificial penalty if a
constraint is violated.
An exterior penalty function was used to penalize the infeasible solutions. If the predicted
value was greater than the respective value for the reference turbine, then the difference
between the two was penalized by a penalty coefficient. The penalty function used is
shown in Equation 5.2.
Penalty = σk · max(0, Yi, pred −Yi,ref)
(5.2)
where,
σk
Penalty coefficient associated with the violation of one design criterion
Yi, pred
Predicted value of motion or tension
Yi, ref
Reference value obtained from simulation
The penalty coefficient, σk, is a fixed value in € that greatly magnifies the solutions that
perform the worst. It is chosen by assessing the extreme cost solutions between possible
solutions.
The penalized cost function with m constraints is given in Equation 5.3.
fp(x) = f(x) + σk
m
∑
i=1
max(0, Yi, pred −Yi,ref)
(5.3)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
33
==PAGE:44==
5.4
Bounds
The second order wave drift forces on the moored platform results in static translational
and rotational displacement relative to its initial position (Loukogeorgaki and Angelides,
2005). These static displacements cause a change in the initial geometry of the catenary
mooring lines. This change in geometry causes a change in static tensions in the lines.
The final position of the platform depends on the stiffness of the lines, which ultimately
is a function of the change in the static tensions of the mooring line (Loukogeorgaki and
Angelides, 2005). To better understand the relationship between the static displacement
and horizontal forces on the platform, a deeper look into the static system of a single
catenary mooring line is required. A two-dimensional sketch of a catenary mooring line is
shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Catenary profile and forces on the section
Figure 5.2 shows a mooring line with unstretched length, l, attached to the anchor at its
lower end and to the fairlead at the upper end. The part that is suspended in the water
takes a catenary shape under the influence of gravity. The weight of the suspended length
of the cable translates to tension at both ends. Displacements in the platform changes the
length of the suspended part of the line causing a change in this catenary shape, as well
as the static tension of the line. This change in tension acts as a restoring force (stiffness)
to the motion of the structure. It is observed that an increase in the force with the offset of
the structure is non-linear, i.e. as the structure moves further away, the rate of increase
of tension gets larger and larger (TheNavelArch, 2020).
The line is assumed to be inelastic and, hence, only the self-weight of the line contributes
to the catenary effect. Good practice is to have no vertical loads on the anchor (TheNave-
lArch, 2020), which is accomplished by ensuring that a part of the line is always resting on
34
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:45==
the sea-bed. It was also assumed that the cable line has constant weight per unit length
and that the cable is made of a homogeneous material. For composite lines, the cate-
nary equation for each segment is to be solved to maintain the continuity of the boundary
conditions at the joints (TheNavelArch, 2020).
At any point the tension can be divided into its horizontal and vertical components, TH
and TV respectively, as shown in Equation 5.4, where, θ is the angle of the line with the
horizontal. In Figure 5.2, the two horizontal forces at the two ends of the section are
balanced while the vertical tension, TV, at the top end is larger than the vertical tension at
the lower end by the weight of the section.
TH = T · cos θ
TV = T · sin θ
(5.4)
A number of assumptions were made to find the maximum tension in the cable line. Firstly,
bending stiffness was neglected, which is a good approximation for chains. Dynamic
effects of the line were neglected. The effect of the mean hydrodynamic forces per unit
length in the normal and tangential direction were neglected. The sea-bed was assumed
to be horizontal with the cable in the vertical plane. The maximum tension in the cable
line is given in Equation 5.5. A detailed derivation can be found in Faltinsen, 1993.
Tmax = TH + w · h
(5.5)
The horizontal distance, X, between the anchor and fairlead can be expressed as shown
in Equation 5.6.
X = l −ls + x
(5.6)
Equations for l, ls and x are taken from Faltinsen, 1993 and substituted in Equation 5.6,
to give a relationship between X and TH, as shown in Equation 5.7.
X = l −h ·
(
1 + 2 · a
h
)0.5
+ a · cosh−1
(
1 + h
a
)
&
a = TH
w
(5.7)
where,
X
Horizontal distance between anchor and fairlead
x
Horizontal distance between point where line rests on the sea-bed and fairlead
l
Un-stretched length of mooring line
ls
Suspended length of mooring line
h
Depth of water from the z position of the fairlead
a
Catenary parameter
TH
Horizontal component of tension
TV
Vertical component of tension
w
Wet weight of line
θ
Angle between line and mean sea level
Values from Table 5.4 are input into Equation 5.7 which resulted in a maximum horizontal
tension at the anchor, TH,max, of 136.71 kN at X = 779.6 m. From Equation 5.5, a maximum
tension, Tmax of 247.51 kN is obtained. The horizontal forces at the anchor as a function
of the horizontal displacement of the platform is plotted in Figure 5.3. This figure clearly
shows the non-linear relationship between the horizontal force on the platform and its
horizontal displacement.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
35
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.4: Input values from U-Maine (Allen et al., 2020)
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Radius of fairlead
Rfairlead
58
m
Radius of anchor
Ranchor
837.60
m
Horizontal distance between fairlead and anchor
X
779.60
m
Unstretched length of cable
l
850
m
Water depth
wdepth
200
m
z-position of fairlead
zfairlead
14
m
Depth of water from z-position of fairlead
h
186
m
Equivalent diameter of cable
D
0.333
m
Dry line linear density
ma
685
N/m
Density of water
ρw
1025
kg/m3
Wet weight of line
w
595.73
N/m
Line breaking strength
Tbr
22286
kN
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: (a) The catenary mooring line system for the semi-submersible platform (Sa-
hasakkul, 2014) (b) Plot of horizontal restoring force (TH) as a function of the horizontal
distance, X, between the anchor and the fairlead. Water depth : 200 m, Weight per unit
length of chain in water : 595.731 N/m, Line length : 850 m, Fairlead depth : 14 m
The line breaking strength, Tbr, was given to be 22 286 kN (Allen et al., 2020). If Tmax is set
equal to Tbr, then from Equation 5.5, a horizontal force, TH,max of 22 175.2 kN is obtained
at an Xmax of 843.8 m. Thus, an increase of about 8.32% in the horizontal offset increases
the maximum tension by 16121%. This validates the assumption that maximum horizontal
force increases non-linearly and at a larger rate with a small increase in offset ( ≈64 m).
Thus, the RHS of Equation 5.6 is set to be the upper bound with Tmax = Tbr, as shown in
Equation 5.8 to make sure that the breaking strength of the line is not exceeded.
X ≤l −h ·
(
1 + 2 · a
h
)0.5
+ a · cosh−1
(
1 + h
a
)
&
a = Tbr −w · h
w
(5.8)
36
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:47==
5.5
Problem formulation
The optimization is a constrained non-linear programming (NLP) problem. Given the the
decision variables, objective, constraints and bounds as described in the previous sec-
tions, the full optimization can be formulated as follows:
min
f(x) = Cm(x)
(5.9a)
with respect to :
x = [ l, r, z ]
(5.9b)
s.t.
¨qRMS, pred(x) ≤¨qRMS, ref
(5.9c)
ux,pred(x) ≤ux, mean, ref
(5.9d)
ROTYmax,pred(x) ≤ROTYmax,ref
(5.9e)
T i
max,a, pred(x) ≤T i
max,a, ref
i = 1, 2, 3
(5.9f)
T i
max,f, pred(x) ≤T i
max,f, ref
i = 1, 2, 3
(5.9g)
where, f(x) is the objective function as explained in Section 5.1, x is a vector of the
three decision variables, l, r and z, ¨qRMS, pred(x) is the predicted RMS value of tower top
acceleration for the vector x, ¨qRMS, ref is the RMS value of tower top acceleration for the
reference turbine given in Table 5.2, ux,pred(x) is the predicted value for surge for the
vector x, ux, mean, ref is the mean of the absolute value of maximum surge for the reference
turbine given in Table 5.2, ROTYmax,pred(x) is the predicted value for maximum pitch for
the vector x, ROTYmax,ref is the absolute value of maximum surge for the reference turbine
given in Table 5.2, T i
max,a, pred(x) is the maximum predicted tension at the anchor, where,
i represents each mooring line, T i
max,a, ref is the reference value for maximum tension
at the anchor for each mooring line, T i
max,f, pred(x) is the maximum predicted tension at
the fairlead, where, i represents each mooring line and T i
max,a, ref is the reference value
for maximum tension at the fairlead for each mooring line. The reference values for the
maximum tension at the anchor and fairlead for each line is given in Table 5.3.
5.6
Optimization setup
The optimization of the material cost of the mooring lines is a constrained NLP, and is
solved using a gradient-based sub-routine from the SciPy optimize package. The sub-
routine applies a trust-region constrained approach, (trust_constr), at each iteration. The
tolerance for the termination by norm of the Lagrangian gradient, (gtol), and the tolerance
for termination by change of the independent variable, (xtol), is set to the default values
of 1e-8.
Gradient based optimizations have a tendency to get stuck in the local optima, and hence
its performance strongly depends on the initial guess value supplied. Two improved de-
signs in the vicinity of the two initial starting point was found and recorded. All parameters
used in scipy.optimize.minimize was set to default values.
Two representative optimized designs from two different initial values are selected and
analysed in Chapter 7.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:49==
6
Surrogate model - ANN
Artificial neural networks was used as the surrogate model. The neural network setup
consisted of two steps : preparation of the data-set and build of the neural network. These
two steps are described in Section 6.1 and 6.5. A local sensitivity analysis performed is
detailed in Section 6.2.
The motion response information for a floating structure is obtained in the form of a time-
series, from which the root-mean-square value (RMS), maximum and minimum value
were recorded. As each response under study is governed by different physical laws,
separate ANNs are built for each target variable. Hence, a total of nine ANN’s are built
to be used in the learning and prediction process. The architecture for each network is
almost similar and the same input values will be used for each target variable.
6.1
Data-set preparation
Given the lack of available data, a population data-set was created by varying the deci-
sion variables within the range as shown in Table 5.1. An array of combinations of l, r
and z were created by setting a basic Pythagoras constraint to filter out unreasonable
combinations as shown in Equation 6.1.
l ≥10 m +
√
h2 + x2
(6.1)
Here, l is the unstretched length of the line, 10 m is the minimum length of line lying on the
sea bed, h is the vertical distance of the fairlead from the sea bed and x is the horizontal
distance of the touchdown point of the line and the position of the fairlead. 10 m is chosen
to be the minimum length of line lying on the sea bed so as to make sure that no vertical
forces act on the anchor.
A simulation was performed in HAWC2 for each combination of decision variables to pro-
duce a time series of the required target variables. The target variables chosen are : RMS
of tower top acceleration, ¨qRMS, the absolute value of maximum surge and pitch displace-
ments, Ux,max and ROTYmax and the maximum tension at the anchor and fairlead of each
of the three lines, Tmax.
Respective data-sets were built by pairing each target variable with the respective decision
variable. The raw data-set comprised of a total of 1860 different combinations of values.
For each target variable the corresponding data-set was treated a little bit differently. For
maximum tension, target variables with negative or zero tension was dropped to clean
the data-set by filtering out bad values. The histogram of each target variable is shown in
Figure 6.1. The statistics for each of the target variables is tabulated in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Statistics for target variables
Unit
Count
Min
Max
Mean
Std
¨qRMS
m/s2
1300
0.245345
0.306517
0.272008
0.014251
ux,max
m
1300
2.410471
172.7078
49.08805
46.73026
ROTYmax
rad
1300
0.121239
0.229754
0.183331
0.023274
Tmax at anchor (L1)
N
1023
1106.722
11723795
2709969
2780710
Tmax at fairlead (L1)
N
1300
1044766
12955712
3601227
2749765
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
39
==PAGE:50==
Table 6.1 continued from previous page
Unit
Count
Min
Max
Mean
Std
Tmax at anchor (L2)
N
1300
1780633
12552122
3850563
2385836
Tmax at fairlead (L2)
N
1300
1780633
12552122
3850563
2385836
Tmax at anchor (L3)
N
1300
1780633
12552122
3850563
2385836
Tmax at fairlead (L3)
N
1300
1780633
12552122
3850563
2385836
Figure 6.1: Histogram of all nine target variables : RMS of tower top acceleration, absolute
maximum of surge, absolute maximum of pitch, maximum tension at anchor and fairlead
for each line respectively
Once the data has been cleaned, a pair plot is used to visualize the relationship between
the decision variables and also the distribution of a single decision variable for each of
the data-sets, as shown in Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.2: Above : Scatter plot of decision variables with a linear regression model fit,
Below : Count plot for decision variables. The data-set set corresponds to that used for
tower-top acceleration.
40
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.3: Above : Scatter plot of decision variables with a linear regression model fit,
Below : Count plot for decision variables. The data-set set corresponds to that used for
maximum tension at anchor for Line 1.
The data-sets created for all target variables shows the same relationship between the
decision variables, only the data-set created for the maximum tension at the anchor for
line 1 differs from the rest. This is because the simulation generated certain negative
tension values which were dropped from the data-set while cleaning the data.
The co-relation between the decision variables can be summarized as as shown in Fig-
ure 6.4, where 0 indicates no co-relation, 1 indicates strong positive co-relation and -1
indicates strong negative co-relation.
Figure 6.4: Co-relation matrix between decision variables for tower-top acceleration (L)
and maximum tension at anchor for mooring line 1.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
41
==PAGE:52==
6.2
Sensitivity analysis
A local sensitivity analysis was carried to understand the impact of each decision variable
on the target variables. It was done by restricting two of the three decision variables to
the value of the reference turbine and checking the influence of the third decision variable
on the target variable. The nine sensitivity analysis plots are shown in Figure 6.5.
From the figures, it is seen that all the decision variables have some degree of influence
on the target variable, which is the desired outcome. In Figure 6.5b, it is observed that
the maximum surge is not very sensitive to a change in the z-position of fairlead. In
Figure 6.5c, no real relationship is observed between the maximum pitch with a change
in length of line, l, and radius of anchor, r. As expected, the sensitivity plots for maximum
tension show the same variation to a change in decision variables. The maximum tension
decreases as the z-position of the fairlead from the SWL is increased, The maximum
tension increases with an increase in length of line, upto a point and then decreases. It
follows a similar tread for a variation in r. Thus, it is essential to find a combination of
decision variables to minimize its impact on all target variables.
(a) RMS value of tower-top acceleration
(b) Absolute maximum value of surge
(c) Absolute maximum value of surge
Figure 6.5: Sensitivity analysis carried out by fixing two of the three decision variables to
the value corresponding to the reference turbine.
42
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:53==
(d) Maximum tension at anchor for line 1
(e) Maximum tension at fairlead for line 1
(f) Maximum tension at anchor for line 2
(g) Maximum tension at fairlead for line 2
(h) Maximum tension at anchor for line 3
(i) Maximum tension at fairlead for line 3
Figure 6.5: Sensitivity analysis carried out by fixing two of the three decision variables to
the value corresponding to the reference turbine (cont).
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
43
==PAGE:54==
6.3
Scaling the data
One of the most important phases in the pre-processing of data to build a machine learning
model is feature scaling. Since the range of values of raw data for the three decision
variables and the nine target variables varies widely, the objective function would not
work correctly without a scaling of the data. Having features on the similar scale helps
the gradient descent converge more quickly and smoothly towards the minima.
For the case of neural networks, feature scaling
The decision variables were scaled using the Min-Max scaler. The Min-Max scaler trans-
forms each feature individually within the range of [0,1] (Pedregosa et al., 2011). The
transformation is given in Equation 6.2.
xnew =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
(6.2)
Certain target variables - surge and maximum tensions at anchor and fairlead for each line
- were scaled using the Standard scaler. The data for each target variable is assumed to be
normally distributed and scaled so that the distribution is centered about 0, with a standard
deviation of 1 (Pedregosa et al., 2011). The transformation is given in Equation 6.3.
xnew = x −µ
σ
(6.3)
Here, σ is the standard deviation of the particular target variable and µ is the mean of the
same target variable.
6.4
Splitting the data
Train-Valid-Test split is used to evaluate the performance of the regression model. For
each data-set, the data is split into a training data-set, a test data-set and a validation
data-set as defined below:
Training data-set : It is the set of data that is used for learning by the model, that is, it is
the sample of data used to fit the model (Ripley, 2007).
Test data-set : It is the set of data used to provide an unbiased evaluation of the final
model that has been fitted on the training data-set (Ripley, 2007).
Validation data-set : It is the set of data used to provide an unbiased evaluation of the
final model that has been fitted on the training data-set while tuning hyper-parameters
(Ripley, 2007).
The data has been split into 80% training data and 20% test data. 30% of the test data has
been further split into validation data and the remaining has been used as the test data. A
visualization of the split is provided in Figure 6.6. The random split into the sub-sets was
computed with the train_test_split helper function from the scikit-learn library.
Figure 6.6: Splitting data into train, test and validation set (expressed in parts out of 100)
44
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:55==
6.5
Training the model
Nine different neural networks were built for each of the nine target variables. All networks
had a similar architecture and were deep neural networks used for regression analysis.
ANNs were selected over simple Linear Regression models as the relationship between
the decision variables and target variable is complex and non-linear. ANN’s tend to learn
this complex relationship via the activation function in each layer. For this report, fully
connected feed forward neural networks is used to perform the Regression Analysis. The
entire code was executed in Python 3.9 and TensorFlow 2.8 utilizing the Keras API.
All models were built with two hidden layers. The activation used for both hidden layers
is the relu activation, while a simple linear activation is used in the output layer. ReLU is
the recommended default activation function for MLPs. For regression problems, linear
activation is to be used.The weight initialization parameter used is he_normal. The He
initialization works on the principle that the scale of the gradients should be similar through
all layers (He et al., 2015). The only difference between all 9 networks is the number is
nodes in each hidden layer. The number of nodes in each hidden layer for each target
variable is shown in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Number of nodes in each layer for each target variable
Hidden layer 1
Hidden layer 2
Output layer
RMS of tower-top acceleration
10
6
1
Absolute maximum of surge
10
5
1
Absolute maximum of pitch
10
5
1
Tmax at anchor (Line 1)
20
10
1
Tmax at fairlead (Line 1)
20
10
1
Tmax at anchor (Line 2)
20
10
1
Tmax at fairlead (Line 2)
20
10
1
Tmax at anchor (Line 3)
20
10
1
Tmax at fairlead (Line 3)
20
10
1
All nine models were trained using the Adam optimizer with default parameters as tabu-
lated in Table 6.3. The cost function used was the MeanSquaredError(), it is the error that
the neural network minimizes throughout the training stage. The squared error loss for
each training example is the square of the difference between the actual and predicted
values. The corresponding cost function is the mean of these square errors (MSE). The
MSE is a quadratic function with only a global minimum, and hence it can be assumed
that the gradient descent will converge to the global minimum.
Table 6.3: Default arguments for Adam algorithm
η
β1
β2
ϵ
0.001
0.9
0.999
1e-7
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.7: An example model architecture for maximum tension at fairlead and anchor
for all lines. The network has 2 hidden dense layers with 20 and 10 nodes respectfully.
The activation function for the two hidden layers is the ReLU activation, while a simple
linear activation is used at the output layer.
An example model architecture for maximum tension at fairlead and anchor for all lines is
shown in Figure 6.7.
The loss graph in the training and validation split was analysed as the epochs passed.
The training was stopped by visually observing the result when the mean square error
of the validation set no longer improves along with the training set. The loss graph for
maximum tension at fairlead for line 3 is shown in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Loss graph for maximum tension at fairlead for line 3. The training has been
stopped when the metric has not improved more than a minimum change to be considered
as an improvement.
Each of the 9 models is trained to fit to to the test-data, then the model performance is
evaluated.
46
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:57==
6.6
Model performance
A crucial aspect when building regression models is to evaluate the quality of the model
fit. This is done using the test set, so that there is no information leakage from the model
training. The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and the coefficient of determination (R2) are the
metrics used to evaluate the model. The formula to express MAE is given in Equation 3.3,
while that for R2 is given by Equation 3.4. The MAE and R2 for each of the nine models
built are tabulated in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Performance metrics for all nine models
Attribute name
R2
MAE
RMS of tower-top acceleration
0.825
0.005
Absolute maximum of surge
0.974
0.087
Absolute maximum of pitch
0.019
0.084
Maximum tension at anchor (Line 1)
0.967
0.115
Maximum tension at fairlead (Line 1)
0.917
0.182
Maximum tension at anchor (Line 2)
0.985
0.077
Maximum tension at fairlead (Line 2)
0.982
0.09
Maximum tension at anchor (Line 3)
0.957
0.116
Maximum tension at fairlead (Line 3)
0.988
0.017
Just by looking at the performance metrics for all models, they seem to have trained well.
An ideal R2 should be as close as possible to 1, while an ideal MAE should be as close
to zero as possible. All the responses, expect for that of tower top acceleration and pitch,
have a R2 value grater than 0.9, which is an indicator of goodness of fit. It is also observed
that the MAE is less than 0.2 for the selected responses.
To gain a better understanding of the model performance a scatter plot of predicted values
along the vertical axis, ˆy, and the true response values, ytrue, along the horizontal axis, for
each target value is used to visualize the results as shown in Figure 6.9. Each point in the
scatter plot represents a single row of the data-set and therefore is the single prediction
for that target. The points on the reference line indicate correct predictions.
(a) RMS value of tower-top acceleration
(b) Absolute maximum value of surge
Figure 6.9: Plot of predictions vs true values for each attribute
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
47
==PAGE:58==
(c) Absolute maximum value of pitch
(d) Max tension at anchor (L1)
(e) Max tension at fairlead (L1)
(f) Max tension at anchor (L2)
(g) Max tension at fairlead (L2)
(h) Max tension at anchor (L3)
Figure 6.9: Plot of predictions vs true values for each attribute (cont.)
48
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:59==
(i) Max tension at fairlead (L3)
Figure 6.9: Plot of predictions vs true values for each attribute (cont.)
The plots for the predicted vs the true values for surge (Figure 6.9b) and for maximum ten-
sions for anchor and fairlead for each of the lines (from Figure 6.9d to Figure 6.9i) shows
that the neural network used is a good predictor of the attribute under consideration. The
network for the prediction of the RMS value of tower-top acceleration (Figure 6.9a) can be
tweaked and made better, time limitations for this thesis has prevented any improvement
for this network.
The network for the absolute maximum value of pitch has almost all predictions in the
middle band of the graph. The prediction is over-estimating the actual outcome for ytrue <
0.18 and is under-estimating the actual outcome for ytrue > 0.18. The model parameters
has been tweaked multiple times but a good fit was not found. One reason could be
that the wave motion was not uniform for each run of the simulation and hence there is
a high level of uncertainity in the data obtained. The predictions could be made better if
more simulations are run to better capture the effect of uncertainity in the wave. Another
reason could be that pitch motion does not depend on the mooring configuration. It mainly
depends on the interaction between the center of buoyancy and the center of gravity, and
is stabilized by the action of restoring moments, which depends on the surface area of
each column of the semi-submersible and the distance between them (Karimirad, 2014).
Hence as there is no real connection between the geometric parameters of the mooring
and the pitch, the network is unable to capture any real relationship between the two.
For the optimization eight of the original nine target variables was used - pitch was dropped.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:61==
7
Results
This chapter is divided into two parts : Section 7.1 describes two representative results
obtained using different initial values for the optimization and Section 7.3 describes the
validation of the optimal solutions.
7.1
Optimization results
The optimization process was performed with different initial guess values, x0. Two op-
timized results with two different initial guess values were chosen and are discussed in
detail. Figure 7.1 and 7.2 show the variation of the objective function and the design
variables during the optimization iteration process for the two selected tests, respectively.
Figure 7.1: History of objective function during two optimization iterations with different
initial guess value of design variables, x0. Test 1 (left) : x0 = [ 805, 840, 12.5 ] ; Test 2
(right) : x0 = [ 835, 850, 14 ]
Figure 7.2: History of design variables during two optimization iterations with different
initial guess value of design variables, x0. Test 1 (left) : x0 = [ 805, 840, 12.5 ] ; Test 2
(right) : x0 = [ 835, 850, 14 ]
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
51
==PAGE:62==
The scale of the objective function is very large due to the penalty function. For better
visualization of the objective function iterations in Test 1, the outlier marked by the dotted
red line in Figure 7.1 is dropped and then the data is normalised. The data is normalised
for Test 2 after omitting the first four iterations. The normalised objective function is then
shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: History of normalised objective function during two optimization iterations with
different initial guess value of design variables, x0. Test 1 (left) : x0 = [ 805, 840, 12.5 ] ;
Test 2 (right) : x0 = [ 835, 850, 14 ]
The total number of function evaluations for Test 1 and Test 2 are 82 and 16, respectively.
The initial values of unstretched length of line and radius of anchor from center-line of
platform for Test 1 is lower than that for Test 2, giving Test 2 a higher cost. The cost
does not change as much within the first 55 iterations for Test 1 and 4 iterations for Test
2. A similar trend is observed for the design variables. For the optimization problem with
three design variables, the average number of function evaluations is about 2.4 for each
iteration for Test 1 and 4 for Test 2.
A decrease in cost can be seen in Test 1 after the 55th function evaluation, after which the
cost keeps decreasing. Corresponding to the decreasing cost, there is a small decrease
in unstretched length of mooring line, l, after which it starts increasing until it hits a high
(expressed as a red line in the graphs) that greatly violates the constraints and dramatically
increases the cost. The l value then decreases until it stabilizes. The radius of anchor
from the center-line of the platform, r, steadily decreases. It reaches its lowest value when
l touches its maximum value. The z-position of fairlead, z, barely narrowly and remains
around the value of 12.5 m.
In Test 2, a sharp decrease in cost is observed after the 4th function evaluation with a
corresponding decrease in l. After the 4th iteration, there is barely any change in r and z,
indicating that l is the driving factor for cost.
Table 7.1 presents the normalised cost and optimal variables for two cases.
Table 7.1: Optimum normalised cost and design variables
Normalised cost
Optimum variables
l
r
z
Optimized Design 1
0.952
809.2 m
826.60 m
12.5 m
Optimized Design 2
0.975
828.9 m
849.01 m
14.0 m
Reference turbine
1.000
850 m
837.60 m
14.0 m
52
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.4 shows us a visual representation of the geometric configuration reference moor-
ing system (in red) and the two optimized designs (in black).
Figure 7.4: Comparison of the mooring system geometry of the two optimized results
(black) and the reference turbine (red)
It is observed that the length of line is reduced in both optimized results. The length of
the part of the line that rests on the ground is decreased. In Section 7.3, the effect of this
shortened length on the tension at the anchor point is examined. In Optimized Design 1,
the fairlead is located higher than that of reference turbine, while, the radius of the anchor
is also decreased. In Optimized Result 2, the fairlead is located at the same level as that
of the reference turbine, while, the radius of the anchor is larger.
The material cost for Optimized Design 1 is reduced to about 95% of the original material
cost and is hence the better design of the two.
7.2
Better design in population data-set
After the population data-set was created and the expensive simulation was run, the data
was checked to see if any of the combinations in the population set gave favourable re-
sults. The responses were evaluated against the constraints presented in Table 5.2 and
Table 5.3, neglecting the constraint set for pitch angle.
Eight better designs were found in the population data-set.
Four designs had the z-
location at 1 m below SWL and four were 2 m below SWL. Two designs were randomly
selected and were chosen to be evaluated. The two combinations chosen are given in
Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Normalised cost and design variables for better designs in population data-set
Normalised cost
Optimum variables
l
r
z
Better Design 1
0.953
810 m
820 m
1 m
Better Design 2
0.976
830 m
840 m
2 m
Reference turbine
1.000
850 m
837.60 m
14.0 m
Figure 7.5 shows us the a visual representation of the geometric configuration of the
reference mooring system (in red) and the two chosen better designs.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 7.5: Comparison of the mooring system geometry of the two chosen better results
(black) and the reference turbine (red
7.3
Validation of results
A validation study of the optimum solutions and the two better solutions using time-domain
simulations was conducted. A sum up of the results is presented in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Normalised cost and design variables for chosen combination and reference
turbine
Normalised cost
Optimum variables
l
r
z
Optimum Design 1
0.952
809.2
826.6
12.5
Optimum Design 2
0.975
828.9
849.01
14.0
Better Design 1
0.953
810.0
820.0
1.0
Better Design 2
0.976
830.0
840.0
2.0
Reference Turbine
1
850.0
837.6
14.0
The optimum variables shown in Table 7.3 were used as inputs for the time-domain sim-
ulations to evaluate the design constraints and validate the responses calculated by the
surrogate models.
In terms of cost, the Optimized Design 1 is the best, which an approximately 5% reduction
in material cost as compared to the reference turbine. A detailed comparison of the re-
sponses generated are shown from Figure 7.6 to Figure 7.13. For all the responses, the
simulation was run for the same period of 8000 s. The input free wind speed was constant,
while the wave input was irregular. For each response, the first 1000 s were truncated.
54
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:65==
(a) Tower-top acceleration for reference turbine
(b) Tower-top acceleration for Optimized Design 1
(c) Tower-top acceleration for Optimized Design 2
(d) Tower-top acceleration for Better design 1
(e) Tower-top acceleration for Better design 2
Figure 7.6: Comparison of time history plot of tower-top acceleration of the two optimized
results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against the reference turbine
(top)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
55
==PAGE:66==
(a) Time history of surge displacement for reference turbine
(b) Time history of surge displacement for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of surge displacement for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of surge displacement for Better design 1
(e) Time history of surge displacement for Better design 2
Figure 7.7: Comparison of time history plot of surge displacement of the two optimized
results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against the reference turbine
(top)
56
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:67==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1 for Better design 2
Figure 7.8: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the anchor for line 1
of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against the
reference turbine (top)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
57
==PAGE:68==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1 for Better design 2
Figure 7.9: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 1
of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against the
reference turbine (top)
58
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:69==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 2 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 2 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 2 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 2 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 2 for Better design 2
Figure 7.10: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the anchor for line
2 of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against
the reference turbine (top)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
59
==PAGE:70==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 2 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 2 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 2 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 2 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 2 for Better design 2
Figure 7.11: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the fairlead for line
2 of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against
the reference turbine (top)
60
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:71==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 3 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 3 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 3 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 3 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the anchor for line 3 for Better design 2
Figure 7.12: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the anchor for line
3 of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against
the reference turbine (top)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
61
==PAGE:72==
(a) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 3 for reference turbine
(b) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 3 for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 3 for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 3 for Better design 1
(e) Time history of variation of tension at the fairlead for line 3 for Better design 2
Figure 7.13: Comparison of time history plot of variation of tension at the fairlead for line
3 of the two optimized results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against
the reference turbine (top)
62
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:73==
Certain trends can be observed in all the plots. All the plots show a similar wave form,
frequency, peak values and range, which is agreeable. Most of the plots also show the
maximum and minimum value around the same period. For the surge of the reference
turbine, the maximum value obtained was very small. Maybe, the maximum value would
be reached after 4000 s. Hence, the maximum surge displacement for the UMaine turbine
of 24 m was used as the comparison. The channel for pitch was investigated as well and is
presented in Appendix G. The channel was not investigated in detail as it was not included
in the optimization.
Table 7.4 shows us the comparison of the responses (constraints) obtained after the high-
fidelity time-domain simulation between the two optimized design, the two better designs
and the reference design.
Table 7.4: Validation of constraints corresponding to optimal solutions using time-domain
simulations
Response
Unit
Reference
Optimized
Optimized
Better
Better
design
design 1
design 2
Design 1
Design 2
RMS value of ¨q
m/s2
0.275
0.257
0.261
0.254
0.261
Absolute max of surge
m
24
7.226
6.351
7.542
6.351
Tmax at anchor (Line 1)
MN
9.203
4.510
4.874
3.725
4.874
Tmax at fairlead (Line 1)
MN
10.330
5.499
5.935
4.985
5.935
Tmax at anchor (Line 2)
MN
9.842
5.768
6.245
5.092
6.245
Tmax at fairlead (Line 2)
MN
10.964
6.906
7.374
6.289
7.374
Tmax at anchor (Line 3)
MN
9.822
5.779
6.334
4.919
6.334
Tmax at fairlead (Line 3)
MN
10.997
6.940
7.465
6.164
7.465
Comparing the values, it is observed that the responses for simulation of the Optimized
Design 2 and the Better Design 2 almost identical, which means the z-position of fairlead
is not a driving factor for the minimization of mooring cost, as it does not affect the turbine
responses. A visual is provided in Figure 7.14 and 7.15 to better compare the responses
of the designs.
Figure 7.14: Tower top acceleration (left) and surge (right) for the four better designs as
well as the reference design
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure 7.15: Tensions at anchor (above) and fairlead (below) for the four better designs
as well as the reference design
From Figure 7.14 and 7.15, it is clearly visible that the responses of the reference turbine
have been greatly reduced by the four new designs. It is seen that for seven of the eight
channels (excluding surge), the combination for Better Design 1 performed the best in
terms of reducing the response motions of the floating structure. However, the fairlead
in this combination is very close to the splash zone (2 m below MSL) and may not be
desirable. The next best performing combination is for Optimized Design 1, which has
a similar l and r as the Better Design 1, but the z-position of the fairlead is now 12.5 m
below MSL. Having the fairlead close to the bottom of the floating platform is better for its
stability as compared to having it near the top of the draft and hence, Optimized Design
1 is chosen as the best performing design overall.
64
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:75==
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
65
==PAGE:76==
8
Conclusion
This research demonstrates that a data-driven optimization can be used to replace a high-
fidelity fully coupled simulation for the design optimization of mooring lines for floating
offshore wind turbines. This methodology employs the use of a surrogate-based opti-
mization when searching for the optimal solution. The design of the mooring system for
the IEA 15 MW reference wind turbine mounted on the UMaine VolturnUS-S reference
semi-submersible has been carried out following this proposed methodology.
Time-domain simulations were run in HAWC2 for a fully coupled system of floating tur-
bine, platform and a single-point mooring system. A simple feed-forward network with 2
hidden layers was trained for the responses associated with the design constraints. A
gradient based optimization was used to find the optimal solution, which was about 5%
lesser than the original. Finally, validations on the optimal solutions was performed. It
was found that this surrogate based optimization is very computationally efficient, once
the simulation results have been generated. This methodology can also work with many
different constraints.
The main limitation in this thesis was the lack of available data. Only one sample of
data of 10 min was not enough to obtain a generalization of the stochastic pattern in the
responses evaluated. HAWC2 is also not easily reproducible and there is some unknown
randomness in each simulation run. To overcome this, more simulations should be run for
a longer period with multiple random realizations, only then the data should be sampled
for the Design of Experiments. Another potential challenge is that the final accuracy of
the prediction is only as good as that of the simulation used to generate the data.
The MLP used was a very simple, two-layer network. One MLP network was constructed
for every response evaluated. It remains to be seen if one single MLP network can be
trained to evaluate all responses at once. The optimization procedure used eight con-
straints to find the optimal solution. An added constraint of controller parameters may
help better the solution.
66
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:77==
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
67
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
Fetting, C. (2020). The european green deal. ESDN Report.
Eurostat. (2022). Share of energy from renewable sources in gross final energy consump-
tion. Statistical office of European Union [data set], last updated : 01/02/2022. Data
code : NGR_IND_REN. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/NRG_
IND_REN__custom_2307203/default/table?lang=en
EC. (2020). Commission notice : Guidance document on wind energy developments and
eu nature legislation. European commission.
IRENA. (2018). Renewable energy prospects for the european union.
WindDK. (2022). Wind denmark. https://winddenmark.dk/tal-fakta/produktion-lige-nu
IRENA. (2021). Renewable energy capacity statistics 2021, international energy agency.
ISBN 978-92-9260-342-7.
Kaldellis, J., & Kapsali, M. (2013). Shifting towards offshore wind energy—recent activity
and future development. Energy policy, 53, 136–148.
MacAskill, A., & Mitchell, P. (2013). Offshore wind—an overview. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Energy and Environment, 2(4), 374–383.
Ramirez, L., Fraile, D., & Brindley, G. (2021). Offshore wind in europe: Key trends and
statistics 2020.
WindEurope. (2022). Dashboard - european offshore wind farms map public. Wind Europe
intelligence platform [data set], last updated : 03/02/2022. https://public.tableau.
com/views/Offshore_Interactive_Tools_PublicMap/OnlineWindFarms?:language=
en&:embed=y&:embed_code_version=3&:loadOrderID=0&:display_count=y&:
origin=viz_share_link
Wilson, A. B. (2020). Offshore wind in europe. EPRS | European Parliamentary Research
Service.
Jakobsen, E. G., & Ironside, N. (2021). Oceans unlocked - a floating wind future. COWI
Insights.
Asim, T., Islam, S. Z., Hemmati, A., & Khalid, M. S. U. (2022). A review of recent advance-
ments in offshore wind turbine technology. Energies, 15(2), 579.
Butterfield, S., Musial, W., Jonkman, J., & Sclavounos, P. (2007). Engineering challenges
for floating offshore wind turbines (tech. rep.). National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL),
Golden, CO (United States).
Leimeister, M., Kolios, A., & Collu, M. (2018). Critical review of floating support struc-
tures for offshore wind farm deployment. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
1104(1), 012007.
Trust, C. (2015). Floating offshore wind: Market and technology review.
Davies, P., Weller, S. D., Johanning, L., & Banfield, S. J. (2014). A review of synthetic fiber
moorings for marine energy applications. 5th International Conference on Ocean
Energy (ICOE 2014), 4th-6th November 2014, Halifax.
Wang, H. (2019). Catenary mooring. In W. Cui, S. Fu, & Z. Hu (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
ocean engineering (pp. 1–6). Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
981-10-6963-5_145-1
Musial, W., Butterfield, S., & Boone, A. (2004). Feasibility of floating platform systems for
wind turbines. 42nd AIAA aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit, 1007.
Monfort, D. (2017). Design optimization of the mooring system for a floating offshore wind
turbine foundation. Master Thesis.
Stehly, T., Beiter, P., Heimiller, D., & Scott, G. (2018). Cost of wind energy review. National
Renewable Energy Laboratory: Golden, CO, USA.
68
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:79==
Fraile, D., Vandenberghe, A., Konari, V., Ramirez, L., Pineda, I., Tardieu, P., Malvault, B.,
& Komusanac, I. (2021). Getting fit for 55 and set for 2050: Electrifying europe
with wind energy. ETIPWind—WindEurope Report. June.
of Shipping, A. B. (2020). Guide for building and classing floating offshore wind turbine
installations.
Hopstad, A. L. H., Argyriadis, K., Manjock, A., Goldsmith, J., & Ronold, K. O. (2018).
Dnv gl standard for floating wind turbines. International Conference on Offshore
Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 51975, V001T01A020.
Commision, I. E. (2019). Iec ts 61400-3-2: 2019 wind energy generation systems-part 3-2:
Design requirements for floating offshore wind turbines.
Veritas, B. (2019). Classification and certification of floating offshore wind turbines ni 572
dt r02. Guidance Note NI, 572.
Gomez, A. G., Oakes, W. C., & Leone, L. L. (2004). Engineering your future: A project-
based introduction to engineering. Great Lakes Press.
Han, Z.-H., Zhang, K.-S. et al. (2012). Surrogate-based optimization. Real-world applica-
tions of genetic algorithms, 343.
Williams, B., & Cremaschi, S. (2021). Novel tool for selecting surrogate modeling tech-
niques for surface approximation. Computer aided chemical engineering (pp. 451–
456). Elsevier.
Sobester, A., Forrester, A., & Keane, A. (2008). Engineering design via surrogate mod-
elling: A practical guide. John Wiley & Sons.
Van Nguyen, N., Lee, J., Tyan, M., & Kim, S. (2015). Repetitively enhanced neural net-
works method for complex engineering design optimization problems. The Aero-
nautical Journal, 119(1220), 1253–1270.
Pribram, K. H. (2014). Hopfield jj, neural networks and physical systems with emergent
collective. Rethinking neural networks (pp. 375–375). Psychology Press.
Berke, L., Patnaik, S., & Murthy, P. (1993). Optimum design of aerospace structural com-
ponents using neural networks. Computers & structures, 48(6), 1001–1010.
Kim, P. (2017). Matlab deep learning. With machine learning, neural networks and artificial
intelligence, 130(21).
Malik, N. (2005). Artificial neural networks and their applications. arXiv preprint cs/0505019.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M.,
Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau,
D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., & Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning
in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825–2830.
Benassai, G., Campanile, A., Piscopo, V., & Scamardella, A. (2015). Optimization of
mooring systems for floating offshore wind turbines. Coastal Engineering Journal,
57(04), 1550021.
Brommundt, M., Krause, L., Merz, K., & Muskulus, M. (2012). Mooring system optimization
for floating wind turbines using frequency domain analysis. Energy Procedia, 24,
289–296.
Fylling, I., & Berthelsen, P. A. (2011). Windopt: An optimization tool for floating support
structures for deep water wind turbines. International Conference on Offshore Me-
chanics and Arctic Engineering, 44373, 767–776.
Pillai, A. C., Thies, P. R., & Johanning, L. (2019). Mooring system design optimization us-
ing a surrogate assisted multi-objective genetic algorithm. Engineering Optimiza-
tion, 51(8), 1370–1392.
Dimitrov, N., & Natarajan, A. (2021). Wind farm set point optimization with surrogate
models for load and power output targets. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
2018(1), 012013.
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
69
==PAGE:80==
Mathern, A., Penadés-Plà, V., Armesto Barros, J., & Yepes, V. (2022). Practical metamodel-
assisted multi-objective design optimization for improved sustainability and build-
ability of wind turbine foundations. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization,
65(2), 1–16.
Muskulus, M., & Schafhirt, S. (2014). Design optimization of wind turbine support structures-
a review. Journal of Ocean and Wind Energy, 1, 12–22.
Mei, X., & Xiong, M. (2021). Effects of second-order hydrodynamics on the dynamic re-
sponses and fatigue damage of a 15 mw floating offshore wind turbine. Journal of
Marine Science and Engineering, 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse9111232
Allen, C., Viscelli, A., Dagher, H., Goupee, A., Gaertner, E., Abbas, N., Hall, M., & Barter,
G. (2020). Definition of the umaine volturnus-s reference platform developed for
the iea wind 15-megawatt offshore reference wind turbine. NREL/TP-76773. https:
//doi.org/10.2172/1660012
Chandrasekaran, S. (2020). Design of marine risers with functionally graded materials.
Woodhead Publishing.
Wayman, E. N. (2006). Coupled dynamics and economic analysis of floating wind turbine
systems (Doctoral dissertation). Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Sclavounos, P., Tracy, C., & Lee, S. (2008). Floating offshore wind turbines: Responses in
a seastate pareto optimal designs and economic assessment. International Con-
ference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 48234, 31–41.
Loukogeorgaki, E., & Angelides, D. C. (2005). Stiffness of mooring lines and performance
of floating breakwater in three dimensions. Applied Ocean Research, 27(4), 187–
208. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apor.2005.12.002
TheNavelArch. (2020). Understanding how buoys affect the catenary of a mooring line.
https://thenavalarch.com/understanding- how- buoys- affect- the- catenary- of- a-
mooring-line/
Faltinsen, O. (1993). Sea loads on ships and offshore structures (Vol. 1). Cambridge uni-
versity press.
Sahasakkul, W. (2014). Development of a model for an offshore wind turbine supported
by a moored semi-submersible platform (Doctoral dissertation). https://doi.org/
10.13140/RG.2.1.4446.2962
Ripley, B. D. (2007). Pattern recognition and neural networks. Cambridge university press.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2015). Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
human-level performance on imagenet classification. Proceedings of the IEEE in-
ternational conference on computer vision, 1026–1034.
Karimirad, M. (2014). Offshore energy structures: For wind power, wave energy and hybrid
marine platforms. Springer.
70
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:81==
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
71
==PAGE:82==
A
Data Sampling
1
import numpy as np
2
import pandas as pd
3
4
def define_parameters():
5
wdepth = 200.0
# water depth [m]
6
R_fairlead = 58.0
# radius from origin to fairlead (in xy-plane) [m]
7
breaking_strength = 22286 # [kN]
8
rho_water = 1.025
# water density [t/m^3]
9
m_a
= 0.685
# mass per length in air [kN/m]
10
D
= 0.333
# mooring line diameter [m]
11
A
= np.pi/4*D**2
# c/s area [m^2]
12
m_w = m_a - rho_water*A
# mass per length in water [kN/m]
13
return wdepth , R_fairlead , breaking_strength , m_w
14
15
wdepth, R_fairlead , breaking_strength , m_w = define_parameters()
16
17
L_value_list = []
18
R_anchor_value_list = []
19
z_fairlead_value_list = []
20
21
for L in range(800, 901, 10):
#specify range for
unstretched length of mooring line
22
for R_anchor in range(800, 901, 10):
#specify range for radius
from origin to anchor (in xy-plane)
23
for z_fairlead in range(0, 20):
#specify range for z-pos
of fairlead
24
L_value_list.append(L)
25
R_anchor_value_list.append(R_anchor)
26
z_fairlead_value_list.append(z_fairlead)
27
28
29
d = {'L_values': L_value_list , 'R_anchor': R_anchor_value_list , 'z_fairlead':
z_fairlead_value_list}
30
df = pd.DataFrame(data=d)
31
32
df = df.rename_axis('File_ID')
33
34
df["Disrupt Constraint"] = np.where(df['L_values'] >= (mooring_seabed + np.
sqrt((df['R_anchor']-mooring_seabed -R_fairlead)**2 + (wdepth - df['
z_fairlead'])**2)), 'Pass', 'Fail')
35
36
df.groupby(["Disrupt Constraint"])["Disrupt Constraint"].count()
37
38
df_clean = df.loc[df['Disrupt Constraint'] == 'Pass'].reset_index()
39
40
df_clean.to_csv('L_R_z_values_pass.csv', index=False)
Listing A.1: Code used for data sampling
72
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:83==
B
Extract data from chosen attribute
1
import numpy as np
2
import pandas as pd
3
import h5py
4
import glob
5
6
# ignore warnings for df.append to pandas.concat
7
import warnings
8
warnings.filterwarnings("ignore")
9
10
# append data from all files
11
def get_data(hf, number_of_blocks , names_of_blocks):
12
13
# read names of all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/data)
14
d = {}
15
for i,number in enumerate(range(0, number_of_blocks)):
16
d["block" + str(i)] = hf[names_of_blocks[i]+"/data"][:, index]
17
18
# append data from all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/data)
19
data = []
20
for value in d.values():
21
data.append(value)
22
return data
23
24
# append gains and offsets from all files
25
def get_gain_or_offset(hf, number_of_blocks , names_of_blocks , gain=False,
offset=False):
26
27
if gain==True:
28
29
# read names of all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/gains)
30
d = {}
31
for i,number in enumerate(range(0, number_of_blocks)):
32
#print(index)
33
d["block" + str(i)] = hf[names_of_blocks[i]+"/gains"][index]
34
35
# append gains from all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/gains)
36
gains = []
37
for value in d.values():
38
gains.append(value)
39
return gains
40
41
elif offset==True:
42
43
# read names of all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/offsets)
44
d = {}
45
for i,number in enumerate(range(0, number_of_blocks)):
46
d["block" + str(i)] = hf[names_of_blocks[i]+"/offsets"][index]
47
48
# append offsets from all blocks in a file (blockXXXX/offsets)
49
offset = []
50
for value in d.values():
51
offset.append(value)
52
return offset
53
54
else:
55
print("Error")
56
return None
57
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
73
==PAGE:84==
58
# return keys for each file
59
def keys(hf):
60
return [key for key in hf.keys()]
61
62
# extract filename , mean, min, max and rmse from each chanel being
investigated
63
def extract_mean_max_min_rmse(filename , index, cut_off_index):
64
65
hf = h5py.File(filename , 'r')
66
67
# return name of blocks in a file
68
names_of_blocks = keys(hf)[3:]
69
70
# total number of blocks in a file
71
number_of_blocks = hf.attrs['no_blocks']
72
73
# append all data from all groups for a file
74
data = get_data(hf, number_of_blocks , names_of_blocks)
75
76
# append all gains from all groups for a file
77
gains = get_gain_or_offset(hf, number_of_blocks , names_of_blocks , gain=
True)
78
79
# append all offsets from all groups for a file
80
offsets = get_gain_or_offset(hf, number_of_blocks , names_of_blocks , offset
=True)
81
82
# offset + data*gains
83
values = []
84
for i in range(0, number_of_blocks):
85
for j in range(0, len(hf[names_of_blocks[i]+"/data"][:,index] )):
86
d = np.add(offsets[i] , np.multiply(data[i][j], gains[i]))
87
values.append(d)
88
89
# index number of file
90
tmp_id = int(file.split('_')[-1].split('.')[0])
91
92
# mean
93
mean = np.mean(values[cut_off_index: ])
94
95
# min
96
min = np.min(values[cut_off_index: ])
97
98
# max
99
max = np.max(values[cut_off_index: ])
100
101
# rms
102
rms = np.sqrt(np.mean(np.square(values[cut_off_index: ])))
103
104
return tmp_id , filename , mean, min, max, rms
105
106
107
if __name__=='__main__':
108
109
# index value of attribute being investigated
110
indexes = [41, 95, 99, 135, 215, 219, 299, 303, 383]
111
112
"""
113
41
: State acc x
Mbdy:tower E-nr:
10 Z-rel:1.00 coo: global
tower top
fa acc
114
95
: ESYS floater SENSOR 1 surge displacement
115
99
: ESYS floater SENSOR 5 pitch displacement
74
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:85==
116
135 : ESYS line1 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
117
215 : ESYS line1 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
118
219 : ESYS line2 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
119
299 : ESYS line2 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
120
303 : ESYS line3 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
121
383 : ESYS line3 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
122
"""
123
124
for index in indexes:
125
126
# step size in time series
127
step_size = 0.01
128
129
# input time in seconds
130
cut_off_time = 100
131
132
# time taken for simulation to stabilize
133
cut_off_index = int(cut_off_time/step_size)
134
135
# read all hdf5 files present in folder
136
filenames = glob.glob('wind_turb_12ms_waves_ireg_rated_*.hdf5')
137
138
# iterate through ever file and extract mean, min, max and rmse
139
for k in range(len(filenames)):
140
file = filenames[k]
141
if
k==0:
142
data = extract_mean_max_min_rmse(file, index, cut_off_index)
143
df = pd.DataFrame(np.column_stack(data), columns=["File_ID", "
Filename", "Mean", "Min", "Max", "RMS"])
144
145
else:
146
data = extract_mean_max_min_rmse(file, index, cut_off_index)
147
row = pd.Series(data, index = df.columns)
148
df = df.append(row, ignore_index=True)
149
150
# print dataframe to csv
151
df.to_csv(f"Result_index_{index}.csv")
Listing B.1: Extract data from chosen attribute
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
75
==PAGE:86==
C
Neural Network - Attribute 41
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import seaborn as sns
5
import tensorflow as tf
6
from tensorflow import keras
7
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
8
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
9
from tensorflow.keras import layers
10
from keras.callbacks import History
11
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error , r2_score
12
13
"""
14
41
: State acc x
Mbdy:tower E-nr:
10 Z-rel:1.00 coo: global
tower top
fa acc
15
"""
16
17
18
# read data
19
feature = pd.read_csv("L_R_z_values_pass.csv", index_col=0)
20
label = pd.read_csv("Result_index_41.csv", index_col=1)
21
df = pd.merge(feature ,label,on="File_ID",how="inner")
22
df = df[['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead','RMS']]
23
24
df.isna().sum()
25
26
#Split data into train and test set
27
features=['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead']
28
labels=['RMS']
29
30
x_train ,x_test ,y_train ,y_test=train_test_split(df[features],df[labels],
test_size=0.2,random_state=42)
31
32
# Feature scaling
33
scaler=MinMaxScaler()
34
x_train = scaler.fit_transform(x_train.values)
35
x_test = scaler.transform(x_test.values)
36
37
# Model build
38
inputs = keras.Input(shape=(3))
39
x = layers.Dense(10, activation='relu', name = 'first_layer')(inputs)
40
x = layers.Dense(6, activation='relu', name = 'second_layer')(x)
41
outputs = layers.Dense(1, activation='linear', name = 'output_layer')(x)
42
43
model = keras.Model(inputs = inputs , outputs = outputs)
44
45
model.compile(
46
loss = keras.losses.MeanSquaredError(),
47
metrics =
['mse'],
48
optimizer=keras.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=0.001)
49
)
50
51
# fit the keras model on the data-set
52
history = History()
53
model.fit(x_train , y_train , epochs=2000, batch_size=64, verbose=2, callbacks=[
history], validation_split=0.3, shuffle=True)
54
55
# recored of history of validation vs training loss
76
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:87==
56
plt.figure(figsize=(16,5))
57
plt.plot(history.history['loss'])
58
plt.plot(history.history['val_loss'])
59
plt.title('model loss')
60
plt.ylabel('Loss')
61
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
62
plt.legend(['Training data', 'Validation data'], loc='upper right')
63
plt.show()
64
65
model.summary()
66
67
# Prediction
68
yhat = model.predict(x_test)
69
70
# Model performance
71
error = mean_absolute_error(y_test, yhat)
72
r2 = r2_score(y_test, yhat)
73
74
# save model
75
model.save('model_attribute_41')
Listing C.1: Model build for attribute 41
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
77
==PAGE:88==
D
Neural Network - Attribute 95
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import seaborn as sns
5
import tensorflow as tf
6
from tensorflow import keras
7
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
8
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , StandardScaler
9
from tensorflow.keras import layers
10
from keras.models import Sequential
11
from keras.layers import Dense
12
from keras.callbacks import History
13
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error , r2_score
14
15
"""
16
95
: ESYS floater SENSOR 1 surge
displacement
17
"""
18
19
# read data
20
feature = pd.read_csv("L_R_z_values_pass.csv", index_col=0)
21
label = pd.read_csv("Result_index_95.csv", index_col=1)
22
df = pd.merge(feature ,label,on="File_ID",how="inner")
23
df = df[['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead','Min', 'Max']]
24
25
df['Min'] = df['Min'].abs()
26
df['Max'] = df['Max'].abs()
27
28
df['max (min, max)'] = df[['Min','Max']].max(axis=1)
29
30
df = df.drop(["Min", "Max"], axis=1)
31
32
df.isna().sum()
33
34
# Feature scaling
35
features=['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead']
36
labels=['max (min, max)']
37
38
feature_scaler=MinMaxScaler()
39
label_scaler=StandardScaler()
40
41
df[features]=feature_scaler.fit_transform(df[features].values)
42
df[labels]=label_scaler.fit_transform(df[labels].values)
43
44
# Split data into train and test set
45
features=['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead']
46
labels=['RMS']
47
48
x_train ,x_test ,y_train ,y_test=train_test_split(df[features],df[labels],
test_size=0.2,random_state=42)
49
50
x_train=x_train.values.reshape(x_train.shape[0],x_train.shape[1],1)
51
x_test=x_test.values.reshape(x_test.shape[0],x_test.shape[1],1)
52
53
# Model build
54
model = Sequential()
55
model.add(Dense(10, input_dim=x_train.shape[1], activation='relu',
kernel_initializer='he_normal', name = 'first_layer'))
56
model.add(Dense(5, activation='relu', kernel_initializer='he_normal', name = '
second_layer'))
78
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:89==
57
model.add(Dense(1, activation='linear', name = 'output_layer'))
58
59
# compile the keras model
60
model.compile(
61
loss = keras.losses.MeanSquaredError(),
62
metrics =
['mse'],
63
optimizer=keras.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=0.001)
64
)
65
66
# fit the keras model on the data-set
67
history = History()
68
model.fit(x_train , y_train , epochs=2000, batch_size=64, verbose=2, callbacks=[
history], validation_split=0.3, shuffle=True)
69
70
# record of history of validation vs training loss
71
plt.figure(figsize=(16,5))
72
plt.plot(history.history['loss'])
73
plt.plot(history.history['val_loss'])
74
plt.title('model loss')
75
plt.ylabel('Loss')
76
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
77
plt.legend(['Training data', 'Validation data'], loc='upper right')
78
plt.show()
79
80
model.summary()
81
82
# Prediction
83
yhat = model.predict(x_test)
84
85
# Model performance
86
error = mean_absolute_error(y_test, yhat)
87
r2 = r2_score(y_test, yhat)
88
89
# save model
90
model.save('model_attribute_95')
Listing D.1: Model build for attribute 95
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
79
==PAGE:90==
E
Neural Network - Attribute 135, 215, 219,
299, 303 and 383
The model for attribute 135, 215, 219, 299, 303 and 383 have the same structure, hence
only one model build is shown below.
1
import pandas as pd
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import seaborn as sns
5
import tensorflow as tf
6
from tensorflow import keras
7
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , StandardScaler
8
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
9
from keras.models import Sequential
10
from keras.layers import Dense
11
from keras.callbacks import History
12
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error , r2_score
13
14
"""
15
135 : ESYS line1 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
16
215 : ESYS line1 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
17
219 : ESYS line2 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
18
299 : ESYS line2 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
19
303 : ESYS line3 SENSOR 4 - Tension at anchor
20
383 : ESYS line3 SENSOR 84 - Tension at fairlead
21
"""
22
23
# read data
24
feature = pd.read_csv("L_R_z_values_pass.csv", index_col=0)
25
label = pd.read_csv("Result_index_135.csv", index_col=1)
26
df = pd.merge(feature ,label,on="File_ID",how="inner")
27
df = df[['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead','Max']]
28
29
df = df.drop(df[df.Max < 0].index)
30
31
df.isna().sum()
32
33
# Feature scaling
34
features=['L_values','R_anchor','z_fairlead']
35
labels=['Max']
36
37
feature_scaler=MinMaxScaler()
38
label_scaler=StandardScaler()
39
40
df[features]=feature_scaler.fit_transform(df[features].values)
41
df[labels]=label_scaler.fit_transform(df[labels].values)
42
43
# Split data into train and test set
44
x_train ,x_test ,y_train ,y_test=train_test_split(df[features],df[labels],
test_size=0.2,random_state=42)
45
46
x_train=x_train.values.reshape(x_train.shape[0],x_train.shape[1],1)
47
x_test=x_test.values.reshape(x_test.shape[0],x_test.shape[1],1)
48
49
# Model build
50
model = Sequential()
51
model.add(Dense(20, input_dim=x_train.shape[1], activation='relu',
kernel_initializer='he_normal', name = 'first_layer'))
80
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:91==
52
model.add(Dense(10, activation='relu', kernel_initializer='he_normal', name =
'second_layer'))
53
model.add(Dense(1, activation='linear', name = 'output_layer'))
54
55
# compile the keras model
56
model.compile(
57
loss = keras.losses.MeanSquaredError(),
58
metrics =
['mse'],
59
optimizer=keras.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=0.001)
60
)
61
62
# fit the keras model on the data-set
63
history = History()
64
model.fit(x_train , y_train , epochs=2000, batch_size=64, verbose=2, callbacks=[
history], validation_split=0.3, shuffle=True)
65
66
# record of history of validation vs training loss
67
plt.figure(figsize=(12,5))
68
plt.plot(history.history['loss'])
69
plt.plot(history.history['val_loss'])
70
plt.title('model loss')
71
plt.ylabel('Loss')
72
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
73
plt.legend(['Training data', 'Validation data'], loc='upper right')
74
plt.show()
75
76
model.summary()
77
78
# Prediction
79
yhat = model.predict(x_test)
80
81
# Model performance
82
error = mean_absolute_error(y_test, yhat)
83
84
r2 = r2_score(y_test, yhat)
85
86
# save model
87
model.save('model_attribute_135')
Listing E.1: Model build for attribute 135
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
81
==PAGE:92==
F
Optimization
1
import tensorflow as tf
2
import numpy as np
3
import pickle
4
from scipy.optimize import minimize
5
from termcolor import colored
6
7
# reload predicted model 41
8
model_41 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_41')
9
10
# load scaling of att 41
11
scaler_41 = pickle.load(open('scaler_41.pkl','rb'))
12
13
# upper bound
14
ref_tt_acc = 0.279041
15
16
def penalty_41(value):
17
x_scaled_41 = scaler_41.transform(value)
18
19
acel_y = model_41.predict(x_scaled_41)
20
21
cons_tt_acc = acel_y - ref_tt_acc
22
23
penaltly_coeff_41 = 10e10
24
25
# exterior penalty function
26
penalty_41 = penaltly_coeff_41*np.maximum(cons_tt_acc , 0)
27
28
# flatten
29
penalty_41 = penalty_41.flatten()
30
31
return penalty_41
32
33
# reload predicted model 95
34
model_95 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_95')
35
36
# load scaling of att 95
37
feature_scaler_95 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_95.pkl','rb'))
38
label_scaler_95 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_95.pkl','rb'))
39
40
# upper bound
41
ref_surge = 49.08804937947942
#mean
42
43
def penalty_95(value):
44
x_scaled_95 = feature_scaler_95.transform(value)
45
46
att_95_y = model_95.predict(x_scaled_95)
47
48
att_95_rescaled = label_scaler_95.inverse_transform(att_95_y)
49
50
cons_95 = att_95_rescaled - ref_surge
51
52
penaltly_coeff_95 = 10e50
53
54
# exterior penalty function
55
penalty_95 = penaltly_coeff_95*np.maximum(cons_95 , 0)
56
57
# flatten
58
penalty_95 = penalty_95.flatten()
82
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:93==
59
60
return penalty_95
61
62
# reload predicted model 135
63
model_135 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_135')
64
65
# load scaling of att 135
66
feature_scaler_135 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_135.pkl','rb'))
67
label_scaler_135 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_135.pkl','rb'))
68
69
# upper bound
70
ref_135 = 9.203349e+06
71
72
def penalty_135(value):
73
x_scaled_135 = feature_scaler_135.transform(value)
74
75
att_135_y = model_135.predict(x_scaled_135)
76
77
att_135_rescaled = label_scaler_135.inverse_transform(att_135_y)
78
79
cons_135 = att_135_rescaled - ref_135
80
81
penaltly_coeff_135 = 10e30
82
83
# exterior penalty function
84
penalty_135 = penaltly_coeff_135*np.maximum(cons_135 , 0)
85
86
# flatten
87
penalty_135 = penalty_135.flatten()
88
89
return penalty_135
90
91
# reload predicted model 215
92
model_215 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_215')
93
94
# load scaling of att 215
95
feature_scaler_215 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_215.pkl','rb'))
96
label_scaler_215 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_215.pkl','rb'))
97
98
# upper bound
99
ref_215 = 1.032996e+07
100
101
def penalty_215(value):
102
x_scaled_215 = feature_scaler_215.transform(value)
103
104
att_215_y = model_215.predict(x_scaled_215)
105
106
att_215_rescaled = label_scaler_215.inverse_transform(att_215_y)
107
108
cons_215 = att_215_rescaled - ref_215
109
110
penaltly_coeff_215 = 10e30
111
112
# exterior penalty function
113
penalty_215 = penaltly_coeff_215*np.maximum(cons_215 , 0)
114
115
# flatten
116
penalty_215 = penalty_215.flatten()
117
118
return penalty_215
119
120
# reload predicted model 219
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
83
==PAGE:94==
121
model_219 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_219')
122
123
# load scaling of att 219
124
feature_scaler_219 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_219.pkl','rb'))
125
label_scaler_219 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_219.pkl','rb'))
126
127
# upper bound
128
ref_219 = 9.842373e+06
129
130
def penalty_219(value):
131
x_scaled_219 = feature_scaler_219.transform(value)
132
133
att_219_y = model_219.predict(x_scaled_219)
134
135
att_219_rescaled = label_scaler_219.inverse_transform(att_219_y)
136
137
cons_219 = att_219_rescaled - ref_219
138
139
penaltly_coeff_219 = 10e30
140
141
# exterior penalty function
142
penalty_219 = penaltly_coeff_219*np.maximum(cons_219 , 0)
143
144
# flatten
145
penalty_219 = penalty_219.flatten()
146
147
return penalty_219
148
149
# reload predicted model 299
150
model_299 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_299')
151
152
# load scaling of att 299
153
feature_scaler_299 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_299.pkl','rb'))
154
label_scaler_299 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_299.pkl','rb'))
155
156
# upper bound
157
ref_299 = 1.096353e+07
158
159
def penalty_299(value):
160
x_scaled_299 = feature_scaler_299.transform(value)
161
162
att_299_y = model_299.predict(x_scaled_299)
163
164
att_299_rescaled = label_scaler_299.inverse_transform(att_299_y)
165
166
cons_299 = att_299_rescaled - ref_299
167
168
penaltly_coeff_299 = 10e30
169
170
# exterior penalty function
171
penalty_299 = penaltly_coeff_299*np.maximum(cons_299 , 0)
172
173
# flatten
174
penalty_299 = penalty_299.flatten()
175
176
return penalty_299
177
178
# reload predicted model 303
179
model_303 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_303')
180
181
# load scaling of att 303
182
feature_scaler_303 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_303.pkl','rb'))
84
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:95==
183
label_scaler_303 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_303.pkl','rb'))
184
185
# upper bound
186
ref_303 = 1.099747e+07
187
188
def penalty_303(value):
189
x_scaled_303 = feature_scaler_303.transform(value)
190
191
att_303_y = model_303.predict(x_scaled_303)
192
193
att_303_rescaled = label_scaler_303.inverse_transform(att_303_y)
194
195
cons_303 = att_303_rescaled - ref_303
196
197
penaltly_coeff_303 = 10e30
198
199
# exterior penalty function
200
penalty_303 = penaltly_coeff_303*np.maximum(cons_303 , 0)
201
202
# flatten
203
penalty_303 = penalty_303.flatten()
204
205
return penalty_303
206
207
# reload predicted model 383
208
model_383 = tf.keras.models.load_model('model_attribute_383')
209
210
# load scaling of att 383
211
feature_scaler_383 = pickle.load(open('feature_scaler_383.pkl','rb'))
212
label_scaler_383 = pickle.load(open('label_scaler_383.pkl','rb'))
213
214
# upper bound
215
ref_383 = 9.821572e+06
216
217
def penalty_383(value):
218
x_scaled_383 = feature_scaler_383.transform(value)
219
220
att_383_y = model_383.predict(x_scaled_383)
221
222
att_383_rescaled = label_scaler_383.inverse_transform(att_383_y)
223
224
cons_383 = att_383_rescaled - ref_383
225
226
penaltly_coeff_383 = 10e30
227
228
# exterior penalty function
229
penalty_383 = penaltly_coeff_383*np.maximum(cons_383 , 0)
230
231
# flatten
232
penalty_383 = penalty_383.flatten()
233
234
return penalty_383
235
236
# Bounds for length based on max tension
237
def define_parameters():
238
wdepth = 200.0
# water depth [m]
239
R_fairlead = 58.0
# radius from origin to fairlead (in xy-plane) [m]
240
breaking_strength = 22286 # [kN]
241
rho_water = 1.025
# water density [t/m^3]
242
m_a
= 0.685
# mass per length in air [kN/m]
243
D
= 0.333
# mooring line diameter [m]
244
A
= np.pi/4*D**2
# c/s area [m^2]
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
85
==PAGE:96==
245
m_w = m_a - rho_water*A
# mass per length in water [kN/m]
246
return wdepth , R_fairlead , breaking_strength , m_w
247
248
wdepth, R_fairlead , breaking_strength , m_w = define_parameters()
249
250
def bounds(value):
251
252
a = (breaking_strength - m_w*(wdepth - value[0,2]) )/m_w
253
254
upper_bound =
value[0,0] - (wdepth - value[0,2])* np.sqrt(1+(2*a/(wdepth
- value[0,2]))) + a * np.arccosh(1+ ((wdepth - value[0,2])/a))
255
256
comparison = value[0,1] - R_fairlead
257
258
cons_bounds = comparison - upper_bound
259
260
penaltly_coeff_bounds = 10e15
261
262
# exterior penalty function
263
penalty_bounds = penaltly_coeff_bounds*np.maximum(cons_bounds , 0)
264
265
# flatten
266
penalty_bounds = penalty_bounds.flatten()
267
268
return penalty_bounds
269
270
# Optimization
271
price_per_meter = 40 # [euros/m] cost of mooring line
272
273
def objfun(x):
274
275
value = np.array(x).reshape(1,-1)
276
277
L_values = value[0,0]
278
279
cost = L_values*price_per_meter + penalty_41(value) + penalty_95(value) +
penalty_135(value) + penalty_215(value) + penalty_219(value) +
penalty_299(value) + penalty_303(value) + penalty_383(value) + bounds(
value)
280
return cost
281
282
# guess value
283
# x0 = np.array([805, 840, 12.5])
284
x0 = np.array([835, 850, 14])
285
286
hess = lambda x: np.zeros((3, 3))
287
288
# optimization
289
res = minimize(objfun, x0, method='trust-constr', hess=hess, options={'verbose
': 3, 'disp': True})
290
291
# Solution
292
print("Function value =", res.fun)
293
print("Solution =", res.x)
294
295
# Cross-check
296
optimum = res.x.reshape(1,-1)
297
298
x_scaled_41 = scaler_41.transform(optimum)
299
acel_y = model_41.predict(x_scaled_41)
300
301
print('Tower top acceleration (predicted): %.8f' % acel_y)
86
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:97==
302
print('Reference value: %.8f' % ref_tt_acc)
303
304
if acel_y < ref_tt_acc:
305
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
306
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
307
else:
308
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
309
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
310
311
x_scaled_95 = feature_scaler_95.transform(optimum)
312
att_95 = model_95.predict(x_scaled_95)
313
att_95_rescaled = label_scaler_95.inverse_transform(att_95)
314
315
print('Surge (predicted): %.8f' % att_95_rescaled)
316
print('Reference value: %.8f' % ref_surge)
317
318
if att_95_rescaled < ref_surge:
319
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
320
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
321
else:
322
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
323
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
324
325
x_scaled_135 = feature_scaler_135.transform(optimum)
326
att_135 = model_135.predict(x_scaled_135)
327
att_135_rescaled = label_scaler_135.inverse_transform(att_135)
328
329
print('Tension at anchor (Line 1) (predicted): %.2f' % att_135_rescaled)
330
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_135)
331
332
if att_135_rescaled < ref_135:
333
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
334
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
335
else:
336
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
337
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
338
339
x_scaled_215 = feature_scaler_215.transform(optimum)
340
att_215 = model_215.predict(x_scaled_215)
341
att_215_rescaled = label_scaler_215.inverse_transform(att_215)
342
343
print('Tension at fairlead (Line 1) (predicted): %.2f' % att_215_rescaled)
344
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_215)
345
346
if att_215_rescaled < ref_215:
347
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
348
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
349
else:
350
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
351
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
352
353
x_scaled_219 = feature_scaler_219.transform(optimum)
354
att_219 = model_219.predict(x_scaled_219)
355
att_219_rescaled = label_scaler_219.inverse_transform(att_219)
356
357
print('Tension at anchor (Line 2) (predicted): %.2f' % att_219_rescaled)
358
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_219)
359
360
if att_219_rescaled < ref_219:
361
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
362
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
363
else:
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
87
==PAGE:98==
364
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
365
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
366
367
x_scaled_299 = feature_scaler_299.transform(optimum)
368
att_299 = model_299.predict(x_scaled_299)
369
att_299_rescaled = label_scaler_299.inverse_transform(att_299)
370
371
print('Tension at fairlead (Line 2) (predicted): %.2f' % att_299_rescaled)
372
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_299)
373
374
if att_299_rescaled < ref_299:
375
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
376
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
377
else:
378
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
379
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
380
381
x_scaled_303 = feature_scaler_303.transform(optimum)
382
att_303 = model_303.predict(x_scaled_303)
383
att_303_rescaled = label_scaler_303.inverse_transform(att_303)
384
385
print('Tension at anchor (Line 3) (predicted): %.2f' % att_303_rescaled)
386
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_303)
387
388
if att_303_rescaled < ref_303:
389
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
390
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
391
else:
392
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
393
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
394
395
x_scaled_383 = feature_scaler_383.transform(optimum)
396
att_383 = model_383.predict(x_scaled_383)
397
att_383_rescaled = label_scaler_383.inverse_transform(att_383)
398
399
print('Tension at fairlead (Line 3) (predicted): %.2f' % att_383_rescaled)
400
print('Reference value: %.2f' % ref_383)
401
402
if att_383_rescaled < ref_383:
403
print('\nPredicted value less than reference value')
404
print (colored('SUCCESS', 'green'))
405
else:
406
print("\nPredicted value more than reference value")
407
print (colored('FAIL', 'red'))
Listing F.1: Surrogate based optimization
88
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:99==
G
Time history for pitch displacement
(a) Time history of pitch displacement for reference turbine
(b) Time history of pitch displacement for Optimized Design 1
(c) Time history of pitch displacement for Optimized Design 2
(d) Time history of pitch displacement for Better design 1
(e) Time history of pitch displacement for Better design 2
Figure G.1: Comparison of time history plot of surge displacement of the two optimized
results (red) and the better data in the simulations (blue) against the reference turbine
(top)
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
89
==PAGE:100==
90
Design optimization of floating offshore wind turbine with surrogate models
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
