==PAGE:1==
Master’s thesis
Biophysical characterization of the
rapeseed proteins cruciferin and napin
Lars Boyens-Thiele
s164969@student.dtu.dk
Supervisors:
Professor Alexander Kai Büll
Postdoctoral researcher Suk Kyu Ko
Submitted June 30, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Front Cover/Title Page Photo Credit: ”Brassica napus flower, koolzaad bloem” By Rasbak - Own
work, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=33354795
I
==PAGE:3==
Preface and acknowledgements
This Master’s thesis was completed in the spring semester of 2022 with the Protein Biophysics
group at DTU Bioengineering. The project corresponds to 30 ECTS points, and serves as part of
the requirements for completion of the MSc degree in Applied Chemistry.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Suk Kyu Ko and Alexander Kai Büll,
for their guidance throughout the project. I am also grateful for the help I have received from all
members of the Protein Biophysics group, and for the warm welcome they have given me. You
are all a joy to work with. I would like to also thank Bettina for her support and patience.
Lars Boyens-Thiele
June, 2022
II
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The global carbon footprint of the production, processing, transport, and storage of food is stag-
geringly large, and without intervention, will only continue to grow. This has lead to an interest
in more sustainable sources of protein for human consumption. One potential source, is the
seed storage proteins of oilseed crops, such as rapeseed. Due to unpalatable properties, the pro-
tein fraction from rapeseed is not used for food, but most commonly rather for animal feed. If
these unwanted traits can be corrected, there is big potential for production of novel sustainable
foods. For this, a better understanding of the fundamental properties of seed storage proteins is
required.
This project describes biophysical and computational characterizations of the two major seed
storage proteins from rapeseed: cruciferin and napin. The coarse-grained molecular dynamics
force field for study of proteins, SIRAH, has been modified to more accurately model intrinsically
disordered regions of cruciferin. This was achieved by rescaling the strength of the Lennard-
Jones potential between water and protein molecules by 5-10%. By simulations of hexameric
complexes of cruciferin, the dynamics of the disordered loops were observed to interact between
monomers. This has previously been proposed for the HVR-I loop, but is here also observed for
the HVR-II loop.
Through the combined use of scattering and fluorescence measurements, the thermal ag-
gregation of a rapeseed protein isolate has been described. The sample, that is relatively rich in
napin, was shown to form amorphous aggregates in a multi-step process. The initial aggregation
process was interpreted by empirical descriptions of the development of the scattering intensity
and the particle size distribution, estimated by DLS. By measurements of the intrinsic fluores-
cence, it was observed that the intensity of the emission of 350 nm wavelength light, appears
unaffected by unfolding of the protein, but still reflects formation of aggregates. For this reason,
it may prove to be a useful measure of the conversion from monomer to aggregates.
III
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface and acknowledgements
II
Abstract
III
Contents
IV
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Seed storage proteins in rapeseed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Cruciferin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Napin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Molecular dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Force fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Metadynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Protein aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
Amorphous aggregation in a food science context . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.2
Models of amorphous aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods and materials
8
2.1
In silico studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Structure prediction and preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Force fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Molecular dynamics simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Rapeseed protein samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Seed storage protein isolates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Biophysical characterizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Principles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Thermal unfolding experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
Isothermal aggregation experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
16
3.1
Computational results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Force field optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Properties of napin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.3
Properties of cruciferin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
IV
==PAGE:6==
3.2
Biophysical characterizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Chemical and thermal denaturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Isothermal aggregation studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Discussions
35
4.1
Force fields for studies of seed storage proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
CG MD of intrinsically disordered regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Modelling of protein-protein interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Function of the disordered regions of cruciferin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Aggregation behaviour of the HAPFAM sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3.1
Descriptive parameters of the aggregation process . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3.2
The concentration dependence of the aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.3
Significance of the intrinsic fluorescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.4
The aggregation mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.5
Relation to the measurements of the Isolexx sample . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
Appendices
52
A Multiple sequence alignments
52
A.1
Alignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2
Sequence identity matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B
Protein-Water scaling in SIRAH
55
C
RMSD plots of CRU3 simulations
57
D Fits to SLS data
58
V
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
An estimated 21-37% of all global emissions of greenhouse gasses stem from production, storage,
processing, and transport of foods. With no intervention, predictions say these emissions will
have increased by 30-40% by the year 2050 [1]. This asserts that improving the sustainability of
food systems will be an important part of succeeding in the goals of the Paris Accords, and for
halting global climate change. A recent study by the Nordic Council of Ministers [2] highlights
the importance of a transition from animal-based foods to more sustainable plant-based foods,
and presents 40 recommendations for achieving it. These recommendations include changes
to national and international policies, consumer awareness strategies, and agricultural practices.
The study also gives specific recommendations for focused research in the application of protein-
rich crops for human consumption, including the development of techniques for improving nu-
tritional qualities, digestibility, texture, and taste.
In Denmark alone, 700 000 tonnes of rapeseed is produced annually. The seeds are mainly
valued for their oil content, but also contain high quantities of protein. Though the rapeseed pro-
teins are known to contain high amounts of essential amino acids, the protein fraction following
the oil extraction is deemed unfit for human consumption, and is instead used as animal feed
[3]. There are multiple apparent issues concerning the use of rapeseed protien in food. Firstly,
rapeseed contains relatively high amounts of antinutrients such as polyphenols and phytate, that
affect the nutritional value and cause bitterness and astringency, and therefore need to be sep-
arated from the proteins in a food application. Secondly, the functional properties of rapeseed
proteins - emulsification capacity, solubility, and gelation properties - have been reported as sub-
optimal [4].
The SEEDFOOD project is a six year collaboration between researchers at the University
of Copenhagen, Le Mans University, and the Technical University of Denmark. The ambition
of the project is to gain knowledge of the properties and interactions of rapeseed seed storage
proteins, and how these properties can be modified for enhanced use in food applications. This
will encompass multiple aspects of the challenge, including how protein can be extracted from
seeds in a gentle manner, how the properties of seed storage proteins can be modified, and how
these modifications affect the functional properties of the proteins. Additionally, variants of the
major rapeseed seed storage proteins will be produced recombinantly at high-throughput, and
their stability and molecular interactions will be analysed through biophysical characterizations.
The biophysical properties of the variants will then help guide the modifications of the wild-type
proteins.
This thesis presents the first explorations of the biophysical aspect of the SEEDFOOD project,
where molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and experimental characterization of natural pro-
1
==PAGE:8==
tein have been used to get a first impression of the properties of rapeseed seed storage proteins.
1.2
Seed storage proteins in rapeseed
The seeds of B. napus (rapeseed) contain approximately 25% seed storage proteins. As for all
cruciferous vegetables, the most predominant seed storage proteins are cruciferin and napin.
These proteins are contained in membrane-bound compartments called protein storage vacuoles,
and serve as a source of amino acids for the seed during germination [4, 5].
(a) Render of the homohexameric complex of the
CRU4 cruciferin variant. One monomer is illus-
trated by a cartoon representation, with the α-chain
coloured in blue, and the β-chain coloured in red.
The locateion of the HVR-I and HVR-II loops are
marked. The five other monomers are represented
as coloured surfaces.
(b) Render of the 2SS4 napin variant. The shorter
chain is coloured in blue, and the longer chain in
red.
Figure 1.1: Renders of the two major seed storage protein of rapeseed, a) cruciferin and b) napin. The
structures are both based on AlphaFold predictions[6], with their preparation being described in section
2.1.1.
1.2.1
Cruciferin
Cruciferin (12S globulin) is the most abundant seed storage protein in rapeseed, and can make
up as much as 60% of the total protein content of the seed. Five different isoforms of cruciferin
are found in rapeseed, as shown in table 1.1. A multiple sequence alignment of the isoforms
is shown in appendix A.1. Each subunit consists of 465 to 509 residues, including a 23 residue
signal peptide not present in the mature proteins. Each cruciferin monomer is split into two
separate chains in the mature protein, bound by a single disulphide bridge: a longer α-chain of
around 30 kDa and a shorter β-chain of around 20 kDa. Three subunits go together to form
a trimeric complex, and two trimers may then form a hexameric quaternary structure with a
combined molecular weight of ~300 kDa [7]. Using single particle electron microscopy, native
cruciferin from rapeseed has also been observed to form an octameric barrel-like complex [8].
The crystal structure of recombinant rapeseed cruciferin in the trimeric form was solved by
Tandang-Silvas et al. [9]. Each subunit primarily consists of two β-barrels composed of 27 an-
tiparallel β-sheets. Furthermore, each subunit has two smaller helix-rich domains - one in each
2
==PAGE:9==
chain - and two hypervariable regions (HVR-I and HVR-II) that are disordered and therefore
not resolved in the crystal structure. The HVR-I region varies greatly in length between the dif-
ferent isoforms, from 19 residues in the CRU4 isoform to 49 residues in the CRU2 and CRU3
isoforms. In all variants it consists almost exclusively of glycines and glutamines, resulting in a
highly flexible and hydrophilic disordered loop. The HVR-II contains the cleavage site between
the two chains, and is thereby composed of the C-terminal of the α-chain and the N-terminal of
the β-chain. The three subunits of the trimer are arranged with three-fold rotational symmetry,
producing a disk with two distinct faces. One face, denoted the IE-face, is the face where two
trimer interact to form a hexamer, and contains both the disordered hypervariable regions. The
other face, denoted the IA-face, consists of the N-terminal and the helical domain of the α-chain
[10, 9]. A render of the hexameric complex of CRU4 is shown in figure 1.1a.
Cruciferins arehighly thermostableproteins, with observed denaturationtemperatures above
80 °C [11]. For recombinantly expressed cruciferin from Arabidopsis thaliana, it has been shown
that variants with longer disordered regions are relatively more thermostable. In addition, using
homology modelling of cruciferin variants from the same species, it has been proposed that the
hexameric complex is stabilized by interactions between the HVR-I loops of different monomers.
The hypothesis is that longer and more flexible IDRs are able to form stronger interactions be-
tween the monomers, resulting in increased thermal stability - an effect that may also be observed
for the homologues from B. napus, where the HVR-I’s likewise differ in length [12].
Intrinsically disordered regions are found in many seed storage proteins, and though their
roles are not well-understood, other functions apart from structural stabilization have also been
proposed. Firstly, it is believed that intrinsically disordered proteins in seeds play a role in sig-
nalling, e.g. in response to stress. It has also been suggested that IDPs serve to increase the
resilience against desiccation by acting as molecular shields, and thereby stabilizing the natured
proteins and preventing aggregation during dehydration of the seed [13, 14].
1.2.2
Napin
Napin (2S albumin) is the second major seed storage protein in rapeseed. Around 20% of the
protein in the seeds by weight are various variants of napin. A total of seven different isoforms of
napin from B. napus have been described in detail, and at least seven more hypothetical proteins
exist. The well-described variants vary in length from 110 to 186 residues including signal pep-
tides and propeptides not present in the mature proteins, [15], and can be found listed in table
1.1. Though most of the variants have very high pairwise sequence identity (> 81%), one variant
named 2SSI is more distinct, being just 53% identical to the closest variant. More details on this
are given in alignments and a sequence identity matrix shown in appendix A.
The structure of the 2SSI napin variant extracted from seeds was solved by NMR by Rico
et al. [16]. Each napin molecule is composed of two chains, bound by two interchain disulphide
bridges. The shorter chain contains 2 α-helices and has a molecular weight of ~4.5 kDa, while the
longer chain contains 3 α-helices and has a molecular weight of ~10 kDA. The longer chain also
contains two intrachain disulphide bridges[7]. Additionally, it has been proposed that napins
from rapeseed can form dimer structures, though this has not been investigated in detail [17]. A
render of the 2SS4 napin variant is shown in figure 1.1b.
Like cruciferin, napin is a highly thermostable protein, with one study failing to observe any
conformational changes, even at 100 °C [11].
3
==PAGE:10==
Table 1.1: Identifiers and names of the annotated rapeseed cruciferin and napin variants in UniProt [18]
Type
UnitProt identifier
UniProt name
Cruciferin
P33523
CRU1_BRANA
P33524
CRU2_BRANA
P33525
CRU3_BRANA
P33522
CRU4_BRANA
P11090
CRUA_BRANA
Napin
P01091
2SS1_BRANA
P01090
2SS2_BRANA
P80208
2SS3_BRANA
P17333
2SS4_BRANA
P27740
2SSB_BRANA
P09893
2SSE_BRANA
P24565
2SSI_BRANA
1.3
Molecular dynamics
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a method for simulating the behaviour of molecular systems. In
conventional MD simulations, the molecular system is an arrangement of atoms each defined by
their coordinates and velocities. The time development of the atoms is simulated by estimating
the interaction energies between the atoms and progressing the system in a step-wise manner,
based on classical mechanics. For a system with the potential V of N atoms with coordinates ri
and masses mi where i = 1..N, the equation for motion for each atom i is:
mi
d2ri
dt2 = −dV
dri
(1.1)
The energy is estimated based on the atomic coordinates using a set of parameters known as
a force field, described further in the next subsection. When the acceleration of each atom is
found, the positions at the following time step can be solved numerically. The process is then
repeated by finding the accelerations of the new state, and again calculating the positions at the
next time step. The result is a series of coordinates in time for each atom, collectively known as
a trajectory [19].
The performance of a simulation will be dependent on the size of the system and the length of
the time step. To ensure the conservation of energy, the size of the time step for an MD simulation
should be significantly smaller than the period of the fastest oscillation in the system. For an all-
atom simulation, this means that appropriate time steps are commonly not larger than a few
femtoseconds. Shorter simulation times of macromolecules can be achieved by using coarse-
grained (CG) MD simulations. Here, multiple atoms are grouped together as a single pseudo
atom known as a bead, with properties (mass, charge, size) reflecting the grouped atoms. This
is beneficial for the performance in two regards; Fewer atoms mean that fewer interaction terms
need to be considered each step, and the heavier beads oscillate slower allowing for larger time
steps. At the cost of atomic precision, CG-MD can therefore provide much longer simulations
of macromolecules [20, 21].
4
==PAGE:11==
1.3.1
Force fields
A force field is a collection of parameters describing how to estimate the potential energy of a
configuration of atoms. These parameters are empirical results based on fits to experimental
measurements. The total potential is found as a sum of potentials related to both the bonded
and non-bonded interactions between the atoms. The bonded interactions are calculated from
the stretching, bending, and torsion of the bonds away from their equilibrium configurations.
Non-bonded interactions are composed of electrostatic and van der Waals interactions [19].
The van der Waals potential between two non-bonded atoms i and j separated by a distance
rij is described by the Lennard-Jones potential.
VLJ,ij = 4ϵij


(
σij
rij
)12
−
(
σij
rij
)6

(1.2)
Here ϵij and σij are parameters specific to the types of atoms describing the minimum energy
and the size of the atoms, respectively. In a force field, these parameters may only be given for in-
teractions between similar atoms. Parameters for interactions between dissimilar atoms can then
be found using the Lorentz-Berthelot combination rules, where ϵij is calculated as a geometric
mean and σij as an arithmetic mean [19, 22].
ϵij = √ϵiiϵjj
σij = 1
2(σii + σjj)
(1.3)
The empirical nature of force fields means that they will often not simulate all systems with
the same accuracy. For example, a force field optimized to accurately predict protein-protein
interactions might underestimate protein-solvent interactions, and might be a poor force field
for simulating intrinsically disordered proteins.
1.3.2
Metadynamics
Metadynamics is a method for enhanced sampling in MD simulations. The principle is to add
additional Gaussian bias potentials to the overall energy throughout an MD run. These potentials
are based on the history of the run, so that states similar to those already sampled are made less
favourable. This causes other states to be sampled more efficiently. The potentials are added and
evaluated based on a space defined by chosen collective variables (CVs). The collective variables
can be any functions of the system coordinates, but should aim to describe the variation of the
system that needs to be sampled. For example, if a conformational change is to be sampled, the
collective variables can be anything distinguishing the initial and final state, such as the radius of
gyration or something as specific as the distance between two particular atoms. Well-tempered
metadynamics, is a type of metadynamics where the height of the added Gaussian potentials
decreases as the simulation proceeds, to ensure smooth convergence. How quickly the heights
diminish is governed by a parameter known as the bias factor [23, 24].
The set of added potentials can be combined to construct an estimate of the free energy
surface (FES), in terms of the CVs. Intuitively, a more favourable point in CV-space would be
sampled for longer and end up with a larger added bias, while an unfavourable state would have
a lower added bias.
5
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Protein aggregation
Protein aggregation is the process of accumulation of protein monomers together in large struc-
tures. Aggregates may either have a well-defined three dimensional structure in which case they
are referred to as ordered, or they may be composed of monomers associated in a more random
manner, in which case they are referred to as amorphous. Examples of ordered aggregates are
amyloid fibrils, commonly studied for their association with neurodegenerative diseases. Amor-
phous aggregation is a process often encountered in the context of protein precipitation, but has
received relatively little attention. In all cases, aggregates initially form by a nucleation event in
which the first monomers begin to stick together. The aggregate can then grow by addition of
individual monomers [25, 26].
The following sections will give an introduction to the relevance of amorphous aggregation
for food science, and present select models proposed for the description of amorphous aggrega-
tion.
1.4.1
Amorphous aggregation in a food science context
In foods, proteins often play a role in the formation of colloid systems with specific properties.
These systems can for example be gels formed and supported by a network of amorphous pro-
tein aggregates. The viscoelastic properties of these gels will depend on the properties of the
aggregates, such as their sizes, shapes, and propensities to interaction. These properties are in
turn governed by the conditions under which the aggregates were formed - e.g. the temperature,
salinity, and pH [27]. In short, the functionality of foods hinge on how they are prepared, which
will not be a surprise to any cook. This is meant to exemplify the principles of how an under-
standing of the molecular interactions leading to amorphous protein aggregation can be useful
for predicting, designing, and improving food properties.
1.4.2
Models of amorphous aggregation
No universally applicable model or mechanism for the formation of amorphous aggregates has
been proposed. Simplified mechanistic models have been proposed and investigated analytically,
but these are built on assumptions not widely accepted. Meanwhile more complex aggregation
mechanisms have been proposed, but only investigated empirically. This section will present
three diverse attempts at describing the growth and formation of amorphous aggregates.
The Finke-Watsky model was originally devised for modelling the autocatalytic formation of
metallic nanoclusters, but has also been applied for the study of protein aggregation. It models
these processes in a minimalistic way considering just two species: a non-catalytic monomer
A, and a catalytic (aggregated) monomer B. The conversion from A to B can happen by two
mechanisms:
A
k1
−−→B
A + B
k2
−−→2 B
The first is a nucleation event. The second is an autocatalytic process, which can be interpreted
as the addition of monomer to an aggregate. Having only two reaction steps is regarded as a
big simplification of a relatively more complex phenomenon. The model has the additional as-
sumption that every monomer (B) in an aggregate contributes equally to the autocatalytic pro-
cess of monomer (A) addition. The simplicity of the model is also a strength, since the time-
development of the concentration of each species can be solved analytically [28, 29].
6
==PAGE:13==
Stranks et al. [26] proposed an empirical model for explaining sigmoidal conversion of mono-
mers into aggregates by surface growth. Here, M ′ is the mass of all aggregates, t′ is the time, γ is
a measure of how fast the aggregate surface area grows compared to its volume, f ′ is parameter
describing the rate addition of monomer to aggregate, m is an empirical parameter related to the
time of half max conversion, and t′
lag is the length of a lag time. All parameters and variables are
dimensionless and are related by the following equation:
t′ = M ′1−γF(1 −γ, 1 + m −γ, 2 −γ, M ′)
f ′ · (1 −γ)
+ t′
lag
(1.4)
The function F is defined as the following infinite series, where (a)k denotes the Pochhammer
polynomial of a with k terms and Γ denotes the gamma function - an extension of the factorial
to real numbers.
F(a, b, c, z) =
∞
∑
K=0
(a)k(b)k
(c)k
zk
k! =
∞
∑
K=0
Γ(a + k)Γ(b + k)Γ(c)
Γ(a)Γ(b)Γ(c + k)
zk
k!
(1.5)
The model is noteworthy for the inclusion of the γ parameter, incorporating a geometrical de-
scription of the aggregates. The model is limited by not considering nucleation, but only aggre-
gate growth.
Golub et al. [30] showed that some proteins form amorphous aggregates in a multi-step pro-
cess called the start aggregate model. The principle is that proteins nucleate and grow to particles
of an intermediate size after which the growth slows. These particles are denoted as start aggre-
gates. When a critical concentration of start aggregates is reached, they begin to stick together,
rapidly forming assemblies of much larger sizes. The first formation of large aggregates is readily
detected by light scattering measurements. The kinetics of these processes have been studied in
a purely empirical way, relating measures of how quickly the start aggregates accumulate to the
overall sample concentration, but providing little mechanistic insight [31, 32].
7
==PAGE:14==
2
Methods and materials
2.1
In silico studies
2.1.1
Structure prediction and preparation
Predicted structures of the five known cruciferin isoforms and the seven known napin variants
from B. napus - as outlined in table 1.1 - are available from the publicly accessible AlphaFold Pro-
tein Structure Database [33, 6]. The predicted structures contain signal peptides and propeptides
that were removed to produce the mature proteins. For the cruciferins, the chains were also cut
in two as specified in the UniProt annotations. At the cleavage sites, MODELLER [34] was used
to add the missing oxygen atom to the newly formed C-termini.
Putative homohexameric structures of CRU3 and CRU4 were prepared, by aligning the pre-
dicted monomers to the chains of the hexameric structure of the cruciferin-homologue cocosin
solved by Jin et al. [35](PDB: 5WPW). The interfaces between the monomers were manually in-
vestigated for intertwined loops. The HVR-II region was observed to cause problematic clashes
at the center of the hexamer, and one end of the cleaved loop (the C-terminal of the α-chain)
was manually moved to the outside of the complex using PyMOL. Having this loop on the out-
side of the hexameric complex is in agreement with all reported hexameric crystal structures of
homologue proteins from natural sources (structures from recombinant proteins have not been
considered, as the choice of expression host could affect post translational modifications such
as the cleavage of the HVR-II loop). Even though the region is disordered and therefore not
present in any of the structures, the last resolved residues are always on the surface of the com-
plex [36, 37, 38, 35](PDB: 3C3V , 5XTY, 5WXU, 1XGF). Finally, the structures were refined to
relieve clashes using MODELLER [34].
AlphaFold-Multimer is a modification to AlphaFold 2.0 that improves the prediction of mul-
timeric complexes [39]. An attempt was made to predict the structures of trimeric and hexameric
cruciferin using this tool, but it did not produce realistic structures.
2.1.2
Force fields
Available force fields for modelling of IDPs
The all-atom force field a99SB-disp has been developed by Robustelli et al. [40] to accurately
model both ordered and disordered proteins. It is based on the a99SB-ILDN force field [41], but
has been optimized by adjusting, among other things, the parameters for the backbone potential
and the van der Waals potential between carbonyls and amides. By comparison to a benchmark
set of experimental measurements, they showed that the optimized force field modelled both
structured proteins and IDPs better than six other all-atom force fields. The force field uses the
8
==PAGE:15==
TIP4P-D water model. A newer all atom force field also commonly recommended, is the ff19SB
force field with the OPC water model [42, 43].
One force field commonly used for coarse-grained simulation of biomolecules is Martini
[44]. In this force field, each residue of the protein is converted to a single backbone bead and up
to four sidechain beads. Because of the simplified backbone, protein secondary structure must
be assigned and fixed in Martini. In Martini, each water molecule is modelled as a single bead.
Thomasen et al. [45] showed that the Martini force field overestimates protein-protein interac-
tions in intrinsically disordered proteins, and proposed that this could be helped by introducing
a scaling factor λ > 1 to all ϵij parameters in equation 1.3 where i and j are atoms of respec-
tively protein and water. Additionally, this rescaling of protein-water interactions also resulted
in better agreement between simulation and experimental results of dimerizations of structured
proteins. This method had previously been applied by Best et al. [46] to an all-atom force field
with similar results, and they both conclude that a λ-parameter of 1.1 is optimal in most cases.
Another force field for CG simulation of proteins is SIRAH [47]. Here, each sidechain is
replaced by up to 5 beads, while the backbone contains three beads per residue. This means
that this force field uses a less coarse bead mapping than Martini, and can be used for studying
changes in secondary structure. SIRAH uses the WT4 water model, in which 4 beads in a tetra-
hedal arrangement represent 11 water molecules. SIRAH has been shown to model intrinsically
disordered proteins with reasonable accuracy, though it also has a tendency to produce more
compact structures [48].
Modification of the protein-water interactions in SIRAH
It was investigated whether or not the approach of rescaling protein-water interactions could also
be beneficial for modelling IDRs using the SIRAH force field. For this, CRU3 monomers were
simulated for 3-5 µs in triplicates using the SIRAH force field with five different λ-values (1.00,
1.05, 1.10, 1.15, and 1.20). CRU3 was chosen because of its long disordered HVR-I loop. The λ
rescaling was performed using the Python script in appendix B.
For comparison, the same protein was also simulated in triplicates using the modified Martini
force field suggested by Thomasen et al. [45] with λ = 1.1 for 5 µs, and using the all-atomic
a99SB-disp force field for 500 ns. Additionally, ff19SB was used for a single 500 ns simualtion of
a CRU3 monomer. Simulations were performed as described in the following sections.
2.1.3
Molecular dynamics simulations
For the MD simulations, three different high-performance computing clusters were used: the
Computerome, the HPC cluster at DTU Compute, and the steno-cluster at DTU Chemistry.
Simulation input files were prepared and provided by Suk Kyu Ko. Analysis scripts were prepared
in collaboration between Suk Kyu Ko and the author.
All-atom simulations
Systems for both conventional and metadynamics simulations were prepared in the same way.
The structures were solvated in rhombic dodecahedra with edges 1.5 nm from the protein the
gmx solvate function in gromacs. The gmx genion function was then used to simultane-
ously adjust the salt concentration and neutralize the system, by replacing water molecules with
sodium or chloride ions [22].
9
==PAGE:16==
Conventional MD
Conventional all-atom MD simulations using the a99SB-disp force field
were performed using GROMACS 2019. Simulations were run with a time step of 2 fs. Long-
range electrostatics were handled using the smooth particle mesh ewald method [49] with a cut-
off of 1.2 nm. Neighbour lists were updated at least every 10 steps. The energy of the systems was
minimized, first with 1000 steps using the steepest descent algorithm and then with another 1000
steps using the conjugate gradient algorithm. This was followed by first a 0.5 ns equilibration in
the NVT ensemble heating the sample to 300 K using the Berendsen thermostat [50] with a time
constant of 10 ps, and a 0.5 ns equilibration in the NPT ensemble adjusting the temperature to
300 K using the Bussi thermostat [51] with a time constant of 0.1 ps, and the pressure to 1 bar
using the Parrinello-Rahman barostat [52] with a time constant of 2 ps. This was followed by
production runs at the same conditions.
Conventional all-atom MD simulations using the ff19SB force field were performed using
AMBER 2020. Simulations were run with a time step of 2 fs, and with a cut-off for non-bonded
interactions of 1.2 nm. The energy of the systems was minimized, first with 5000 steps using
the steepest descent algorithm and then with another 5000 steps using the conjugate gradient
algorithm. This was followed by first a 0.3 ns heating in the NVT ensemble to 300 K using the
Langevin thermostat [53] with a collision frequency of 5 ps−1, and a 2 ns equilibration in the
NPT ensemble adjusting the temperature to 300 K using the same Langevin thermostat, and the
pressure to 1 bar using the Monte Carlo barostat [54]. This was followed by production runs at
the same conditions.
Metadynamics
Well-tempered metadynamics simulations were performed on the 2SSB napin
variant. Simulations were done using both the a99SB-disp and ff19SB force fields, with the min-
imization and equilibration as described for the conventional MD simulations described above.
Metadynamics were performed as 500 ns simulations using PLUMED version 2.8 [55], with a
Gaussian depostion rate of 1 ps, a bias factor of 25, and with ALPHARMSD as the only collective
variable. This parameter is a measure of the α-helical content of the protein [56].
The simulation using a99SB-disp force field, was done using the NPT ensemble, regulating
the temperature to 300 K using the Bussi thermostat with a time constant of 0.1 ps, and the pres-
sure to 1 bar using the Parrinello-Rahman barostat with a time constant of 2 ps. The simulation
using ff19SB force field, was done using the NVT ensemble, regulating the temperature to 300 K
using the Langevin thermostat with a collision frequency of 5 ps−1
Coarse-grained simulations
Similar experiments were performed with GROMACS 2019 using both the SIRAH and Martini
CG force fields, including simulations of single proteins and simulations of napin-napin inter-
actions. Furthermore, homohexameric cruciferin has been simulated in SIRAH. The following
paragraph outlines the preparation of systems for both force fields, after which the simulation
conditions are described in more detail for each force field.
Firstly, structures were mapped to coarse-grained beads. For simulations of a single pro-
tein molecule, the prepared structures were solvated in rhombic dodecahedra with edges 1.5 nm
from the protein. Systems for simulation of protein-protein interactions of napins were prepared
as eight molecules centered on the vertices of a 6 nm cube with random rotations. These were
solvated in cubes with edges 1.2 nm from the proteins. Systems of hexameric cruciferin were
solvation in cubic boxes with edges 1.5 nm from the protein. For the SIRAH system, the sol-
vation was done using the gmx solvate function in gromacs, while adjustment of the salt
concentration and neutralization of the system was done using the gmx genion function. For
10
==PAGE:17==
Martini, the solvation was instead performed using Insane [57], that was also used to adjust the
salt concentration and neutralize the systems.
SIRAH
For all simulations using the SIRAH force field, a time step of 10 fs was used and elec-
trostatics were calculated using the smooth Particle-mesh Ewald method. The cutoff distance
for non-bonded interaction was set to 1.2 nm, and neighbour lists were updated every 5 steps.
Firstly, a minimization of the initial system was performed, composed of 50000 steps of the
steepest descent algorithm followed by 50000 steps of the conjugate gradient algorithm. This
was followed by a 5 ns NVT ensemble equilibration at 10 K using the Berendsen thermostat with
a time constant of 10 ps, and a 2 ns NPT ensemble equilibration at 300 K and 1 bar using the
Berendsen thermostat with a time constant of 10 ps and Berendsen barostat with a time constant
of 5 ps. The topology files were then modified to include rescaled non-bonded protein-water in-
teractions, as described above in section 2.1.2, using the script in appendix B. Unless otherwise
specified, a λ-value of 1.1 was used. Finally, an NPT ensemble production run was performed
with the Bussi thermostat with a time constant of 1 ps and the Parrinello-Rahman barostat with
a time constant of 10 ps, still at 300 K and 1 bar.
Martini
For the Martini runs, a time step of 10 fs was used, long-range electrostatic interactions
were calculated using the reaction field method. The cutoff distance for non-bonded interactions
was set to 1.1 nm, and neighbour lists were updated every 40 steps. The secondary structure was
assigned using the DSSP algorithm. The prepared systems were minimized using the steepest
descent algorithms for 10000 steps. The topology files were then modified to include rescaled
protein-water interactions with λ = 1.1 using the scripts published by Thomasen et al. [45]. For
simulations of cruciferin, the topology files were also modified to remove elastic restraints and
angular potentials from the HVR-I and HVR-II regions, as they are known to be disordered. The
minimised systems were then treated with a 10 ns equilibration in the NPT ensemble at 300 K
and 1 bar using the Bussi thermostat with a time constant of 1 ps and the Parrinello-Rahman
barostat with a time constant of 12 ps. This was followed by a production run, using the same
conditions as the equilibration.
2.1.4
Analysis
The python package MDtraj [58] was used to calculate properties of the frames of MD trajecto-
ries, such as the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD), the root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF)
and radius of gyration (Rg).
In analysis of CG simulations of protein-protein interactions (PPI), an interaction between
two molecules was counted each time two beads were observed within 6.5 Å of each other. This
was achieved using a Tcl script in VMD [59].
The aggregation propensities of the residues of the 2SS4 variant of napin, as predicted by
AlphaFold, were predicted by two methods. The propensities as predicted by the Aggrescan3D
algorithm were predicted using the webserver provided by the University of Warsaw [60]. Ag-
gregation propensities from the SAP (spatial aggregation propensity) algorithm [61], were cal-
culated using a script provided by Suk Kyu Ko.
Principal component analysis of the cartesian coordinates of the α-carbon beads of from CG
simualtions of cruciferin, was performed using the PCA method from the sklearn.decomposition
python package. K-means clustering of the resulting principal component scores were performed
using the KMeans method from the sklearn.cluster python package.
11
==PAGE:18==
Correlation coefficients were calculated between calculated residue-wise properties of the
2SS4 napin variant (PPIcounts, aggregation propencities), andcategorical propertiesofthe residues.
These categorical properties include charge, hydrophilicity, and aromaticity, and were based on
the amino acid groupings by Berg et al. [62].
2.2
Rapeseed protein samples
Two different isolates of rapeseed seed storage proteins have been available. This section will
describe what is known about their purification from seeds and how the proteins were extracted
from the powder.
2.2.1
Seed storage protein isolates
TEUTEXX Isolexx
Isolexx from TEUTEXX Proteins (Ontario, Canada) is a commercially available isolate of pro-
teins from the seeds of B. napus and B. rapa. It is marketed as an ingredient for use in foods and
beverages. The isolate is a fine brown spray-dried powder.
The general processings steps are as follows. The isolate is prepared from press cakes from
which rapeseed oil has been extracted. Excess oil in the cakes is removed using extraction with
n-butane, after which residual solvent is distilled off under vacuum. Unwanted phytic acid from
the raw material is degraded by addition of phytase. The product is pasteurised under unspec-
ified conditions. The protein content is separated from low-molecular weight components by
centrifugation, before the final product is formulated by spray-drying [63].
The product is reported to typically contain around 93% protein by weight. Other compo-
nents are ~2% fat and ~4% carbohydrates. The content of phytate was measured to be less than
1%, and the content of phenols to be around 0.15%. It is reported that the product shows no
phytase activity [63].
LC-MS analysis of the sample has been performed by assistant professor Kasper Engholm-
Keller at the university of Copenhagen department of Food Science (data not published). This
showed that the Isolexx sample is relatively rich in B. napus cruciferins, specifically CRU3 and
CRU4. Of the napins, fragments of 2SS4 were most frequent. SDS-PAGE followed by LC-MS
performed by postdoctoral researcher Shuangyan Wang and Kasper Engholm-Keller also showed
that bands of many different molecular weights could be identified as the same cruciferin vari-
ants, indicating a highly degraded sample (data not published).
HAPFAM isolate
The other isolate has been prepared as part of the HAPFAM (Healthy and Affordable Protein-
Rich Foods for the African Market) research project at the University of Copenhagen by Joehnke
[64] in March 2016. It appears as a light beige powder.
The sample has been produced from a cold-pressed rapeseed cake. Proteins were extracted
under acidic conditions at 45 °C, centrifuged, and purified by cation-exchange chromatography.
Small molecules were removed from the fractions of retained proteins by ultracentrifugation.
LC-MS analysis of the HAPFAM sample has also been performed by assistant professor
Kasper Engholm-Keller (data not published). As opposed to the Isolexx sample, this sample
is relatively rich in napins, especially 2SS4. The most prominent cruciferin is CRU4.
12
==PAGE:19==
2.2.2
Extraction
Extractions of both isolates were prepared by first suspending 100 mg of the dry products in
1 mL of a 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 buffer with 750 mM NaCl. The mixtures were then kept on a
rotary mixer at low speed for 3 hours. The resulting extractions were centrifuged for 10 min at
16 kRCF and 5 °C, and 900 µL of each supernatants was kept. To remove small molecule solutes,
the supernatants were diluted ten-fold in Tris buffer and filtered in 10 kDa centrifugal filters.
The filtration was repeated two more times, each time first diluting the sample five-fold. In the
filtration steps, the retained fraction of the extracts overall ended up being diluted two-fold.
The concentrations of the resulting samples were measured using a NanoDrop spectropho-
tometer from Thermo Scientific. The extract from the Hapfam sample had a protein concentra-
tion of 25 mg mL−1 and the Isolexx sample had a protein concentration of 45 mg mL−1.
2.3
Biophysical characterizations
2.3.1
Principles
This section will present the most basic principles behind three common biophysical measure-
ments: static light scattering (SLS), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and nano differential scan-
ning fluorimetry (nanoDSF). All three measurements can be performed simultaneously on up
to 48 samples, using the Prometheus Panta instrument from NanoTemper Technologies GmbH
(Munich, Germany) (henceforth referred to as NanoTemper).
Static light scattering
Static light scattering (SLS), is a method in which the intensity of the light scattering is measured,
when an analyte in solution is treated with light. If the sample is pure, the scattering intensity
can be related to a molecular weight [65].
When the wavelength of the incident light is much larger than the particles in solution,
Rayleigh scattering occurs, in which the scattering intensity scales with the sixth power of the
particle radius [66]. The measured signal is thus very sensitive to the presence of large molecules
or particles.
Dynamic light scattering
In dynamic light scattering (DLS), a sample in solution is also treated with light, and the scatter-
ing intensity is measured. As opposed to SLS, the intensity of the signal is not what is important,
but rather its time development. As described by the Stokes-Einstein equation, smaller molecules
diffuse more quickly in solution than larger molecules. Therefore, the fluctuations in a scattering
signal measured of a sample with small molecules due to Brownian motion, will be faster that
the fluctuations measured for a larger molecule. This effect can be analysed by calculating the
autocorrelation of the scattering intensity signal. How the signal correlates with itself, will be
dependent on the size distribution of the dissolved species, and methods have therefore been de-
veloped to estimate the size distributions that best fit the autocorrelations of DLS measurements.
Thus, the distribution of particle sizes in a sample can be estimated from its scattering intensity
over time [67].
13
==PAGE:20==
Nano differential scanning fluorimetry
Nano differential scanning fluorimetry (nanoDSF) is a method for detecting conformational
changes in proteins, based on shifts in their intrinsic fluorescence. The emission spectrum of
fluorescent residues, are dependent on their close environments. By exciting tryptophans of a
sample while monitoring the emission at both 330 nm and 350 nm, one can therefore detect if
and when their surroundings change. This is most commonly performed during a thermal ramp,
to monitor thermal unfolding of proteins [68].
2.3.2
Thermal unfolding experiments
A dilution series of urea was prepared starting with 7.1 M urea in Tris buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl
pH 8.5, 750 mM NaCl), going down to 2.2 molar urea in four 0.75x dilution steps using the same
Tris buffer. Each of the prepared protein extracts were diluted 4x in each urea dilution, as well as
in urea-free buffer, to prepare six 6.25 mg mL−1 samples in a range of urea concentrations from
0 to 5.2 molar.
The samples were loaded in duplicates in 10 µL glass capillaries (standard grade capillaries
from NanoTemper) by capillary action and loaded in the NanoTemper Prometheus Panta. The
fluorescence emission at 330 and 350nm were then measured by nanoDSF during heating of
the samples from 25 °C to 90 °C followed by cooling back down to 25 °C, all with a temperature
gradient of 1.5 °C min−1. The excitation power was set to 31%. During the experiment, the
scattering intensity was also measured.
Analysis
Inflection points of the fluorescence curves, and of the curves for their ratios were identified by
the PR.Panta Control software v 1.4.3 from NanoTemper. The identified points were manually
inspected.
2.3.3
Isothermal aggregation experiments
Procedure
Thetwo prepared proteinextracts were diluted in either 1.5- or2-fold serial dilutionswith (50 mM
Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 750 mM NaCl). The diluted samples were loaded in duplicates in 10 µL glass
capillaries (standard grade capillariesfromNanoTemper) andloaded in theNanoTemperPrometheus
Panta. The samples were heated to a specific temperature, that was then kept constant for be-
tween 2 and 16 hours. Experiments were performed at the temperatures 60, 65, 70, 75, 80 (twice),
and 90 °C. SLS, DLS, and nanoDSF measurements were started as soon as the target temperature
was reached. The fluorescence excitation power was automatically set between 30 and 33%. The
power of the scattering laser was set to 100%.
Analysis
The scattering intensity signal was smoothed using a running mean filter with a window size
of 5 measurements. The inflection point of each SLS curve was found by approximating the
first derivative with a Savitsky-Golay filter of first-order polynomials and a window size of 7
measurements[69]. The main peak of the first derivative was then found using the find_peaks
14
==PAGE:21==
method of the scipy.signal python package using a prominence threshold of 9 · 105. The time of
this point, being the inflection point of the scattering intensity. will be denoted tI.
The first parts of the non-smoothed curves until the signal reached half the value as the signal
at tI were fitted to the following piecewise function, with an initial linear increase followed by an
additional quadratic dependence on time:
I(t) =
{
I0 + a · t
if t ≤t0
I0 + a · t + Kagg(t −t0)2
if t > t0
(2.1)
Here the four free fitting parameters are: the signal at start I0, the slope of the initial part of
the curve a, a lag time marking the end of the linear region t0, and a measure of the increase in
signal following the lag time Kagg. The formula is based on a function recommended by Borzova
et al. [31], with an additional linear term to account for the initial increase in signal observed in
the measurements.
Relationships between variables and parameters were investigated using fits of linear, expo-
nential, and power law functions. All fitting was performed using the curve_fit method of the
scipy.optimize python package.
Particle size distributions from DLS measurements were estimated by the PR.Panta Control
software v 1.4.3 from NanoTemper.
15
==PAGE:22==
3
Results
3.1
Computational results
The following sections will present the results the analyis of computational studies of cruciferin
and napin. Firstly, the results from the attempt to optimize the coarse granied force field SIRAH
is presented. This is followed by computational characterizations of napin and cruciferin indi-
vidually.
3.1.1
Force field optimization
Figure 3.1 shows the RMSF of each residue of monomeric CRU3 simulated using different force
fields. In each plot, the results of triplicate 500 ns all-atomic simulations using the a99SB-disp
force field are shown in red. In each pane, the RMSF of the same protein simulated using SIRAH
with a modified protein-water interaction strength is also shown in blue, going from λ = 1.00
to λ = 1.20. Using all force fields, RMSF values upwards of 20 Å are observed, indicating that
regions are modelled as disordered. The all-atom simulations show more similar results across
replicate runs, while the SIRAH runs show higher variation. There is a general trend that higher
values of λ result in higher residue fluctuations. For all force field, a peak is observed near residue
125, that corresponds to the middle of the long disordered HVR-I loop. All modified SIRAH
force fields tested - even stock SIRAH with λ = 1 - have at least one replicate with higher fluctu-
ations of HVR-I than the all atom force field. The C-terminal of the α-chain, which is one half
of HVR-II, gives a sharp peak around residue 290 for all three all-atom simulations, that is less
distinct in coarse-grained simulations. Of the values of λ tested for SIRAH, 1.05 and 1.10 give
the best agreement with the RMSF values of the optimized all atom force field, though they still
have disagreements, especially in the C-terminal of the β-chain (at residue numbers > 425).
The distributions of the radii of gyration (Rg) of the CRU3 monomer during MD simulations
are illustrated as violin plots in figure 3.2. Here, the width of each shaded area is proportional to
the frequency of the given Rg. All areas are scaled to have the same width at the most frequent
Rg. The plot includes results from the same runs using a99SB-disp and SIRAH with varying λ-
values as in figure 3.1, but also include a single run using the ff19SB force field and triplicates
of runs using Martini 3 with a λ value of 1.10. The all-atom simulations with the a99SB-disp
force field show some variation between replicates, indicating that the sampling is not ample.
Still, the average Rg observed are close to each other. The SIRAH simulations all show even
higher variation between replicates, with distributions of some replicates not even covering the
averages of others, indicating insufficient sampling. On the other hand, the Martini simulations
show much less diversity between the replicate trajectories. All three distributions lie almost
perfectly on top of each other, and the averages are near identical.
16
==PAGE:23==
0
20
40
RMSF [Å]
a99SB-disp
SIRAH  = 1.00
0
20
40
RMSF [Å]
a99SB-disp
SIRAH  = 1.05
0
20
40
RMSF [Å]
a99SB-disp
SIRAH  = 1.10
0
20
40
RMSF [Å]
a99SB-disp
SIRAH  = 1.15
0
100
200
300
400
Residue
0
20
40
RMSF [Å]
a99SB-disp
SIRAH  = 1.20
Figure 3.1: Plots of α-carbon RMSF plotted against residue number for simulations of a CRU3 monomer
with 150 mM NaCl, simulated using various force fields. In each pane, blue curves show results from
triplicate 3-5 µs CG simulations using SIRAH with different protein-water interaction rescaling factors, λ,
between 1.00 and 1.20. Red curves show results from triplicate 500 ns simulations using the a99SB-disp
force field.
Starting at λ = 1.05, the average radius of gyration (Rg) values observed using SIRAH
increase steadily with increased λ-values. Compared to a99SB-disp, Rg is underestimated for
λ < 1.05, and overestimated for λ > 1.10 Based on Rg alone, and ignoring any sampling
considerations, an optimal protein-water interaction rescaling factor is expected to lie in this
range. The Rg distributions from the simulations using the optimized Martini force field show
high similarity to the distributions of the optimized all-atom a99SB-disp force field, but with a
slightly lower average value. The single simulation using the ff19SB force field also resulted in
Rg values slightly lower than using a99SB-disp.
Plots of the RMSD over time for all the considered simulations of CRU3 are shown in ap-
pendix C, and indicate that all simulations more or less reach convergence. Perfect convergence
is not necessarily feasible when simulating IDRs, but this shows that unfolding of the entire pro-
tein is not an issue in any of the simulations.
3.1.2
Properties of napin
17
==PAGE:24==
 
a99SB-disp
ff19SB
SIRAH =1.00
SIRAH =1.05
SIRAH =1.10
SIRAH =1.15
SIRAH =1.20
MARTINI =1.10
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
Radius of gyration [Å]
Averages for each replicate
Average of a99SB-disp runs
Figure 3.2: Distributions of the radii of gyration observed in simulations of monomeric CRU3 with
150 mM NaCl, using various force fields. Shaded areas represent the distribution. Black crosses repre-
sent average values. A horizontal dashed line represents the average value across all simulations per-
formed with the a99SB-disp force field. The simulations included are triplicates of 500 ns simulations
with a99SB-disp, a single 500 ns simulation using the ff19SB force field, triplicates of simulations using
the SIRAH force field with protein-water interaction rescaling factors (λ) of 1.00, 1.05, 1.10, 1.15, and 1.20
run for 3-5 µs, and triplicate 5 µs simulations using the Martini force field with λ = 1.10.
Protein-Protein interactions
Figure 3.3 shows the count of all intermolecular protein-protein interactions observed in simu-
lations of 8 napins together. A protein-protein interaction is counted each time any two beads
from different protein molecules are found within 6 Å of each other. The count is more than an
order of magnitude higher for the simulations with SIRAH compared to those with Martini un-
der the same conditions - in the SIRAH simulations prolonged interactions were observed, which
was not the case for the Martini simulations where neither oligomerization or even dimerization
was seen. The interaction count for both 2SS4 and 2SSI simulated using Martini decreased with
an increase in salt concentration from 50 mM to 150 mM, indicating electrostatic screening. In
simulations of 2SS4 using SIRAH, the reverse effect was observed, with an increased interaction
count following the same change in salt concentration, though it should be noted that 2SS4 with
high salt has only been run once using SIRAH. 2SSI has not been simulated using SIRAH at
150 mM NaCl.
The interaction count plotted over time for the different SIRAH simulations are shown in
figure 3.4. Interaction counts roughly change in a stepwise manner, corresponding to the for-
mation and dissolution of prolonged interactions. The positive trend indicates oligomerization
of napin molecules.
Two algorithms for prediction of aggregation propensity of the residues in a protein structure,
Aggrescan3D and the Spatial Aggregation Propensity (SAP), have been applied on the AlphaFold
prediction of the structure of 2SS4. The correlation coefficients between these predictions, and
the interaction counts for each residue in both the Martini and SIRAH simulations at 150 mM
NaCl have been calculated. Figure 3.5 shows these in a correlation matrix, that also includes
correlations to boolean descriptions of the residues (describing hydrophilicity, aromaticity, and
18
==PAGE:25==
charge). The two interaction counts show some correlation (with a correlation coefficient of
0.56), and both correlate slightly with hydrophilic and charged residues. This is likely explained
by the interaction counts describing surface residues. The two aggregation propensity predic-
tions are also correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.63, indicating some agreement. Nei-
ther of the interaction counts show any correlation with either of the aggregation propensity
predictions.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
Interaction sum
SIRAH
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Interaction sum
Martini
2SS4, 50mM NaCl
2SS4, 150mM NaCl
2SSI, 50mM NaCl
2SSI, 150mM NaCl
Figure 3.3: Bar plots indicating the total sum of intermolecular interactions detected in simulations of 8
napin monomers together. The left plot shows results from simulations using SIRAH with λ = 1.10 and
the plot on the right shows results from simulations using Martini with λ = 1.10. Error bars indicate the
standard deviation when duplicate simulations have been performed.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [µs]
0
50
100
150
200
Interaction count
2SS4, 50mM NaCl
2SS4, 150mM NaCl
2SSI, 50mM NaCl
Figure 3.4: Plots of the count of intermolecular interactions detected in simulations of 8 napin monomers
together against simulation time, using SIRAH with λ = 1.10.
Metadynamics
The free energy surfaces (FES) from 500 ns well-tempered metadynamics simulations of 2SSB
with ALPHARMSD as the sole CV, using both the a99SB-disp and ff19SB force fields, are shown
in figure 3.6. The time development of each FES is illustrated by the colour gradient. The last
few surfaces shown are similar to the final FES in black, indicating convergence. Using both
force fields, a single energy minimum is observed around an ALPHARMSD of 40-50. The energy
minimum from the ff19SB simulation is better defined, being surrounded by steeper slopes. That
other local energetic minima were observed, indicates that any disruption of the α-helical core
structure of napin is unfavourable.
19
==PAGE:26==
Martini interactions
SIRAH interactions
Aggrescan3D
SAP
Hydrophillic residue
Aromatic residue
Positive residue
Negative residue
Neutral residue
Martini interactions
SIRAH interactions
Aggrescan3D
SAP
Hydrophillic residue
Aromatic residue
Positive residue
Negative residue
Neutral residue
1.0
0.56
-0.09
-0.06
0.23
0.24
0.18
0.23
-0.29
0.56
1.0
-0.17
-0.15
0.23
-0.01
0.1
0.14
-0.17
-0.09
-0.17
1.0
0.63
-0.6
0.19
-0.3
-0.09
0.32
-0.06
-0.15
0.63
1.0
-0.79
0.25
-0.26
-0.2
0.34
0.23
0.23
-0.6
-0.79
1.0
-0.08
0.35
0.15
-0.39
0.24
-0.01
0.19
0.25
-0.08
1.0
-0.1
0.12
0.03
0.18
0.1
-0.3
-0.26
0.35
-0.1
1.0
-0.1
-0.85
0.23
0.14
-0.09
-0.2
0.15
0.12
-0.1
1.0
-0.44
-0.29
-0.17
0.32
0.34
-0.39
0.03
-0.85
-0.44
1.0
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Correlation coefficient
Figure 3.5: Correlation matrix showing the correlation coefficients between properties of residues of 2SS4.
Properties include the count of intermolecular interactions detected for the residue in simualations of 8
2SS4 molecules with 150 mM NaCl, using either SIRAH or MARTINI both with λ = 1.10.
Renders of representative states with ALPHARMSD values near the energy minimum at
value of 40 are shown to the right in figure 3.7. On the left, renders of frames with ALPHARMSD
value of 17 are shown. The helices apparently most affected by the decrease in α-helical content
is the small helix at the N-terminal of the short chain that is lost, and the two large helices of the
longer chain, that are disrupted in the less favourable state. These can be interpreted as having
the least stable secondary structure. The overall fold of the protein is preserved. Though the pre-
sented frames can only serve as examples, inspection of other frames with similar values show
the same result.
3.1.3
Properties of cruciferin
Conformations in monomers and hexamers
The distribution of the radius of gyration of the sampled states of the cruciferin monomers on
their own and in a hexameric complex, are shown as violin plots in figure 3.8. In general, CRU3
is larger than CRU4, likely owing to the differences in length of the HVR-I’s, that is the biggest
difference between the two (see appendix A.1 for an alignment). For each variant, there is addi-
tionally a tendency for the monomers simulated on their own to have a more compact conforma-
tion compared to the monomers simulated as part of a hexamer. This measure will be somewhat
biased by the initial configuration, where the HVR-II’s were manually extended for the hexamer
input structures but not adjusted for the monomer input structures.
Figure 3.9 shows the two-dimensional score plots from the PCAs of the cartesian coordinates
of all α-carbon beads from the last µs of all simulations of CRU3 or CRU4. For each variant, the
colour of the observations (frames) represent the partitioning from a K-means clustering into
three clusters. Observations from hexameric simulations are plotted as full dots, while obser-
vations from monomeric simulations are plotted with white centres. The frame closest to the
20
==PAGE:27==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ALPHARMSD
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Free Energy [kJ/mol]
FES using a99SB-disp
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ALPHARMSD
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
FES using ff19SB
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [ns]
Figure 3.6: Free energy surfaces from 500 ns metadynamics simulations of 2SSB with 150 mM NaCl using
both the a99SB-disp (left) and ff19SB (right) force field. Black lines indicate the free energy as a function
of α-helix content at the end of the simulation. Coloured lines indicate the time development of the free
energy surfaces, with a colorbar relating colour to simulation time.
(a) a99SB-disp, ALPHARMSD = 17
(b) a99SB-disp, ALPHARMSD = 40
(c) ff19SB, ALPHARMSD = 17
(d) ff19SB, ALPHARMSD = 40
Figure3.7: Renders of representative frames from 500 ns metadynamics simulations of 2SSB with 150 mM
NaCl using both the a99SB-disp and ff19SB force field. For each force field, a state with ALPHARMSD
values of both 17 and 40 are shown.
21
==PAGE:28==
Monomeric CRU3
Hexameric CRU3
Monomeric CRU4
Hexameric CRU4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
Radius of gyration [nm]
Average
Figure 3.8: Distributions of the radii of gyration of cruciferin monomers during simulations using SIRAH
with λ = 1.10 with 150 mM NaCl. Each distribution represents either CRU3 or CRU4, and either the
protein simulated on its own or in the context of a hexameric complex.
centroid in each cluster is marked with a black cross. The clustering was performed to sam-
ple some of the variation in the frames. For a more exhaustive sampling, more distinct clusters
could have been identified for both variants, especially if scores for additional principal com-
ponents were included. For CRU3, there is a tendency that monomers simulated on their own
tend towards higher scores of the second principal component (PC2), while monomers in a hex-
americ complex are observed with both high and low scores of both the first (PC1) and second
principal component. The two groups are not readily distinguishable. For CRU4 on the other
hand, one cluster at high PC1 and low PC2 includes all frames of the monomeric simulations
and none of the frames from the hexameric simulations. Here the sampled conformations of the
two groups are thereby perfectly distinguishable by two principal components. Furthermore, it
appears observations from monomeric and hexameric simulations could also be separated with
high precision from just their PC2 scores being above or below negative 7.
The coefficients from the first two principal components - that each corresponds to one of
three coordinates of a bead of the coarse grained model - have been averaged for each bead.
These measures of the contribution of each residue to the principal components are plotted
against residue number in figure 3.10, along with the average RMSF of each α-carbon across
all simulations. In the simulations of CRU3, the biggest absolute contribution to both principal
components appears to be positive contributions from the long disordered HVR-I loop around
residue 125. This region also shows the highest backbone fluctuations. The HVR-II near residue
290 however, shows little importance in explaining the overall variance of the conformations,
even though it has nearly as high backbone fluctuations as HVR-I. Other differences in the con-
tributions to PC1 and PC2 for CRU3 are more subtle. Figure 3.10b shows the same results for
CRU4. The largest α-carbon fluctuations are again observed around HVR-I (near residue 100)
and HVR-II (near residue 250). Similarly to the results for CRU3, residues of HVR-I contribute
greatly to both principal components, but here residues of HVR-II also appear to contribute to
explaining the variance of the conformations. Another region of interest of CRU4 with high ab-
solute contributions to both principal components, is the α-helical region of the α-chain around
residue 200.
To probe the variation of the conformations that are separated by PCA and clustering, figure
3.11 shows renders of the frames closest to each cluster centroid, as shown as black crosses in the
PCA score plots in figure 3.9. The monomer frames are visualized as liquorice representations
coloured according to the clustering in figure 3.9, along with the remaining five monomers of the
22
==PAGE:29==
20
10
0
10
20
PC1
20
10
0
10
20
PC2
(a) CRU3
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
PC1
10
5
0
5
10
15
PC2
(b) CRU4
Figure 3.9: PCA score plots for the frames from the last µs of all simulations of a) CRU3 and b) CRU4
using SIRAH with λ = 1.10 showing the projection of each frame against the first two principal directions.
Full dots represent monomers simulated as part of a hexameric complex, while dots with white centres
represent runs of monomers simulated on their own. The colouring represent the partioning into three
clusters using K-means clustering. The centroid of each cluster is represented by a black cross.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Residue
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
RMSF [Å]
RMSF
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Principal component weight 
PC1
PC2
(a) CRU3
0
100
200
300
400
Residue
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
RMSF [Å]
RMSF
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
Principal component weight
PC1
PC2
(b) CRU4
Figure 3.10: Residue-wise characteristics from from the last µs of simulations of a) CRU3 and b) CRU4
in both the monomeric and hexameric state using SIRAH with λ = 1.10. The blue line represents the
average of the RMSF values from each run. The red and green lines represent the weights of each residue
on the first and second principal component.
23
==PAGE:30==
(a) CRU3 centroid structures with CRU3 hexamer
surface.
(b) CRU4 centroid structures with CRU3 hexamer
surface.
Figure 3.11: Aligned renders of the frames closest to the centroids of the clusters shown in figure 3.9.
Colours correspond the the colouring of the clusters. Along with the renders of both a) CRU3 and b)
CRU4, the remaining five monomers of hexameric CRU3 is rendered as a transparent, grey surface.
hexameric CRU3 complex as a transparent surface. The rendered frames of CRU3 monomers
all stem from simulations of hexamers. As expected from the results of figure 3.10a, the most
prominent difference between the three structures is the conformation of HVR-I. For the red and
blue conformations - that both from figure 3.9a have some similarity to sampled conformations
of monomeric CRU3 - HVR-I is seen to be pointed away from the rest of the complex, either
extended into the solvent (red) or folded onto the core of the monomer (blue). The HVR-I of
the green structure is however oriented towards the interface between the two trimers of the
hexameric complex, and would be within reach of the HVR-I of the monomer on the other side
of the complex. Of the three centroid structures, this structure is the least similar to any sampled
monomeric proteins, in terms of the first two PCA scores as shown on 3.10a. This could indicate
that the group of conformations where HVR-I is facing in the direction of the IE face is rarely
observed for CRU3 monomers on their own. For the frames of CRU4 illustrated in figure 3.11b,
the differences in the conformation of HVR-I are less pronounced than for CRU3 - which makes
sense considering the results in figure 3.10a showing that multiple regions contribute greatly
to the PCA scores. Still, the blue cluster centroid has its HVR-I extended towards the rest of
the complex, in reach of the other monomers, while the red cluster centroid represents a more
compact conformation though still as part of the hexameric complex.
The intermolecular interactions of the HVR’s of both variants are presented in more detail in
the following section.
24
==PAGE:31==
0
100
200
300
400
Residue #
0
100
200
300
400
Residue #
(a) CRU3
0
100
200
300
400
Residue #
0
100
200
300
400
Residue #
(b) CRU4
Figure 3.12: Heatmaps showing which pairs of residues take part in intermolecular interactions during
the simulations of hexameric cruciferin. Separate plots are shown for the two considered variants a) CRU3
and b) CRU4. Darker shades of green correspond to a higher count of interactions, with the darkest shade
denoting 10 or more interactions counted.
Intermolecular interactions in the hexameric complex
The roles of the different regions of the two cruciferin variants in the structure of the hexam-
eric complex, is illustrated in figure 3.12 by heatmaps showing the frequency of intermolecular
interactions between all pairs of residues in the last 1 µs of each simulation. An intermolecular
protein-protein interactions is counted, as described in section 3.1.2, as two beads from different
protein molecules found within 6 Å of each other. The interactions between HVR-I and HVR-II
and neighbouring monomers in the hexamer are further illustrated by the structures in figure
3.13, where a colour gradient denotes the frequency of interactions between the given residue
and either of the HVR’s.
For both variants, it is apparent from the diagonals in figure 3.12 that there are interac-
tions between the HVR-I’s (residue number ~125 in CRU3, or residue number ~100 in CRU4)
and HVR-II’s (residue number ~290 in CRU3, or residue number ~250 in CRU4) of adjacent
monomers. For CRU3 there are also interactions between HVR-I and HVR-II, while this is lim-
ited for CRU4. Further, HVR-I in both variants is seen to have interactions with many residues
of the β-chain, especially the α-helix-rich domain. This is visualized by the renders on the left
hand side of figure 3.13.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.13: Cartoon renders of monomer of CRU3 (top) and CRU4 (bottom), with residues coloured
according to their intermolecular interaction count with residues of either HVR-I (left) or HVR-II (right).
The colour gradient goes from dark blue corresponding to no detected interactions, to red corresponding
to the most interactions detected.
3.2
Biophysical characterizations
3.2.1
Chemical and thermal denaturation
The unfolding of extracts from the HAPFAM and Isolexx rapeseed protein isolates along with
varying concentrations of denaturant (urea) during heating and cooling, was probed using nano-
DSF. The ratios between fluorescence emissions at 350 nm/330 nm are shown in figure 3.14. Both
samples are seen to be highly thermostable in the absence of urea (blue curves), where the sam-
ples do not fully unfold even at 95 °C. With increased concentration of denaturant, the unfolding
is promoted, and can be detected in the observed range of temperatures. For the Isolexx sam-
ples at high urea concentration, single sigmoidal curves are observed that end in a plateau. The
HAPFAM sample also initially shows a sigmoidal curve, but does not end in a plateau. Instead,
the signal ratio continues to increase. This could indicate that at least two species of the sample
are unfolding at different temperatures.
In the subsequent cooling of the samples, none of the signal ratios are observed to decrease
again - some even continue to increase. This indicates a non-reversible conformational change.
For the samples of the HAPFAM sample with 0 or 1.6 M urea, formation of aggregates is also evi-
dent from an increase in the scattering intensity coinciding with the unfolding (data not shown).
26
==PAGE:33==
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Temperature [°C]
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Ratio 350nm/330nm
5.2 M urea
3.9 M urea
2.9 M urea
2.2 M urea
1.6 M urea
0.0 M urea
(a) Extracts from the Hapfam isolate.
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Temperature [°C]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Ratio 350nm/330nm
5.2 M urea
3.9 M urea
2.9 M urea
2.2 M urea
1.6 M urea
0.0 M urea
(b) Extracts from the Isolexx isolate.
Figure 3.14: The ratio of fluorescence emission signals (350 nm/330 nm) from nanoDSF of extracts from
a) the HAPFAM isolate and b) the Isolexx isolate, plotted against the temperature from 25 to 95 °C. A
colour gradient denotes the concentration of urea from 0 M (blue) to 5.2 M (red). Full lines indicate mea-
surements during heating while faint dashed lines indicate measurements during the subsequent cooling.
3.2.2
Isothermal aggregation studies
The thermal aggregation of both HAPFAM and Isolexx samples was investigated using a combi-
nation of scattering and fluorescence measurements. The results from the HAPFAM sample were
in general observed to be more mutually consistent than those from the Isolexx sample, that were
more irregular, and thus proved difficult to interpret. The following sections will therefore first
present and comment on the measurements and analyses of the HAPFAM sample. Afterwards,
a section will present examples of the more noisy measurements of the Isolexx sample.
Static light scattering
Figure 3.15 shows the initial part the SLS measurements for all isothermal runs of the HAPFAM
sample where aggregation was observed in the span of the experiments. This includes a total
of 51 experiments across 6 temperature steps from 60 to 90 °C. Note that scattering intensity is
plotted on a logarithmic axis. All curves show a similar trend; They start with a region of approx-
imately linear increase, before the signal accelerates, reaches a plateau, and becomes increasingly
noisy with a negative trend. Though sample concentration is not indicated on the figure, it is a
consistent trend at each temperature that a lower concentration corresponds to a later increase
in signal. Additionally, all duplicate samples proceed in a near identical manner. For all but
the runs at 90 °C, the highest protein concentration shown is 25 mg mL−1. At 90 °C the highest
concentration shown is 11.1 mg mL−1, as the samples at higher concentrations already showed
high scattering counts at the start of the measurements.
The first part of each curve is overlaid with a fit of equation 2.1 as a black dashed line. Overall,
the fits appear to follow the data well. Closer inspection reveals that some fits are not following the
initial slope closely. This is most prominent for samples at high concentration and temperature,
where fewer data points are available. The time and signal of the lag time, t0, are indicated with
blue dots. Similarly, the time and signal of the inflection points (at time tI) are plotted in red.
Exponential fits on the form I = aebt shown as coloured dashed lines show a clear trend for both
points marked. The fitted parameters a and b are given in appendix D. The values of t0 and tI
extracted across all runs are highly correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.99. Figure 3.16
shows a scatter plot of corresponding values of the two, from each sample shown in figure 3.15.
A linear fit gives a slope of 1.66 ≈5
3.
27
==PAGE:34==
 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
Time [s]
107
108
109
Scattering intensity
60°C
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
Time [s]
65°C
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
Time [s]
107
108
109
Scattering intensity
70°C
 0
 2000
 4000
 6000
 8000
 10000
 12000
 14000
 16000
Time [s]
75°C
 0
 2000
 4000
 6000
 8000
Time [s]
107
108
109
Scattering intensity
80°C
 0
 2000
 4000
 6000
 8000
 10000
 12000
Time [s]
90°C
Raw Measurements
Fits of equation (2.1)
t0 estimates
Exponential fit to t0
tI estimates
Exponential fit to tI
Figure 3.15: Logarithmic plots of measurements of scattering intensity over time from 51 isothermal
runs of the HAPFAM sample distributed on six plots based on experimental temperatures between 60
to 90 °C. Gray lines show raw measurements. The sample concentration at each run is not indicated,
but for all but the runs at 90 °C, the highest protein concentration is 25 mg mL−1. At 90 °C the highest
concentration is 11.1 mg mL−1. Black dashed lines shows fits of equation 2.1, blue points represents the
t0 fitting parameters, and red dots represent inflection points tI from numerical differentiation. Dashed
lines in blue and red show exponential fits to the points at t0 and tI respectively. The fitting parameters
from the exponential fits are reported in appendix D.
The parameters extracted from the scattering data, being the t0 fitting parameters from equa-
tion 2.1, the times of the inflection points tI, and the Kagg fitting parameters also from equation
2.1 describing a parabolic increase in signal with time, have been attempted related to the sam-
ple concentration at each temperature through power laws. For the two times, their reciprocals
t−1
0
and t−1
I
have been considered. This is illustrated by fits on the form y = k · xn, shown in
figure 3.17. The main plot to the left in each subfigure shows the values of the parameters as dots
and fitted functions as dashed lines in a log-log plot. The temperature is indicated by a colour
gradient. Two smaller plots to the right of each subfigure shows values of the fitting parameters,
the exponents n and the factors k, plotted against temperature with error bars denoting ± one
standard deviation of the estimate. It should be noted that since most samples at each temper-
ature derive from the same dilution series, the measurements are not completely independent.
28
==PAGE:35==
 1000
 10000
t0 [s]
 1000
 10000
tI [s]
Extracted values
tI =
2.76 102 + 1.66 t0
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Temperature [C]
Figure 3.16: Extracted t0 and tI from 51 isothermal runs of the HAPFAM sample also shown in figure
3.15 plotted against each other in a log-log plot. The colours of the dots indicates the temperature of the
runs, and can be read using the colorbar shown on the right. A linear fit through the dots is illustrated
with a black dashed line.
Thus, the uncertainties illustrated by the error bars are not necessarily accurate and should be
interpreted carefully. The reciprocals of both t0 (in figure 3.17a) and tI (in figure 3.17b) appear to
follow power laws well at all temperatures considered. For the fits to t−1
0 the exponent parameter
n has a positive trend with temperature going from ~1.2 at 60 °C to ~1.75 at 90 °C, indicating
that higher temperatures give rise to slightly higher-order concentration dependencies of the pa-
rameter. For the fits to t−1
I , the exponent does not show a clear trend with varying temperatures,
but ranges between ~1.2 and ~1.3. For fits to both t−1
0
and t−1
I , the factor coefficient k increases
steadily with temperature.
The plots for the power law fits of the Kagg parameters can be seen in figure 3.17c. From the
lack of linearity between the points in the log-log space, it is clear that the relations are not well
described by power laws. None of the fits are particularly good, but they generally appear more
plausible at lower temperatures. Estimates of the exponent fitting parameters as high as n = 5
are obtained, but with poor fits these vales should not be considered meaningful.
Dynamic light scattering
The time development of the size distribution of a representative run is illustrated as a ridgeline
plot in figure 3.18. Each of the first 60 measurements is represented by a distribution of radii
in grey, where the height is proportional to the scattering intensity contribution from each par-
ticle size, as approximated by DLS. The measurement closest to t0 is coloured in blue, and the
measurement at tI is coloured in red. The data here is from one replicate of the sample with a
concentration of 12.5 mg mL−1 at 70 °C. In this case, the size distribution fit to the correlation
function continues to be good beyond the measurements shown. From the start of the measure-
ments, species of two different sizes dominate the distribution. These two species are present in
the sample, even before heating. The smaller of the two, with a radius around 2.5 nm, is similar
in size to a single napin molecule. The larger has a radius of around 35 nm. As the scattering
intensity scales with the sixth power of the radius, it is safe to say that the concentration of the
smaller species is exceedingly higher than the concentration of the larger species at time 0. Until
t0, particles with these radii persist with few other sizes detected, with the trend that the con-
centration of the larger particles is increasing while the concentration of the smaller particles is
decreasing. This trend should be considered carefully, as the concentration of the smaller species
still far exceeds that of the larger species. From t0 to tI the conversion from small particles to
large particles accelerates, and the small particles become nearly undetectable. This should not
be interpreted as near depletion of the monomer, but rather just that the scattering signal from
29
==PAGE:36==
101
3 × 1004 × 100 6 × 100
2 × 101
Concentration [mg/ml]
10
7
10
6
t
1
0
60
70
80
90
Temperature [C]
60
80
Temperature [C]
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Exponent (n)
60
80
Temperature [C]
0
1
2
Factor (k)
1e
8
(a) Power law fits relating t−1
0
to the sample concen-
tration.
101
3 × 1004 × 100 6 × 100
2 × 101
Concentration [mg/ml]
10
7
t
1
I
60
70
80
90
Temperature [C]
60
80
Temperature [C]
1.2
1.3
Exponent (n)
60
80
Temperature [C]
1
2
Factor (k)
1e
8
(b) Power law fits relating t−1
I
to the sample concen-
tration.
101
3 × 1004 × 100 6 × 100
2 × 101
Concentration [mg/ml]
10
14
10
13
10
12
10
11
10
10
Kagg
60
70
80
90
Temperature [C]
60
80
Temperature [C]
0
5
10
Exponent (n)
60
80
Temperature [C]
0
1
2
Factor (k)
1e
11
(c) Power law fits relating Kagg to the sample con-
centration.
Figure 3.17: The results from fits of power laws on the form y = k·xn to three parameters extracted from
the scattering experiments: a) the reciprocal lag times, t−1
0 , from the fits to equation 2.1, b) the reciprocal
times of the inflection point, t−1
0 , from numerical differentiation, and c) the Kagg parameters from the
fits to equation 2.1. The log-log plot to the left of each subfigure shows parameters and fits plotted against
smaple concentration, with their colours denoting the temperature. The two smaller fits on the right of
each subfigure show the fitting parameters n and k plotted against temperature, with error bars indicating
± one standard deviation of the estimate.
30
==PAGE:37==
100
101
102
103
104
Radius [nm]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Time [min]
t0
tms
Figure 3.18: Ridgeline plot showing the estimated size distribution of a sample of 12.5 mg mL−1 of the
HAPFAM isolate extract in an isothermal scan at 70 °C over time. The curves shown represent the size
distribution based on relative intensity contribution estimated from each of the first 60 DLS measure-
ments. The blue curve represents the size distribution closest to the time t0. The red curve represents the
size distribution at time tI.
the larger species begins to dominate the overall signal. Close to tI, particles with radii signif-
icantly bigger than 35 nm begin to form. The general pattern in figure 3.18 is similar across all
the samples also presented in figure 3.15.
31
==PAGE:38==
Intrinsic fluorescence
The emission of light with wavelengths 330 nm and 350 nm from intrinsic fluorescence of the
sample was also measured during the same isothermal experiments. Measurements from four
sample concentrations at 90 °C are displayed against time in figure 3.19, along with the scattering
intensity in thin faint lines. Measurements from the same sample are grouped by colour, where
the blue lines correspond to the highest sample concentration and purble with the lowest. In all
cases, the two emission measurements show different developments. At 330 nm, the intensity is
initially showing a clear decrease in signal, which must be related to a conformational change.
This conformational change could be unfolding of native protein or the formation of the ~35 nm
particles as observed by DLS, but since relatively few of these particles exist prior to t0, unfolding
is more likely. In the same initial region, no change is observed in the intensity of the 350 nm
fluorescence. This signal thereby seems unaffected by unfolding of the sample. Coinciding with
the increase in scattering intensity beginning around t0, the 350 nm signal begins to increase in a
sigmoidal manner, reaching a plateau well after the scattering intensity has begun to deteriorate.
Most noticeable at higher sample concentration, the curves of the 350 nm fluorescence signals
appear to have a kink around midway through the sigmoid. This kink coincides closely with tI,
and is likely an effect of increased turbidity.
The blue fluorescence curves begin to show more erratic behaviour after 5000 s. This phe-
nomenon is also observed for other samples not shown, and appears more prevalent at lower
temperatures. In all cases it appears after the peak of the scattering signal, but not necessarily
after the fluorescence signals reach their plateau.
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
Time [S]
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Fluorescence intensity
Emission at 330nm
Emission at 350nm
107
108
Scattering intensity
SLS signal
Figure 3.19: Plot of the fluorescence emissions at 330 nm in dashed lines and 350 nm in full lines plotted
against time for four different concentrations of the HAPFAM sample measured during the same isother-
mal run at 90 °C. Faint lines indicate the concurrent scattering intensities, plotted on the secondary axis
in log scale. Colours denote the sample protein concentration: blue: 11.1 mg mL−1, red: 7.4 mg mL−1,
green: 4.9 mg mL−1, purple: 3.3 mg mL−1.
Measurements of the Isolexx sample
In this section, results from the measurements of isothermal scans of the Isolexx sample are
presented, to highlight some of the observed differences to the HAPFAM sample. As an example,
32
==PAGE:39==
thefour highest concentrations ofIsolexx samples, going from~45 to 5.6 mg mL−1 protein, tested
at 70 °C are considered. Figure 3.20 illustrates the scattering intensity and the turbidity over time.
The two samples at lower concentration appear to show an initial increase in scattering intensity,
before the signal plateaus and becomes more noisy. The signals of the two more concentrated are
already irregular at the start of the mesaurements. For all the samples shown, a distinct increase
in turbidity is at some point observed - this happens sooner for the more concentrated samples,
and later for the more dilute samples. The increase in turbidity appears to coincide with a rise
and fall in the scattering intensity, though the latter signal is difficult to interpret due to the high
noise.
The concurrent fluorescence measurements of emissions at 330 nm and 350 nm are plotted
in figure 3.21. No noteworthy changes are observed in either of the signals before the time of
the increase in turbidity, where all fluorescence measurements decrease and also become more
erratic. Any phenomena giving rise to the initial increase in scattering intensity, are thereby
not observable by the intrinsic fluorescence at these wavelengths. Additionally, it appears that
all changes in one of the emissions coincides with a change in the other, and there is therefore
no evidence for the phenomenon observed for the HAPFAM sample where the 350 nm signal
appears unaffected by unfolding.
For all the DLS measurements, the particle size distribution fit to the autocorrelation function
shows discrepancies from the measurements, even from the start of the experiments (data not
shown).
 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
 60000
Time [S]
108
109
Scattering intensity
SLS signal
2 × 102
3 × 102
4 × 102
Turbidity
Turbidity
Figure 3.20: Plot of scattering measurements against time from four concentrations of the Isolexx sample
during an isothermal scan at 70 °C. The scattering intensity is plotted in full lines on one log-scale axis
and the turbidity is plotted in dashed lines on a separate log-scale axis. Colours denote the sample protein
concentration: blue: 45 mg mL−1, red: 22.5 mg mL−1, green: 11.3 mg mL−1, purple: 5.6 mg mL−1.
33
==PAGE:40==
 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
 60000
Time [S]
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Fluorescence intensity
Emission at 330nm
Emission at 350nm
Figure 3.21: Plot of fluorescence measurements against time from four concentrations of the Isolexx
sample during an isothermal scan at 70 °C. Full lines indicate emission at 350 nm and dashed lines indi-
cate the emission at 330 nm. Colours denote the sample protein concentration: blue: 45 mg mL−1, red:
22.5 mg mL−1, green: 11.3 mg mL−1, purple: 5.6 mg mL−1.
34
==PAGE:41==
4
Discussions
4.1
Force fields for studies of seed storage proteins
Cruciferin, the major seed storage proteins of rapeseed, contain regions that are folded in highly
stable structures and regions that are intrinsically disordered [10]. When studying its properties
using molecular dynamics simulations, this gives rise to specific requirements for the parameters
used. Furthermore, the hexameric complex of cruciferin is too large to be effectively modelled
using a conventional all-atom representation, meaning that coarse-graining is required. The fol-
lowing sections will discuss an attempt to modify the coarse grained SIRAH force field to better
model disordered regions, and how the results compare to a recently published modification of
the Martini force field with the same ambitions.
4.1.1
CG MD of intrinsically disordered regions
The a99SB-disp all atom force field has been developed with the specific goal of simulating both
structured and disordered proteins, and has been shown to do this well [40]. It will therefore be
considered as a benchmark for the simulation of these proteins. One concern with the a99SB-
disp force field, is that the force field on which it is based (a99SB), is known to have issues mod-
elling secondary structures accurately [70]. The stability of the α-helical secondary structure
of the 2SSB napin variant was therefore investigated using metadynamics with ALPHARMSD
as the collective variable, with both the a99SB-disp force field and the newer ff19SB force field
where secondary structure biases have been minimized [42]. Both simulations result in similar
relationships between the α-helical content of the structure and the free energy. As shown in
figure 3.6, the free energy minimum is more defined using the ff19SB force field meaning that
the secondary structure is not as easily broken, which could be expected as this force has been
shown to produce more compact conformations than a99SB-disp [43]. It is uncertain if this is
due to an overestimation of its stability when using ff19SB or an underestimation when using
a99SB-disp.
The two force fields also seemed to predict that the same secondary structures would be lost,
given an overall reduction in the helical content. Overall, nothing alarming was observed when
modelling the stability of the secondary structures of napin using the a99SB-disp force field. Ad-
ditionally, the result that the structure of napin is highly stable is in agreement with the nanoDSF
measurements of the HAPFAM sample presented in figure 3.14. The use the a99SB-disp force
field as an estimate of the optimal modelling of both structured and disordered proteins, should
only be considered for lack of a better benchmark, i.e. actual experimental measurement, such
as from NMR or SAXS.
From the results in section 3.1.1, it is seen that an increase of between 5-10% in the strength of
35
==PAGE:42==
the Lennard-Jones potential between protein and water in SIRAH, results in a better agreement
with a99SB-disp, when simulating monomers of the CRU3 variant. This variant has the longest
disordered HVR-I region of the considered cruciferin variants, and would presumably be the
most difficult to model. The better agreement between the force fields when compared to stock
SIRAH, manifests itself both in the fluctuation of the protein backbone (as per the RMSF plots
in figure 3.1) and in the overall size of the simulated protein (as per the Rg distributions in figure
3.2). The disagreement between non-modified SIRAH and the a99SB-disp simulations, is also
in agreement with a study showing that SIRAH has a tendency to underestimate the radii of
gyration of IDP’s [48]. From the variation between replicate Rg distributions, it is clear that
the simulations using SIRAH are not sampling the conformations sufficiently. Ideally, more and
longer simulations should therefore be run, in order to get a more objective, statistically sound
estimate of the optimal λ-value. In lack of this, the conclusion is that λ-values between 1.05 and
1.10 improve the modelling of cruciferin using SIRAH.
Previously, a similar approach to the optimization of SIRAH for simulation of α-synuclein,
an intrinsically disordered protein, concluded that a rescaling factor of λ = 1.30 resulted in the
best agreement with experimental data [71]. The highest value of the parameter considered in
the present study was 1.20, and even this was shown to cause high overestimation of the radius
of gyration and the backbone fluctuations of CRU3, compared to the results using a99SB-disp.
It is thereby unlikely that a rescaling with λ = 1.30 would be remotely appropriate when study-
ing cruciferin using SIRAH. These two contrasting results together indicate that the approach
of optimizing SIRAH for modelling structured and disordered proteins simultaneously, just by
scaling the strength of protein-water interactions, is not perfectly feasible. Rather, disordered
proteins are best modelled with one value of λ, while structured proteins are best modelled with
another value of λ. When adjusting just this parameter, the performance of one of the tasks will
therefore always come at the expense of the performance of the other task, and a compromise
must be made.
Based on the Rg distributions, simulations of CRU3 using the modified Martini force field
recently presented by Thomasen et al. [45] with the recommended scaling factor of λ = 1.10,
appears to be in good agreement with the a99SB-disp simulations, with just a minor tendency to
underestimate the average radius of gyration. It should also be mentioned that Martini trumps
all other considered force fields in terms of efficient sampling. Here, the three replicates showed
nearly identical size distributions. This effect is likely due to a lack of a detailed backbone struc-
ture in Martini, meaning that the disordered regions can move more freely, and the possible
conformations can be sampled more efficiently.
4.1.2
Modelling of protein-protein interactions
When the interactions between napins were simulated using Martini and SIRAH, both modified
with a λ-value of 1.10, the results were distinctly different. Using SIRAH, prolonged interactions
were observed between monomers, and the count of interactions increased with increased salt
concentration, as if electrostatic repulsions are screened. Conversely, using Martini, only short-
lived interactions were observed. Additionally, the count of interactions here decreases with
increased salt concentration, as if electrostatic attractions are screened. The question standing is
then: which force field is providing the more accurate prediction of protein-protein interactions?
In the most recentversionof stockMartini, the property ofaccurately modellingnon-aggrega-
ting species as stable monomers was specifically addressed [44]. Still, the dimerization of folded
proteins was shown to be overestimated in Martini, and it was demonstrated that this was helped
by the addition of the10% increase in the Lennard-Jonespotential of protein-waterinteractions[45].
36
==PAGE:43==
Thesameconsiderations havenotbeen found highlighted in theliteraturesurrounding theSIRAH
force field, though multiple studies applying SIRAH for modelling protein-protein interactions
have recently been published[72, 73].
For 2SS4, the residues observed to take part in interactions observed using both force fields,
had essentially no correlations with residues predicted to contribute to the aggregation, as cal-
culated by two different methods for estimating aggregation propensity. From this lack of cor-
relation, it would seem that the prolonged interactions observed in SIRAH, do not tend to be
interactions typically associated with protein aggregation.
Evidence from the experimental isothermal aggregation studies of the HAPFAM sample, rich
in napins, also indicate that unfolding of the proteins is a key step in the aggregation process
(this claim is accounted for in section 4.3). This would be a further indication that the sustained
interactions between folded napin monomers observed using SIRAH, does not represent the true
aggregation behaviour of the protein. Here, it should be noted that the salt concentration in the
experiments was higher than in the simulations, which could affect the aggregation behaviour.
Additionally, the experimental results are not from a perfectly pure protein sample, meaning that
other components than just napin could influence the observed behaviour.
Overall, most considerations suggest that the behaviour of protein-protein interactions ob-
served when using Martini are more likely to be correct. This would indicate that the modified
SIRAH force field overestimates protein-protein interactions, and does not accurately model
interactions between napin molecules. To conclude anything with more certainty, more data
is needed. Additional aggregation experiments could be performed, to map out the effects of
changes in salt concentrations, preferably with pure, recombinantly expressed napin. This might
not be sufficient if unfolding is a true prerequisite for aggregation. Computationally, simula-
tions could be performed at higher temperature, as has e.g. been done to study the mechanism
of heat-induced amorphous aggregation of myoglobin [74].
4.2
Function of the disordered regions of cruciferin
As introduced in section 1.2.1, multiple theories have been proposed as to the function of IDR’s
in seed storage proteins, such as the HVR’s of cruciferin. Keeping the considerations of section
4.1.2 in mind - that the ability of the modified SIRAH force field to accurately model protein-
protein interactions has not been firmly established - the simulations of hexameric cruciferin
presented in section 3.1.3 might still give an indication of the dynamic behaviour of the HVR’s.
From static homology models of homohexamers of cruciferin variants from A. thaliana, it was
proposed that the HVR-I loops interact between monomers and that the strength of these inter-
actions are dependent of the length of HVR-I. Specifically it was proposed that this interaction
could take place between adjacent monomers each from different trimers, thus stabilizing the
hexameric complex [12]. Simulation of hexameric CRU3 and CRU4 show that this is also plau-
sible in rapeseed cruciferin. Here, both variants show interactions between neighbouring HVR-I
loops, and additionally also between the shorter HVR-II regions, which has not been proposed
before. However, it has not been investigated whether or not the difference in length of these
disordered regions affects the strength of the interaction. This could be done by performing
umbrella sampling, to access the binding free energy between homotrimers of both CRU3 and
CRU4.
Even though the HVR loops show many interactions with themselves, high variation is ob-
served in the sampled conformations of the regions, consistent with the notion that these are
disordered loops never solved in homologous crystal structures (e.g. PDB accessions 3C3V ,
37
==PAGE:44==
5XTY, 5WXU and 1XGF [36, 37, 38, 35]). The interactions between the HVR’s can therefore not
be considered strong enough to result in a stable fold. Rather, the loops are observed to interact
non-specifically with a range of residues on the surfaces of adjacent monomers.
The primary structure of HVR-I, consisting of glycines and glutamines, could be a hint that
the function of the region is not exclusively structural. Evidence shows that polyglumatine se-
quences often serve the purpose of cellular sensors, allowing organisms to react to differences
in the environment [75]. A specific example from plants is the FLOE1 protein of seeds from A.
thaliana, that has been shown to form biocondensates as a response to hydration, which is then
believed to regulate functions during germination [76]. This protein contains a large domain rich
in glutamines, serines, and prolines. Similar signalling functions could be imagined for HVR-I,
though cruciferin is not expected to phase separate.
4.3
Aggregation behaviour of the HAPFAM sample
4.3.1
Descriptive parameters of the aggregation process
The lag time t0 represents the duration of the initial linear increase in scattering intensity, and
thereby the time it takes before the scattering intensity begins to increase drastically. This point
in the aggregation progress is well defined by the experimental conditions, as apparent from the
relations shown in figure 3.15. Not only do most replicate samples result in near identical t0
values, but there is also a clear exponential relationship between the time and scattering inten-
sity at these points. The inverse of the lag period, t−1
0 , can be regarded as a measure of how
fast this well-defined point in the process is reached. In the start aggregate model of amorphous
protein aggregation presented by Golub et al. [30], the lag period in the scattering intensity is
characterised by unfolding of native proteins and formation of increasing amounts of start ag-
gregates. The end of the lag-period is considered to mark the time when start aggregates begin
to stick together, forming larger particles that scatter light with much higher intensity than their
constituent start aggregates. From the particle size distributions approximated over time - as il-
lustrated by the representative process in figure 3.18 - it is however evident that the end of the lag
period does not coincide with an increase in particle size. Rather, the stark increase in scattering
intensity following the lag period, is due to a rapid increase in the concentration of aggregates of
similar size to those already present.
The other descriptive time point from the scattering curves from isothermal aggregation
runs, the time of the inflection point tI, is just as well-defined by the experimental conditions
as the lag period. It too shows a simple exponential relationship between time and signal at all
temperatures. Additionally, the two descriptive times are linearly correlated across all measure-
ments, with t0 always being around 60% of tI. The inverse of this time, t−1
I , is a measure of how
quickly this point in the process is reached. Here it should be noted, that the time until tI clearly
appears to contains at least two distinct regions of the aggregation process - before and after t0.
As tI is the time of the inflection point of the scattering intensity, it marks a point in the aggre-
gation process when the curvature of the scattering signal becomes negative. This must be the
point where negative contributions to the change in signal begin to outweigh the positive con-
tributions from formation of larger particles from smaller particles. One negative contribution
would be the formation of particles so big that their centres no longer scatter light, effectively
decreasing the amount of light-scattering matter. This explanation is helped by an increase in
the sample turbidity around tI in all cases, indicating that aggregates grow large enough to block
light. This also means that tI represents the point where the scattering intensity signal stops be-
ing representative of the sample composition as a whole. For this reason, one should be careful
38
==PAGE:45==
interpreting scattering measurements from this point onwards. The estimated size distributions
over time as exemplified in figure 3.18 do however, still fit the autocorrelation function well for
a while after tI, and also indicate that larger aggregates then begin to form. The inflection point
can then be interpreted as having a similar significance as the end of the ’lag period’ in the start
aggregate model, by marking the point when larger aggregates begin to form.
It is worth noting that both the times tI and t0, are defined relative to the start of the mea-
surements. Since the measurements only start when the target temperature is reached, any part
of the aggregation process occurring during the heating of the samples, will not be reflected by
these parameters.
The interpretation of Kagg is best evaluated from its role in equation 2.1, where it describes
a parabolic relationship between the scattering intensity and time. This relationship has previ-
ously been used to fit similar scattering data as those shown in figure 3.15, where Kagg has been
interpreted as a measure of the rate of aggregation [31]. The relationship is however empirical
in nature, and has been presented without a precise physical interpretation of the parameter. It
may be that the parameter can be be related to true reaction rates of the process, but this would
require deeper insights into the aggregation mechanism.
4.3.2
The concentration dependence of the aggregation
By the fits in figure 3.17 it was shown that the inverse of both of the descriptive times t0 and tI
can at all considered temperatures be related to the sample concentration with power laws. In
all cases, the exponent fitting parameter, n, was larger than one, indicating that the relationships
are not simply linear. Though the two descriptive times were also shown to have a clear linear
mutual dependence, the n parameter from the fits to t−1
0
showed an increasing trend with in-
creasing temperature, while the n-parameter from the fits to t−1
I
showed no trend with changing
temperatures.
A more detailed interpretation of the concentration dependencies of the inverse durations
of the descriptive times can be stated, if it is assumed that these parameters are closely related
to true reaction rates of the aggregation process. Then, the power laws can be thought of as rate
laws. For a rate law concerning a single reacting species, the order of the rate law, n, represents
the concentration dependence of the reaction rate. In an aggregation reaction, this can be used
to indicate the nature of the rate-limiting step in the process. With a first-order rate law, the
rate-limiting step is a process involving individual molecules, typically interpreted as a necessary
conformational change such as unfolding of native protein. For higher-order rate laws, the rate-
limiting step is instead a cooperative process involving multiple molecules, such as a nucleation
event [31]. The increase of the n-parameter in power law fits to t−1
0 with increasing temperatures
can then be interpreted as a shift in the rate-limiting step of the process. At lower temperatures
the process is limited by the rate of monomer unfolding but - as is apparent from the nanoDSF
results in figure 3.14 - this barrier is lowered at the higher temperatures tested. Instead, the rate
of aggregation becomes limited by a cooperative process such as nucleation, and n increases.
For t−1
I , as no clear pattern in the temperature dependence of the reaction order n is observed,
the interpretation would be that there is no change in the cooperativity of the rate-limiting step
until the scattering signal inflection points. The crucial assumption here, that the reaction rates
governing parts of the aggregation process can be directly related to the reciprocal times t−1
0 and
t−1
I
and their relation to the sample concentration, is problematic. First of all, the parameters
could at best be considered as average rates throughout the durations of the processes considered.
Secondly it is assumed that only one species is involved in the reactions described by the rate laws.
If multiple species of the protein isolate sample are involved in the aggregation with different
39
==PAGE:46==
orders - e.g. due to the reaction stoichiometry - the overall rate law order can not be resolved by
a single dilution series of the sample.
The dependence of the Kagg fitting parameter on the sample concentration was shown to be
poorly explained by power law fits. This stands in contrast to several applications of the parameter
as a measure of the aggregation rate, as reviewed by Kurganov [32]. The relation in equation 2.1
of which the parameter originates was used, because the present SLS data has similarities with
measurements presented by Borzova et al. [31]. This model is entirely empirical, and for that
reason there is little insights to gain from the lack of accordance between data and model. This
exemplifies a limitation of empirical models with no mechanistic support.
A consideration with the present data sets related to the sample concentrations, is that most
measurements at each temperature are of samples from the same dilution series. Here, an error
in one dilution step would extend to all subsequent dilutions. Such a propagation of errors in
the concentrations would manifest itself as an error in the concentration dependencies of all
features of the runs at a given temperature. No signs of such an error have been observed. Still,
truly independent replicates would always be preferred.
It should also be noted that the trends observed in the parameters can also be affected by
aspects of the analysis. The t0 parameter is for instance best described as ’the time when the
scattering signal begins to increase drastically’, and is thereby only defined conceptually. This
point could be estimated numerically by a multitude of approaches other than as a fitting pa-
rameter in equation 2.1 (e.g. the start of an increase in slope, the start of an increase in variance,
or the end of linearity, to name some of the options considered). Though the fits of equation 2.1
appear to fit the data well in figure 3.15, this is - as stated before - an entirely empirical relation,
and other methods may find points in time that fit the description of t0 just as well. Therefore,
even if there exists a mechanistic interpretation of a point with the description: ’the time when
the scattering signal begins to increase drastically’, it is entirely possible that this time is not ap-
propriately reflected by the present fitting parameter. The tI parameter, the time of the inflection
point of the scattering curve, has a more rigid analytical definition than t0. Still, the same argu-
ments apply, as it is derived using numerical methods. Per this reasoning, parameters without
a mechanistic interpretation should be considered with caution, and much meaning should not
be attributed to their nuances. As an example, the differences in the n-parameter observed with
differences in temperature for the power law fits to t−1
0 , could plausibly be attributed to a bias in
how t0 is extracted from the measurements.
4.3.3
Significance of the intrinsic fluorescence
Results from the nanoDSF measurements during the isothermal scans of the samples, indicate
that the intrinsic fluorescence emission at 350 nm is effectively unaffected by unfolding of the
protein. Still, the same emission changes following aggregation. Since the emission at 330 nm
changes during both processes, the close environment of tryptophan residues must be altered
during unfolding, and it is therefore not trivial to explain why the signal at 350 nm is unaffected.
For context, the most prominent protein in the HAPFAM sample, the 2SS4 napin variant, con-
tains a single tryptophan residue located close to the protein surface but partly buried. This
phenomenon could be studied in more detail by measuring full emission spectra, and perhaps
by a more thorough analysis of the fluorophore environment in the native state of the protein.
It would also be relevant to investigate if these properties are unique to some variants of napin,
and to what extent they vary between the variants.
If the signal is truly only dependent on the conversion from monomer to aggregate, this is a
result with great potential in the context of studying aggregation kinetics. Compared to the scat-
40
==PAGE:47==
tering signal, where the contribution from each particle scales with the sixth power of the radius,
the contribution of each particle to the fluorescence signal would ideally scale linearly with the
mass. This means that the fluorescence intensity could serve as a direct measure of the amount
of monomer converted. The formation of very large aggregates is also not as detrimental to the
fluorescence signal, as it is to the scattering intensity, and thus a larger portion of the aggregation
process can be studied. The two methods can be considered as complementary. Measurement of
the scattering allows for a detailed description of the initial part of an aggregation process, where
aggregates can be detected in very small numbers, and where the time development of the size
distribution can even be estimated by DLS. Fluorescence, on the other hand, does not address
the sizes of the particles at all, but could allow for studying the full extend of the aggregation
process.
The idea that the fluorescent signal could be a measure of monomer conversion assumes that
only one fluorescing species exist, and additionally that all aggregated monomers have the same
fluorescing properties. This might not always be the case, e.g. in a large spherical aggregate
where the monomers near the surface can be expected to fluoresce more than those buried in
the aggregate centre where less light reaches. On the fluorescence intensities shown in figure
3.19, a sizeable kink in some of the signals was also observed coinciding with an increase in
turbidity. Additionally, many of the fluorescence curves measured show sudden changes in signal
at seemingly random times, after which the measurements are more erratic. This phenomenon
means that not all aggregation processes are measured from start to end. If these limitations
are investigated and addressed, the resulting measure of monomer conversion could be fitted to
models of amorphous aggregation, and hopefully provide further insights into the aggregation
mechanism.
4.3.4
The aggregation mechanism
The particle size distribution over time, as estimated from the DLS measurements, hint at an
aggregation process in multiple steps. Even at room temperature, the sample consists of both a
smaller and a larger species, though the smaller far dominates in terms of particle counts. The
size of the smaller species is what would be expected of a single napin molecule. When heated,
conformational changes over time are observed in the samples by nanoDSF, and since no sig-
nificant aggregation it yet observed, this is best explained as unfolding of the monomers. This
process dominated by unfolding proceeds until the first distinct change in the measurements is
observed, at the time denoted t0. This point in the aggregation process is observed in multiple
ways: as the time when the scattering intensity begins to increase, as the time when the fluores-
cence emission at 350 nm begins to increase, and as the time when the particle size distributions
begin to show higher contribution from the larger species.
By marking the end of a first apparent step in the process, t0 also marks the start of the next.
Here, more of the larger species suddenly begin to form. It can be speculated why this process
would start so suddenly. One interpretation is that the amount of unfolded monomers reach
a critical concentration, after which they readily form aggregates. The aggregates however, do
not grow indefinitely. Rather, the growth stops near the size of the larger of the species already
present, as no larger species are initially observed. This phenomenon is not easily explained,
without further insight into the nature of the particles.
Particle sizes only begin to increase above the size of this larger species, at a point near the
time denoted tI. This is reminiscent of the start aggregate model, where smaller aggregates are
first formed. After a lag period, when enough start aggregates are formed, they then accumulate
and form larger aggregates.
41
==PAGE:48==
If we now assume that the fluorescence emission at 350 nm is indicative of the monomer
conversion, as discussed in the section above, these sigmoidal curves show that monomers con-
tinue to be converted to aggregate well beyond the time tI. Whether this is primarily through the
continued formation of new smaller aggregates, or through addition to established aggregates is
uncertain. As scattering measurements have little meaning at this stage of the process, estimating
the size distribution by DLS will be no help.
Overall, the distinct steps of the process, indicate that multiple mechanism are at play. One
can be hopeful that further analysis will allow assumptions to be made, allowing for more elab-
orate quantitative modelling of the measurements. For instance, the high correlation between
t0 and tI, could indicate a relation between the underlying mechanisms governing their values -
provided they both have a meaningful, mechanistic interpretation.
It is important to note, that though the HAPFAM sample was shown to be dominated by
napins, the aggregation behaviour observed can not be assumed equivalent to the behaviour of
pure napin. Firstly, it is likely that the properties of other components such as variants of cru-
ciferin, also contribute to the measurements. There may even be cooperative effects between
napin and other components, that would not be observed in a pure napin sample. Secondly,
the napin isoform composition of the sample has not been established with high certainty. The
different variants of napin may have distinct properties, which may be reflected in the measure-
ments. These issues could be resolved by analysis of samples of pure recombinantly expressed
variants.
4.3.5
Relation to the measurements of the Isolexx sample
Compared to the HAPFAM sample, the scattering and fluorescence measurements of the Isolexx
sample proved more difficult to interpret. This is most probably an effect of working with ill-
defined samples, not prepared with protein purity in mind. Rather, the sample has been prepared
for use as a food and beverage additive. This is evident from the fairly harsh purification methods
applied [63].
The difficulty in fitting a size distribution to the DLS aurocorrelation results, could be ex-
plained by the sample containing an abundance of different proteins and degradation products.
The same had been observed using SDS-PAGE and LC-MS analysis.
More meaningful measurements could be achieved by studying well-defined samples, either
purified from natural product in a gentle way, or from recombinant expression.
42
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
Properties of the major rapeseed seed storage proteins, cruciferin and napin, have been investi-
gated through computational and biophysical characterizations.
SIRAH, a force field for coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of proteins, was
modified with the aim of improving the modelling of intrinsically disordered regions. This was
done by increasing the strength of the Lennard-Jones potential between water and protein beads.
It was concluded that a 5-10% increase in the potential improved the modelling of intrinsically
disordered loops of the CRU3 variant of cruciferin, by favouring less compact conformations.
There is, however, also indications that the modified force field has a tendency to overestimate
the strength of protein-protein interactions.
The modified SIRAH force field was applied in studying the dynamics of two IDRs of cru-
ciferin: HVR-I and HVR-II. The results point in favour of a standing hypothesis, that HVR-I
loops interact in the hexameric form of cruciferin, thus stabilizing the complex. Additionally, it
was found that the HVR-II loops - that have received less attention - may serve a similar function.
The aggregation behaviour of an isolate of natural rapeseed seed storage proteins has been
characterised, through a combination of scattering and fluorescent measurements at isothermal
conditions. The sample, that is rich in napin, was shown to aggregate in a consistent manner
following heating. Measurements of the scattering intensity over time were analysed, resulting in
a set of empirical parameters, t0 and tI, describing the durations of apparent distinct steps in the
initial aggregation process. These parameters were shown to be linearly correlated, and both were
related to the sample concentration by power laws. Though the parameters are empirical, these
relationships may prove useful in developing mechanistic insights, through further analysis.
Particle size distributions over time in the aggregation process, as estimated by DLS, pro-
vided further indications of a multi-step aggregation mechanism. The process appears to pro-
ceed in at least three consecutive steps as follows: 1) firstly a duration dominated by unfolding of
monomeric napin, 2) a step dominated by formation of smaller aggregates of a well-defined size,
and 3) the formation of larger aggregates, possibly from smaller aggregates beginning to stick
together.
The intrinsic fluorescence of the sample during the same aggregation experiments showed a
curious phenomenon. It appears that the emission of 350 nm light, is unaffected by the unfolding
of the monomers observed as the first step of the aggregation process. Still, a shift in the emission
intensity is observed during the steps dominated by aggregation. This is a promising result, as
the signal may then be treated as a direct measure of the conversion from monomer to aggregate.
This could allow for analysis of the entire aggregation process, which is infeasible with methods
based on scattering.
43
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1] P R Shukla, J Skea, R Slade, R van Diemen, E Haughey, J Malley, M Pathak, and J Portugal Pereira,
editors. Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land
Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial
Ecosystems. United Nations, New York, USA, 2019.
[2] Annika Lund Gade, Leif Bach Jørgensen, Ida Ekqvist, Therese Holter, and Kajsa Pira.
Nordic
Food Transition - Low emission opportunities in agriculture. TemaNord. Nordic Council of Min-
isters, June 2021.
ISBN 978-92-893-7053-0.
doi: 10.6027/temanord2021-525.
URL https:
//pub.norden.org/temanord2021-525.
[3] Morten Gylling and John Hermansen. Kvantificering af forventede fremtidige proteinmarkeder og
kortlægning af potentialer i forskellige nye proteinkilder. (8), 2018.
[4] Janitha P.D. Wanasundara, Tara C. McIntosh, Suneru P. Perera, Thushan S. Withana-Gamage,
and Pranabendu Mitra. Canola/rapeseed protein-functionality and nutrition. OCL, 23(4):D407,
July 2016.
ISSN 2272-6977, 2257-6614.
doi: 10.1051/ocl/2016028.
URL http://www.
ocl-journal.org/10.1051/ocl/2016028.
[5] Katarzyna Gacek, Iwona Bartkowiak-Broda, and Jacqueline Batley. Genetic and Molecular Reg-
ulation of Seed Storage Proteins (SSPs) to Improve Protein Nutritional Value of Oilseed Rape
(Brassica napus L.) Seeds.
Frontiers in Plant Science, 9:890, July 2018.
ISSN 1664-462X.
doi:
10.3389/fpls.2018.00890.
URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
fpls.2018.00890/full.
[6] Mihaly Varadi, Stephen Anyango, Mandar Deshpande, Sreenath Nair, Cindy Natassia, Galabina
Yordanova, David Yuan, Oana Stroe, Gemma Wood, Agata Laydon, Augustin Žídek, Tim Green,
Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Stig Petersen, John Jumper, Ellen Clancy, Richard Green, Ankur Vora,
Mira Lutfi, Michael Figurnov, Andrew Cowie, Nicole Hobbs, Pushmeet Kohli, Gerard Kleywegt,
Ewan Birney, Demis Hassabis, and Sameer Velankar.
AlphaFold Protein Structure Database:
massively expanding the structural coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy mod-
els.
Nucleic Acids Research, 50(D1):D439–D444, January 2022.
ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1061. URL https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/50/D1/
D439/6430488.
[7] J.P.D. Wanasundara, S. Tan, A.M. Alashi, F. Pudel, and C. Blanchard. Proteins From Canola/Rape-
seed.
In Sustainable Protein Sources, pages 285–304. Elsevier, 2017.
ISBN 978-0-12-802778-3.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802778-3.00018-4. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/B9780128027783000184.
[8] Thomas Nietzel, Natalya V. Dudkina, Christin Haase, Peter Denolf, Dmitry A. Semchonok, Egbert J.
Boekema, Hans-Peter Braun, and Stephanie Sunderhaus. The Native Structure and Composition
44
==PAGE:51==
of the Cruciferin Complex in Brassica napus. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 288(4):2238–2245,
January 2013. ISSN 00219258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.356089. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S002192582046497X.
[9] Mary Rose G. Tandang-Silvas, Takako Fukuda, Chisato Fukuda, Krisna Prak, Cerrone Cabanos,
Aiko Kimura, Takafumi Itoh, Bunzo Mikami, Shigeru Utsumi, and Nobuyuki Maruyama. Conser-
vation and divergence on plant seed 11S globulins based on crystal structures. Biochimica et Bio-
physica Acta (BBA) - Proteins and Proteomics, 1804(7):1432–1442, July 2010. ISSN 15709639. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.02.016. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S1570963910000671.
[10] Thushan S. Withana-Gamage, Dwayne D. Hegedus, Xiao Qiu, and Janitha P. D. Wanasundara. In
Silico Homology Modeling To Predict Functional Properties of Cruciferin. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 59(24):12925–12938, December 2011. ISSN 0021-8561, 1520-5118. doi: 10.
1021/jf201979a. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jf201979a.
[11] Suneru Perera, Tara McIntosh, and Janitha Wanasundara. Structural Properties of Cruciferin and
Napin of Brassica napus (Canola) Show Distinct Responses to Changes in pH and Temperature.
Plants, 5(3):36, September 2016. ISSN 2223-7747. doi: 10.3390/plants5030036. URL http://
www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/5/3/36.
[12] Thushan S. Withana-Gamage, Dwayne D. Hegedus, Xiao Qiu, and Janitha Wanasundara.
Sol-
ubility, Heat-Induced Gelation and Pepsin Susceptibility of Cruciferin Protein as Affected by
Subunit Composition.
Food Biophysics, 10(2):103–115, June 2015.
ISSN 1557-1858, 1557-
1866.
doi: 10.1007/s11483-014-9370-3.
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s11483-014-9370-3.
[13] Zamora-Briseño, Pereira-Santana, Reyes-Hernández, Castaño, and Rodríguez-Zapata. Global Dy-
namics in Protein Disorder during Maize Seed Development. Genes, 10(7):502, June 2019. ISSN
2073-4425. doi: 10.3390/genes10070502. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/10/
7/502.
[14] Thomas C. Boothby and Gary J. Pielak.
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins and Desiccation Tol-
erance: Elucidating Functional and Mechanistic Underpinnings of Anhydrobiosis. BioEssays, 39
(11):1700119, November 2017. ISSN 0265-9247, 1521-1878. doi: 10.1002/bies.201700119. URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bies.201700119.
[15] Kenny K. Y. So and Robert W. Duncan. Breeding Canola (Brassica napus L.) for Protein in Feed
and Food. Plants, 10(10):2220, October 2021. ISSN 2223-7747. doi: 10.3390/plants10102220. URL
https://www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/10/10/2220.
[16] Manuel Rico, Marta Bruix, Carlos González, Rafael I. Monsalve, and Rosalía Rodríguez. 1 H NMR
Assignment and Global Fold of Napin BnIb, a Representative 2S Albumin Seed Protein. Biochem-
istry, 35(49):15672–15682, January 1996. ISSN 0006-2960, 1520-4995. doi: 10.1021/bi961748q.
URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/bi961748q.
[17] Isabelle Schmidt, Denis Renard, David Rondeau, Pascal Richomme, Yves Popineau, and Monique
Augustin-Viguier Axelos. Detailed Physicochemical Characterization of the 2S Storage Protein from
Rape ( Brassica napus L.). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 52(19):5995–6001, September
2004. ISSN 0021-8561, 1520-5118. doi: 10.1021/jf0307954. URL https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/10.1021/jf0307954.
[18] The UniProt Consortium, Alex Bateman, Maria-Jesus Martin, Sandra Orchard, Michele Magrane,
Rahat Agivetova, Shadab Ahmad, Emanuele Alpi, Emily H Bowler-Barnett, Ramona Britto, Borisas
45
==PAGE:52==
Bursteinas, Hema Bye-A-Jee, Ray Coetzee, Austra Cukura, Alan Da Silva, Paul Denny, Tunca Do-
gan, ThankGod Ebenezer, Jun Fan, Leyla Garcia Castro, Penelope Garmiri, George Georghiou,
Leonardo Gonzales, Emma Hatton-Ellis, Abdulrahman Hussein, Alexandr Ignatchenko, Giuseppe
Insana, Rizwan Ishtiaq, Petteri Jokinen, Vishal Joshi, Dushyanth Jyothi, Antonia Lock, Rodrigo
Lopez, Aurelien Luciani, Jie Luo, Yvonne Lussi, Alistair MacDougall, Fabio Madeira, Mahdi Mah-
moudy, Manuela Menchi, Alok Mishra, Katie Moulang, Andrew Nightingale, Carla Susana Oliveira,
Sangya Pundir, Guoying Qi, Shriya Raj, Daniel Rice, Milagros Rodriguez Lopez, Rabie Saidi, Joseph
Sampson, Tony Sawford, Elena Speretta, Edward Turner, Nidhi Tyagi, Preethi Vasudev, Vladimir
Volynkin, Kate Warner, Xavier Watkins, Rossana Zaru, Hermann Zellner, Alan Bridge, Sylvain
Poux, Nicole Redaschi, Lucila Aimo, Ghislaine Argoud-Puy, Andrea Auchincloss, Kristian Ax-
elsen, Parit Bansal, Delphine Baratin, Marie-Claude Blatter, Jerven Bolleman, Emmanuel Boutet,
Lionel Breuza, Cristina Casals-Casas, Edouard de Castro, Kamal Chikh Echioukh, Elisabeth Coud-
ert, Beatrice Cuche, Mikael Doche, Dolnide Dornevil, Anne Estreicher, Maria Livia Famiglietti,
Marc Feuermann, Elisabeth Gasteiger, Sebastien Gehant, Vivienne Gerritsen, Arnaud Gos, Na-
dine Gruaz-Gumowski, Ursula Hinz, Chantal Hulo, Nevila Hyka-Nouspikel, Florence Jungo, Guil-
laume Keller, Arnaud Kerhornou, Vicente Lara, Philippe Le Mercier, Damien Lieberherr, Thierry
Lombardot, Xavier Martin, Patrick Masson, Anne Morgat, Teresa Batista Neto, Salvo Paesano, Ivo
Pedruzzi, Sandrine Pilbout, Lucille Pourcel, Monica Pozzato, Manuela Pruess, Catherine Rivoire,
Christian Sigrist, Karin Sonesson, Andre Stutz, Shyamala Sundaram, Michael Tognolli, Laure Ver-
bregue, Cathy H Wu, Cecilia N Arighi, Leslie Arminski, Chuming Chen, Yongxing Chen, John S Gar-
avelli, Hongzhan Huang, Kati Laiho, Peter McGarvey, Darren A Natale, Karen Ross, C R Vinayaka,
Qinghua Wang, Yuqi Wang, Lai-Su Yeh, Jian Zhang, Patrick Ruch, and Douglas Teodoro. UniProt:
the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic Acids Research, 49(D1):D480–D489, January
2021. ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1100. URL https://academic.
oup.com/nar/article/49/D1/D480/6006196.
[19] Frank Jensen. Introduction to computational chemistry. Wiley, Chichester, UK ; Hoboken, NJ, third
edition edition, 2017. ISBN 978-1-118-82595-2 978-1-118-82598-3.
[20] Efrem Braun, Justin Gilmer, Heather B. Mayes, David L. Mobley, Jacob I. Monroe, Samarjeet
Prasad, and Daniel M. Zuckerman.
Best Practices for Foundations in Molecular Simulations
[Article v1.0].
Living Journal of Computational Molecular Science, 1(1), 2019.
ISSN 25756524.
doi: 10.33011/livecoms.1.1.5957. URL https://www.livecomsjournal.org/article/
5957-best-practices-for-foundations-in-molecular-simulations-article-v1-0.
[21] Soumil Y. Joshi and Sanket A. Deshmukh. A review of advancements in coarse-grained molecular
dynamics simulations. Molecular Simulation, 47(10-11):786–803, July 2021. ISSN 0892-7022, 1029-
0435. doi: 10.1080/08927022.2020.1828583. URL https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
full/10.1080/08927022.2020.1828583.
[22] GROMACS development team. GROMACS Documentation. Release 2021.5, January 2022. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.5849961.
[23] Alessandro Barducci, Massimiliano Bonomi, and Michele Parrinello. Metadynamics. WIREs Com-
putational Molecular Science, 1(5):826–843, September 2011. ISSN 1759-0876, 1759-0884. doi: 10.
1002/wcms.31. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wcms.31.
[24] Qinghua Liao.
Enhanced sampling and free energy calculations for protein simulations.
In
Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science, volume 170, pages 177–213. Elsevier, 2020.
ISBN 978-0-12-821135-9. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.01.006. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S187711732030017X.
[25] Albert L. Lehninger, David L. Nelson, and Michael M. Cox. Lehninger principles of biochemistry.
W.H. Freeman, New York, 6th ed edition, 2013. ISBN 978-1-4292-3414-6. OCLC: ocn820352899.
46
==PAGE:53==
[26] Samuel D. Stranks, Heath Ecroyd, Steven Van Sluyter, Elizabeth J. Waters, John A. Carver, and
Lorenz von Smekal.
Model for amorphous aggregation processes.
Physical Review E, 80(5):
051907, November 2009. ISSN 1539-3755, 1550-2376. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.80.051907. URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.051907.
[27] Taco Nicolai and Dominique Durand. Controlled food protein aggregation for new functionality.
Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science, 18(4):249–256, August 2013. ISSN 13590294. doi: 10.
1016/j.cocis.2013.03.001. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S135902941300040X.
[28] Murielle A. Watzky and Richard G. Finke. Transition Metal Nanocluster Formation Kinetic and
Mechanistic Studies. A New Mechanism When Hydrogen Is the Reductant: Slow, Continuous Nu-
cleation and Fast Autocatalytic Surface Growth.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 119
(43):10382–10400, October 1997.
ISSN 0002-7863, 1520-5126.
doi: 10.1021/ja9705102.
URL
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ja9705102.
[29] Aimee M. Morris, Murielle A. Watzky, and Richard G. Finke. Protein aggregation kinetics, mecha-
nism, and curve-fitting: A review of the literature. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Proteins and
Proteomics, 1794(3):375–397, March 2009. ISSN 15709639. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2008.10.016. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1570963908003488.
[30] Nikolay Golub, Alexey Meremyanin, Kira Markossian, Tatyana Eronina, Natalia Chebotareva,
Regina Asryants, Vladimir Muronets, and Boris Kurganov. Evidence for the formation of start ag-
gregates as an initial stage of protein aggregation. FEBS Letters, 581(22):4223–4227, September
2007. ISSN 00145793. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.07.066. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1016/j.febslet.2007.07.066.
[31] Vera A. Borzova, Kira A. Markossian, and Boris I. Kurganov. Relationship between the initial rate of
protein aggregation and the lag period for amorphous aggregation. International Journal of Biological
Macromolecules, 68:144–150, July 2014. ISSN 01418130. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.04.046. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0141813014002736.
[32] B. I. Kurganov. Antiaggregation activity of chaperones and its quantification. Biochemistry (Moscow),
78(13):1554–1566, December 2013. ISSN 0006-2979, 1608-3040. doi: 10.1134/S0006297913130129.
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1134/S0006297913130129.
[33] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridgland, Clemens
Meyer, Simon A. A. Kohl, Andrew J. Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Stanislav
Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman, Ellen Clancy, Michal
Zielinski, Martin Steinegger, Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer, Sebastian Bodenstein,
David Silver, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew W. Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Pushmeet Kohli, and Demis
Hassabis. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature, 596(7873):583–
589, August 2021. ISSN 0028-0836, 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03819-2.
[34] Benjamin Webb and Andrej Sali. Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using MODELLER.
Current Protocols in Bioinformatics, 54(1), June 2016. ISSN 1934-3396, 1934-340X. doi: 10.1002/
cpbi.3. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpbi.3.
[35] Tengchuan Jin, Cheng Wang, Caiying Zhang, Yang Wang, Yu-Wei Chen, Feng Guo, Andrew Howard,
Min-Jie Cao, Tong-Jen Fu, Tara H. McHugh, and Yuzhu Zhang. Crystal Structure of Cocosin, A
Potential Food Allergen from Coconut ( Cocos nucifera ). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry,
65(34):7560–7568, August 2017. ISSN 0021-8561, 1520-5118. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b02252. URL
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b02252.
47
==PAGE:54==
[36] Tengchuan Jin, Feng Guo, Yu-wei Chen, Andrew Howard, and Yu-Zhu Zhang. Crystal structure of
Ara h 3, a major allergen in peanut. Molecular Immunology, 46(8-9):1796–1804, May 2009. ISSN
01615890. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.01.023. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0161589009000443.
[37] S. Vajravijayan, N. Nandhagopal, and K. Gunasekaran. Crystal structure determination and anal-
ysis of 11S coconut allergen: Cocosin. Molecular Immunology, 92:132–135, December 2017. ISSN
01615890. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2017.10.018. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0161589017305473.
[38] Pramod Kumar, Pooja Kesari, Sonali Dhindwal, Ashish K. Choudhary, Madhusudhanarao Katiki,
Neetu, Aparna Verma, Kiran Ambatipudi, Shailly Tomar, Ashwani Kumar Sharma, Girish Mishra,
and Pravindra Kumar. A novel function for globulin in sequestering plant hormone: Crystal struc-
ture of Wrightia tinctoria 11S globulin in complex with auxin. Scientific Reports, 7(1):4705, Decem-
ber 2017. ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-04518-7. URL http://www.nature.
com/articles/s41598-017-04518-7.
[39] Richard Evans, Michael O’Neill, Alexander Pritzel, Natasha Antropova, Andrew Senior, Tim Green,
Augustin Žídek, Russ Bates, Sam Blackwell, Jason Yim, Olaf Ronneberger, Sebastian Bodenstein,
Michal Zielinski, Alex Bridgland, Anna Potapenko, Andrew Cowie, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool,
Rishub Jain, Ellen Clancy, Pushmeet Kohli, John Jumper, and Demis Hassabis.
Protein com-
plex prediction with AlphaFold-Multimer. preprint, Bioinformatics, October 2021. URL http:
//biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2021.10.04.463034.
[40] Paul Robustelli, Stefano Piana, and David E. Shaw. Developing a molecular dynamics force field
for both folded and disordered protein states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115
(21):E4758–E4766, May 2018. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1800690115. URL
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.1800690115.
[41] Kresten Lindorff-Larsen, Stefano Piana, Kim Palmo, Paul Maragakis, John L. Klepeis, Ron O.
Dror, and David E. Shaw. Improved side-chain torsion potentials for the Amber ff99SB protein
force field: Improved Protein Side-Chain Potentials. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinfor-
matics, 78(8):1950–1958, June 2010. ISSN 08873585. doi: 10.1002/prot.22711. URL https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/prot.22711.
[42] Chuan Tian, Koushik Kasavajhala, Kellon A. A. Belfon, Lauren Raguette, He Huang, Angela N.
Migues, John Bickel, Yuzhang Wang, Jorge Pincay, Qin Wu, and Carlos Simmerling. ff19SB: Amino-
Acid-Specific Protein Backbone Parameters Trained against Quantum Mechanics Energy Surfaces in
Solution. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 16(1):528–552, January 2020. ISSN 1549-
9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00591. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.
1021/acs.jctc.9b00591.
[43] Luciano A. Abriata and Matteo Dal Peraro. Assessment of transferable forcefields for protein simu-
lations attests improved description of disordered states and secondary structure propensities, and
hints at multi-protein systems as the next challenge for optimization. Computational and Structural
Biotechnology Journal, 19:2626–2636, 2021. ISSN 20010370. doi: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.050. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2001037021001628.
[44] Paulo C. T. Souza, Riccardo Alessandri, Jonathan Barnoud, Sebastian Thallmair, Ignacio Faustino,
Fabian Grünewald, Ilias Patmanidis, Haleh Abdizadeh, Bart M. H. Bruininks, Tsjerk A. Wassenaar,
Peter C. Kroon, Josef Melcr, Vincent Nieto, Valentina Corradi, Hanif M. Khan, Jan Domański,
Matti Javanainen, Hector Martinez-Seara, Nathalie Reuter, Robert B. Best, Ilpo Vattulainen, Luca
Monticelli, Xavier Periole, D. Peter Tieleman, Alex H. de Vries, and Siewert J. Marrink.
Mar-
tini 3: a general purpose force field for coarse-grained molecular dynamics. Nature Methods, 18
48
==PAGE:55==
(4):382–388, April 2021. ISSN 1548-7091, 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/s41592-021-01098-3. URL
http://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01098-3.
[45] F. Emil Thomasen, Francesco Pesce, Mette Ahrensback Roesgaard, Giulio Tesei, and Kresten
Lindorff-Larsen. Improving Martini 3 for Disordered and Multidomain Proteins. Journal of Chem-
ical Theory and Computation, page acs.jctc.1c01042, April 2022.
ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c01042. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.
1c01042.
[46] Robert B. Best, Wenwei Zheng, and Jeetain Mittal. Balanced Protein–Water Interactions Improve
Properties of Disordered Proteins and Non-Specific Protein Association. Journal of Chemical Theory
and Computation, 10(11):5113–5124, November 2014. ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/
ct500569b. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ct500569b.
[47] Matías R. Machado, Exequiel E. Barrera, Florencia Klein, Martín Sóñora, Steffano Silva, and Sergio
Pantano. The SIRAH 2.0 Force Field: Altius, Fortius, Citius. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation, 15(4):2719–2733, April 2019. ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00006.
URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00006.
[48] Florencia Klein, Exequiel E. Barrera, and Sergio Pantano. Assessing SIRAH’s Capability to Simulate
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins and Peptides. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 17
(2):599–604, February 2021. ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00948. URL
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00948.
[49] Ulrich Essmann, Lalith Perera, Max L. Berkowitz, Tom Darden, Hsing Lee, and Lee G. Pedersen. A
smooth particle mesh Ewald method. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 103(19):8577–8593, Novem-
ber 1995. ISSN 0021-9606, 1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/1.470117. URL http://aip.scitation.
org/doi/10.1063/1.470117.
[50] H. J. C. Berendsen, J. P. M. Postma, W. F. van Gunsteren, A. DiNola, and J. R. Haak. Molecular dy-
namics with coupling to an external bath. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 81(8):3684–3690, Octo-
ber 1984. ISSN 0021-9606, 1089-7690. doi: 10.1063/1.448118. URL http://aip.scitation.
org/doi/10.1063/1.448118.
[51] Giovanni Bussi, Davide Donadio, and Michele Parrinello. Canonical sampling through velocity
rescaling. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 126(1):014101, January 2007. ISSN 0021-9606, 1089-
7690.
doi: 10.1063/1.2408420.
URL http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.
2408420.
[52] M. Parrinello and A. Rahman. Polymorphic transitions in single crystals: A new molecular dynamics
method. Journal of Applied Physics, 52(12):7182–7190, December 1981. ISSN 0021-8979, 1089-7550.
doi: 10.1063/1.328693. URL http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.328693.
[53] T. Schneider and E. Stoll. Molecular-dynamics study of a three-dimensional one-component model
for distortive phase transitions. Physical Review B, 17(3):1302–1322, February 1978. ISSN 0163-
1829.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.17.1302.
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevB.17.1302.
[54] Kim-Hung Chow and David M. Ferguson. Isothermal-isobaric molecular dynamics simulations
with Monte Carlo volume sampling. Computer Physics Communications, 91(1-3):283–289, Septem-
ber 1995. ISSN 00104655. doi: 10.1016/0010-4655(95)00059-O. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/001046559500059O.
49
==PAGE:56==
[55] Gareth A. Tribello, Massimiliano Bonomi, Davide Branduardi, Carlo Camilloni, and Giovanni Bussi.
PLUMED 2: New feathers for an old bird. Computer Physics Communications, 185(2):604–613,
February 2014. ISSN 00104655. doi: 10.1016/j.cpc.2013.09.018. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0010465513003196.
[56] Fabio Pietrucci and Alessandro Laio. A Collective Variable for the Efficient Exploration of Protein
Beta-Sheet Structures: Application to SH3 and GB1. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa-
tion, 5(9):2197–2201, September 2009. ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/ct900202f. URL
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ct900202f.
[57] Tsjerk A Wassenaar, Helgi I Ingol, and Siewert J Marrink. Computational Lipidomics with insane:
A Versatile Tool for Generating Custom Membranes for Molecular Simulations. J. Chem. Theory
Comput., page 12, 2015.
[58] Robert T. McGibbon, Kyle A. Beauchamp, Matthew P. Harrigan, Christoph Klein, Jason M. Swails,
Carlos X. Hernández, Christian R. Schwantes, Lee-Ping Wang, Thomas J. Lane, and Vijay S. Pande.
MDTraj: A Modern Open Library for the Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Trajectories. Biophysical
Journal, 109(8):1528–1532, October 2015. ISSN 00063495. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.08.015. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006349515008267.
[59] William Humphrey, Andrew Dalke, and Klaus Schulten.
VMD: Visual molecular dynamics.
Journal of Molecular Graphics, 14(1):33–38, February 1996.
ISSN 02637855.
doi: 10.1016/
0263-7855(96)00018-5. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
0263785596000185.
[60] Aleksander Kuriata, Valentin Iglesias, Jordi Pujols, Mateusz Kurcinski, Sebastian Kmiecik, and Sal-
vador Ventura. Aggrescan3D (A3D) 2.0: prediction and engineering of protein solubility. Nucleic
Acids Research, 47(W1):W300–W307, July 2019. ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkz321. URL https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/W1/W300/5485072.
[61] Vladimir Voynov, Naresh Chennamsetty, Veysel Kayser, Bernhard Helk, and Bernhardt L. Trout.
Predictive tools for stabilization of therapeutic proteins. mAbs, 1(6):580–582, November 2009. ISSN
1942-0862, 1942-0870. doi: 10.4161/mabs.1.6.9773. URL http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.4161/mabs.1.6.9773.
[62] Jeremy M. Berg, John L. Tymoczko, Gregory J. Gatto, and Lubert Stryer. Biochemistry. W.H. Freeman
& Company, a Macmillan Education Imprint, New York, eighth edition edition, 2015. ISBN 978-1-
4641-2610-9.
[63] EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific Opinion on the safety
of “rapeseed protein isolate” as a Novel Food ingredient. EFSA Journal, 11(10), October 2013. ISSN
18314732, 18314732. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3420. URL https://data.europa.eu/doi/
10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3420.
[64] Marcel Skejovic Joehnke. Effects of Processing on the In Vitro Digestibility of Napin Proteins from
Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.). PhD Thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2017.
[65] Dagmar Klostermeier and Markus G Rudolph. Biophysical Chemistry. page 793.
[66] C. E. Barnett. Some Applications of Wave-length Turbidimetry in the Infrared. The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry, 46(1):69–75, January 1942. ISSN 0092-7325, 1541-5740. doi: 10.1021/j150415a009.
URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/j150415a009.
50
==PAGE:57==
[67] Understanding
the
Concept
of
Dynamic
Light
Scattering.
White
paper,
An-
ton
Paar
GmbH.
URL
https://www.anton-paar.com/corp-en/
services-support/document-finder/application-reports/
white-paper-understanding-the-concept-of-dynamic-light-scattering/.
[68] Lea Martin, Sascha Schwarz, and Dennis Breitsprecher. Prometheus: the platform for analyzing
protein stability and thermal unfolding of proteins. page 10.
[69] Abraham. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay. Smoothing and Differentiation of Data by Simplified Least
Squares Procedures. Analytical Chemistry, 36(8):1627–1639, July 1964. ISSN 0003-2700, 1520-
6882.
doi: 10.1021/ac60214a047.
URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/
ac60214a047.
[70] James A. Maier, Carmenza Martinez, Koushik Kasavajhala, Lauren Wickstrom, Kevin E. Hauser, and
Carlos Simmerling. ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters
from ff99SB. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 11(8):3696–3713, August 2015. ISSN
1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255. URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255.
[71] Rafael Ramis, Joaquín Ortega-Castro, Rodrigo Casasnovas, Laura Mariño, Bartolomé Vilanova,
Miquel Adrover, and Juan Frau. A Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Approach to the Study
of the Intrinsically Disordered Protein α-Synuclein. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling,
59(4):1458–1471, April 2019. ISSN 1549-9596, 1549-960X. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00921. URL
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00921.
[72] Jagdish Suresh Patel and F. Marty Ytreberg. Fast Calculation of Protein–Protein Binding Free Ener-
gies Using Umbrella Sampling with a Coarse-Grained Model. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation, 14(2):991–997, February 2018. ISSN 1549-9618, 1549-9626. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00660.
URL https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00660.
[73] Suk Kyu Ko, Carolin Berner, Alina Kulakova, Markus Schneider, Iris Antes, Gerhard Winter, Pernille
Harris, and Günther H.J. Peters. Investigation of the pH-dependent aggregation mechanisms of
GCSF using low resolution protein characterization techniques and advanced molecular dynam-
ics simulations. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 20:1439–1455, 2022. ISSN
20010370. doi: 10.1016/j.csbj.2022.03.012. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S2001037022000873.
[74] Yuen Ki Ng, Nastaran N. Tajoddin, Pablo M. Scrosati, and Lars Konermann. Mechanism of Thermal
Protein Aggregation: Experiments and Molecular Dynamics Simulations on the High-Temperature
Behavior of Myoglobin. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 125(48):13099–13110, December 2021.
ISSN 1520-6106, 1520-5207. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c07210. URL https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c07210.
[75] Therese M. Gerbich and Amy S. Gladfelter. Moving beyond disease to function: Physiological roles
for polyglutamine-rich sequences in cell decisions. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 69:120–126,
April 2021. ISSN 09550674. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2021.01.003. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S095506742100003X.
[76] Yanniv Dorone, Steven Boeynaems, Eduardo Flores, Benjamin Jin, Shannon Hateley, Flavia Bossi,
Elena Lazarus, Janice G. Pennington, Emiel Michiels, Mathias De Decker, Katlijn Vints, Pieter
Baatsen, George W. Bassel, Marisa S. Otegui, Alex S. Holehouse, Moises Exposito-Alonso, Shahar
Sukenik, Aaron D. Gitler, and Seung Y. Rhee. A prion-like protein regulator of seed germination
undergoes hydration-dependent phase separation. Cell, 184(16):4284–4298.e27, August 2021. ISSN
00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.06.009. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0092867421007108.
51
==PAGE:58==
A
Multiple sequence alignments
Multiple sequence alignments of the seven different napin variants and the five different cru-
ciferin variants from rapeseed presented in table 1.1. Sequences are from the annotated entries
in UniprotKB. Sequence alignment performed using Clustal Omega.
A.1
Alignments
Napins
2SSI_BRANA      ------------------------------------------QPQKCQREFQQEQHLRAC
18
2SSE_BRANA      MANKLFLVSATLALFFLLTNASVYRTVVEVDEDDATNPAGPFRIPKCRKEFQQAQHLRAC
60
2SS4_BRANA      MANKLFLVSATLAFFFLLTNASIYRTIVEVDEDDATNPAGPFRIPKCRKEFQQAQHLKAC
60
2SS3_BRANA      -------------------------------------SAGPFRIPKCRKEFQQAQHLRAC
23
2SS1_BRANA      --------------------------------------------PKCRKEFQQAQHLKAC
16
2SSB_BRANA      MANKLFLVSATLAFFFLLTNASIYRTVVEFDEDDATNPAGPFRIPKCRKEFQQAQHLKAC
60
2SS2_BRANA      MANKLFLVSATLAFFFLLTNASIYRTVVEFDEDDATDSAGPFRIPKCRKEFQQAQHLRAC
60
                                                             **::**** ***:**
2SSI_BRANA      QQWIRQQLAGSP---------------------FQSGPQEGPWLREQCCNELYQEDQVCV
57
2SSE_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQPGGGSGPSWTLDGEFDFEDDVENQQQGPQQRPPPPQQCCNELHQEEPLCV
120
2SS4_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQSG--SGPSWTLDGEFDFEDDMEN-PQGPQQRPPLLQQCCNELHQEEPLCV
117
2SS3_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQSG--SGP------------------QGPQQRPPLLQQCCNELHQEEPLCV
63
2SS1_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQSG--GGPSWTLDGEFDFEDDMEK--QGPQQRPPLHQQYCNELQQEEPLCV
72
2SSB_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQSG--SGPSWTLDGEFDFEDDMEN-PQGPQQRPPLLQQCCNELHQEEPLCV
117
2SS2_BRANA      QQWLHKQAMQSG--GGPSWTLDGEFDFEDDMEN-PQGPQQRPPLLQQCCNELHQEEPLCV
117
                ***:::*                            .***: *   :* **** **: :**
2SSI_BRANA      CPTLKQAAKSVRVQ----------GQHGPFQSTRIYQIAKNLPNVCNMKQIGTCPFIAIP
107
2SSE_BRANA      CPTLKGASKAVRQQVRQQQGQQMQGQQMQQVISRVYQTATHLPRVCNIRQVSICPFQKTM
180
2SS4_BRANA      CPTLKGASKAVKQQVRQQQGQ--QGQQLQQVISRIYQTATHLPKVCNIPQVSVCPFQKTM
175
2SS3_BRANA      CPTLKGASRAVKQQVRQQQGQ--QGQQLQQVISRIYQTATHLPKVCNIPQVSVCPFQKTM
121
2SS1_BRANA      CPTLRGASKAVKQQIQQQEQQ--QGK--QQMVNRIYQTATHLPKVCNIPQVSVCPFQKTM
128
2SSB_BRANA      CPTLKGASKAVKQQIQQQGQQ--QGK--LQMVSRIYQTATHLPKVCKIPQVSVCPFQKTM
173
2SS2_BRANA      CPTLKGASKAVKQQIQQQGQQ--QGK--QQMVSRIYQTATHLPKVCNIPQVSVCPFQKTM
173
                ****: *:::*: *          *:      .*:** *.:**.**:: *:. ***    
2SSI_BRANA      FFP---
110
2SSE_BRANA      PGPGFY
186
2SS4_BRANA      PGPSY-
180
2SS3_BRANA      PGPS--
125
2SS1_BRANA      PGPSY-
133
2SSB_BRANA      PGPSY-
178
2SS2_BRANA      PGPSY-
178
                  *   
52
==PAGE:59==
Cruciferin
CRU3_BRANA      MVKVPHLLVATFGVLLVLNGCLARQSLGVPPQLGNACNLDNLDVLQPTETIKSEAGRVEY
60
CRU4_BRANA      -MGPTSLLSFFFTFLTLFHGFTA-------QQWPNECQLDQLNALEPSQIIKSEGGRIEV
52
CRU2_BRANA      MARLSSLLYFSITVLIFLHGSTA-------QQFPNECQLDQLNALEPSHVLKAEAGRIEV
53
CRUA_BRANA      MARLSSLLSFSLALLTFLHGSTA-------QQFPNECQLDQLNALEPSHVLKAEAGRIEV
53
CRU1_BRANA      MARLSSLLSFSLALLIFLHGSTA-------QQFPNECQLDQLNALEPSHVLKAEAGRIEV
53
                      **   : .* .::*  *        *  * *:**:*:.*:*:. :*:*.**:* 
CRU3_BRANA      WDHNNPQIRCAGVSVSRVIIEQGGLYLPTFFSSPKISYVVQGMGISGRVVPGCAETFMDS
120
CRU4_BRANA      WDHHAPQLRCSGFAFERFVIEPQGLYLPTFLNAGKLTFVVHGHALMGKVTPGCAETFNDS
112
CRU2_BRANA      WDHHAPQLRCSGVSFVRYIIESQGLYLPSFLNTANVSFVAKGQGLMGRVVPGCAETFQDS
113
CRUA_BRANA      WDHHAPQLRCSGVSFVRYIIESKGLYLPSFFSTARLSFVAKGEGLMGRVV-LCAETFQDS
112
CRU1_BRANA      WDHHAPQLRCSGVSFVRYIIESKGLYLPSFFSTAKLSFVAKGEGLMGRVVPGCAETFQDS
113
                ***: **:**:*.:. * :**  *****:*:.: .:::*.:* .: *:*.  ***** **
CRU3_BRANA      QPMQGQQQGQPWQGQQGQQGQQGQQ---GQQGQQGQQGQ-QGQQGQQGQQGQQQQGFRDM
176
CRU4_BRANA      PVFGQ-GQGQEQG----------------QG-----------------QGQGQGQGFRDM
138
CRU2_BRANA      SVFQP-GSGSPFGEGQGQ-GQQGQGQGQGQGQGKGQQGQGKGQQGQSQGQQGQGQGFRDM
171
CRUA_BRANA      SVFQP-SGGSPFGEGQGQ-GQQGQGQGH-QGQGQGQQG-----QQGQQGQQSQGQGFRDM
164
CRU1_BRANA      SVFQP-SGGSPSGEGQGQ-GQQGQGQGH-QGQGQGQQG-----QQGQQGQQSQGQGFRDM
165
                  :     *.                   *                      * ******
CRU3_BRANA      HQKVEHVRHGDIIAITAGSSHWIYNTGDQPLVIICLLDIANYQNQLDRNPRTFRLAGNNP
236
CRU4_BRANA      HQKVEHLRSGDTIATPPGVAQWFYNNGNEPLILVAAADIANNLNQLDRNLRPFLLAGNNP
198
CRU2_BRANA      HQKVEHIRSGDTIATHPGVAQWFYNNGNQPLVIVAVMDLASHQNQLDRNPSQFYLAGKNP
231
CRUA_BRANA      HQKVEHIRTGDTIATHPGVAQWFYNDGNQPLVIVSVLDLASHQNQLDRNPRPFYLAGNNP
224
CRU1_BRANA      HQKVEHIRTGDTIATHPGVAQWFYNDGNQPLVIVSVLDLASHQNQLDRNPRPFYLAGNNP
225
                ******:* ** **   * ::*:** *::**:::.  *:*.  ******   * ***:**
CRU3_BRANA      QGGSQ---QQQQQQQNMLSGFDPQVLAQALKIDVRLAQELQNQQDSRGNIVRVKGPFQVV
293
CRU4_BRANA      QGQQWLQGRQQQKQNNIFNGFAPQILAQAFKISVETAQKLQNQQVNRGNIVKVQGQFGVI
258
CRU2_BRANA      QGQSWLHGRGQQPQNNILNGFSPEVLAQAFKIDVRTAQQLQNQQDNRGNIVRVQGPFGVI
291
CRUA_BRANA      QGQVWIEGREQQPQKNILNGFTPEVLAKAFKIDVRTAQQLQNQQDNRGNIIRVQGPFSVI
284
CRU1_BRANA      QGQVWIEGREQQPQKNILNGFTPEVLAKAFKIDVRTAQQLQNQQDNRGNIIRVQGPFSVI
285
                **      : ** *:*::.** *::**:*:**.*. **:***** .****::*:* * *:
CRU3_BRANA      RPPLRQPYESEQWRHPRGPPQSPQDNGLEETICSMRTHENIDDPARADVYKPNLGRVTSV
353
CRU4_BRANA      RPPLRQGQ--------GGQQPQEEGNGLEETLCTMRCTENLDDPSSADVYKPSLGYISTL
310
CRU2_BRANA      RPPLKSQR-----------PQETEANGLEETICSARCTDNLDDPSNADVYKPQLGYISIL
340
CRUA_BRANA      RPPLRSQR-----------PQE-EVNGLEETICSARCTDNLDDPSNADVYKPQLGYISTL
332
CRU1_BRANA      RPPLRSQR-----------PQETEVNGLEETICSARCTDNLDDPSNADVYKPQLGYISTL
334
                ****:.               . : ******:*: *  :*:***: ******.** :: :
CRU3_BRANA      NSYTLPILQYIRLSATRGILQGNAMVLPKYNMNANEILYCTQGQARIQVVNDNGQNVLDQ
413
CRU4_BRANA      NSYNLPILRFLRLSALRGSIHNNAMVLPQWNVNANAALYVTKGKAHIQNVNDNGQRVFDQ
370
CRU2_BRANA      NSYDLPILRVLRLSALRGSIRQNAMVLPQWKSKSNAVLYVTDGEAQIQVVNDNGDRVFDG
400
CRUA_BRANA      NSYDLPILRFLRLSALRGSIRQNAMVLPQWNANANAVLYVTDGEAHVQVVNDNGDRVFDG
392
CRU1_BRANA      NSYDLPILRFLRLSALRGSIRQNAMVLPQWNANANAVLYVTDGEAHVQVVNDNGDRVFDG
394
                *** ****: :**** ** :: ******::: ::*  ** *.*:*::* *****:.*:* 
CRU3_BRANA      QVQKGQLVVIPQGFAYVVQSHQNNFEWISFKTNANAMVSTLAGRTSALRALPLEVITNAF
473
CRU4_BRANA      EISKGQLLVVPQGFAVVKRATSQQFQWIEFKSNDNAQINTLAGRTSVMRGLPLEVISNGY
430
CRU2_BRANA      QVSQGQLLSIPQGFSVVKRATSDQFRWIEFKTNANAQINTLAGRTSVMRGLPLEVIANGY
460
CRUA_BRANA      QVSQGQLLSIPQGFSVVKRATSEQFRWIEFKTNANAQINTLAGRTSVLRGLPLEVISNGY
452
CRU1_BRANA      QVSQGQLLSIPQGFSVVKRATSEQFRWIEFKTNANAQINTLAGRTSVLRGLPLEVISNGY
454
                ::.:***: :****: * :: .::*.**.**:* ** :.*******.:*.******:*.:
CRU3_BRANA      QISLEEARRIKFNTLETTLTRARGGQPQLIEEIVEA
509
CRU4_BRANA      QISPQEARSVKFSTLETTLTQSSGPMGYGMPRVEA-
465
CRU2_BRANA      QISLEEARRVKFNTIETTLTHSSGPASYGRPRKADA
496
CRUA_BRANA      QISLEEARRVKFNTIETTLTHSSGPASYGGPRKADA
488
CRU1_BRANA      QISLEEARRVKFNTIETTLTHSSGPASYGGPRKADA
490
                *** :*** :**.*:*****:: *       .    
53
==PAGE:60==
A.2
Sequence identity matrices
Napin
2SSI_BRANA
2SSE_BRANA
2SS4_BRANA
2SS3_BRANA
2SS1_BRANA
2SSB_BRANA
2SS2_BRANA
2SSI_BRANA
2SSE_BRANA
2SS4_BRANA
2SS3_BRANA
2SS1_BRANA
2SSB_BRANA
2SS2_BRANA
100.0%
51.82%
52.29%
52.78%
51.92%
51.4%
53.27%
51.82%
100.0%
90.56%
90.4%
81.2%
85.96%
85.96%
52.29%
90.56%
100.0%
97.6%
89.47%
93.82%
92.7%
52.78%
90.4%
97.6%
100.0%
87.07%
90.24%
92.68%
51.92%
81.2%
89.47%
87.07%
100.0%
92.48%
93.98%
51.4%
85.96%
93.82%
90.24%
92.48%
100.0%
96.63%
53.27%
85.96%
92.7%
92.68%
93.98%
96.63%
100.0%
Cruciferin
CRU3_BRANA
CRU4_BRANA
CRU2_BRANA
CRUA_BRANA
CRU1_BRANA
CRU3_BRANA
CRU4_BRANA
CRU2_BRANA
CRUA_BRANA
CRU1_BRANA
100.0%
54.98%
58.49%
59.13%
59.5%
54.98%
100.0%
71.86%
71.3%
71.43%
58.49%
71.86%
100.0%
89.75%
90.0%
59.13%
71.3%
89.75%
100.0%
99.18%
59.5%
71.43%
90.0%
99.18%
100.0%
54
==PAGE:61==
B
Protein-Water scaling in SIRAH
A Python script for modifying a SIRAH topology file, to add scaled ϵij-parameters for all non-
bonded interactions between protein and water. Based on a similar script published by Thomasen
et al. [45] for modification of Martini topology files.
1 import argparse
2 parser.add_argument("-i", "--input", type=str)
3 parser.add_argument("-o", "--output", type=str)
4 parser.add_argument("-l", "--rescaling", type=float)
5 args = parser.parse_args()
6
7 topfile = args.input
8 outputfile = args.output
9 rescaling = args.rescaling
10
11 with open(topfile, 'r') as f:
12
toplines = f.readlines()
13
14 protein_beads = [ # [name, sigma, epsilon, type]
15
["C7Nk",
0.55,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
16
["C7Nm",
0.55,
3,
"hydrophilic"],
17
["GNz",
0.55,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
18
["GOz",
0.55,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
19
["C5N",
0.45,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
20
["C6O",
0.45,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
21
["P1S",
0.41,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
22
["P2P",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
23
["P5N",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
24
["GNn",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
25
["C1Ck",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
26
["P1O",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
27
["P4O",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
28
["GOn",
0.4,
0.55,
"hydrophilic"],
29
["C3Cr",
0.4,
0.35,
"hydrophilic"],
30
["C4Cd",
0.4,
0.35,
"hydrophilic"],
31
["C4Ce",
0.4,
0.35,
"hydrophilic"],
32
["A8P",
0.35,
0.55,
"aromatic"],
33
["A7N",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
34
["A5D",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
35
["A5E",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
36
["A3P",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
37
["A4O",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
38
["A1C",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
39
["A1Cw",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
40
["A2C",
0.35,
1.7,
"aromatic"],
55
==PAGE:62==
41
["P3Cn",
0.4,
0.35,
"hydrophobic"],
42
["P3Cq",
0.4,
0.35,
"hydrophobic"],
43
["Y6Cp",
0.42,
1,
"hydrophobic"],
44
["C2Cr",
0.42,
2,
"hydrophobic"],
45
["Y5Sx",
0.42,
2,
"hydrophobic"],
46
["Y1C",
0.42,
3,
"hydrophobic"],
47
["Y3Sm",
0.42,
3,
"hydrophobic"],
48
["Y4Cv",
0.42,
3,
"hydrophobic"],
49
["Y2Ca",
0.42,
2,
"backbone"],
50
["GC",
0.42,
0.55,
"backbone"],
51
["GN",
0.42,
0.55,
"backbone"],
52
["GO",
0.42,
0.55,
"backbone"],
53
["Y5Sz",
0.42,
2,
"???"]
54 ]
55
56 water_sigma = 0.42
57 water_epsilon = 0.55
58
59 types_to_mod = ["hydrophilic", "hydrophobic", "aromatic", "backbone", "???"
]
60
61 newlines = []
62
63 for i, topline in enumerate(toplines):
64
newlines.append(topline)
65
if "[ nonbond_params ]" in toplines[i-1]:
66
newlines.append("
;Rescaled PW interactions\n")
67
for protein_bead in protein_beads:
68
if protein_bead[3] in types_to_mod:
69
sigma = 0.5*(protein_bead[1] + water_sigma)
70
epsilon = (protein_bead[2] * water_epsilon)**0.5 *
rescaling
71
string = "
WT
{0}
1
{1}
{2}\n".format(
protein_bead[0], str(sigma)[:6], str(epsilon)[:6])
72
newlines.append(string)
73
74 with open(outputfile,'w') as f:
75
for line in newlines:
76
f.write(line)
56
==PAGE:63==
C
RMSD plots of CRU3 simulations
RMSD plots from the simulations of single CRU3 monomer with 150 mM NaCl, using a vari-
ety of force fields. The simulations are the same same as those for which the radii of gyration
distributions are given in figure 3.8.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [ns]
0
5
10
15
20
25
RMSD [Å]
ff99SB-disp
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [ns]
RMSD [Å]
ff19SB
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
0
5
10
15
20
25
RMSD [Å]
SIRAH =1.00
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
RMSD [Å]
SIRAH =1.05
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
0
5
10
15
20
25
RMSD [Å]
SIRAH =1.10
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
RMSD [Å]
SIRAH =1.15
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
0
5
10
15
20
25
RMSD [Å]
SIRAH =1.20
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Time [ns]
RMSD [Å]
Martini =1.10
57
==PAGE:64==
D
Fits to SLS data
Fitting parameters from the exponential fits to the times and signals at the times of the t0 and tI
points, as shown in figure 3.15. Note that fits were performed on the times in microseconds.
Temperature [°C]
Fitting parameters
Fits to t0
Fits to tI
a
b
a
b
60
7.58e+07
-5.92e-08
1.58e+09
-7.57e-08
65
7.93e+07
-1.02e-07
1.06e+09
-9.80e-08
70
8.44e+07
-1.64e-07
1.10e+09
-1.62e-07
75
5.25e+07
-1.46e-07
6.21e+08
-1.91e-07
80
4.84e+07
-1.85e-07
5.12e+08
-2.58e-07
90
2.64e+07
-1.65e-07
1.00e+08
-1.29e-07
58
