==PAGE:1==
Business Analytics
Master of Science in Engineering
Impact of remote work on Novo Nordisk workforce
MSc thesis
Maria Konstantina Papaioannou
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Maria Konstantina Papaioannou
Impact of remote work on Novo Nordisk workforce
MSc thesis, July 4, 2022
Supervisors:
Kathrin Kirchner
Christine Ipsen
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU Compute
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a major impact on how individuals work and inter-
act in many sectors of the the global economy, including large-scale enterprises. While
working from home was a notion that had been researched before the pandemic, it
appears that worldwide work constraints and rapid technological advancements has-
tened its growth. As a result, it appears that work from home is embedded in a
significant number of organizations around the world, even in the era post of the
pandemic.
Therefore, it is beneficial to study how large-company employees and
management have dealt with remote work during lock-downs, how they perceive the
current situation, and how they envision a future workplace. In order to accomplish
this, a survey was designed and distributed to Novo Nordisk personnel in both man-
aging and non-managing roles. Initially, all 10 production sites ( Bagsværd, Hillerød
and Kalundborg in Denmark, Algeria, France, Iran, Russia, Brazil, China and the
US) of the company were in scope, but responders were primarily from the regions of
Denmark and India. There were 220 participants in total, 29 of them in managerial po-
sitions. The analysis’ focus was on contrasting their experiences and answering two
research questions: how the adoption of remote work had impacted either group’s
productivity and whether managers had experienced remote work differently than
employees. The results indicate that the productivity remained unaffected from the
shift to remote work. Indian employees’ in particular, that reported long commuting
time while working at the oﬀice, productivity even increased during remote work.
This might be an indication that there is a correlation between long commuting time
while working on-site and increased productivity while working at home. In addition,
the results suggest that managers experienced remote work in a more negative way
than employees especially regarding their motivation and engagement- possibly as a
result of the manager’s role-leading nature. These results are also reflected in the
managers’ and employees’ idea of an ideal future workplace. Both of them envision
a hybrid work set-up post pandemic, where employees wish to work at the oﬀice 2
days per week and managers 3 days per week.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was written in completion of the requirements for the Master of Science
in Engineering in Business Analytics degree at the Department of Management Engi-
neering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU Management). The work presented
here was completed between January 3rd and July 4th, 2022, under the supervision
of:
• Kathrin Kirchner
Associate Professor, DTU Management
• Christine Ipsen
Associate Professor, DTU Management
Kongens Lyngby, July 3, 2022
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This MSc thesis is an individual project, however many people have been involved for
its completion, provided their feedback and offered their much appreciated support.
Therefore, I would like to firstly say a warm thank you to my supervisors, Kathrin
Kirchner and Christine Ipsen, Associate Professors in Technical University of Den-
mark for providing their valuable feedback and guidance. I would like to convey my
thanks to Kathrin in particular, for her trust and support during my time at DTU.
During my MSc studies, I had an excellent collaboration with her, and with her calm
and positive spirit,provided feedback and support whenever I needed.
In addition, I would like to warmly thank my team in Novo Nordisk, who gave
continuous feedback for the completion of this research. In particular, many thanks
to my manager Kim for guiding and empowering me. Being managed by him has
been a great learning and inspiring experience.
In addition, many thanks to my
colleagues Anne and Maira for supporting me in ensuring a high response rate in the
questionnaire and giving their valuable inputs.
Moreover, I would like to express my appreciation to all employees of Novo Nordisk
who took the time to answer the survey developed for this report. Each response
contributed to gaining a more concrete and valid overview of the studied topic.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family, friends and partner and state my
gratitude towards them. Their support, encouragement and faith in me throughout
not only the MSc but also my BSc programs have been valuable to my psychology,
performance and motivation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature analysis
5
2.1
Experience of employees in managing position on remote work
. . . .
5
2.2
Experience of employees in non managing position on remote work . .
7
2.3
Remote work landscape before COVID-19 pandemic . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
The hybrid working environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Responders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
17
4.1
Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Gender of participants per site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
Commuting time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
How was the productivity of employees affected by remote work . . . .
21
4.3
Employees in managing positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Employees in non managing position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Comparison of remote work experience between workers and managers
28
4.5.1
Site specific insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Limitations and future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Conclusion and outlook
35
A
Survey
37
B
Timeline
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The concept of remote work whereby individuals carry out their job duties outside of
the oﬀice facilities [1] and interact online by utilizing technology [2] has emerged since
1970[3]. In order to cut expenses and provide employees with more flexibility while
also saving time and energy, several organizations have implemented remote work
practice [4]. Although it may not necessarily increase productivity, this adjustment
was seen to be positive for staff morale[4].
Although the practice of remote work was known before, it became broadly
adopted in 2020, 2 months after the first known case of COVID-19 was detected
in Wuhan [5].
Health authorities identified social distancing as the most eﬀicient
way to prevent the spread of the virus[6] and thus free movement of individuals was
restricted [4]. The restrictions had immediate implications on the working environ-
ment of individuals globally [6]. In particular, in order for organizations to continue
operating, employees were required to switch to remote work [4]. Employees were
completing their tasks as before and interacting with their colleagues only now every
activity was switched to online [4]. As a result, home, which was previously a place
of comfort, became the workspace overnight. Hence, this shift from traditional to re-
mote work setup was immediate and did not include any training of the employees[4].
This brought a variety of challenges, including blurred lines between work and home
life, diversions in case more than one workers or children were in the same house-
hold, but also benefits, such as flexibility and independence of the employee[4]. Thus,
the social and professional consequences of the pandemic were viewed by researchers
as ”a worldwide natural experiment” [7] that provided scientists with unique study
opportunities and sparked numerous studies [2].
Among other organizations, Novo Nordisk has adopted remote work practice dur-
ing the different phases of the COVID-19 pandemic. Novo Nordisk is the case or-
ganization for this study and is a Danish pharmaceutical firm founded in 1923 and
headquartered in Bagsvaerd, Denmark. The company’s main products are aimed at
diabetes and obesity treatment [8]. Their products are used by over 29 million people,
the company occupies over 48.000 employees across the globe and is manufacturing
over 50% of the world’s insulin[8].
The company’s production sites are located in 10 regions:
• Bagsværd, Denmark
• Blida, Algeria
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Chartres, France
• Clayton, US
• Hillerød, Denmark
• Kaluga, Russia
• Kalundborg, Denmark
• Monte Claros, Brazil
• Tianjin, China
• Teheran, Iran
These production sites are in close collaboration with the Global Business Service
department (GBS) of Novo Nordisk, which is located in Bangalore, India, and is the
department that triggered this study.
Specifically, once the virus was brought under control by widespread vaccination,
the so-called ”return to normal” employment environment reappeared. The manage-
ment of Novo Nordisk encouraged employees to spend the majority of the workweek
on-site. However, the workforce of the organization that does not occupy manage-
ment roles was reluctant to leave the remote work arrangement, especially in places
like India where the daily commute might last up to three hours. Several questions
are raised by the supervisors’ eagerness to return to on-site work and the employees
in non-managerial positions’ opposition.
1.1
Purpose statement
Therefore, the present study aims to make three contributions. Firstly, leveraging
the unique context of COVID-19, it seeks to offer insights into the experience of
Novo Nordisk employees regarding remote work and its future within the organization.
Second, the study seeks to answer the following research questions, that were indicated
by reviewed literature:
• How was the productivity of the Novo Nordisk workforce, both employees and
managers included, affected by the adoption of remote work?
• Was the managers’ experience with remote work different than that of the em-
ployees in non-managing positions?
Finally, based on the findings and possible patterns identified by the analysis, it
attempts to conclude on the experience of managers and employees on remote and
how they envision a future workplace and make recommendations for Novo Nordisk.
Therefore, a survey was designed and shared with the employees in Novo Nordisk
located in the 10 production sites of the company and India.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Learning objectives
3
1.2
Learning objectives
In the section below, the learning objectives that were achieved for the completion of
this report and its timeline are presented.
For the development of the present study the following learning objectives were
achieved:
1. Firstly, a complex problem that arose in the daily work life in Novo Nordisk,
that of the unwillingness of Indian employees to return to the oﬀice, was defined
as the topic of the study. That problem was then put into a broader context and
was formulated into the investigation of remote work experience of employees
in managing and non-managing positions that are employed in Novo Nordisk
and are located in the production sites and India.
2. The scope of this problem was clarified by clearly formulating and expressing
two research questions the study would focus on.
3. Once the scope was concise, the planning for the completion of the report took
place.
4. Using sources from scientific literature and knowledge gained from my MSc
studies, a survey was identified as the most eﬀicient way of gathering data on
the topic and was designed. After its development, feedback from experts was
received and 2 iterations were made in order for it to give valid insights.
5. Utilizing digital tools suitable for data analysis (Tableau, Microsoft Excel, and
Matlab) the plots were created.
6. Evaluation of the insights the plots gave, comparison with the reviewed litera-
ture, and answer to the research questions followed.
7. The knowledge and insights were then communicated through a written report
and an oral presentation of 30 min that included questions. In these, the use of
written and oral English language was also tested.
8. The conclusion of the report included critical thinking and reflections that
helped to highlight both the report’s limitations and its potential for further
study.
All the above were done in an ethical context since the anonymity of all sensi-
tive data gathered was ensured. Finally, this thesis is an individual project that is
completed through autonomous and consistent work.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature analysis
From the studies that have been reviewed for the completion of this report, some
aimed to map the landscape of remote work and identify its benefits and drawbacks
[9–11] and others were angled to examine and determine how different groups, such as
employees in leadership positions and employees in non-managing positions, women
and men, professionals in different countries, etc. perceived remote work. [11, 12].
2.1
Experience of employees in managing position on
remote work
More specifically, according to reviewed literature [12–14], there is a mismatch be-
tween managers’ and employees’ in non-managing roles perspectives on remote work
both prior and post pandemic. Relevant literature [7, 12, 15, 16] suggests that there
is a wide trend of extensive managerial resistance to employees primarily working
from home post pandemic and captures their perspective [11–13]. At the same time,
the trend for employees that do not occupy managing positions is different. They are
willing to adopt fully remote or hybrid work model long term [13, 14] since they be-
lieve it carries a lot of advantages [11, 13]. In a hybrid working setup, employees have
the flexibility to work remotely some days of the work week, as long as technology
and management support it [13].
Kirchner et al. in their article ”COVID-19 Leadership Challenges in Knowledge
Work” Kirchner et al. focused on the experience that employees in managing posi-
tions experienced remote work. In particular, in the context of this study, a survey
was designed that was distributed to professionals internationally. The survey was
accessible from the 21st of March until the 11th of May 2020, indicating that the first
lock-down was starting to end and schools, shopping, and other facilities began to re-
open. The dataset the study utilized for the analysis included 1053 Danish employees
and 290 managers. According to the results of the analysis, managers had diﬀiculties
in organizing their work and communicating with the employees. In addition, the
employees in supervising positions reported an increase in the number of meetings
they attended throughout the work day compared to when they worked from home,
as well as fewer breaks and hence a drop in productivity.
Hence, the findings of
the study indicated that remote work has been a more challenging experience for
managers than for employees.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature analysis
Furthermore, Parker et al. for their article ”Remote Managers Are Having Trust
Issues” published in Harvard Analytics Review, conducted a study on the rise of
the pandemic, by designing and sharing a survey with 1200 workers that have ex-
perienced remote work in different industries (manufacturing, science, real estate,
education, and financial services). In the article, it is highlighted that all partici-
pants in supervising position were untrained and inexperienced in distance managing,
which requires a different skill set than face-to-face management. Thus, 40% of them
expressed low self-confidence in their distance managing abilities. In addition, the
results of the study indicate, as the title of the article suggests, that 40% of them
that completed the survey, were experiencing diﬀiculties in their remote management
role and part of them was due to mistrust they felt towards the personnel they were
managing [12]. The article also touches upon the performance of the employees as
evaluated by their managers. In the article, it is stated that 38% of managers believe
that remote workers usually perform worse than those who work in an oﬀice, with
22% being unsure. Lastly, the study includes the perspective of professionals in non-
managing positions. According to the article, the feeling of mistrust managers felt
was perceived by their teams who stated that they were feeling the negative effects of
it. Specifically, 11% of them stated that they had a feeling of being micro-managed,
and 20% of them, that they felt they were expected to be available all day and answer
calls or texts immediately. The study concludes that remote work is here to stay and
proposes 5 ways of moving towards the hybrid working set-up which mostly includes
the training of the managers on how to perform distant managing.
The issues raised in the articles mentioned above are supported by the study of
J. Sahadi for the article ”How managers really feel about remote work,” which was
published in CNN Business in 2021. Sahadi spoke with professionals in supervisory
roles in a variety of industries, including financial consulting, legal, and software
development firms. The following are the challenges that the managers experienced
when their teams were fully working remotely:
• Personnel availability. Because some of the team members were away from their
computers and engaged in personal activities such as errands, several of the
questioned supervisors had diﬀiculty contacting them. Employees performing
personal tasks during working hours, according to the author, is a drawback of
the flexibility that remote work provides.
• The workplace environment was generally degraded while fully working from
home according to interviewed managers. Unstable internet connections and a
noisy background during meetings were cited as problems of working from home
in the article. Thus, following the pandemic, 40% of the supervisors queried
stated that they would like employees to return to the oﬀice on certain days of
the week because they ensure that everyone is connected to a stable WiFi, that
they have the necessary equipment and a quiet place to take a call.
• Spontaneous conversations were lost. The fact that unplanned activities among
colleagues were naturally eliminated while fully working from home was also
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Experience of employees in non managing position on remote work
7
mentioned in the article. Most of the managers interviewed commented on the
loss of spontaneous brainstorming during coffee breaks, icebreaker discussions,
and the opportunity to ask a quick questions to their colleagues. The absence
of informal activities has immediate implications on a variety of features of
a company.
Firstly, onboarding new team members become more complex,
and new employees may feel less connected and integrated than senior team
members. This could also lead to roles’ ambiguity [9] both for new as well as
In addition these employees miss the ”observe and learn” experience that work
on site provides. In addition, as it is highlighted by one of the interviewees
in the article, the loss of informal exchange of information compromises the
productivity of employees to an extent, since ”the instant you have to pick up
a phone or write a message you’re wasting valuable time.” [13]
The findings mentioned above are in accordance with the article ”Why the return
at the oﬀice is not working” by Molla R[14].
In the article, it is mentioned that
managers believe that working at the oﬀice is beneficial for encouraging creativity
and innovation.
2.2
Experience of employees in non managing
position on remote work
On the other hand, the literature argues that individuals in non-management roles
are planning to embrace the remote or hybrid work paradigm indefinitely since it
allows them to work where and when they are most productive [17].
This is further elaborated in the article ”How managers really feel about remote work”,
where Sahadi also included the perspective of employees of various organizations
that do not hold managerial roles as mentioned above. In the interviews, employees
highlight that the majority of tasks they are responsible for, are completed by digital
tools and thus they are ”in front of the computer 90% anyway”. In addition, they
state that they prefer performing their tasks at their own pace and order, rather than
in a segmented and strict manner[13]. In this sense, they support that working at the
oﬀice carries mostly disadvantages such as long commuting time and loss of work-life
balance.
This is also supported by the article ”Why the return at the oﬀice is not working”
by Molla R. published in 2021. The author mentions that after two years of working
remotely, workers have developed their expectations about how to spend their time,
and spending time commuting is less than desirable [14].
In addition, they state
that they prefer performing their tasks at their own pace and order, rather than in
a segmented and strict manner[13]. In this sense, they support that working at the
oﬀice carries mostly disadvantages such as long commuting time and loss of work-life
balance.
This is also supported by the article ”Why the return at the oﬀice is not working”
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Literature analysis
by Molla R. published in 2021. The author mentions that after two years of working
remotely, workers have developed their expectations about how to spend their time,
and spending time commuting is less than desirable [14]. The author also outlines
that employees have struggled to adapt to remote work when the pandemic burst and
after they found the advantages it carries, such as the escape from commute, they
are unwilling to shift back to traditional working on-site 5 days a week. However,
the author indicates that employees would like to work at the oﬀice 2 days per week
for socializing with their colleagues. This is not in accordance with the managers
who wish that employees return to the oﬀice at least 3 days per week. In the article,
it is concluded that the employees’ main argument is that they are just as or even
more productive at home and apart from their social needs, which can be satisfied
by working at the oﬀice 2 days per week, they no longer understand the role that the
oﬀice plays.
In the article, it is concluded that the employees’ main argument is that they are just
as or even more productive at home and apart from their social needs, which can be
satisfied by working at the oﬀice 2 days per week, they no longer understand the role
that the oﬀice plays.
The fact that working remotely carries significant advantages is also concluded in the
article ”Six Key Advantages and Disadvantages of Working from Home in Europe
during COVID-19” by Ipsen et al. Through a survey answered by 5748 knowledge
professionals located in 29 European countries, the study identifies the advantages
and disadvantages of remote work and groups them into 3 factors[11]. The primary
benefits of WFH are represented by the factors of better work-life balance, increased
productivity, and more work control, whereas the disadvantages can be grouped into
home oﬀice constraints, work uncertainties, and inadequate tools. In addition, the
authors analyze how the characteristics of the responders relate to these factors. For
instance, in the article, it is stated that as expected, employees who have children
reported a low level of productivity during remote work. In this study, the authors
state that according to their analysis, there are more advantages than disadvantages
to working remotely, and thus remote work was perceived by most of the responders
as a positive experience.
2.3
Remote work landscape before COVID-19
pandemic
An interesting point raised by reviewed literature is that remote work was considered
a viable work practice and its advantages and limitations were studied long before
the outbreak of pandemic [3, 7, 18].
Although it was not as broadly adopted as it was during waves of the COVID-
19 pandemic, the bibliography suggests that this concept was being researched since
1970 [18] and that its roots locate when pioneers predicted a digital revolution that
would allow employees to work from home. [7].
==PAGE:19==
2.4 The hybrid working environment
9
Specifically, in their book ”In Work, at Home,” published in 1999, A. Felstead
and N. Jewson state that remote work found fertile ground due to two reasons. The
first reason, according to the authors, is that the two primary realms of contempo-
rary social life, home, and work, have been decoupled throughout industrialization.
The authors regard work from home as a technique of not only recoupling but also
optimizing these two realms since it promises to restore job satisfaction while also
rejuvenating family relationships[3]. They state unequivocally that remote work has
several advantages, and they feel that this is why homeworkers have piqued policy-
makers’ and managers’ interest. However, Felstead et al. refer to several social and
psychological concerns about remote employment that should be examined further.
In particular, the concept of self-management, both discipline- and time-wise, is dis-
cussed by the writers, as is the growth of homeworking concentration among some
of the most disadvantaged groups in the labor market, such as women and ethnic
minorities.
In addition, M. Olson discusses the notion of remote work and the suitability of
computer experts as remote workers[18] in her article ”Work at home for computer
professionals, present attitudes and possibilities.” Even though the article was written
more than 30 years ago, the landscape and concerns that the author discusses are
still extremely relevant in today’s post-pandemic workplace. Olson et al. point out
that the managers of the computer experts were uneasy with the practice of remote
work and preferred that the personnel work on-site. Furthermore, in this study, work
from home was associated with decreased job satisfaction, reduced work engagement,
and a loss of work-life balance owing to considerable additional unpaid labor [18].
2.4
The hybrid working environment
Based on the learnings that the employees have gained through their accumulated
experience of working from home, the setup of the post-pandemic working environ-
ment has shaped up to be a hybrid one [19, 20]. In a hybrid setup, as long as the
IT infrastructure of an organization is developed enough to support it [21], and man-
agement approves so, employees are given the chance to remote work certain days
of the work week [20]. This possibility is offered by 71% of corporations in English-
speaking countries whereas 9% of the total number of companies worldwide do not
allow employees to work remotely post pandemic[20].
Sahadi J. in her article ”How managers really feel about remote work”, also con-
cludes that a hybrid work set-up would be the best work practice, a combination of
traditional and post pandemic working environment.
Lastly, Gilson et al. study the topic of hybrid work model in their article ”Post-
pandemic hybrid work: opportunities and challenges for physical activity and public
health”. There, the authors suggest that the hybrid model might not be ideal for
newly hired employees that are in process of being trained. It is however designed
in a way that it can combine the perks of remote and traditional work [22]. In addi-
tion, the authors highlight the inequities that this work practice carries. Specifically,
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Literature analysis
the author mentions that the economically disadvantaged groups of workers, such as
workers in construction, transportation and manufacturing are ”least able to access
the potential benefits of hybrid work” and states that this enhances existing social
inequalities [22].
Based on the above, it appears that the typical workplace has been quietly evolving
over the last several decades, and the pandemic prompted the previously considered
trend of remote work [7]. The flexibility and work-life balance that was missing in the
conventional working environment seem to have been restored by remote and hybrid
work practices[17]. However, two aspects of these work practices are of great interest
and worthy of further investigation. Firstly, studies agree that the performance and
productivity of employees were unharmed by remote work [9, 13, 20].
Secondly,
studies agree that there is a mismatch of employees in managerial and non-managerial
positions in corporate that goes back to the rise of remote work in the late 1970s [12,
13, 15–18, 23].
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
To answer the research questions, gain an overview of the impact of remote work in a
company of the scale of Novo Nordisk and complete the present study, a combination
of qualitative and quantitative analysis was utilized.
3.1
Survey
The study’s qualitative part included physical meetings with employees of Novo
Nordisk, in managing and non-managing positions to gain their insight on remote
work and observations during my one-year internship. Those facilitated the creation
of a questionnaire, which was the study’s primary tool. After the data was acquired,
the quantitative analysis began, which involved analyzing the data, calculating the
average, and seeking trends. The phases of the study are outlined below in detail.
• Review of associated literature
This step was performed as a first step in the development of the survey and
assisted in gaining an overview of recent research on the field of remote work
and including knowledgeable and insightful questions to the survey, suitable to
corporate employees and managers. As mentioned above, the reviewed docu-
mentation included information on advantages and drawbacks of remote work
[9], how it was perceived and experienced by employees and their supervisors[7,
11–13, 15, 16, 23], the fact that the issues related to remote work have arisen
long before the burst of the pandemic[3, 7, 18] and the setting of working envi-
ronment post pandemic [17, 19–21].
• Development
The review of relevant literature along with personal observation over the 1
my internship assisted me greatly in forming the initial draft of the survey.
In particular, the article ”Six Key Advantages and Disadvantages of Working
from Home” by Ipsen et al. served as the main source of inspiration for the
survey’s questions’ content [9]. While developing the questionnaire, attention
was given to the type and formulation of the question to avoid biased responses.
Specifically, consideration was given to avoiding both positively and negatively
loaded questions, thus the majority of the questions included are Likert scale
questions[9]. These questions were of two types: the questions that made a
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Methodology
statement and the responses varied from ”strongly disagree” to ”strongly agree”
(i.e question 18 in appendix A) and those that aimed to compare aspects of
daily work life (i.e motivation, engagement, innovation) between remote work
and work at the oﬀice. There, responders could answer from a range of ”less”
to ”more” (i.e question 14 in appendix A). In the analysis part, numbers were
assigned to each response to calculate the mean value and standard deviation
of the variables that each question sought to answer. The numbers assigned to
each response for the two types of Likert scale questions are presented below:
1. 5 point likert scale from ”strongly disagree” to ”strongly agree”, i.e ques-
tion 18 (A):
Strongly disagree 1
Disagree 2
Neutral 3
Agree 4
Strongly agree 5
2. 3 point likert scale from ”more” to ”less”, i.e question 14 (A):
Less 1
Same 2
More 3
Unsure was treated as a missing value and was excluded from the analy-
sis[9].
The calculation of mean value was done according to equation 3.1 and assisted
in deciding the average response to the Likert scale questions of the survey.
m =
∑(xi)
N
[24]
(3.1)
,where xi is each value from the population and N is the size of population.
Furthermore, the standard deviation was calculated as indicated in equation
3.2 and indicates how much the responses differ from the mean value. It is
a measurement for how spread out the data is in relation to the mean value.
Low standard deviation means that the data are clustered around the mean,
and high standard deviation indicates data are more dispersed. Thus, for the
responses that the standard deviation is high, the results are less reliable than
the ones with low [24].
σ =
√∑(xi −m)2
N
[24]
(3.2)
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Survey
13
Finally, the mean values were utilized to perform a t-test to compare in depth
the experiences of employees in managing and non-managing positions for ques-
tions 14, 16 and 17 (A).
• Content
All personnel, in managing and non-managing roles, answered the first 20 sur-
vey questions (A). The first 14 questions were specifically designed to gather
descriptive statistics. This indicates that their goal was to collect information
on the responders’ features, like their age, gender, location, and level of senior-
ity at Novo Nordisk, as well as to help the author and the reader comprehend
the dataset that served as the basis for the research. Questions 15 to 19 (A)
aimed to compare the respondents’ experiences of remote work amongst various
groups, including managers and employees and Indian and Danish professionals,
in terms of working hours, productivity, engagement, and motivation. In ad-
dition, respondents were asked to explain their overall experience with remote
work in a free text response to question 20 (A). This question was included to
enable participants to concentrate on what they believed to be the most cru-
cial components of remote work, elaborate on those points, and provide more
in-depth remarks [25].
The questions that were solely relevant to employees in management positions
followed after question 20. Managers provided their personal experiences with
remote work up until question 20, but starting with that question and forward,
they provided their perspectives on the experiences of the people they were su-
pervising. This facilitated the comparison between employees’ real experiences
with the managers’ perceptions of it.
• Review
Generating questions for a survey requires considerable pilot work to refine
wording and content[26]. Hence, after the draft of the survey was obtained, two
physical meetings with employees of the company followed. The meetings had
the form of discussions on the questionnaire and included the manager and a
team member that does not occupy managing role of cPlanning team. cPlanning
is part of the department responsible for operational planning of production for
Novo Nordisk. The team is driving the project of transfer of all production
and purchasing activities from the production sites to the department of the
company in India. Due to the nature of the project that this team is driving, the
team members have a lot of interaction with international project stakeholders
and were identified as suitable people to give feedback on the relevance of the
questions. The manager of the team has more than fifteen years of experience in
the organization and was called to distantly manage a team of 10 employees and
coordinate the stakeholders during multiple waves of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These reviewing sessions of the survey aimed to listen to both a manager’s and
an employee perspective on remote work and assure content validity[26].
• Pilot
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Methodology
As a last step that ensured the survey’s reliability and validity, it was piloted
to a small test sample of intended respondents [26]. The survey was sent to
the cPlanning team in order to identify issues that lacked clarity or that would
not be acceptable for, or discriminate against, participants. The team consists
of 10 people who are diverse in terms of Novo Nordisk seniority, age, and gen-
der. Thus, it was identified as a suitable representative test sample due to its
variety[26].
3.2
Data analysis
Once the final version of the questionnaire was developed and pilot was successful,
it was designed in Microsoft forms and was made accessible to the workforce of the
company via Novo Nordisk’s internal communication platform, Yammer, as well as
via circulation to the company’s emailing lists. Due to the company’s large scale,
the scope was limited down to solely supply chain employees of all production sites
and India. The supply chain area of Novo Nordisk was identified as an appropriate
target audience for the study since it involves a lot of interactions among international
employees of the company and could ensure the perspective of employees in more than
one country. To engage participants and provide transparency, the email described the
survey, including its aim, voluntary nature, and how long it would take to complete.
Emphasis was given to the anonymity of the data obtained, and their use solely for
academic purposes.
The questionnaire was distributed to the Novo Nordisk workforce in April of 2022
indicating that the participants have had 2 years experience of in remote work, and
it was accessible to the employees for 2 weeks. This period was chosen since relevant
literature[26] suggests that the majority of responses to a survey are gathered within
one week and a period longer than 3 weeks does not add many more insights
The recordings of the responses were extracted from Microsoft forms directly to Excel
and analyzed in Tableau.
3.3
Responders
The dataset included 220 Novo Nordisk professionals that were mostly men(60%)
and almost half of the participants(40%) had never worked from home prior to the
pandemic.
In table 3.1, a high-level information overview is given on the characteristics of
the responders.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Responders
15
Table 3.1: Characteristics of all participants.
Variables
Total
Age(years) N(%)
18 to 20
1(0.5)
21 to 30
54(24.5)
31 to 40
106(48.2)
41 to 50
34(15.5)
51 to 60
25(11.4)
Above 60
0(0)
Prefer not to say
0(0)
Gender N(%)
Male
133(60)
Female
86(39)
Prefer not to say
1(1)
Seniority in Novo Nordisk(years) N(%)
Less than 2
65(30)
2 to 5
57(26)
6 to 10
42(19)
11 to 15
29(13)
16 to 20
8(4)
over 20
19(9)
No of children at home N(%)
0
154(70)
1
46(21)
2
15(7)
3
(2)
4
0(0)
more than 4
0(0)
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Descriptive statistics
In this section, the characteristics of responders included in table 3.1 are displayed
in greater detail. In particular, the descriptive statistics presented below assist both
the author and the reader to gain overview of the dataset as well as to emphasize
possible correlations between variables.
Of the 220 participants, 29(13.18%) hold management roles as indicated in figure
4.1. The majority of these managers, (48.28%) currently manages a team of 10 to 30
people.
Figure 4.1: Responders in managing and non-managing roles.
It is an interesting insight that only (26.18%) of employees in non-managing posi-
tions have children, indicating that the vast majority of them (73.82%) do not. If one
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Results
considers that the participants that hold managing roles are significantly less than
the employees and that the majority of managers (55.17%) have children, this is a
significant difference. This cannot be related to their age, since the majority of both
groups (55.17% of managers and 47.12% of employees) are 31 to 40 years old. In
addition, 28.18% of employees in non managing positions have been employed in the
company less than 2 years, and 26% of them for 2-5 years. However, 31% of the man-
agers are employed in Novo Nordisk 11-15 years and 17% more than 20 years. This is
an indication that, unsurprisingly, participants in managing positions are employed
in the company longer than the employees.
Figure 4.2 summarizes the responses to question 7, regarding the location of the
stakeholders that employees mostly interact with. As showed, 55% of participants
replied that during a work day they are interacting equally with stakeholders located
in the same and different site as theirs.
Figure 4.2: Daily interaction of participants with stakeholders..
However, if India is differentiated from the rest of the regions, the analysis shows
that 53% of the total participants located there mostly interact with stakeholders in
a different site than them.
The dataset covered 10 different countries, 9 of which host the production sites of
the company, and India. Table 4.1 displays each country’s response rate.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Descriptive statistics
19
Table 4.1: Response rate of different sites.
Variables
Total
Site, N(%)
Bagsværd, Hillerød and Kalundborg, Denmark
128(58)
Bangalore, India
67(30.5)
Monte Claros, Brazil
10(5)
Kaluga, Russia
5(2)
Clayton, US
5(2)
Tianjin, China
2(1)
Chartres, France
2(1)
Teheran, Iran
1(0.5)
As indicated in the table, the vast majority of participants were located in Den-
mark and India and the engagement from the rest of sites was very low. Since the
response rate from other sites was so limited, the focus of the present study was on
the regions of Denmark and India.
4.1.1
Gender of participants per site
In the figures below an overview of the gender of the responders is given. In par-
ticular, figure 4.3 presents the ratio of female to male employees in managing and
non-managing position for Denmark and India.
Figure 4.3: Gender of participants per site.
It is noteworthy that the ratio of female to male employees in Denmark is 1:1, but
it is 1:4 in India. This might imply that the Novo Nordisk personnel in Denmark is
more gender balanced than the rest of the sites.
However, when it comes to employees in managing positions, the ratio changes.
A shown in figure 4.4, the ratio of female and male employees holding managing
positions for India is and 1:1 for Denmark 2:1.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Results
Figure 4.4: Gender of employees in managing position per site.
4.1.2
Commuting time
In regards to commuting time, the responses of the participants in Denmark and
India are presented below.
Figure 4.5: Percentage of commuting time of participants in Denmark and India.
As shown above, approximately half (42%) of the participants whose commuting
time is less than 1 hr located in Denmark. The pattern is that the longer the commute,
the higher the percentage of Indian participants and the lower the percentage of
Danish participants. In addition, as shown in figure 4.6 37% of the responders in
India, commute for 2 to 3 hours to get to work.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 How was the productivity of employees affected by remote work
21
Figure 4.6: Commuting time in India.
The responses of participants in India regarding commuting time confirm the issue
that was initially identified and sparked this study.
4.2
How was the productivity of employees affected
by remote work
To answer the research question of how remote work impacted the productivity of
Novo Nordisk workforce, the replies from both employees and managers to several
survey questions covering areas of productivity were examined.
Firstly, responses of both employees and managers to questions 14 and 15 that aimed
to compare on the number of working hours and tasks of remote and traditional work
set-up were analyzed.
As mentioned in the methodology section, these questions were 3 point Likert
scale questions. More specifically, when comparing working remotely to working at
the oﬀice, less time was assigned to number 1, the same time was assigned to number
2, and more time to number 3. The value ”Unsure” were excluded from the analysis.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Results
The items stated above are shown in 4.2, together with their mean values and standard
deviations (SDs).
Table 4.2: Productivity aspects of both employees and managers.
Variables
Mean value
STD
Working hours
2.5
0.6
No of tasks
1.8
0.8
The results displayed in table 4.2 indicate that employees worked more hours when
they were working at their homes compared to when working at the oﬀice. This is con-
sistent with the replies on question 13 (A), where half of the participants responded
that the time they saved from commuting time while working remotely translated
into working hours. This finding alone does not give an indication about employees’
productivity. However, when asked about the number of tasks they performed on a
work day of working from home, results suggest that employees completed the same
number of tasks they did at the oﬀice in the same or less time when working remotely.
This fact combined with the longer working hours, could indicate an increase on the
number of the tasks an employee completed while working remotely and thus an in-
crease in productivity.
To also get the managers’ perspective on the employees’ productivity, their re-
sponses to questions 24-28 (A) for teams’ productivity, engagement, innovation, mo-
tivation and KPIs were analyzed and the results are displayed in 4.3.
Table 4.3: Managers’ perspective on employees during remote work.
Variables
Mean value
STD
Productivity
2
0.7
Engagement
1.8
0.5
Innovation
1.6
0.6
Motivation
1.8
0.6
KPIs
2.2
0.4
The results suggest that according to their managers, the productivity of employ-
ees was the same as when they were working at the oﬀice. This statement is supported
by the landscape of the KPIs of different departments of Novo Nordisk that were sta-
ble during the shift to remote work or slightly impoved. In particular, the standard
deviation of this element is the lowest, indicating that most responses are clustered
around the mean value and thus there is agreement of the participants on it.
However, employees in supervising positions stated that the they felt that employ-
ees were less engaged, less motivated and less innovative while working from home
compared to when working at the oﬀice.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 How was the productivity of employees affected by remote work
23
As presented in figure 4.7, according to managers, the only two aspects that
remained unaffected by work from home or were slightly improved is productivity
and KPIs.
Figure 4.7: Perspective of managers on employees.
When an overall insight on the productivity of the repsonders was gained, a divi-
sion of the regions of India and Denmark was made.
When the two sites are differentiated, it seems that Danish and Indian employees that
do not occupy managing roles have similar experiences regarding their productivity
while working remotely.
Indian employees stated that they worked more hours when working remotely (mean
value 2.6) as danish did (mean value 2.4) and they both performed the same number
of tasks in less time compared to when they were working at the oﬀice (Danish 1.8
and Indian employees 1.6).
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Results
The experience of Danish and Indian managers regarding the productivity of their
teams however, is slightly different. Danish managers reported that the productivity
of the employees they were managing was the same as to when they working from the
oﬀice (mean value 2.03) whereas Indian managers reported a considerable increase in
the employees’ productivity while working remotely (2.4). This might be an implica-
tion that long commuting time is affecting productivity.
Finally, as presented in figure 4.8, only Danish managers considered that employ-
ees was affected negatively by remote work.
Figure 4.8: Perspective of managers on employees.
Conclusively, when analyzing the employees and managers perspective in terms
of productivity while working remotely, a common theme emerges: productivity of
employees in Novo Nordisk was unharmed during working remotely.
4.3
Employees in managing positions
In this section of the report, the findings of the analysis for the 29 participants in
the managing position are displayed. The managers hold different levels, with the
majority of them (48.28%) managing 10 to 30 people. However, regardless of their
level, all participants in managing positions had to reply to questions 23 to 34 (A).
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Employees in managing positions
25
Firstly, to identify the areas the employees in managing positions had a focus on,
their responses to the free text question of the survey (A) were examined. The 4
aspects of remote work that managers focused on are presented below.
1. Flexibility
35% of the responding supervisors of Novo Nordisk focused on the flexibility
they experienced while fully working remotely. In their responses, they men-
tioned that they got the chance to combine work with everyday chores, including
children’s care, throughout their working hours. In addition, they highlighted
that they got the chance to engage in more family activities and thus felt that
the work-life balance that was missing before the adoption of remote work was
restored while fully working remotely. This was a very common aspect that
managers chose to focus on on the free text question since 56% of them have
children.
2. Isolation
35% of the participants in management positions were concerned about the lack
of socializing with colleagues while working remotely. The managers felt discon-
nected from the organization and its day-to-day news, and they were challenged
to keep their teams connected, according to the comments that accompanied
this remark.
3. Lack of motivation and engagement
10% of the managers touched upon the issue of staying motivated and engaged
while working from home. They commented that while remote work was intro-
duced as a temporary measure against COVID-19, it lasted longer than antici-
pated and during this time, the motivation and engagement of the teams they
were managing, as well as their own, started falling.
4. Lack of idea generation and innovation
The final prevalent aspect the managers focused on, was the lack of idea genera-
tion and innovation on behalf of their teams. They stated that the development
of ideas was seriously limited and that team members were no longer creative
together.
Regarding their personal experience, the managers answered questions 14, 16 and
17 (A) regarding the working hours, their motivation and their engagement respec-
tively. In addition, they replied to questions 29-32 that address the confidence they
had on their ability to distant manage their teams,the online on-boarding of new em-
ployees, their overview of the team members tasks and the frequency they checked
with their teams.
In table 4.4 the elements mentioned above, along with their means and STDs are
presented. In the last column, the scale of the likert question is also added.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Results
Table 4.4: Managers’ experience on remote work.
Variables
Mean value
STD
Likert scale
Working hours
2.5
0.6
3 point
Motivation
1.5
0.5
3 point
Engagement
1.5
0.6
3 point
Confidence on distant managing
3.8
0.9
5 point
On-boarding of new employees
2.8
0.7
5 point
Overview of team’s tasks
2.4
0.6
5 point
Checking with employees
2.3
0.7
5 point
The results from table 4.4 indicate that in terms of working hours, managers’ have
been working more hours during remote work period and that they were less engaged
and motivated compared to when they were working on-site. In addition, they stated
that the on-boarding of new employees as well as keeping an overview of their teams’
tasks and their progress on it was more challenging compared to when they were
working at oﬀice. This could potentially be the reason why they checked as many or
slightly more times with them.
Finally, the mean value of managers’ trust in remote managing is an intriguing
addition to these findings. The standard deviation is high which indicates that the
majority of responses deviate significantly from the mean value. This meand that
there was no consensus among the participants in managing roles regarding their
confidence to distant manage.
4.4
Employees in non managing position
In order to compare the experience of employees in managing and non-managing
position and answer research question no 2, in the section below, the experience of
employees in non managing position is presented.
It was challenging to aggregate responses from Novo Nordisk employees who did
not hold management roles and group them into categories. This was because of their
rich content as well as the large volume of comments. However, the following list of
common themes that the majority of employees raised is presented below:
1. Loneliness
The isolation the employees felt throughout the remote work time is the most
common feature that employees have mentioned by 30% of the responders in
non managing position. The isolation manifested itself in a variety of ways,
such as a lack of sense of belonging to the company, the loss of an opportunity
to establish or maintain a contact with a social network, or a simple lack of the
social interaction that working on-site offers.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Employees in non managing position
27
2. Increased focus
The employees’ enhanced sense of focus was the second most often mentioned
factor in the comments. Particularly, 22% of them mentioned in the free text re-
sponse that since there were no breaks or diversions involved, working remotely
aided employees in finishing a task more quickly. Additionally, they were not
under any time constraints from their supervisor, giving them more time to
discover pertinent information and better handle challenging tasks.
3. Flexibility
11% of employees at Novo Nordisk noted a wide range of flexible characteristics
of remote work in response to the open-ended question.
80% of employees
from India highlighted the time and energy they saved from commuting as
well as the fact that they got to choose the hours they would work instead
of having to be available on set hours, as expected from figures 4.5 and 4.6.
This is reasonable given that the Indian workforce frequently interacts with
stakeholders in Europe and that the time difference poses complications in their
day-to-day job activities.
4. Development of digital tools
Finally, 5% of the respondents noted that the personnel of Novo Nordisk put a
lot of effort and resources on developing digitally after work from home became
the norm for a while. Even after the pandemic, the conveniences and tools that
have been created are organically incorporated into professional life.
5. Hybrid work set-up is the ideal one
Within the text employees in non managing position wrote in question 20 of the
surveyA, employees of Novo Nordisk outlined the ideal future working environ-
ment. 16% of the employees stated that work from home is a nice option when
conditions ask for it, i.e doctor’s appointment, sickness of family member etc.
but it is viewed by most of the employees only as an alternative to a working
future where work on site is the default.
In table 4.5 the experience of employees regarding the number of hours they
worked, their motivation and engagement while working remotely is displayed.
Table 4.5: Employees’ experience on remote work.
Variables
Mean value
STD
Likert scale
Working hours
2.5
0.6
3 point
Motivation
1.8
0.7
3 point
Engagement
1.6
0.4
3 point
As table 4.5 shows, employees in non managing roles reported increased number
of working hours and slightly less motivation and engagement when working from
home compared to when they were working on-site.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Results
4.5
Comparison of remote work experience between
workers and managers
Based on the sections above that examine the experience of managers and employ-
ees, the following findings emerge. The experiences of the two groups concerning the
number of hours they worked during the shift to remote work is comparable, since it
has increased for both groups. However, it terms of engagement and motivation, it
appears that employees in managing position were less engaged and motivated while
working from home than employees in non managerial roles.
In order to better compare their experience a t-test was performed. A t-test utilizes
the means of two groups and is used to decide on whether the difference of the two
groups is significant [27].
For this test below, the mean values for the groups of managers and workers in terms
of working hours, motivation and engagement presented in tables 4.5 and 4.4 were
taken into consideration.
The mean values along with the p values for the elements mentioned above are dis-
played in the table below.
Table 4.6: Comparison of managers’ and employees’ experience on remote work.
Variables
Managers (Mean value)
Employees(mean value)
p-value
Working hours
2.5
2.5
0.43
Motivation
1.5
1.6
0.13
Engagement
1.5
1.8
0.02
A p-value of 0.43 indicates that there is a 43% probability that the difference
between the means of the two groups is the result of random chance. Therefore, a
p-value of more than 0.05 denotes that there is no statistically significant difference
between the two groups [27]. As presented in table 4.6, when it comes to working
hours, there is very little distinction between managers and employees, meaning that
both groups experienced an increase in their working hours while working remotely.
There is a greater difference in motivation, although it is not statistically significant.
However, the p-value shows a significant difference when it comes to managers’ and
employees’ engagement during remote work.
This indicates that when shifted to
remote work, supervisors experienced a greater decrease in engagement than their
teams did.
In addition, the replies in the free text questionnaire were taken into consideration.
29 supervisors of Novo Nordisk viewed mostly negative sides of remote work worth
mentioning, excluding the flexibility.
Isolation, lack of motivation and innovation
were the features that focused on.
On the other hand, 191 employees in non managing position focused on positive sides
of work from home such as flexibility, increased focus and development of new digital
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Comparison of remote work experience between workers and managers
29
tools. Aside from the feature of loneliness they experienced, the overall tone of the
employees’ responses was positive since they were exposed to a new agile approach
of work through the remote setup, which restored the flexibility missing from their
typical workday.
Coclusively, employees that occupy managing positions in Novo Nordisk had a more
negative experience on remote work than their teams did.
The challenges managers faced during remote are reflected in their responses in ques-
tion 33 of the survey (A) regarding the ideal number of days they would like employees
to work on site post pandemic. The results indicate that on average, the participants
in managing position would like employees to work at the oﬀice 3 days per week. This
number is quite high, but not as high as expected from their negative remote experi-
ence. When asked why they would prefer employees to return at the oﬀice in survey
question 34 (A) 100% of the managers answered that they believe that employees are
more motivated and more engaged. This comes in complete accordance with their
perception of their teams’ decreased motivation and engagement during remote work
4.7.
On the other hand, employees in non managing position replied that they would like
to return at the oﬀice 2 days per week.
4.5.1
Site specific insights
If one looks at the regions of India and Denmark separately, interesting insights are
gained.
33% of employees in India would like to shift to fully working remotely whereas 50%
of the managers would like employees to return at the oﬀice 2 days per week.
The percentage of Indian employees that would like to shift to fully working remotely
is high but if the commuting time and their interaction with stakeholders is taken
into consideration, it makes sense. More specifically, as shown in figure 4.2 37.31% of
employees in India need 2 to 3hr per day to get to their oﬀice. This, combined with
the 53% of them that mostly interact with stakeholders outside of the region of India,
could be the reason why employees in India would like to shift to fully work remotely.
On the other hand, only 2% of the responders located in Denmark in non managing
positions stated that they would like to shift to fully working remotely and 33% of
them stated they would like to return at the oﬀice 3 days per week.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
When summarizing the findings from the analysis the following points emerge:
1. The productivity of the employees in Novo Nordisk, including those in managing
position, was not impacted by the sudden shift from traditional to remote work.
Employees reported that they were working longer hours compared to when they
were working at the oﬀice and that they performed the same number of tasks in
less hours. This together with the evaluation of their managers that they were
as productive as they were at the oﬀice indicates that productivity of the Novo
Nordisk personnel was unharmed. In particular, Indian managers reported that
on average the productivity of their teams was increased (mean value of 2.2).
Regarding the productivity of employees in managing position, the result of the
present study is opposed to the article ”COVID-19 Leadership Challenges in
Knowledge Work” by Kirchner et al. where danish managers reported drop in
their productivity due to long work days. It is also opposed to the results of
survey presented in the article ”Remote managers are having trust issues” by
Parker et al. where 38% of managers that participated in it, reported a drop in
the productivity and performance of the teams they were managing. However,
it is consistent with the articles ”Six Key Advantages and Disadvantages of
Working from Home in Europe during COVID-19” by Ipsen et al. and ”Why
the return at the oﬀice is not working” by Molla R., where the employees’
increased productivity while working remotely is identified as a key positive
aspect of work from home.
An interesting point rising is that Indian employees, once they did not have
to commute for many hours, saw their productivity increase. This might be
an implication increased productivity during the time of remote work can be
associated with employees that had long commuting time. This is supported by
relevant literature since the issue of commuting is mentioned as an important
disadvantage from the employees’ perspective [13, 15]. In addition, the majority
of Indian employees reported that they are mostly interacting with stakeholders
that are located in a different site that theirs, also indicating a difference in time
zones. A point they raised when answered the free text question of the survey
(A) is that they could work when it was convenient for them, meaning they did
not have to be available all day for meetings. This seems to have increased their
productivity.
2. There is a mismatch between the experience of employees in managing and non
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Discussion
managing positions. Results of the present analysis suggest that responders in
supervising position in Novo Nordisk, found remote work more challenging in
terms of staying motivated and engaged than the employees in non-managing
positions.
The experience of remote work in terms of working hours is comparable for
managers and employees of Novo Nordisk as they both reported an increase in
their working hours while working remotely compared to when they worked at
the oﬀice. This is in accordance with the reviewed article ”COVID-19 Leader-
ship Challenges in Knowledge Work” by Kirchner et al. where it is stated that
managers experienced longer work hours that included more meetings and less
breaks compared to when they were working at the oﬀice. The managers’ nega-
tive remote work experience is also consistent with reviewed literature [parker,
7, 13, 15] The low motivation and engagement might be due to challenges in
communicating with their teams as stated by Kirchner et al. [11] but also to
general characteristics that the responders in managing position had in com-
mon. More specifically, an interesting insight that emerged from the present
analysis is that employees that occupy managing roles tend to be more extro-
vert (mean value of 3.7) than employees that do not (mean value of 3.1). Thus,
these employees are the ones that missed socializing in the oﬀice more (mean
value of 4.4 for managers and mean value of 3.7 for employees in a 5 point scale).
Furthermore, in terms of number of times that managers checked in with their
teams during work, 76.36% of employees answered in survey question 19 A that
their managers were checking less or as many times as they were checking with
them at the oﬀice. This is consistent with the managers’ responses on this in
question 31 (A), as 37% of them answered that they were checking with their
teams as many times as they were checking at the oﬀice. This implies that,
opposed to relevant literature [15], managers of Novo Nordisk that participated
in the survey, did not micromanage their teams while working remotely.
This could also be due to the fact that according to the responses employees
in managing position seem to be slightly more extrovert (mean 3.6) than other
employees (mean 3.2).
In addition, low engagement and motivation can be linked to the nature of a
managing role. Specifically, relevant literature supports that a managers carry
responsibility for the whole team since they are the coordinators and leaders
that set both the targets but also ensure the employees’ satisfaction and well-
being [28]. These responsibilities need physical presence in order to be carried
out and are challenging through distant managing[13].
Finally, interestingly the misalignment of employees in managing and non-
managing positions can be traced back to 1970 [18] when remote work was
first introduced. This might indicate that the issue of the working place is a
political decision that managers would like to have the final word on, in the
sense that they feel that they should be the ones to take the final decision.
3. In the post pandemic work landscape, managers would like employees to work
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Limitations and future research
33
on site 3 days per week, whereas employees 2 days per week.
The difference in the number of days certainly does not indicate a large mis-
alignment between the two groups, but two conclusions can be drawn. Firstly,
both parties seem to envision a future work place as a hybrid one, where both
at the oﬀice and at home would be feasible. Secondly, the result show that em-
ployees in managing and non managing position have different views on what
the default should look like in this hybrid set-up. Employees would like to work
mostly at home, whereas managers mostly on-site. These numbers are in com-
plete accordance with the article ”Why the return at the oﬀice is not working”
by Molla R, where the exact number of days for employees and managers are
stated.
5.1
Limitations and future research
Future research could stem from the limitations of the present study as well as from
its indications.
Specifically, an obvious limitation of this report is the the low response rate. Only 29
employees in managing positions participated in the survey and from those, only 6
are located in India. This small sample threatens the validity and robustness of the
results.
An additional limitation is that the response rate from most countries was very low
as most answers came from Denmark and India. As of its current state, the study
can detect trends only considering the regions that mainly participated to the survey.
Additionally, a constraint of this study stems from the nature of a questionnaire as
a tool to collect data. Since a survey is an artificial environment[25], there is the
risk that responders were biased. Furthermore, it could be that participants were not
honest, due to mistrust towards the anonymity of the gathered data [25].
Finally, the study focused on differentiating the experiences of employees in managing
and non managing positions. However, many more groups for which implications were
included in this report could be used for the analysis.
As a result, future research on this topic could involve higher overall response rate,
higher response rate from different regions and comparison of productivity during
remote work for various groups.
For instance a division of managers in different
countries and division of perspective of female and male managers within the same
country would be worth investigating.
In addition, as indicated in this report, employees that are located in India have
longer commuting time, and a lot of interaction with stakeholders that are located in
regions with different time zones. Their productivity was a higher compared to when
they were working at the oﬀice, and this could be an indication that long commuting
time while working remotely is associated with increased productivity while working
remotely. A research on how commuting time, location of stakeholders that employees
mostly interact during the day and different time zones affect willingness to work from
home could give interesting results.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and outlook
Even though remote work was first implemented as a temporary solution [6], its effects
on different groups, including employees in managing and non-managing positions, al-
tered their perceptions of the workplace and their expectations of it. According to
the results of this study three points emerge:
Productivity of the employees, both managers and non managers, in Novo Nordisk
remained unharmed from the extensive period of remote work. This is also reflected
on the employees’ performance as evaluated by their managers but also the KPIs of
the different departments that were the same or slightly improved compared to when
they were working at the oﬀice. Managers do, however, perceived a decline in their
own and their teams’ creativity, drive, and engagement.
The findings of this study indicate that the inclination of professionals to work from
home is associated by their long commute times and their frequent engagement with
stakeholders at sites other than their own. Results of the current research specifically
show that 77% percent of male Indian workers who have children and 33% percent
of all Indian responders are willing to switch to fully working remotely. In addition,
productivity of Indian employees was increased considerably while working remotely,
according to their managers.
Remote work was a more challenging experience for employees in managing positions
rather than the ones that do not hold a managing position. Managers reported be-
ing less motivated and engaged than their employees. This is also reflected in the
future working environment these two groups envision. They both consider a hybrid
working setup to be an ideal one, with managers wanting personnel to work on-site
3 days per week whereas employees 2 days per week. The difference does not seem
significant, it does however indicate that managers and employees have a different
views on the default state of an ideal working environment. This could be due to the
nature of the job of a manager that is directly related to their teams, as they lead,
coach, monitor, and plan. Particularly in corporate, it could also be that managers
want to preserve the ”corporate culture” meaning the culture of sharing sentiments
and knowledge [29].
As a closing note, based on the results of the present study,Novo Nordisk is recom-
mended to adopt the future working setup that best serves the productivity, perfor-
mance and well-being of its workforce, in this case the hybrid one. To make the hybrid
work model as effective as possible, individuals in managing and non-managing roles
should agree on standards such as team availability when working remotely and the
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Conclusion and outlook
number of days they are flexible to do so. All workers should receive training on how
to communicate and operate remotely, and supervisors, in particular, should receive
training on how to supervise but also motivate and support team members in this
type of working environment. Finally, oﬀice facilities may become smaller if they are
only used 2 to 3 days per week, saving a lot of costs.
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX A
Survey
Work From Home Questionnaire
The survey will take approximately 6 minutes to complete.
Section 1: General
1. What is your age?
18 to 20 years
21 to 30 years
31 to 40 years
41 to 50 years
51 to 60 years
Above 60 years
Prefer not to say
2. To which gender identity do you most identify?
Female
Male
Prefer not to say
Other
3. On a scale of 1 to 5, 1 being introvert and 5 being extrovert, which number
best describes your personality?
1
2
3
4
5
4. How many years of working experience do you have?
less than 2 years
2 to 5 years
6 to 10 years
11 to 15 years
16 to 20 years
==PAGE:48==
38
A Survey
over 20 years
5. How long have you been employed in Novo Nordisk?
less than 2 years
2 to 5 years
6 to 10 years
11 to 15 years
16 to 20 year
over 20 years
6. In which Novo Nordisk site are you currently working?
Bagsværd- Denmark
Bangalore- India
Blida-Algeria
Chartres- France
Clayton-US
Hillerød- Denmark
Kaluga-Russia
Kalundborg- Denmark
Monte Claros- Brazil
Tianjin- China
Teheran- Iran
7. The stakeholders you are mostly interacting with are located
In the same site as me
In a different site than me
Both
Unsure
8. Approximately, how many days per week do you currently work from home?
I never work from home
1
2
3
4
I only work from home
9. Before first outbreak of the COVID-19 virus in the spring of 2020, how many
days per week did you on average work partly or full-time from home? I have never
worked from home before
Less than a day
1
2
3
==PAGE:49==
A Survey
39
4
I always worked from home
10. How many young people and adults, including yourself, are present in your
home when you work from home?
1
2
3
4
5 or more
11. How many children are present in your home, when you work from home?
0
1
2
3
4 or more
12. When you go to work, the commuting time is: In the commuting time, trav-
elling both to and from work are included.
Less than 1hr
1 hr to 2hr
2 to 3 hr
13. The time you dedicate to commuting, translates into working hours when I
work from home.
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree
Section 2 : During lock-downs
The questions below concern the time during lock-downs, when employees were asked
to only work from home.
14. While fully working from home, you worked:
More hours than when I was at the oﬀice
Less hours than when I was at the oﬀice
The same hours than when I was at the oﬀice
I am unsure
15. While fully working from home, you did the same number of tasks in:
More time compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
==PAGE:50==
40
A Survey
Less time compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
The same time compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
I am unsure
16. While fully working from home, you felt:
More engaged compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
Less engaged compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
As engaged as when I was working at the oﬀice
Unsure
17. While fully working from home, you felt:
More motivated compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
Less motivated compared to when I was working at the oﬀice
As motivated as when was working at the oﬀice
Unsure
18. While fully working from home, you missed socializing in the working envi-
ronment.
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree
19. While fully working from home, your manager was checking with you: If you
have changed departments during lock-downs, you can answer this question for your
most recent manager.
As many times as when we were working at the oﬀice
Less times than when we were working at the oﬀice
More times than when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
20. Please briefly describe your overall experience while working from home. En-
ter your answer
21. In an ideal scenario, you would like to work at the oﬀice approximately:
1 day per week
2 days per week
3 days per week
4 days per week
I would like to shift to fully work remotely
22. Are you in a managing position?
Yes
==PAGE:51==
A Survey
41
No
Section 3: The following questions are applicable to employees in man-
aging positions.
23. How many people are you currently managing?
2 to 5 people
5 to 10 people
10 to 30 people
30 to 60 people
60 to 100 people
More than 100 people
24. While fully working from home, you felt the productivity of the people you
were managing:
Was affected positively compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
Was affected negatively compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
Was the same compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
25. While fully working from home, you felt the employees you were managing
were:
More engaged compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
Less engaged compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
As engaged as when they were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
26. While fully working from home, you felt the employees you were managing
were:
More motivated compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
Less motivated compared to when they were working at the oﬀice
As motivated as when they were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
27. While fully working from home, you felt the employees you were managing
were:
More innovative compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Less innovative compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
As innovative compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
28. The results from the KPIs set for your department/team were:
Better compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Worse compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
==PAGE:52==
42
A Survey
The same as when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
29. In case there was any hiring in your department while fully working from
home, the on-boarding of new employees was:
More challenging compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Less challenging compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
As challenging as when we were working at the oﬀice
There was no hiring in my department while we were fully working from home
Unsure
30. While fully working from home, keeping an overview of what the employees
you were managing were working on and their progress on it was:
More challenging compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Less challenging compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
As challenging as when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
31. While fully working from home, you checked with your team:
More often than compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
Less often compared to when we were working at the oﬀice
As often as when we were working at the oﬀice
Unsure
32. Overall, you were confident you could manage the employees remotely
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly agree
33. In an ideal scenario you would like employees to return at the oﬀice:
1 day per week
2 days a week
3 days per week
4 days per week
5 days per week
Unsure
34. The reason why you would like employees to work at the oﬀice is:
You may choose more than one option.
I believe that they are happier
I believe that they are more motivated
I believe that they are more engaged
==PAGE:53==
A Survey
43
I believe that they are more productive
Working at the oﬀice facilities eases the communication among the team members
The KPIs are better when employees are at the oﬀice
Working at the oﬀice enables spontaneous and bonding activities with colleagues
I believe that the equipment available at the oﬀice (Wifi, laptops, desks etc.) eases
the employees’ tasks
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX B
Timeline
The different phases of the development of the present report are presented in B.1
Figure B.1: Timeline of the thesis.
The steps shown above are explained in detail in the Methodology section of this
report.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
1.
Viktorovich, K. E. et al. The development of remote workers with disability
for entrepreneurship system. Journal of Entrepreneurship Education 23, 1–10
(2020).
2.
Rosen, J. et al. Pandemic upheaval offers a huge natural experiment. Nature
596, 149–151 (2021).
3.
Felstead, A. & Jewson, N. In work, at home: Towards an understanding of
homeworking (Routledge, 2002).
4.
Al-Rfou, A. N. Remote Working Environment Challenges in the Context of the
Covid-19 Pandemic. Journal of Asian Business Strategy 11, 95–103 (2021).
5.
Fauci, A. S., Lane, H. C. & Redfield, R. R. Covid-19—navigating the uncharted
2020.
6.
Saladino, V., Algeri, D. & Auriemma, V. The psychological and social impact of
Covid-19: new perspectives of well-being. Frontiers in psychology, 2550 (2020).
7.
Williamson, S., Colley, L. & Hanna-Osborne, S. Will working from home become
the ‘new normal’in the public sector? Australian Journal of Public Administra-
tion 79, 601–607 (2020).
8.
Novo Nordisk, howpublished = https://www.novonordisk.com/about/who-
we-are.html, note = Accessed: 2022-06-09
9.
Ipsen, C., van Veldhoven, M., Kirchner, K. & Hansen, J. P. Six key advantages
and disadvantages of working from home in Europe during COVID-19. Interna-
tional Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, 1826 (2021).
10.
Dunatchik, A., Gerson, K., Glass, J., Jacobs, J. A. & Stritzel, H. Gender, parent-
ing, and the rise of remote work during the pandemic: Implications for domestic
inequality in the United States. Gender & Society 35, 194–205 (2021).
11.
Kirchner, K., Ipsen, C. & Hansen, J. P. COVID-19 leadership challenges in
knowledge work. Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 1–8 (2021).
12.
Parker, S. K., Knight, C. & Keller, A. Remote managers are having trust issues.
Harvard Business Review 30 (2020).
13.
Sahadi, J. How managers really feel about remote work (2021).
14.
Molla, R. Why the return to the oﬀice isn’t working (2021).
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
15.
TETT, G. The empty oﬀice: what we lose when we work from home. The
Guardian,[S. l.] 3 (2021).
16.
Wang, B., Liu, Y., Qian, J. & Parker, S. K. Achieving effective remote working
during the COVID-19 pandemic: A work design perspective. Applied psychology
70, 16–59 (2021).
17.
Konovalova, V., Petrenko, B. & Aghgashyan, R. Choosing a Hybrid Work Model
and New Challenges in Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference
“Smart Nations: Global Trends In The Digital Economy” (2022), 547–554.
18.
Olson, M. H. Work at home for computer professionals: current attitudes and
future prospects. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 7, 317–
338 (1989).
19.
Rydvalová, P., Maršíková, K. & Demel, J. in Handbook of Research on Smart
Management for Digital Transformation 139–164 (IGI Global, 2022).
20.
Kane, G. C., Nanda, R., Phillips, A. & Copulsky, J. Redesigning the post-
pandemic workplace. MIT Sloan Management Review 62, 12–14 (2021).
21.
Ng, C. F. Teleworker’s home oﬀice: an extension of corporate oﬀice? Facilities
(2010).
22.
Gilson, N. et al. Postpandemic hybrid work: opportunities and challenges for
physical activity and public health. British Journal of Sports Medicine (2022).
23.
Savage, M. What bosses really think about remote work (2021).
24.
Livingston, E. H. The mean and standard deviation: what does it all mean?
Journal of Surgical Research 119, 117–123 (2004).
25.
Popping, R. Analyzing open-ended questions by means of text analysis pro-
cedures. Bulletin of Sociological Methodology/Bulletin de Méthodologie Soci-
ologique 128, 23–39 (2015).
26.
Rattray, J. & Jones, M. C. Essential elements of questionnaire design and devel-
opment. Journal of clinical nursing 16, 234–243 (2007).
27.
Kim, T. K. T test as a parametric statistic. Korean journal of anesthesiology 68,
540–546 (2015).
28.
Hill, L. A. Becoming a manager: How new managers master the challenges of
leadership (Harvard Business Press, 2003).
29.
Molenaar, K., Brown, H., Caile, S. & Smith, R. Corporate culture. Professional
safety 47, 18–27 (2002).
==PAGE:59==
==PAGE:60==
