==PAGE:1==
Cloud-based Distributed
Internet Measurement Platform
Rafi Kurnia Putra
Espoo, Finland 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Cloud computing has become an essential component of most networked appli-
cations today. Thus, Internet failures that prevent access to cloud data centres
are sources of service disruptions and monetary losses. To prevent such failures,
Internet measurement platforms are utilised to run network diagnostic tests to
probe the Internet and identify anomalies. However, maintaining such platforms
is complex, as it may involve large amounts of hardware and servers and has
non-negligible monetary costs.
This thesis investigates the possibility of implementing an Internet measurement
platform leveraging the serverless computing paradigm. To this end, the work
proposes the design and implementation of a novel cloud-based measurement
platform in a serverless fashion. The proposed solution is then evaluated against
the more traditional approach of using virtual machines in Google Compute En-
gine. Cost comparison between the two approaches shows that the serverless
solution significantly reduces costs if the duration of the network measurement
is below 22 minutes. As a drawback, performing measurements on the server-
less approach exhibits slightly higher, yet negligible for measurement platforms,
response time than the virtual machine-based approach; about 13.37% longer
with 20.3 ms of difference.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Aalto University, School of Science, Finland, in
partial fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring the M.Sc. double degree
in Security and Cloud Computing (SECCLO) at Aalto University, School of
Science, Finland and Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Denmark.
The thesis deals with designing and developing a novel approach to Internet
measurement platforms devised in a serverless fashion. In addition, the thesis
includes the evaluation of the proposed solution compared to the traditional
approach. This thesis also consists of literature studies of the Internet, network
measurement tools, and Internet measurement platforms.
Espoo, 01-July-2022
Rafi Kurnia Putra
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to Allah SWT, who
has granted me the knowledge and the opportunity for me to finish this thesis. In
addition, I am grateful for His countless blessings, which allowed me to encounter
kind, admirable, and wonderful supervisors, advisor, teachers, and friends who
have taught, guided and supported me throughout my study and on this thesis
journey.
Then, I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Mario Di Francesco
and Professor Nicola Dragoni, for all the guidance along this journey. In
addition, I would also like to thank my advisor, Lorenzo Corneo Ph.D.,
for introducing me to the Internet measurement world, supporting and working
closely with me, and responding to my last-minute questions and requests during
this thesis work.
I am also thankful to my wife, Intan, and my daughter, Keiko, for all the
encouragement and patience in dealing with me all this time. Also, I am grate-
ful to my family in Indonesia for understanding and supporting me in my life
decisions.
Lastly, I am grateful to all my friends, whom I cannot mention one by one, for
the support and encouragement that kept me going and finishing this thesis.
Espoo, 01-July-2022
Rafi Kurnia Putra
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives and Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Scope and Limitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
The Internet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Internet Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Active Network Measurement Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Internet Measurement Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Serverless Computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Serverless Measurement Platform
23
3.1
Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
System Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
System Functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Proof of Concept Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Evaluation
37
4.1
Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion and Future Work
53
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A API Server
57
A.1 OpenAPI Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Measurement Task Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 Measurement Task Cancellation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.4 Measurement Task Status Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.5 Measurement Task Results Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cloud computing providers have been massively investing in the expansion
of their infrastructure through the deployment of data centres all around the
world [Gooa, Ama, Mic]. As a consequence, cloud computing is today an es-
sential component of most networked applications [CEM+21]. To provide an
estimation of the importance of cloud computing today, Cisco forecasts that
about 94% of the Internet workload is processed in cloud data centres [Cis18].
Thus, any sort of failure to access data centres is unacceptable nowadays as it
results in service disruptions and heavy monetary losses. However, given the
complexity of the Internet ecosystem, temporary failures are pretty common.
A very effective remedy to identify Internet failures is through global measure-
ments.
The Internet measurement research community has put significant efforts into
developing and studying Internet measurement platforms [BS15]. An Internet
measurement platform is a globally distributed infrastructure that facilitates
users to run network diagnostic tests through the Internet [BS15]. There are
several approaches to realising such platforms. Some require the procurement
and deployment of hardware devices [RIPb, Cra08], while others only provide
software that runs the measurement [HBB+05, SOBB11]. Different approaches
face different challenges. For example, hardware-based platforms face the ageing
of hardware. Hence, any replacement results in huge overhead, high costs, and
inconsistencies in the measurement results [BES15]. In addition, deploying a
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
new probe requires a provisional cost. On the other hand, software-based mea-
surement platforms require a host, such as a virtual machine (VM) or on-premise
hardware in data centres. The cost of these platforms typically depends on the
resource allocation and is possibly cost-ineffective during idle or low usage.
In order to overcome such cost inefficiencies, cloud providers devised a new
computing paradigm, namely, serverless computing. A few examples of server-
less computing services offered by cloud providers are AWS Lambda 1, Google
Cloud Functions2, and Azure Functions3. This thesis investigates the possibil-
ity of implementing an Internet measurement platform leveraging the serverless
computing paradigm.
1.1
Research Questions
There are challenges to building a serverless measurement platform, such as
the unknown possibility of realising one and the potential trade-offs. There-
fore, we formulate these research questions to address the previously mentioned
challenges:
• RQ1:
How is it possible to replicate all the functions of a VM-
based measurement platform in a serverless fashion?
From the study literature, we found some sets of functionalities that an
Internet measurement platform needs to support. We gathered and iden-
tified the most common and essential functionalities and listed them as
requirements in Section 3.1. This RQ aims to find how these requirements
are satisfied by serverless services.
• RQ2:
Is there any difference in the response time of a server-
less Internet measurement platform compared to a VM-based
approach? If yes, to what extent?
Serverless computing is designed and built differently compared to the
VM. As a result, each approach has its distinct behaviour that may result
in different performance outputs. This RQ aims to know the response time
difference of the proposed solution compared to the traditional approach.
• RQ3:
What are the economic benefits of a serverless Internet
measurement platform compared to a VM-based approach?
1https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/
2https://cloud.google.com/functions
3https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions/
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Objectives and Contributions
3
Serverless computing comes with a different pricing model than the VM-
based approach. Therefore, we are interested in discovering the cost ben-
efits of the proposed solution compared to the traditional approach.
1.2
Objectives and Contributions
The main objective of this thesis is to propose a serverless measurement platform
that provides answers to all the research questions. In addition, the contribu-
tions of this thesis are as follows:
• It reviews active network measurement tools and various efforts in building
Internet measurement platforms.
• It provides a design of an Internet measurement platform built and de-
ployed on top of fully serverless cloud services.
• It presents a proposed solution: the implementation of the serverless In-
ternet measurement platform.
• It evaluates the performance of the proposed solution compared to the
traditional approach of a VM-based measurement platform.
• It presents a cost projection of the proposed solution compared to the
traditional approach based on a real Internet measurement campaign.
1.3
Methodology
A design and implementation of the proposed solution are presented and re-
alised. Then, the response time data of the proposed solution are collected. A
quantitative analysis of the collected data is then performed. Moreover, com-
parisons with the traditional approach are also discussed. In addition, all ex-
periments and data collection are carried out in an isolated environment where
the resources are provisioned especially for this purpose.
1.4
Scope and Limitation
This thesis focuses on analysing the impact of computing choices on response
time and infrastructure cost. It does not profoundly analyse the possible reasons
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
of root causes that produce the variance in the collected data.
In addition,
the specification of all resources under a test is equivalent on paper, with the
assumption that the cloud provider provides the exact hardware specification
underhood.
The evaluation of the proposed system and the traditional approach is performed
from the same VM deployed in the same cloud provider as the system under
evaluation. However, the experiments are performed on different time windows
to prevent resource sharing that possibly affects the experimental results. This
approach is taken with an assumption that the cloud provider guarantees no
service degradation occurred during the experiments, meaning that the exter-
nal variables stay constant, which makes the experimental results comparable.
In fact, no notification about service degradation events is sent by the cloud
provider during experiments, indicating that the assumption is most likely valid.
The cost projection presented in this thesis is made under a specific use case to
demonstrate how the cost projection can be carried out. It is not to show the
cost forecasting under all possible scenarios with distinct parameter values.
1.5
Structure of the Thesis
This chapter presents the introduction to the topic of the thesis. The rest of
this thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 presents the literature reviews
and background that are relevant to the thesis. Then, the design and imple-
mentation of the proposed solution are elaborated in Chapter 3. The evaluation
and discussion of the results are presented in Chapter 4. Finally, Chapter 5
concludes this thesis and discusses future work ideas.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter presents the concepts and technologies that are relevant to the
thesis.
It starts by explaining what the Internet is and introduces the fun-
damental concepts in this respect. After that, Internet measurements are ex-
plained, including their motivation and categories. Then, a list of popular active
measurement tools is presented, followed by a recap of the related works on In-
ternet measurement platforms. Finally, the chapter ends with a summary of the
serverless computing paradigm, which is the computing model of the proposed
solution of this thesis.
2.1
The Internet
The Internet is a group of networks that are connected through links [FF07].
Each network consists of a collection of inter-connected computers that are ca-
pable of exchanging information with each other. The main goal of the Internet
is to provide end-to-end connectivity between hosts despite being possibly far
from each other. In this thesis, host and computer refer to the same entity and
are used interchangeably.
Other than the end host, there are other types of entities on the Internet, such
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
as routers, switches, and servers. A router is a device that connects two or
more different networks. The primary functions of a router are to forward data
packets to the correct destination. Different from routers, a switch connects
devices in the same network. It forwards data packets to the destination device
in the same network. Lastly, servers are high-powered computers that provide
different contents to users, usually at end hosts. Servers generally act as content
providers and provide services to anyone on the Internet [VSF+15]. Figure 2.1
illustrates the location of these entities in small networks according to their
functionality.
Figure 2.1: The example of servers, switches, and routers in small networks.
Another component of the Internet is the Autonomous System (AS). Each AS
consists of routers that one or more network operators control under a routing
policy [HB96]. An AS can be identified by a number called Autonomous System
Number (ASN). The number is divided into two formats, i.e., 16-bit and 32-bit.
The 16-bit format ranges from 0 to 65535, while the 32-bit format ranges from 0
to 4294967295. However, some are already reserved for private use, i.e., 64512 -
65534 inclusive for the 16-bit format and 4200000000 - 4294967294 inclusive for
the 32-bit format [Mit13]. Figure 2.2 illustrates three ASes that are connected
through links.
There are two fundamental concepts for the Internet to function: packets and
protocols. A packet is the smallest unit representing a message exchanged be-
tween hosts on the Internet. Each packet contains data and information about
these data, usually referred to as the packet header. The header is located at
the beginning of the packet. It is crucial to let any entity in the network that re-
ceives a packet know what to do with it. A group of packets forms complete data
represented in human-readable forms, such as documents, images, and videos.
Therefore, when a computer sends content to another computer via Internet,
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Internet
7
Figure 2.2: The example of Autonomous Systems.
the content is broken down into packets, and each packet is sent independently.
The packets are forwarded to the destination by routers and switches using the
information provided in the packet header. A protocol, instead, is a standard-
ised communication form agreed upon and understood by all entities on the
Internet. There are different protocols used on the Internet. The one used for
network-to-network communication is called Internet Protocol (IP).
IP contains a set of rules for addressing the packets so that they can move across
the network and arrive at the correct destination. Each host on the Internet has
one or more IP addresses. Other network entities use an address to send packets
to the host. There are currently two versions of IP, i.e., IP version 4 (IPv4) and
IP version 6 (IPv6). IPv4 uses a 32-bit format to specify the address of the
host, supporting only up to 232 devices. Therefore, IPv6 aims to overcome this
shortage of unique addressing, supporting up to 2128 devices. However, IPv6 is
not fully adopted. Thus, unless otherwise stated, this thesis refers to IPv4.
IP can be used with other protocols to define how packets are moved between
entities on the Internet. Those protocols are called transport protocols. The
most common transport protocols are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). In TCP, once a destination receives a
packet, it sends an acknowledgement to the sender. If a packet is missing, it is
going to be detected and sent back to the destination. In addition, it also ensures
that the packets arrive in the correct order. Conversely, UDP does not support
the acknowledgement mechanism, making it less reliable than TCP since packet
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
loss cannot be detected. Despite the lack of reliability, UDP is designed to be
very simple and faster than TCP.
2.2
Internet Measurements
Since the advent of the Internet in the 1980s, billions of devices are intercon-
nected today. Consequently, the topology and structure of the networks that
make up the Internet have become complex and challenging to observe [KB12].
In addition, most applications nowadays are deployed on cloud computing plat-
forms that rely heavily on the Internet [CEM+21]. As a result, failures on the
Internet may impact the availability of the applications, which may directly or
indirectly affect our daily lives.
The discussion above highlights that it is crucial to understand the condition of
the networks. Internet measurements open the possibility of detecting network
anomalies, which allows locating and identifying issues [FPAB17]. However, the
importance of performing Internet measurement is not limited to troubleshoot-
ing purposes; it is also essential for future planning, development, and deploy-
ment of the Internet [Cer91].
The IP Performance Measurement (IPPM) Working Group defines a set of
metrics and methodologies for Internet measurement to obtain meaningful re-
sults [Pax96, PAMM98]. A metric refers to the property of an Internet that is
obtained through measurement. Therefore, it can vary depending on the spe-
cific component in the network. For instance, a metric of interest for a network
router could be the forwarding rate: the number of packets per second it receives
at one interface and sends out at another [Pax96]. While in an Internet path,
it could be the elapsed time of a packet to travel between two hosts.
A measurement methodology refers to a way to obtain metrics. It can be divided
into two groups, i.e., active and passive. Active measurement requires one or
more network components to generate traffic. The generated traffic is only for
the purpose of measuring, for instance, for a source host to probe the target
host and for the target host to return a response as a form of acknowledgement.
Since generated traffic may disturb other entities, it is an intrusive type of
measurement. As a result, active measurement must be used with moderation
to ensure that it does not overload the target host. In addition, some ethics need
to be followed. For instance, privacy and security violations are not allowed.
Furthermore, data collection must be carefully planned to achieve research goals
with minimal impact [Cer91].
Therefore, checking whether the desired data
exists is recommended before starting any measurement experiments.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Active Network Measurement Tools
9
On the contrary, passive measurement does not generate additional traffic and,
thus, is non-intrusive. It observes the target of interest by capturing incoming
and, or outgoing packets. While the information captured from the packets is
highly detailed, this becomes a serious drawback when the connection speed
is high. In fact, the amount of data can grow significantly in a short amount
of time, thus becoming extremely costly to process. An alternative to packet
capturing is to analyse the packets at the flow level. A flow is a set of packets that
share common properties and pass through the same observation point [JR86,
Cla88]. Although it is cheaper to analyse, flow only provides a summary of the
packets and gives only an abstraction of each packet. As a result, the granularity
level is low, and essential information may be lost.
The measurement platform developed in this thesis is designed for active mea-
surement. Thus, passive measurement is out of the scope of the thesis and is
not discussed further.
2.3
Active Network Measurement Tools
This section overviews the major tools for network measurement. It includes
ping and traceroute, the two most commonly used tools [BS15]. Moreover,
this section presents the tools that emerge to overcome the shortcoming of the
older tools.
2.3.1
Ping
ping is one of the most commonly used network debugging tools.
It was
created in 1983 by Michael John Muuss when he encountered unusual be-
haviour of the IP network at his workplace at the Ballistic Research Labo-
ratory [Muu00]. Although some sources mention that ping stands for Packet
Internet Groper [Mil83, Bar89], Muuss says that the name is taken from the
analogy of sonar that uses sound to probe the surroundings: similarly, ping
probes another entity by sending a set of packets and waiting for replies to
determine the reachability and latency between two entities.
ping is implemented by using the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
Echo and Echo Reply message defined on RFC792 [Pos81a]. ICMP is a part
of IP and thus must be implemented by every IP module; therefore, ping has
become a universal diagnostic tool since all network entities understand the
protocol and are capable of responding to probe packets.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
The primary purpose of ICMP is to report an error in datagram processing,
for instance, when a datagram fails to reach its destination or a router does
not have enough capacity to forward a datagram [Pos81a]. However, ICMP can
also be employed to perform network attacks, such as ICMP flood [GJSG16]
and SMURF attacks [GSAM11]. As a result, network administrators generally
block ICMP packets on network devices to protect them from being attacked.
Consequently, ping may not be able to work as intended. Therefore, a lack
of response to ping probes does not necessarily imply that the target node is
unreachable. As a result, ping may fail to provide accurate information for
users to understand the actual condition of the network.
0
7
15
31
Type
Code
Checksum
Source
Sequence Number
Data ...
Figure 2.3:
ICMP datagram of Echo and Echo Reply messages.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the ICMP datagram for Echo and Echo Reply messages.
The default size of each ICMP packet generated by ping is 64 bytes, including 8
bytes of header and 56 bytes of data. The first byte in the header indicates the
ICMP packet type. The value is 8 for the Echo message and 0 for the Echo Reply
message. The code value stored in the following sequence byte is zero for both
types of messages. In addition, for a ping request to be successful, the protocol
requires the data in the Echo message to be sent back to the source host in the
responding Echo Reply message. The source and destination address values in
the IP packet header are never changed. Therefore, when an Echo message is
received, the protocol uses the source address information from the packet as
the destination of the Echo Reply message.
ping sends an ICMP packet every second. Each packet has a different sequence
number, which indicates the packet order. The sequence number is stored in the
last two bytes of the ICMP packet header. This helps indicate anomalies, such
as when packets are lost, reordered, or duplicated. In addition, the checksums
are always calculated, which is helpful to detect if packet is corrupted. Finally,
the most important aspect is that the timestamp contained in the packet is used
to determine the round-trip time, the time elapsed from when the packet is sent
until a response is received. This helps determining the latency of data transfer
between two nodes in the network.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Active Network Measurement Tools
11
2.3.2
Tokyo Ping
Tokyo Ping was born to solve an issue of the classic ping, which is discussed in
Section 2.3.1, raised by the presence of per-flow load-balancing routers. Pelsser
et al. [PCVB13] discovered that the delay variance in the ping measurement
results is very high. Such a situation occurs due to the design of ping that
sends several probes that belong to different flows. As a result, the load balancer
forwards the probes to different paths, possibly having different lengths.
To ensure that the probes belong to the same flow, they all must have the same
flow identifier. Therefore, the set of fields used to generate a flow identifier must
remain constant for all probes. Tokyo Ping adapted Paris Traceroute (discussed
in Section 2.3.4), which keeps the fields that generate the flow identifier set to
user-specified constants.
Tokyo Ping supports both UDP and ICMP probes. In ICMP, the fields that
contribute to the flow identifiers are type, code, and checksum. Since ICMP
Echo messages and Echo Reply messages have different values for type (i.e.,
8 and 0, respectively), the checksum is also different. Because the source host
cannot control the reply message, the flow identifiers are not controllable. Tokyo
Ping overcomes this issue by holding a one-to-one mapping between the flow
identifiers of probes and the flow identifiers of responses. For UDP probes, the
response is an ICMP Destination Unreachable message, which is affected by the
payload of the UDP probes. Tokyo Ping can predict an ICMP message from the
destination host by crafting a UDP payload that keeps the checksum constant,
resulting in a constant flow identifier.
2.3.3
Traceroute
traceroute is a network routing diagnostic tool invented in 1988 by Van Ja-
cobson [Jac88]. It provides a list of IP addresses that belong to a set of routers
that process the packets along a path from source to destination, including the
round-trip time taken between the source and each router.
traceroute primarily leverages the Time-to-Live (TTL) information on the IP
header.
TTL defines the time for a packet to live in seconds.
In practice,
however, this value is decremented by one at each router where the packet
is processed. Therefore, for a packet to arrive at the destination successfully,
the TTL value should be greater or equal to the number of routers the packet
traverses. [Pos81a]. The packet is discarded if the TTL value is one when it
reaches a router that is not the final destination. This happens because the
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
router decreases the value to zero, and the packet cannot be forwarded anymore.
In addition, the router that discards the packet sends an ICMP Time Exceeded
message to the source host.
traceroute uses UDP by default to send probes to the destination on a random
port, ranging from 33434 to 33523 [SZ05]. It starts by sending packets with a
low TTL value (i.e., one), which gradually increases by one until the value is
large enough to make the packet arrive at the destination. traceroute sends
three packets by default for each TTL value and waits for the corresponding
responses. If all three packets are not getting any response until the timeout
(i.e., 5 seconds by default), it moves to the next TTL value. Figure 2.4 illustrates
how traceroute with the ICMP probes works on simple network topology.
Figure 2.4: The example of traceroute with the ICMP probes.
The TTL value represents the distance of the router from the source host in
terms of the number of hops. As a result, traceroute uses the TTL value and
the received ICMP Time Exceeded message to identify the sequence of routers
along the path from the source to the destination. Moreover, traceroute ex-
pects that no application is listening on the target port. In such a case, the
destination sends another ICMP message (i.e., Destination Unreachable) to the
source host when the packet is processed.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Active Network Measurement Tools
13
0
7
15
31
Type
Code
Checksum
unused
Internet Header + 64 bits of Original Data Datagram
Figure 2.5:
ICMP datagram for a Time Exceeded message.
Figure 2.5 shows the datagram of an ICMP Time Exceeded message [Pos81a].
This message can be identified by ICMP type 11. The value of the code field
can be zero or one. Zero indicates that the time to live was exceeded in transit,
which is the most common scenario for traceroute. A value of one means that
a host failed to reassemble a fragmented datagram because missing fragments
are unavailable within the time limit. Lastly, the Internet header and the first
64 bytes of the original data are also returned. This information is helpful for
the source host to match the message it sent earlier.
traceroute has several weaknesses. First, the ability of traceroute may be
impacted when a router or host has ICMP disabled, similar to ping. Moreover,
traceroute cannot tell if different traces where at least a certain hop reported
different IP addresses indicate distinct paths [MPPKB13]. There is a possibility
that multiple IP addresses belong to different interfaces on the same router.
In addition, each TTL value uses different probe packets. The path taken for
each probe may be different due to possible temporary changes in routes or
the presence of load balancers. Therefore, traceroute may yield an inaccurate
route and fail to help reconstruct network topology.
2.3.4
Paris Traceroute
Paris Traceroute was introduced in 2006 by Augustin et al. [ACO+06] to ad-
dress the deficiency of the classic traceroute, the one described in the previous
section.
In modern networks, routing protocols such as OSPF [Moy98] and IS-IS [Cal90]
allow load balancing on packet routes to enhance the reliability of network con-
nections. However, the network architecture becomes more complex as more
links between routers are established. As a result, traceroute designed decades
ago may not be capable of fully understanding these network topologies, lead-
ing to inaccurate measurement results. In particular, several anomalies from
the traceroute measurement result cannot be detected and filtered out: loops,
cycles, and diamonds [ACO+06]. Loops refer to the condition where the same
node appears twice or more in a row. On the other hand, cycles mean there
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
exists a node that appears twice but is separated by at least one distinct node.
Finally, diamonds indicate a condition where the depicted route contains false
links. These anomalies are illustrated in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Anomalies in the traceroute results.
Paris Traceroute filters these anomalies by controlling the header fields in the
probe packets to ensure that all probes for the same destination go through
the same path, even in the presence of the load balancers. To identify ICMP
response with the corresponding probe packets, Paris Traceroute varies the first
eight bytes of the transport-layer header, which is not used for load balancing.
2.3.5
Reverse Traceroute
Reverse Traceroute was introduced by Katz-Bassett et al. [KBMA+10] to ad-
dress a significant limitation of traceroute: it does not provide reverse path
information.
When traceroute was created, it was safe to assume that the trace from source
to destination is symmetrical to the trace from destination to source. However,
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Active Network Measurement Tools
15
links between routers have become complex, and paths are asymmetrical with
the presence of load balancers and advanced routing algorithms. The lack of
reverse path visibility hinders many researchers and industries where they can
only guess return paths [KB12]. Therefore, Reverse Traceroute was born with
that motivation in mind.
Since there is no control over destination hosts, it is impossible to expect that
they perform any operations. If destination hosts can be controlled instead,
Reverse Traceroute is as trivial as instructing such hosts to perform traceroute
to the source. For this reason, Reverse Traceroute is not a stand-alone program
but requires help from other nodes, referred to as vantage points.
The Reverse Traceroute workflow can be divided into a few steps. In the first
step, a source host requests a reverse trace from a particular destination. Then,
the vantage points perform traceroute to the source host to collect informa-
tion regarding the route toward the source host and build an atlas of paths.
Afterwards, Reverse Traceroute applies different strategies to obtain informa-
tion piece by piece.
The first strategy is to collect possible reverse hops using RR-Ping and TS-
Query-Ping. The difference between RR-Ping and the classic Ping is that the
RR-Ping sends ICMP Echo messages with the Record Route (RR) option set.
Setting such an option enables recording the IP addresses of the routers that
process the packet along the path. The caveat of this approach is that the num-
ber of recorded addresses is limited to nine [Pos81b]. If the number of hops from
the forward path is nine or more, any hops that are parts of the reverse path are
not recorded. TS-Query-Ping probes the destination using ICMP packets with
the timestamp query enabled between the destination host (D) and a particular
router (R). It is meant to record timestamps when the packet reaches R after D.
These timestamps are helpful in measuring the latency between the two points.
However, Reverse Traceroute does not use timestamp values. In fact, Reverse
Traceroute is only interested in knowing whether node R is in a reverse path
from D to the source or not.
The other strategy is to perform spoofing of the source IP address. Since Reverse
Traceroute is backed up by a few hundred or even a few thousand vantage
points, they can be used to perform RR-Ping together with a spoofed IP Source.
Suppose ping is performed by vantage points close to the destination, and the
source IP is spoofed by setting it to the actual source host address rather than
the vantage point address. In that case, the destination sends the Echo Reply
message to the source host instead of the actual one. With RR enabled, several
hops from the destination to the actual source may be recorded due to the close
distance between the vantage points and the destination.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Finally, Reverse Traceroute builds the full reverse paths by doing an incremental
build of the path fragments. Since the combination of strategies above may only
yield a small fragment of the reverse paths, the process can be repeated several
times by applying the same algorithm with different destination nodes to obtain
other path fragments. The process starts with the actual destination as the
destination node, which then gets replaced by the closest node to the source
node in the fragment of paths. The process continues until the node in the path
reaches the source host.
2.3.6
Scamper
Scamper [Luc10] is a measurement tool built with the motivation to help Internet
researchers focus on performing measurements rather than splitting priority
into other technical aspects, such as dealing with different operating systems,
recording data, and handling performance issues.
The design of the tool targeted the following objectives:
• Precise: the packet response must be easy to retrieve for analysis. The
tool must allow researchers to annotate a single or group of measurements
to describe the purpose of the collected data.
• Parallel operation: several simultaneous measurements may be needed
to perform massive Internet measurements.
Those measurements may
include waiting time which usually blocks other operations. Therefore,
parallelisation support is required to let all measurements run individually
without blocking each other.
• Portable: the measurements must run in different operating systems and
computer architectures.
• Flexible: each measurement may have different requirements. Therefore,
the parameters for the measurement should be easy to configure.
• Volunteer friendly: since volunteers often facilitate measurements1, the
tool must be lightweight, self-contained, and easy to operate.
• Modular: multiple measurement techniques must be supported, and they
should be easy to add.
1Recall, for instance, the vantage points used by Reverse Traceroute.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Internet Measurement Platforms
17
Figure 2.7: The architecture of Scamper [Luc10].
Figure 2.7 illustrates the architecture of Scamper.
As shown in the figure,
Scamper supports several measurement techniques, including Traceroute and
Ping. The capabilities of each measurement technique are as follow:
• Traceroute supports IPv4 and IPv6, and the probes available are TCP,
UDP, and ICMP. In addition, the Paris Traceroute option is also sup-
ported.
• Ping supports TCP, UDP, ICMP, and TTL-limited probing.
• MDA Traceroute uses a multipath detection algorithm to deduce all avail-
able interfaces exposed through per-flow load balancers.
• Alias resolution allows to tell if IP addresses observed are aliases.
• Sting enables detecting one-way packet loss. It uses the TCP-based algo-
rithm by Stevan Savage [Sav99].
• TBIT uses two techniques in Medina et al. [MAF05] for measuring be-
haviour in response to an ICMP packet with a large message and to Ex-
plicit Congestion Notification.
2.4
Internet Measurement Platforms
This section summarises several efforts that have been made to develop Internet
measurement platforms and perform standardisation.
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
2.4.1
Hardware-Based Approaches
RIPE Atlas is an Internet measurement platform established by RIPE Network
Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC). It consists of over ten thousand active hard-
ware probes spread across the globe [RIPd].
As illustrated in Figure 2.8, the probes are small USB-powered devices that
can be connected to an ethernet port of a home router or data centre. When
this thesis is written, RIPE NCC provisioned four hardware versions, in which
the latest version was first distributed in June 2019 [RIPa]. At the same time,
the next generation is in the progress of being manufactured [RIPe]. Users can
volunteer to host RIPE Atlas probes with the incentive of getting credits that
can be used to run user-defined measurements. [Man12].
Figure 2.8: RIPE Atlas probe v3 [RIPc].
The heterogeneous hardware versions lead to a problem, as Bajpai et al. [BES15]
found load issues in older probe generations. The authors experimented on v1,
v2, and v3 hardware probes, which are directly connected to the home gateway
in a residential network. The goal is to find the first-hop latencies of the probes,
which are expected to be less than 1ms. v3 probes show the expected latencies.
On the contrary, all v1 and v2 probes show higher latencies. The difference in
hardware specification causes this problem, especially the memory size. As a
result, this issue produces a problem of skewed measurement results.
2.4.2
Browser-Based Approaches
Dhawan et al. [DST+12] explain that measuring network performance is ideal if
done from the end systems perspective. In addition to the benefits it produces
for researchers, carrying out measurements at end systems can help practitioners
to know their local performance. However, realizing such a platform on end
systems may be troublesome and discourage the practitioners, especially with
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Internet Measurement Platforms
19
the difficulty of installing custom tools.
As a result, they aim to overcome
the issue by introducing a measurement platform called Fathom, running on
web browsers.
Specifically, the platform runs as a Firefox extension.
With
the ubiquity of web browsers, the platform is believed to achieve an adequate
tradeoff between deployability and flexibility.
Fathom is designed to support both passive and active measurements. Passive
measurements are needed to understand problems running in the browser. The
analysed data can be browser-level activities, such as DOM updates and HTTP
session tracking. Active monitoring is also essential since active probing can
trigger the root cause of the problem to surface.
To interact with the platform, Fathom provides a set of APIs to be invoked from
JavaScript code running in the browser. The user needs to provide a callback
function that the platform calls once the result is ready. This design allows
asynchronous process handlers and prevents the blocking of other jobs. One
of the APIs provides the functionality to invoke system-provided tools, such as
traceroute and ping. Fathom sanitises the arguments and the output to prevent
malicious actions and undesirable situations.
In addition, the invocation of
arbitrary system commands is not allowed.
The privacy and security aspects of the platform are also part of the design. To
ensure that attacks such as XSS and CSRF do not occur, Fathom has a separate
network I/O stack from the browser’s stack. Therefore, cookie files and session
data cannot be retrieved by Fathom. Moreover, one of the security features that
Fathom supports is the configuration of client policy that defines which APIs
are available to the scripts.
Of course, Fathom impacts Internet browsing activities. It happens due to the
behaviour of Fathom, which monitors all HTTP activities of the browser. Based
on the evaluation of Fathom on eight popular websites, it has an overhead of
less than 3.2% in terms of page load times.
2.4.3
Cooperative Approaches
Xiaodong et al. [XFL11] built a cooperative network measurement platform.
Compared to the older measurement platforms coordinated by a centralised
server, such as Surveyor [KZ99] and NIMI [PAM02], the platform is built on a
peer-to-peer network architecture to enable cooperation between measurement
nodes. One entity acts as a server that handles the registration of a new node
upon startup, making it a hybrid peer-to-peer network instead of a pure one.
In addition, such a server node also performs task coordination. Despite being
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
a single point of failure, it hardly becomes overwhelmed with tasks because its
only function is to be a node manager.
The measurement tasks are handled by nodes called measurement nodes. A
measurement node gets a list of other measurement nodes after startup. Be-
cause of that, a node is able to ask other nodes to perform measurements to-
gether. The measurements supported by the platform are divided into three
categories: IPPM measurements, web measurements, and RTSP-based video
streaming measurements.
A measurement node is represented as a tuple, <id, ip, AS, task_num, tasks>,
where id is the unique node identifier, ip is the IP address of the node, AS is the
ASN of the node, task_num is the limit of number tasks the node can handle
simultaneously, and tasks list the measurement tasks that are supported by the
node. A measurement task is defined as an array in the form of {command,
args, opts}. command refers to the command that the node runs, args are the
arguments of the command, and opts are the options for the command.
One of the example use cases of the platform is to perform Distributed QoS
Measurement.
Suppose that a video streaming server has been set up.
To
check that the server works correctly, one can install a measurement node that
joins the cooperative peer-to-peer network. When the node has a list of other
measurement nodes, one can assign a measurement task to the other measure-
ment nodes. After the nodes perform the measurement task, they return the
measurement results to the requester node.
2.4.4
Standardisation
M. Bagnulo et al. [BBC+14] propose standardisation on measurement platforms
by extending a set of standard protocols. They observe that major measure-
ment platforms, such as RIPE Atlas [RIPb], perfSONAR [HBB+05], and Sam-
Knows [Cra08], have their proprietary protocols for the communication between
platform components, both for controlling probes and collecting results. More
importantly, the platforms have their methods for presenting measurement re-
sults (e.g., providing the 95th percentile mean or interval to exclude outliers),
making the results from those platforms difficult to compare.
SamKnows is chosen as a use case platform to demonstrate the standardisa-
tion suggestion, targeted in several aspects. First, the authors suggest using
a standard information model to define the data passing through each compo-
nent in the platform for executing the measurement and reporting. This covers
what kind of measurement the probe should do and when it should be per-
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Serverless Computing
21
formed. Then, they propose implementing standardised test protocols which
complement IPPM metrics [Pax96, PAMM98]. Furthermore, instead of using
proprietary protocols, they use the NETCONF/YANG protocol for the com-
munication between controller and measurement probes to configure test and
reporting schedules. Finally, they suggest using the IPFIX protocol to deliver
the measurement results. They conclude that despite the differences in the plat-
form, abstraction and standardisation can enable a degree of interoperability.
2.5
Serverless Computing
Serverless computing is a paradigm that conceals operational concerns of server
management from users [Phu20].
It is also known as a Function as a Ser-
vice (FaaS), where users only need to deploy their function without managing
a server or runtime environment. Amazon Web Services (AWS) introduced the
first serverless computing service in 2004, called AWS Lambda2 [EW17]. Since
then, other cloud providers have included FaaS in their service offerings, such
as Google Cloud Functions3 and Microsoft Azure Functions4.
From the definition discussed above, serverless terminology can also be used for
fully-managed services provided by cloud providers that abstract away server op-
erational responsibility from users. Therefore, the serverless definition is shifted
towards more than just FaaS, such as serverless container service. Google Cloud
Run5 is an example of a serverless container service.
It allows users to de-
ploy containerised applications without performing server provisioning, security
patching, and auto-scaling. One of the advantages of the serverless container
service compared to the FaaS solutions is that there is no need to be bounded by
the FaaS supported runtimes. In addition, there is more flexibility in including
additional software dependencies inside a container.
On serverless computing services, cloud providers manage the scaling capability,
which means the computing resource scales in and out automatically depending
on the demand. Although it is expected for the service to handle all incoming
requests, there is a known issue called cold starts, in which there is extra latency
for the application to handle the initial requests. This issue can be solved by
keeping the computing resources warm by allocating at least one resource on
stand-by. However, cloud providers typically charge users more because of the
allocated resources.
2https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/
3https://cloud.google.com/functions
4https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions/
5https://cloud.google.com/run
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
The pricing model of the serverless computing services is pay-as-you-go [Phu20].
This means users pay only for the duration of the application run to serve
incoming requests. This differs from the conventional approach, where users
must maintain at least a single server to handle requests. Consequently, users
need to pay for the server even when idle.
Although the serverless pricing
model is seemingly potential cost savings, users need to pay more attention to
its pricing model, which is more complex than it appears [EW17]. Depending
on the application use case and usage pattern, using serverless can be more
expensive than running the application inside virtual machine servers.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Serverless Measurement
Platform
This chapter elaborates on the design and implementation of the proposed so-
lution. It starts by listing the functional requirements. Then, the system design
and the functionalities offered by the solution are presented. Finally, the imple-
mentation of the proof of concept is elaborated.
3.1
Functional Requirements
From the literature, we identified the following set of requirements that have to
be fulfilled by an Internet measurement platform:
• It must allow users to use ping and traceroute probes.
• It must allow users to run a one-off measurement.
• It must allow users to run a repeated measurement with the specified
interval.
• It must allow users to schedule a measurement to run in the future.
==PAGE:34==
24
Serverless Measurement Platform
• It must allow users to check the status of measurements.
• It must allow users to abort running and scheduled measurements.
• It must allow users to retrieve and store the measurement results.
3.2
System Design
Figure 3.1: The architecture of the serverless platform.
The proposed solution is designed and built on the Google Cloud Platform
(GCP)1. GCP is one of the leading cloud providers that has offered Cloud In-
frastructure and Platform Services for the past years [Gar]. It offers various
serverless services, including computing and database services, which are needed
to devise the proposed solution.
1https://cloud.google.com/
==PAGE:35==
3.2 System Design
25
Figure 3.1 illustrates the architectural design of the proposed solution. There
are three main software components developed for this thesis:
1. Measurement CLI
It is a command-line interface (CLI) tool that helps users to interact with
the platform. The tool allows users to create a measurement task and
manage existing tasks. The task creation operation prompts users to input
information the platform needs, referred to as Task Specification. The
other function is managing existing tasks, such as cancelling scheduled
and running tasks, checking task status, and retrieving task results.
2. API Server
API server provides several functionalities supported by the measure-
ment platform. Each functionality is handled by a function deployed in
the Google Cloud Functions service2.
These functions are invoked us-
ing HTTP triggers. The invocation is done from the Google Cloud API
Gateway service3, which becomes the entry point of the API server.
3. Measurer
A measurer instance is a probe that performs measurement.
Each in-
stance is packaged as a docker image. Therefore, the Google Cloud Run
service4 is chosen as a computing service for measurer instances. ping and
traceroute are bundled inside the docker image. This ensures that all
measurer instances have the same version of these tools.
Outside the main components, Google Cloud Firestore service5 and Google
Cloud Scheduler service6 are used to store data and schedule measurement in-
vocation, respectively. All GCP services used for the solution, as illustrated in
Figure 3.1, fall into the serverless category, resulting in a fully-serverless appli-
cation.
3.2.1
Measurement Task Specification
We define a measurement task specification as a set of information users must
provide to the measurement platform.
2https://cloud.google.com/functions
3https://cloud.google.com/api-gateway
4https://cloud.google.com/run
5https://cloud.google.com/firestore
6https://cloud.google.com/scheduler
==PAGE:36==
26
Serverless Measurement Platform
Figure 3.2: A measurement task specification.
Figure 3.2 presents the data structure and example of a task specification. The
specification covers a list of vantage points containing the Google Cloud region
name where measurer instances are deployed. In addition, it contains probe
type, which refers to the network measurement tool used for measurement.
Moreover, additional arguments that may be given to the network measure-
ment tool are also included in the specification. Finally, the specification also
holds information about the measurement schedule. The schedule consists of
the start time, stop time, and cron expression. Start time defines the beginning
time of the measurement. For a situation where the measurement is favoured
to run immediately, this value can be left blank. In order to perform a one-off
measurement, stop time must be left blank, and therefore cron expression field
is ignored. The cron expression is to define the interval of the measurement. It
is used by Cloud Scheduler7 to trigger the measurer instance deployed in Cloud
Run.
The example of a measurement task presented in Figure 3.2 defines a ping mea-
surement to google.com from measurer instances deployed in Jakarta, Indonesia
(asia-southeast2) and Saint-Ghislain, Belgium (europe-west1) regions. The
measurement runs for a year, from July 18, 2022, at 9 a.m UTC+2 to July 18,
2023, at 9 a.m UTC+2. The cron expression states that the measurement is
performed every 3 hours.
3.2.2
Measurement Task Metadata
Measurement task metadata refers to the full specification of a measurement
task. It is a measurement task specification with additional information, such
as the status of measurement and how many data points were collected per
vantage point.
Figure 3.3 shows the example of a measurement task metadata. In addition to
7https://cloud.google.com/scheduler/docs/configuring/cron-job-schedules
==PAGE:37==
3.2 System Design
27
Figure 3.3: A measurement task metadata.
the information defined in the task specification, there are three more fields:
NumberOfSequence, Status, and Type.
NumberOfSequence holds the last sequence number of measurement results for
each vantage point. It can be translated as the number of data points collected
per vantage point. Status indicates the state of a measurement task. The task
status details are elaborated in the following subsection about the task lifecycle.
Lastly, Type defines the measurement type based on the provided Schedule
information. There are four different types of measurement:
• one-off_as-soon-as-possible
This measurement type runs only once and starts as soon as possible after
it is created. To create a measurement of this type, users must leave both
StartTime and StopTime values empty. In this measurement type, the
CronExpresion value is ignored. In addition, the Google Cloud Scheduler
job is not provisioned, as the scheduling is not necessary.
• one-off_scheduled
This measurement type runs only once and starts in the future. To create
a measurement of this type, users need to specify the StartTime value
and leave the StopTime value empty.
In this measurement type, the
CronExpresion value is ignored.
• recurring_as-soon-as-possible
This measurement type runs periodically and immediately starts after
it is created. To create a measurement of this type, users must leave the
StartTime value empty. However, both the StopTime and the CronExpre-
sion values must be provided.
==PAGE:38==
28
Serverless Measurement Platform
• recurring_scheduled
This measurement type runs periodically and starts in the future.
To
create a measurement of this type, users must provide the StartTime,
StopTime, and CronExpresion values.
3.2.3
Measurement Task Lifecycle
Figure 3.4: Measurement task lifecycle.
The measurement task lifecycle shows the state transition of a measurement
task. Each measurement task has one of the five possible states (i.e., scheduled,
running, failed, cancelled, and finished). Figure 3.4 illustrates the state
transition from one to another.
When a new measurement task is created,
the platform provisions a Google Cloud Scheduler job for each region, except
for a one-off_as-soon-as-possible measurement type in which the Cloud
Scheduler service is not utilised. If the provisioning fails in all regions, then
the task is inexecutable and marked as failed. However, if at least one of the
scheduler jobs is successfully created, the task is in a scheduled state.
When a task in the scheduled state is invoked, it checks whether the StartTime
is equal to or past the current time. If the condition is met, the measurement is
marked as running, and the first measurement sequence is performed. At the
end of each execution, it checks if the measurement is done. This is indicated
by the StopTime that is equal to or past the current time. If the measurement
is done, the status is updated to finished.
On the other hand, users can choose to abort a measurement task. It can only
be aborted if the status is either scheduled or running. If the task is aborted,
the task is marked as cancelled.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 System Functionalities
29
3.3
System Functionalities
This section elaborates on the functionalities supported by the offered solution.
It starts with an elaboration of the creation of a measurement task. Then, the
management operations supported by the platform are presented, including task
cancellation, task status check, and task results retrieval.
3.3.1
Measurement Task Creation
Task creation is done at the beginning of a cycle when users want to perform a
measurement.
Figure 3.5: The sequence diagram of task creation.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the communication flow between components during the
creation of a measurement task.
First, users provide a task specification to
the platform via the measurement-cli tool. The tool sends the data over the
HTTP POST method to the API Gateway endpoint. The API Gateway then
invokes the corresponding Cloud Functions resource. The function stores the
task specification in Cloud Firestore. Afterwards, for each GCP region listed
as the vantage point, the function either directly invokes the measurer instance
in the Cloud Run service or creates a Cloud Scheduler job. The direct invo-
==PAGE:40==
30
Serverless Measurement Platform
cation to the measurer instances is special for a case when the measurement
is an immediate one-off type (i.e., one-off_as-soon-as-possible). Finally,
the platform returns an identifier of the task at the end of the operation. The
identifier is essential for users to perform management operations on the task.
Those management operations are explained in the following subsections.
3.3.2
Measurement Task Cancellation
Task cancellation is an operation that allows users to abort scheduled and run-
ning tasks.
Figure 3.6: The sequence diagram of task cancellation.
To cancel a task, users must provide the task identifier. As shown in Figure 3.6,
the identifier is used by a function named measurement-cancel-task deployed
in Google Cloud Functions to retrieve the task metadata. The function checks if
the task is either in a scheduled or running state. This is due to the cancellation
is not possible to be done on the other operations.
The cancellation is performed by deleting all Google Cloud Scheduler jobs be-
longing to the task. When all scheduler jobs are deleted, the measurement is
stopped. Thus, the task status is updated to cancelled.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 System Functionalities
31
3.3.3
Measurement Task Status Retrieval
Task status retrieval is an operation that allows users to check the status of
a measurement task. As illustrated in Figure 3.7, users must provide a task
identifier to check the task status. This operation has a small footprint; the
maximum returned data is nine bytes. This operation is helpful in case users
want to periodically perform an automated status check before retrieving the
measurement result.
Figure 3.7: The sequence diagram of task status retrieval.
3.3.4
Measurement Task Results Retrieval
Figure 3.8 illustrates the task results retrieval operation that allows users to
retrieve the results of a measurement task. Users also must know and provide
the task identifier to retrieve the task results.
==PAGE:42==
32
Serverless Measurement Platform
Figure 3.8: The sequence diagram of task results retrieval.
3.4
Proof of Concept Implementation
As described in Section 3.2, three main components are designed and developed
for this thesis. This section elaborates on the technical details of the implemen-
tation and deployment of these components.
3.4.1
Measurement CLI
measurement-cli is written in Go 1.18. The primary purpose of this tool is to
assist users in interacting with the measurement platform. Algorithm 1 shows
the pseudocode of how the tool generally works. The tool parses user input
from the command-line arguments. To perform such a task, we created a new
Go package called flag with a function named Parse. This function returns
a tuple of two, consisting of the subcommand and arguments. The expected
value of the subcommand is either measure or manage. If the tool receives other
values, it shows help menu instead. The help menu can also be printed using
-h, as illustrated in Figure 3.9.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Proof of Concept Implementation
33
Figure 3.9: The screenshot of the measurement-cli help menu.
Algorithm 1 Main function of the measurement-cli.
1: (subcommand, args) ←flag.Parse()
2: switch subcommand do
3:
case “measure":
4:
spec ←toTaskSpecification(args)
5:
apiConnector.SendTask(spec)
6:
case “manage":
7:
(action, taskID) ←toTaskManagement(args)
8:
switch action do
9:
case “cancel":
10:
apiConnector.CancelTask(taskID)
11:
case “status":
12:
apiConnector.GetStatus(taskID)
13:
case “results":
14:
apiConnector.GetResults(taskID)
15:
case default:
16:
showHelp()
17:
case default:
18:
showHelp()
The arguments are defined as a Go interface for generic usage and easier cast-
ing. Therefore, once the subcommand is recognised, the arguments are cast to
the correct struct type. In the measure subcommand, the struct type is a task
specification, described in Section 3.2.1. In the manage subcommand, the argu-
==PAGE:44==
34
Serverless Measurement Platform
ments consist of a management action type and a task identifier. The action
determines a management operation users want to perform on the task. The
expected values of the action are cancel, status, and results. The details of
those operations are discussed in Section 3.3.2, Section 3.3.3, and Section 3.3.4,
respectively.
Figure 3.10 summarises the use cases of the measurement-cli
tool.
Figure 3.10: The use cases of the measurement-cli tool.
The measure and manage subcommands send the information received from
users to the measurement platform. We defined a new package that handles
the communication with the API gateway of the measurement platform. This
package has functions that perform HTTP calls to the measurement platform.
Each function targets a different endpoint and sends a different HTTP method.
The endpoints and the HTTP methods are discussed in the following subsection
about API Server.
3.4.2
API Server
This subsection explains the implementation of the API server of the measure-
ment platform. As illustrated in Figure 3.1, the API server consists of a Google
Cloud API gateway resource and four functions deployed in the Google Cloud
Functions service. The codes and configurations of these services can be found
in Appendix A.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Proof of Concept Implementation
35
The API gateway resource is defined as an OpenAPI specification8. We defined
four paths with different target addresses and HTTP methods in the specifica-
tion, as summarised in Table 3.1. For easier management and versioning of the
paths, all paths have the same base path (i.e., /api/v1), which is prepended to
the paths.
Path
Method
Function Name
/measurements
POST
measurement-create-task
/measurements/:id
DELETE
measurement-cancel-task
/measurements/:id
GET
measurement-get-status
/measurements/:id/results
GET
measurement-get-results
Table 3.1: API gateway resources definition.
All functions are written in Go 1.16. Although it is not the latest version of Go
at the time of development, 1.16 is the latest version of Go runtime supported
by Google Cloud Functions9.
3.4.3
Measurer
The measurer application is built and written in Go 1.18. Unlike the other two
components previously discussed, this application runs as a web server and is
packaged as a docker image. The primary reason is that one of the functional
requirements discussed in Section 3.1 demands that the platform must support
ping and traceroute. Therefore, bundling them inside the image is proper to
ensure they are available for use and have the same version across all application
instances.
We implemented multi-stage builds to optimise the final output docker image
size, as shown in Listing 1. After the application is built, there is no need to
host it inside a container that has Go installed. Moreover, we chose to host the
application in Alpine Linux10, which is lightweight and built based on musl libc11
and busybox12. Alpine Linux 3.15 has both ping and traceroute preinstalled.
8https://swagger.io/specification/
9https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/concepts/go-runtime
10https://alpinelinux.org/
11https://musl.libc.org/
12https://busybox.net/
==PAGE:46==
36
Serverless Measurement Platform
# syntax=docker/dockerfile:1
FROM golang:1.18.2-alpine3.15 as builder
WORKDIR /app
COPY . ./
RUN apk add --no-cache git && \
CGO_ENABLED=0 GOOS=linux go build -a -o app .
FROM alpine:3.15
WORKDIR /app
COPY --from=builder /app/app ./app
CMD ["./app"]
Listing 1: Dockerfile of the measurer application.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Evaluation
This chapter provides the details of the evaluation. It starts with an explana-
tion of evaluation methods followed by the performance metrics we gathered.
Then, the experiment setup is elaborated. Finally, the results and discussion
are presented.
4.1
Evaluation Methods
We evaluate the measurement platform running in serverless computing (the
proposed solution) compared to the traditional approach of using VMs. In order
to make the evaluation of both options comparable, the application structure
running in the proposed solution is modified to fit the deployment model of the
traditional approach, while preserving its functional logic and algorithm. Such
modification is the unification of all functions, which are spread across Cloud
Functions resources, into a single web server application. The web server is then
encapsulated as a Docker container running in Alpine 3.15. The container then
runs inside Google Compute Engine1 VMs on Container-Optimized OS from
Google2.
1https://cloud.google.com/compute
2https://cloud.google.com/container-optimized-os/docs
==PAGE:48==
38
Evaluation
Figure 4.1: The architecture of the platform deployed in the virtual machines.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the design of the platform running in the VMs. Compared
to Figure 3.1, the only difference is that the serverless computing resources (i.e.,
Cloud Functions and Cloud Run) are changed into Google Compute Engine
VMs. For API Server, instead of using API gateway and several Cloud Functions
resources, it turned into a single VM. Although it becomes a single point of
failure and a possible cause of scaling issues, those concerns are out of the scope
of this thesis evaluation. On the other hand, there is no change in the measurer
instances except in the computing resource selection.
The evaluation aims to get a general idea of how the proposed solution per-
forms compared to the traditional approach. Therefore, we chose to focus on
measuring the performance of running a measurement (Measurer) and getting
the measurement results (Get Results), as they represent all capabilities cur-
rently supported by the platform.
We come up with a hypothesis that the response time of the proposed solution
is higher than the traditional approach. This is due to the known issue called
cold starts that was previously discussed in Section 2.5. Another hypothesis
we have, based on its use case as a measurement platform, is that the cost of
running a measurement campaign can be cheaper on the serverless platform.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Performance Metrics
39
Although at some point in time, there is a case when VM is a better option,
cost-wise.
We performed experiments to measure the performance of both options. We are
interested in knowing the difference in response time between the two options.
Moreover, we are also interested in the cost of both solutions.
Finally, we
perform quantitative analysis to confirm the hypotheses.
4.2
Performance Metrics
The evaluation aims to find out whether the proposed solution answer the re-
search questions stated in Section 1.1. Therefore, the following metrics need to
be gathered:
• Response time: an end-to-end duration from a request being sent by users
until all response data are received.
• Cost: the cost to run an example use case of a measurement campaign.
4.2.1
Response Time
To better understand the response time, we profiled the response time as visu-
alised in Figure 4.2.
To do the profiling, we logged timestamps on a few points in the program
execution to determine the duration of each program phase. Startup time is the
duration from the invocation until the handler function is started. Shutdown
time is the duration from when a program execution exit the function until all
response is received by the client. On the Get Results operation, execution time
is the duration between the startup time and the shutdown time. While on the
Measurer operation, the response time can be profiled a step further by logging
timestamps when the measurement is started and finished.
Then, execution
time is the duration of performing a measurement.
However, in Figure 4.2,
we mark the execution time for the Measurer operation with white colour to
indicate its exclusion from the response time definition. This is because the
measurement target heavily influences the measurement duration, making it
irrelevant to the application performance. It is important to emphasise that
the cloud provider charges the whole processing time. Therefore, for evaluating
the Measurer operation, we use null probe: a probe that does not perform
==PAGE:50==
40
Evaluation
Figure 4.2: The profiling of response times on running a measurement
(Measurer) and get results (Get Results) operation.
any measurement to the target. In addition, as the duration affects the cost, it
becomes another metric of interest, which is further explained in the following
subsection.
4.2.2
Cost
Another metric we are interested in is the cost of performing a measurement
campaign. Since the duration of a measurer instance performing a measurement
is the major factor that determines the cost, we are interested in knowing a data
point where the cost of two options would be equivalent. Hence before that
point, one option is cheaper than the other.
4.3
Experimental Setup
We set up the infrastructure resources on GCP in Saint-Ghislain, Belgium
(europe-west1) region, as all the resources we need are available in this region.
Moreover, all resources are deployed to the same region to minimise additional
latencies due to the geographical distance. The remainder of this section elab-
orates the setup of both the proposed solution and the traditional approach, as
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Results
41
well as a machine that performs the benchmark to these platforms.
The proposed solution. We provisioned all resources with the same CPU and
memory specification. In Cloud Run resources, we configured the CPU limit3
of 2 vCPUs and the memory limit4 of 8GB. For Cloud Functions resources, we
allocated a memory of 8GB for each function. Based on this allocated memory
amount, the resource has 2 vCPUs [Goob]. Unless otherwise stated, we left all
other configurations to the default values.
The traditional approach. We chose the e2-standard-25 machine type for
the VM specification, with 2 vCPUs and 8GB of memory. This is to ensure that
both options have the same computing power.
Benchmarking tool. We use the Apache JMeter6 tool version 5.4.3 with Java
8 to generate HTTP requests to the platform. We chose to run the tool inside
a VM to better isolate the experiment from other external factors that can
cause a disturbance, especially to the network bandwidth.
In addition, the
VM is located in the same region where the platform is deployed, again, to
minimise additional latencies. The VM has 2 vCPUs, 8GB of memory, and runs
Ubuntu 22.04 LTS OS. We configure Apache JMeter to send the requests with a
concurrency level of one, meaning that only one request is being sent at a time.
We did not experiment with other concurrency levels because load testing the
platform is out of the scope of this thesis evaluation.
4.4
Results
We calculate the number of data points required per experiment using the sam-
ple size formula:
n = z2 × ˆp(1 −ˆp)
ϵ2
Where n is the sample size, z is the z-score, ˆp is the population proportion, and ϵ
is the error margin. The population proportion used is 50%, indicating an equal
chance of the measured value being higher and lower than the actual value. With
the target of having a confidence level of 99%, the obtained z-score is z = 2.587.
Finally, by aiming to get 1% of error margin, we get n = 16641, meaning that at
3https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/configuring/cpu
4https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/configuring/memory-limits
5https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/general-purpose-machines
6https://jmeter.apache.org/
7https://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/gerstman/StatPrimer/z-two-tails.pdf
==PAGE:52==
42
Evaluation
least 16641 samples should be collected per experiment. Therefore, we rounded
up the sample size to 20000, equivalent to having an error margin of 0.91217%
with the same confidence level.
The remainder of this section presents the evaluation results of the proposed
solution compared to the traditional approach.
4.4.1
Response Time
Measurer. Table 4.1 shows the details of the experiment of the Measurer oper-
ation. We conducted the experiment on the proposed solution (Cloud Run) and
the traditional approach (VM) on non-overlapping time windows, meaning that
one experiment starts after the other is finished. The results show that the VM
can collect 20000 data points in 50 minutes and 42 seconds, approximately 6.57
transactions per second (TPS). On the other hand, Cloud Run gets a lower TPS
value (i.e., 5.79) since the experiment to get the same amount of data points
took 6 minutes and 50 seconds longer than the VM.
Cloud Run
VM
Start time
2022-06-12 09:29:02 UTC
2022-06-12 19:32:07 UTC
Stop time
2022-06-12 10:26:34 UTC
2022-06-12 20:22:49 UTC
Duration
57 minutes and 32 seconds
50 minutes and 42 seconds
TPS
5.79
6.57
Table 4.1: Experiment details on the Measurer operation.
Table 4.2 presents the response times of the Measurer operation on the Cloud
Run and VM. The average response time of Cloud Run is higher than VM.
However, their standard deviation values are similar, approximately only 2 ms
of difference. This shows that both options show no significant difference in
terms of performance. To be exact, the difference in the average response time
of both options is 20.3 ms.
The profiled response times of the Measurer operation are illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.3. The values inside the black boxes are standard deviations, while the
white ones indicate average values. In Figure 4.3, both initialisation and tear-
down time of the two options look similar. The difference of the two options
look the clearest on the startup time.
The difference can be seen more clearly from the plot of the time series data of
the startup time illustrated by Figure 4.4. There is a high response time spotted
at the beginning of the sequence in Cloud Run, followed by occasional spikes.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Results
43
Response Time [ms]
Cloud Run
VM
Mean
172.061350
151.759250
Standard deviation
30.180367
32.230331
Min
137.000000
124.000000
Median
164.000000
147.000000
99th percentile
280.000000
232.000000
Max
1711.000000
1948.000000
Table 4.2: Response times on the Measurer operation.
Figure 4.3: The duration of each phase in the program in the Measurer oper-
ation.
However, compared to the Cloud Run, VM exhibits more uniformity, resulting
in a lower variance.
The data distribution illustrated in Figure 4.5 shows that most of the requests
are served below 280ms. Therefore, the requests that take longer to complete
most likely are outliers. Figure 4.6 shows the data distribution up to the 99th
percentile. It is visible that 80% of the requests can be finished below or equal
to 181 ms by Cloud Run. However, VM performs better; approximately 95% of
requests can be finished within the same duration.
Get Results. The experiment on the Get Results operation was carried out
similarly to the Measurer operation. Table 4.3 shows the details of the exper-
iment of the Get Results operation. The data size returned by the platform
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation
Figure 4.4: Startup time of the Measurer operation with maximum aggregate
for each 100 sequence.
Figure 4.5: CDF of response time of
the Measurer.
Figure 4.6: CDF of response time of
the Measurer (until the
99th percentile).
is equal for all requests (i.e., 997 bytes). The experiment was conducted on the
proposed solution (Cloud Functions) and the traditional approach (VM), also
on non-overlapping time windows. The results show that the VM can collect
20000 data points in 17 minutes and 27 seconds, approximately 19.1 TPS. The
proposed solution (i.e., Cloud Functions) yields a lower TPS value (i.e., 11.35).
The experiment on Cloud Functions took 11 minutes and 55 seconds longer than
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Results
45
the VM.
Cloud Functions
VM
Start time
2022-06-04 16:05:05 UTC
2022-06-04 09:29:36 UTC
Stop time
2022-06-04 16:34:27 UTC
2022-06-04 09:47:03 UTC
Duration
29 minutes and 22 seconds
17 minutes and 27 seconds
TPS
11.35
19.1
Table 4.3: Experiment details on the Get Results operation.
Table 4.4 presents the response times of the Get Results operation on the
Cloud Functions and VM. In average, Cloud Functions takes longer to finish
the requests than the VM. In addition, the data points gathered from Cloud
Functions have a higher variance than the VM. The most significant difference
is visible in the maximum response time, whereas it reaches more than 5 seconds
in Cloud Functions, which can be further investigated by looking at the profiled
response time, illustrated in Figure 4.7.
Response Time [ms]
Cloud Functions
VM
Mean
87.737550
52.105100
Standard deviation
50.356602
17.730484
Min
65.000000
38.000000
Median
82.000000
49.000000
99th percentile
178.000000
108.000000
Max
5373.000000
1172.000000
Table 4.4: Response times on the Get Results operation.
Figure 4.7 shows a significant difference between the two options in the startup
time.
Especially the high variance of the startup time in Cloud Functions.
Although the graph also shows the difference in shutdown time, the value is
small and negligible.
The time-series data of the startup time is illustrated in Figure 4.8. The biggest
response time that goes beyond 5 seconds happens only once at the beginning of
the request sequence. The higher variance of the startup time in Get Results
is more clearly visible in Figure 4.9. There are occasional high spikes that set
give the latency more than 450 ms.
Figure 4.10 shows the data distribution up to the 99th percentile. It is visible
that 80% of the requests can be finished below or equal to 89 ms by Cloud
Functions. However, VM performs better; approximately 98% of requests can
be finished within the same duration. In addition, while 80% of the requests
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
Figure 4.7: The duration of each phase in the program in the Get Results
operation.
Figure 4.8: Startup time of the Get Results operation with maximum aggre-
gate for each 100 sequence.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Results
47
Figure 4.9: Startup time of the Get Results operation with maximum aggre-
gate for each 100 sequence (rescaled on y-axis).
Figure 4.10: CDF of response time of the Get Results operation (until the
99th percentile).
can be finished below or equal to 53 ms by VM, within the same duration there
is no requests is completed by Cloud Functions.
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
4.4.2
Cost
The cost projection is inspired by an actual measurement campaign by Corneo
et al. [CEM+21]. The authors performed measurements for 12 months target-
ing 189 data centres. This subsection presents the cost projection if the same
measurement campaign is done using the proposed solution and the traditional
approach. The adjustment made from the author’s campaign is the number of
vantage points that perform the measurement. The vantage points are 23 GCP
regions, as listed in Table 4.6. In addition, we assume that the measurement is
done at the interval of three hours.
Tier
CPU
Memory
Requests
Free
180,000 vCPU-seconds
360,000 GiB-seconds
2 million requests
per month
per month
per month
1
$0.00002400
$0.00000250
$0.40 per million
per vCPU-second
per GiB-second
requests
2
$0.00003360
$0.00000350
$0.40 per million
per vCPU-second
per GiB-second
requests
Table 4.5: Cloud Run Pricing for services with CPU only allocated during
request processing [Gooc].
Table 4.5 shows the pricing model of the Cloud Run service. Free quotas are
offered per month, meaning users are not billed if the usage is below the quotas.
Then, the usage beyond the free quotas is charged based on the pricing tier
applied to the resource. The pricing tier depends on the location where the
service is running. The list of the locations and their tier pricing was obtained
from the Cloud Run pricing page8.
On the other hand, the pricing model of VM is different. A VM resource is
billed as long as it is running. Then, assuming that a VM is always running for
a month, the pricing for that month is fixed. However, it is important to note
that the price may differ per region. Table 4.6 shows VM the pricing of VM
with the e2-standard-2 machine type, which was used in the experiment.
As we previously discussed in Section 4.2.1, the measurement target influences
the measurement duration. Therefore, we are interested in knowing the duration
of a measurement where one option is cheaper than the other.
Figure 4.11 shows the projection of the cost based on the measurement dura-
tion. The price plotted in the graph is based on the resources specification, as
described in Section 4.3. The graph shows that if the measurement duration
8https://cloud.google.com/run/pricing#tables
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Results
49
Region
VM monthly price
Disk monthly price
Subtotal
1
asia-east1
$56,64
$0,40
$57,04
2
asia-east2
$68,44
$0,50
$68,94
3
asia-northeast1
$62,75
$0,52
$63,27
4
asia-northeast2
$62,75
$0,52
$63,27
5
asia-northeast3
$62,75
$0,52
$63,27
6
asia-south1
$58,75
$0,48
$59,23
7
asia-southeast1
$60,34
$0,44
$60,78
8
asia-southeast2
$65,77
$0,52
$66,29
9
australia-southeast1
$69,41
$0,54
$69,95
10
europe-central2
$63,02
$0,48
$63,50
11
europe-west1
$53,81
$0,40
$54,21
12
europe-west2
$63,02
$0,48
$63,50
13
europe-west3
$63,02
$0,48
$63,50
14
europe-west6
$68,44
$0,52
$68,96
15
northamerica-northeast1
$53,85
$0,44
$54,29
16
southamerica-east1
$77,65
$0,60
$78,25
17
us-central1
$48,91
$0,40
$49,31
18
us-east1
$48,91
$0,40
$49,31
19
us-east4
$55,09
$0,44
$55,53
20
us-west1
$48,91
$0,40
$49,31
21
us-west2
$58,75
$0,48
$59,23
22
us-west3
$58,75
$0,48
$59,23
23
us-west4
$55,09
$0,44
$55,53
Total Monthly
$1 395,70
Table 4.6: Pricing list of the e2-standard-2 machine type [Good].
Figure 4.11: Projection of cost over measurement duration on Cloud Run and
VM.
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
does not exceed 1 minute and 17 seconds, the proposed solution is free of charge.
In addition, if Cloud Run execution does not exceed 22 minutes and 19 seconds,
the proposed solution is still a cheaper option.
4.5
Discussion
This section discusses the capabilities of the proposed solution compared to the
traditional approach as the answer to the previously defined research questions.
Response Time. The experimental results show that the proposed solution
has a longer response time than the traditional approach. For the Measurer
operation, the average response time of the application running on Cloud Run
is 13.37% higher than the VM, with a difference of 20.3 ms. In the Get Results
operation, the average response time of the application running on Cloud Func-
tions is 68.39% higher than the VM. However, in value, the difference between
the average response of the two options in this operation is 35.63 ms. From
the profiled response times of both operations, it is visible that the difference
between the two options comes mostly from the startup time, which indicates
that the serverless computing resources suffer from cold starts. This shows that
the hypothesis we defined earlier in Section 4.1 is confirmed.
By looking at the percentage alone, the difference in the average response times
of the two options is relatively huge. However, the value difference in both oper-
ations is not more than 100 ms. Corneo et al. [CEM+21] summarise the timing
thresholds, which can be used to determine the impact of the time difference on
human perception. In our case, the results show that the differences are both
less than 100 ms (20.3 ms in the Measurer operation and 35.63 ms in the Get
Results operation), which are not perceivable by humans, meaning that the
differences can be considered negligible.
In addition, looking at the performance of Cloud Run and Cloud Functions
(Serverless) compared to the VM that does the same operation, the difference
in the standard deviation value of the Get Results operation is higher, as shown
in Table 4.7. The possible conclusion can be Cloud Run, which is container-
based service, is more stable than Cloud Functions, FaaS solution. Although
this needs further investigation and out of the scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Discussion
51
Standard Deviation of
Response Time [ms]
Measurer
Get Results
Serverless
30.180367
50.356602
VM
32.230331
17.730484
Difference
2.049964
32.626118
Table 4.7: The difference in the standard deviation of the response time.
Cost. The results show that if the measurement duration is no longer than 22
minutes and 19 seconds, the proposed solution is a better option as it is cheaper
than the traditional approach of using VMs. The proposed solution even has free
quotas that can accommodate up to 1 minute and 17 seconds per measurement.
However, it is important to note that the cost projection is based on the re-
source specification used in the experiment. Depending on the use case, the
specification can be too high or too low. Nevertheless, RIPE Atlas, an industry-
standard Internet measurement platform, has probes with lower specifications
than we evaluated [BES15]. This indicates that there is room for reducing the
resource specification further, resulting in a more cost-saving potential.
Since the cost projection is based on a measurement campaign done by Corneo et
al. [CEM+21], we may as well see if the proposed solution is still a cheaper option
for the measurement campaign, especially on the measurement of the cloud
access latency. From the author’s work, the result shows that the latencies of
the measurement to the closest data centres in most continents are below 100 ms.
Some other continents take longer, possibly until 400ms. This shows that the
duration is still within the free quota included in the proposed solution, making
it better than the traditional approach. This also confirms the hypothesis about
the cost that discussed in Section 4.1.
Answering the research question. RQ1 is interested in knowing how the
functional requirements are fulfilled with serverless services. First, the network
measurement tools (i.e., ping and traceroute) are bundled with the application
as a docker image, running in Cloud Run, GCP’s serverless container service.
Then, a measurement that uses the tools can be invoked by a scheduler service
named Cloud Scheduler without managing any cron server. All measurement
task metadata and results are stored in a serverless NoSQL database service.
This service is Google Cloud Firestore.
The management tasks (i.e., cancel
measurement, get measurement status, and get measurement results) are invok-
able using HTTP. These functionalities are handled by an API gateway resource
and several Cloud Functions resources, which also fall into the serverless service
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
category.
The thesis also evaluates the performance of the proposed solution regarding
response time and cost of running a measurement campaign to answer RQ2 and
RQ3, respectively. The results indicate that, although the proposed solution
shows a higher response time than the traditional approach, the difference is
negligible. On the other hand, the proposed solution has more advantages in
terms of cost.
It is possible to run measurements cheaper in the proposed
solution than in the traditional approach. Moreover, the proposed solution can
even have the resources running free of charge.
Another important aspect to point out is how cloud providers, such as GCP,
divide their cloud services based on how they serve them.
GCP divides its
services into global, regional, and zonal resources9. The serverless computing
services used in this thesis (i.e., Cloud Run and Cloud Functions) are regional
resources10,11. On the other hand, the Google Compute Engine VM instance is
a zonal resource12.
On regional resources, the cloud provider is responsible for the redundancy of
the resource across the zones within the region. In comparison, zonal resources
give users more options in choosing the deployment location. As a result, the
proposed solution gives users less control of the vantage point locations com-
pared to the traditional approach.
9https://cloud.google.com/docs/geography-and-regions
10https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/locations
11https://cloud.google.com/functions/docs/locations
12https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and Future
Work
This chapter summarises the work and contributions of this thesis, including its
experimental results. Then, a discussion of the possible ideas for future work is
presented.
5.1
Conclusion
This thesis aims to design, implement, and evaluate a serverless Internet mea-
surement platform.
We first studied the literature to find related works on
building Internet measurement platforms and the network monitoring tools that
are commonly needed. For instance, we found that the most common network
measurement tools are ping and traceroute. Hence they must be included and
supported in the proposed solution. However, we found that the FaaS solution
has a limitation in including these tools. Therefore, serverless container service
is a better choice and can satisfy this need. Nevertheless, the FaaS solution is
better for simpler operations (e.g., getting measurement results).
We then came up with a hypothesis that serverless computing exposes additional
latency due to the known drawbacks of having to suffer from cold starts. Despite
==PAGE:64==
54
Conclusion and Future Work
that, we are interested to know how much the drawback affects its performance.
In addition, we have another hypothesis that serverless computing has the po-
tential to provide economic benefits compared to the traditional approach. We
then evaluated two platform capabilities: running a measurement and getting
the measurement results. We performed experiments with the Apache JMeter
tool that generates HTTP requests in an automated fashion and collected 20000
data points per experiment. All resources were provisioned with the exact com-
puting specification and to the same cloud region, including a machine that runs
the benchmarking tool. These ensure that the comparison is valid and that no
additional latency is produced by the geological distance, respectively.
The results show no significant difference in the response times compared to
the traditional approach.
Although we found differences, they are all below
100ms and can be considered negligible as humans cannot easily perceive them.
In addition, we profiled the response times and divided them into several pro-
gram phases, in which we found the latency difference comes mostly from the
startup time. This finding confirms the hypothesis that serverless computing
incurs additional latencies mainly due to cold starts. From the cost point of
view, we projected a cost based on a measurement campaign done by Corneo
et al. [CEM+21], in which we found the proposed solution offers a cheaper cost
than the traditional approach for measurement for a measurement duration be-
low 22 minutes and 19 seconds. Even better, if the measurement runs below
1 minute and 17 seconds, it is within free quotas. Hence, using the proposed
solution significantly eliminates money expenses compared to the traditional
approach, which shows that the other hypothesis we came up with is confirmed.
5.2
Future Work
This thesis aims to develop the proof of concept and provide a minimum viable
product of a measurement platform. As a result, we noticed shortcomings that
we believe are essential but out of the scope of the thesis. This chapter presents
the discussion of future work ideas.
User Authentication and Authorization. The proof of concept developed in
this thesis does not include this feature in the functional requirements. Without
this feature, potential external threats can cost the platform owner huge mon-
etary losses. In addition, the platform can be misused to attack other Internet
entities. In fact, in addition to this feature, RIPE Atlas also added uses credits
to limit the user-defined measurements. Therefore, the user authentication and
authorization feature is an important feature that can be an excellent to be
added to the platform.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Future Work
55
Load testing. The specification of the proposed solution, which was evaluated,
is potentially overprovisioned and over-capable in performing measurements.
With proper load testing, we can estimate the right computing size, which results
in a more cost-effective solution and unleashes more cost benefits of serverless
computing.
==PAGE:66==
56
Conclusion and Future Work
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
API Server
This appendix contains the code of API Server, consisting of OpenAPI specifi-
cation of the API gateway resources and functions deployed in the Google Cloud
Functions service.
A.1
OpenAPI Specification
swagger: '2.0'
info:
title: measurement-platform
description: A measurement platform built on top of serverless computing
version: 1.0.0
contact:
name: Rafi Kurnia Putra
schemes:
- https
definitions:
tasks.TaskInput:
properties:
arguments:
type: string
probe:
type: string
schedule:
==PAGE:68==
58
API Server
$ref: '#/definitions/tasks.Schedule'
vantagePoints:
items:
type: string
type: array
type: object
tasks.Schedule:
properties:
cronExpression:
type: string
startTime:
type: string
stopTime:
type: string
type: object
utils.HTTPResponse:
properties:
code:
type: integer
message:
type: string
type: object
basePath: /api/v1
paths:
/measurements:
post:
consumes:
- application/json
parameters:
- description: Each field is required, otherwise it will be set as an
empty string.
,→
in: body
name: task
required: true
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/tasks.TaskInput'
produces:
- application/json
responses:
"201":
description: the ID of the task
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"400":
description: the error message and status code
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"500":
description: the error message and status code
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
summary: Create a measurement task
tags:
- Measurements
operationId: createTask
==PAGE:69==
A.1 OpenAPI Specification
59
x-google-backend:
address: https://europe-west1-omega-moonlight-291117.cloudfunctions.ne ⌋
t/measurement-create-task
,→
path_translation: APPEND_PATH_TO_ADDRESS
deadline: 300
/measurements/{id}:
get:
parameters:
- description: The ID of the task
in: path
name: id
required: true
type: string
produces:
- application/json
responses:
"200":
description: the status of the task
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"404":
description: Not Found
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"500":
description: Internal Server Error
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
summary: Returns a status of a task with the specified ID
tags:
- Measurements
operationId: getTaskStatus
x-google-backend:
address: https://europe-west1-omega-moonlight-291117.cloudfunctions.ne ⌋
t/measurement-get-status
,→
path_translation: APPEND_PATH_TO_ADDRESS
deadline: 300
delete:
parameters:
- description: The ID of the task
in: path
name: id
required: true
type: string
produces:
- application/json
responses:
"204":
description: No Content
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"400":
description: Bad Request
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
==PAGE:70==
60
API Server
"404":
description: Not Found
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"500":
description: Internal Server Error
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
summary: Cancel a task with the specified ID
tags:
- Measurements
operationId: cancelTask
x-google-backend:
address: https://europe-west1-omega-moonlight-291117.cloudfunctions.ne ⌋
t/measurement-cancel-task
,→
path_translation: APPEND_PATH_TO_ADDRESS
deadline: 300
/measurements/{id}/results:
get:
parameters:
- description: The ID of the task
in: path
name: id
required: true
type: string
produces:
- application/json
responses:
"200":
description: the results of the task
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"202":
description: the results are not ready
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"404":
description: Not Found
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
"500":
description: Internal Server Error
schema:
$ref: '#/definitions/utils.HTTPResponse'
summary: Returns a results of a task with the specified ID
tags:
- Measurements
operationId: getTaskResults
x-google-backend:
address: https://europe-west1-omega-moonlight-291117.cloudfunctions.ne ⌋
t/measurement-get-results
,→
path_translation: APPEND_PATH_TO_ADDRESS
deadline: 300
==PAGE:71==
A.2 Measurement Task Creation
61
A.2
Measurement Task Creation
package p
import (
"bytes"
"encoding/json"
"errors"
"fmt"
"log"
"net/http"
"os"
"strconv"
"strings"
"sync"
"time"
run "cloud.google.com/go/run/apiv2"
"google.golang.org/api/idtoken"
runpb "google.golang.org/genproto/googleapis/cloud/run/v2"
"google.golang.org/grpc/codes"
"google.golang.org/grpc/status"
)
func init() {
log.SetFlags(0)
firestoreCollectionName = os.Getenv("FIRESTORE_COLLECTION_NAME")
}
var trace string
func CreateTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
var bt, et int64
bt = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
var traceHeader string
projectID := os.Getenv("GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT")
if projectID != "" {
traceHeader = r.Header.Get("X-Cloud-Trace-Context")
traceParts := strings.Split(traceHeader, "/")
if len(traceParts) > 0 && len(traceParts[0]) > 0 {
trace = fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/traces/%s", projectID, traceParts[0])
}
}
benchmarkID := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_id")
benchmarkSeq := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_sequence")
bid, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkID, 10, 64)
bseq, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkSeq, 10, 64)
==PAGE:72==
62
API Server
var taskID string
defer func() {
et = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
bench := &benchmark{
BeginningTime: bt,
EndingTime:
et,
DeltaETandBT:
et - bt,
}
inJson, _ := json.Marshal(bench)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"INFO",
Message:
string(inJson),
Component:
"benchmark",
BenchmarkID:
bid,
BenchmarkSequence: bseq,
Trace:
trace,
})
}()
switch r.Method {
case "POST":
var t *task
var err error
counter := 0
for {
counter += 1
t, err = newTask()
taskID = t.ID
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("newTask -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "task",
Trace:
trace,
})
continue
}
_, err := getTaskFromFirestore(r.Context(), taskID)
if status.Code(errors.Unwrap(err)) == codes.NotFound {
break
}
if counter == 10 {
msg := "Unable to find a unique task ID"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Measurement Task Creation
63
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, msg)
return
}
}
if err := json.NewDecoder(r.Body).Decode(t); err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("json.NewDecoder.Decode -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "body",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, err.Error())
return
}
receivedPayload, err := json.Marshal(t)
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("json.Marshal -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "json",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, err.Error())
return
}
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"DEBUG",
Message:
string(receivedPayload),
Component: "function",
Trace:
trace,
})
if t.Schedule.StartTime.IsZero() && t.Schedule.StopTime.IsZero() {
t.Type = "one-off_as-soon-as-possible"
} else if !t.Schedule.StartTime.IsZero() && t.Schedule.StopTime.IsZero() {
t.Type = "one-off_scheduled"
} else if t.Schedule.StartTime.IsZero() && !t.Schedule.StopTime.IsZero() {
t.Type = "recurring_as-soon-as-possible"
} else {
t.Type = "recurring_scheduled"
}
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"DEBUG",
==PAGE:74==
64
API Server
Message:
t.Type,
Component: "function",
Trace:
trace,
})
for _, vantagePoint := range t.VantagePoints {
t.NumberOfSequence[vantagePoint] = 0
}
if err := addTaskToFirestore(r.Context(), t); err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("addTaskToFirestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
errs := make(chan error, len(t.VantagePoints))
successes := make(chan string, len(t.VantagePoints))
var wg sync.WaitGroup
if t.Type == "one-off_as-soon-as-possible" {
for _, vantagePoint := range t.VantagePoints {
wg.Add(1)
go func(t *task, vantagePoint string) {
defer wg.Done()
runClient, err := run.NewServicesClient(r.Context())
if err != nil {
msg := fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg.Error(),
Component: "run",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- msg
return
}
defer runClient.Close()
req := &runpb.GetServiceRequest{
Name: fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/locations/%s/services/%s",
projectID, vantagePoint, "measurer"),
,→
}
resp, err := runClient.GetService(r.Context(), req)
if err != nil {
msg := fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg.Error(),
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Measurement Task Creation
65
Component: "run",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- msg
return
}
ts, err := idtoken.NewTokenSource(r.Context(), resp.Uri)
if err != nil {
msg := fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg.Error(),
Component: "token",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- msg
return
}
token, err := ts.Token()
if err != nil {
msg := fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg.Error(),
Component: "token",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- msg
return
}
httpRequestBody, err := json.Marshal(&struct {
ID string `json:"id"`
}{ID: taskID})
if err != nil {
msg := fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg.Error(),
Component: "json",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- msg
return
}
httpReqPayload := bytes.NewBuffer(httpRequestBody)
httpReq, err := http.NewRequest(http.MethodPost,
resp.Uri+"/api/v1/measurements", httpReqPayload)
,→
==PAGE:76==
66
API Server
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err).Error(),
Component: "http",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
return
}
token.SetAuthHeader(httpReq)
httpReq.Header.Set("X-Cloud-Trace-Context", traceHeader)
httpClient := &http.Client{}
go httpClient.Do(httpReq)
successes <- vantagePoint
}(t, vantagePoint)
}
} else {
for _, vantagePoint := range t.VantagePoints {
wg.Add(1)
go func(t *task, vantagePoint string) {
defer wg.Done()
runClient, err := run.NewServicesClient(r.Context())
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err).Error(),
Component: "run",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
return
}
defer runClient.Close()
req := &runpb.GetServiceRequest{
Name: fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/locations/%s/services/%s",
projectID, vantagePoint, "measurer"),
,→
}
resp, err := runClient.GetService(r.Context(), req)
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err).Error(),
Component: "run",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Measurement Task Creation
67
return
}
err = createScheduler(r.Context(), projectID, t, vantagePoint,
resp.Uri)
,→
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err).Error(),
Component: "scheduler",
Trace:
trace,
})
errs <- fmt.Errorf("%s: %w", vantagePoint, err)
return
}
successes <- vantagePoint
}(t, vantagePoint)
}
}
wg.Wait()
close(errs)
close(successes)
successCount := 0
for range successes {
successCount += 1
}
if successCount == 0 {
updateTaskStatus(r.Context(), taskID, "failed")
}
errors := make([]error, 0)
for err := range errs {
errors = append(errors, err)
}
if len(errors) != 0 {
msg := fmt.Sprintf("Task created, ID: '%s'. However, the following
error(s) occurred: %+v", taskID, errors)
,→
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "function",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, msg)
return
}
sendRespond(w, http.StatusCreated, taskID)
return
default:
==PAGE:78==
68
API Server
sendRespond(w, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed,
http.StatusText(http.StatusMethodNotAllowed))
,→
return
}
}
A.3
Measurement Task Cancellation
package p
import (
"encoding/json"
"errors"
"fmt"
"log"
"net/http"
"os"
"strconv"
"strings"
"sync"
"time"
"google.golang.org/grpc/codes"
"google.golang.org/grpc/status"
)
func init() {
log.SetFlags(0)
firestoreCollectionName = os.Getenv("FIRESTORE_COLLECTION_NAME")
}
var trace string
func CancelTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
var bt, et int64
bt = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
projectID := os.Getenv("GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT")
if projectID != "" {
traceHeader := r.Header.Get("X-Cloud-Trace-Context")
traceParts := strings.Split(traceHeader, "/")
if len(traceParts) > 0 && len(traceParts[0]) > 0 {
trace = fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/traces/%s", projectID, traceParts[0])
}
}
benchmarkID := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_id")
benchmarkSeq := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_sequence")
bid, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkID, 10, 64)
==PAGE:79==
A.3 Measurement Task Cancellation
69
bseq, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkSeq, 10, 64)
var taskID string
defer func() {
et = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
bench := &benchmark{
BeginningTime: bt,
EndingTime:
et,
DeltaETandBT:
et - bt,
}
inJson, _ := json.Marshal(bench)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"INFO",
Message:
string(inJson),
Component:
"benchmark",
BenchmarkID:
bid,
BenchmarkSequence: bseq,
Trace:
trace,
})
}()
switch r.Method {
case "DELETE":
urls := strings.Split(strings.TrimPrefix(r.URL.Path, "/"), "/")
if len(urls) < 4 {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
taskID = strings.TrimSpace(urls[3])
if taskID == "" {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
==PAGE:80==
70
API Server
task, err := getTaskFromFirestore(r.Context(), taskID)
if err != nil {
if status.Code(errors.Unwrap(err)) == codes.NotFound {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("getTaskFromFirestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusNotFound, err.Error())
return
}
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("getTaskFromFirestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
if task.Status == "finished" {
msg := "The task status is finished"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "status",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
if task.Status == "cancelled" {
msg := "The task status is cancelled"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "status",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
if task.Status == "failed" {
msg := "The task status is failed"
log.Println(Entry{
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Measurement Task Cancellation
71
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "status",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
if task.Type == "one-off_as-soon-as-possible" {
msg := "The task is a one-off_as-soon-as-possible measurement and thus
does not have scheduler to cancel"
,→
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "status",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
var wg sync.WaitGroup
errs := make(chan error, len(task.VantagePoints))
for _, vantagePoint := range task.VantagePoints {
wg.Add(1)
go func(id, vp string) {
defer wg.Done()
err := deleteScheduler(r.Context(), id)
if err != nil {
errs <- fmt.Errorf("%s: deleteScheduler -> %w", vp, err)
}
}(taskID, vantagePoint)
}
wg.Wait()
close(errs)
errors := make([]error, 0)
for err = range errs {
errors = append(errors, err)
}
if len(errors) != 0 {
msg := fmt.Sprintf("the following error(s) occurred: %+v", errors)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "status",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, msg)
==PAGE:82==
72
API Server
return
}
err = updateTaskStatus(r.Context(), taskID, "cancelled")
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("updateTaskStatus -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "scheduler",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
sendRespond(w, http.StatusNoContent, http.StatusText(http.StatusNoContent))
return
default:
sendRespond(w, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed,
http.StatusText(http.StatusMethodNotAllowed))
,→
return
}
}
A.4
Measurement Task Status Retrieval
package p
import (
"encoding/json"
"errors"
"fmt"
"log"
"net/http"
"os"
"strconv"
"strings"
"time"
"google.golang.org/grpc/codes"
"google.golang.org/grpc/status"
)
func init() {
log.SetFlags(0)
firestoreCollectionName = os.Getenv("FIRESTORE_COLLECTION_NAME")
}
var trace string
==PAGE:83==
A.4 Measurement Task Status Retrieval
73
func GetStatus(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
var bt, et int64
bt = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
var traceHeader string
projectID := os.Getenv("GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT")
if projectID != "" {
traceHeader = r.Header.Get("X-Cloud-Trace-Context")
traceParts := strings.Split(traceHeader, "/")
if len(traceParts) > 0 && len(traceParts[0]) > 0 {
trace = fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/traces/%s", projectID, traceParts[0])
}
}
benchmarkID := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_id")
benchmarkSeq := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_sequence")
bid, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkID, 10, 64)
bseq, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkSeq, 10, 64)
var taskID string
defer func() {
et = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
bench := &benchmark{
BeginningTime: bt,
EndingTime:
et,
DeltaETandBT:
et - bt,
}
inJson, _ := json.Marshal(bench)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"INFO",
Message:
string(inJson),
Component:
"benchmark",
BenchmarkID:
bid,
BenchmarkSequence: bseq,
Trace:
trace,
})
}()
switch r.Method {
case "GET":
urls := strings.Split(strings.TrimPrefix(r.URL.Path, "/"), "/")
if len(urls) < 4 {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
==PAGE:84==
74
API Server
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
taskID = strings.TrimSpace(urls[3])
if taskID == "" {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
task, err := getTaskFromFirestore(r.Context(), taskID)
if err != nil {
if status.Code(errors.Unwrap(err)) == codes.NotFound {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("getTaskFromFirestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusNotFound, err.Error())
return
}
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("getTaskFromFirestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
sendRespond(w, http.StatusOK, task.Status)
return
default:
sendRespond(w, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed,
http.StatusText(http.StatusMethodNotAllowed))
,→
return
}
}
==PAGE:85==
A.5 Measurement Task Results Retrieval
75
A.5
Measurement Task Results Retrieval
package p
import (
"encoding/json"
"fmt"
"log"
"net/http"
"os"
"strconv"
"strings"
"time"
firebase "firebase.google.com/go"
"google.golang.org/api/iterator"
"google.golang.org/grpc/codes"
"google.golang.org/grpc/status"
)
func init() {
log.SetFlags(0)
}
func GetResults(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
var bt, et int64
bt = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
var trace string
projectID := os.Getenv("GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT")
firestoreCollectionName := os.Getenv("FIRESTORE_COLLECTION_NAME")
if projectID != "" {
traceHeader := r.Header.Get("X-Cloud-Trace-Context")
traceParts := strings.Split(traceHeader, "/")
if len(traceParts) > 0 && len(traceParts[0]) > 0 {
trace = fmt.Sprintf("projects/%s/traces/%s", projectID, traceParts[0])
}
}
benchmarkID := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_id")
benchmarkSeq := r.URL.Query().Get("benchmark_sequence")
bid, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkID, 10, 64)
bseq, _ := strconv.ParseInt(benchmarkSeq, 10, 64)
var taskID string
defer func() {
et = time.Now().UnixNano() / int64(time.Millisecond)
bench := &benchmark{
==PAGE:86==
76
API Server
BeginningTime: bt,
EndingTime:
et,
DeltaETandBT:
et - bt,
}
inJson, _ := json.Marshal(bench)
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"INFO",
Message:
string(inJson),
Component:
"benchmark",
BenchmarkID:
bid,
BenchmarkSequence: bseq,
Trace:
trace,
})
}()
switch r.Method {
case "GET":
urls := strings.Split(strings.TrimPrefix(r.URL.Path, "/"), "/")
if len(urls) < 4 {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
taskID = strings.TrimSpace(urls[3])
if taskID == "" {
msg := "empty parameter"
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
msg,
Component: "parameter",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusBadRequest, msg)
return
}
app, err := firebase.NewApp(r.Context(), nil)
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("firebase.NewApp -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firebase",
==PAGE:87==
A.5 Measurement Task Results Retrieval
77
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
client, err := app.Firestore(r.Context())
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("app.Firestore -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
defer client.Close()
dsnap, err :=
client.Collection(firestoreCollectionName).Doc(taskID).Get(r.Context())
,→
if err != nil {
if status.Code(err) == codes.NotFound {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("client.Get -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusNotFound, err.Error())
return
}
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("client.Get -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
metadata := dsnap.Data()
jobStatus := metadata["Status"]
if jobStatus == "scheduled" {
sendRespond(w, http.StatusAccepted, http.StatusText(http.StatusAccepted))
return
}
count := 0
==PAGE:88==
78
API Server
iter := client.Collection(firestoreCollectionName).Doc(taskID).Collections ⌋
(r.Context())
,→
reg := make(map[string]map[int]map[string]interface{})
for {
collRef, err := iter.Next()
if err == iterator.Done {
break
}
count += 1
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("iter.Next -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
nextIter := client.Collection(firestoreCollectionName).Doc(taskID).Colle ⌋
ction(collRef.ID).Documents(r.Context())
,→
seq := make(map[int]map[string]interface{})
for {
doc, err := nextIter.Next()
if err == iterator.Done {
break
}
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("nextIter.Next -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
return
}
docName := doc.Ref.ID
valInt, err := strconv.ParseInt(docName, 10, 32)
if err != nil {
log.Println(Entry{
TaskID:
taskID,
Severity:
"ERROR",
Message:
fmt.Errorf("strconv.ParseInt -> %w", err).Error(),
Component: "firestore",
Trace:
trace,
})
sendRespond(w, http.StatusInternalServerError, err.Error())
==PAGE:89==
A.5 Measurement Task Results Retrieval
79
return
}
seq[int(valInt)] = doc.Data()
}
reg[collRef.ID] = seq
}
metadata["ID"] = taskID
metadata["Results"] = reg
b, _ := json.Marshal(metadata)
sendRespond(w, http.StatusOK, string(b))
return
default:
sendRespond(w, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed,
http.StatusText(http.StatusMethodNotAllowed))
,→
return
}
}
==PAGE:90==
80
API Server
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[ACO+06]
Brice Augustin, Xavier Cuvellier, Benjamin Orgogozo, Fabien
Viger, Timur Friedman, Matthieu Latapy, Clémence Magnien,
and Renata Teixeira. Avoiding Traceroute Anomalies with Paris
Traceroute. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCOMM Confer-
ence on Internet Measurement, IMC ’06, page 153–158, New York,
NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Ama]
Amazon Web Services.
Global Infrastructure.
https://aws.
amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/.
(Accessed
on 07/01/2022).
[Bar89]
Hans W. Barz.
Notable Abbreviations in Telecommunications.
SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 19(2):67–85, apr 1989.
[BBC+14]
Marcelo Bagnulo, Trevor Burbridge, Sam Crawford, Philip Eard-
ley, Juergen Schoenwaelder, and Brian Trammell. Building a stan-
dard measurement platform.
IEEE Communications Magazine,
52(5):165–173, May 2014.
[BES15]
Vaibhav Bajpai, Steffie Jacob Eravuchira, and Jürgen Schön-
wälder. Lessons Learned From Using the RIPE Atlas Platform
for Measurement Research. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
45(3):35–42, jul 2015.
[BS15]
Vaibhav Bajpai and Jürgen Schönwälder. A Survey on Internet
Performance Measurement Platforms and Related Standardization
Efforts. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 17(3):1313–
1341, thirdquarter 2015.
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Cal90]
Ross Callon. Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and dual
environments. RFC 1195, RFC Editor, December 1990. http:
//www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1195.txt.
[CEM+21]
Lorenzo Corneo, Maximilian Eder, Nitinder Mohan, Aleksandr Za-
vodovski, Suzan Bayhan, Walter Wong, Per Gunningberg, Jussi
Kangasharju, and Jörg Ott. Surrounded by the Clouds: A Com-
prehensive Cloud Reachability Study. In Proceedings of the Web
Conference 2021, WWW ’21, page 295–304, New York, NY, USA,
2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Cer91]
V.G. Cerf. Guidelines for Internet Measurement Activities. RFC
1262, RFC Editor, October 1991.
[Cis18]
Cisco. Global Cloud Index Projects Cloud Traffic to Represent 95
Percent of Total Data Center Traffic by 2021. https://newsroom.
cisco.com/c/r/newsroom/en/us/a/y2018/m02/global-cloud-
index-projects-cloud-traffic-to-represent-95-percent-
of-total-data-center-traffic-by-2021.html,
02
2018.
(Accessed on 07/01/2022).
[Cla88]
D. Clark. The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Pro-
tocols. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 18(4):106–114, aug
1988.
[Cra08]
Sam Crawford. SamKnows. https://www.samknows.com/, 2008.
(Accessed on 04/10/2022).
[DST+12]
Mohan Dhawan,
Justin Samuel,
Renata Teixeira,
Christian
Kreibich, Mark Allman, Nicholas Weaver, and Vern Paxson.
Fathom: A Browser-Based Network Measurement Platform. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Internet Measurement Conference, IMC
’12, page 73–86, New York, NY, USA, 2012. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
[EW17]
Adam Eivy and Joe Weinman.
Be Wary of the Economics of
"Serverless" Cloud Computing. IEEE Cloud Computing, 4(2):6–
12, March 2017.
[FF07]
B.A. Forouzan and S.C. Fegan. Data Communications and Net-
working.
Data Communications and Networking. McGraw-Hill
Higher Education, 2007.
[FPAB17]
Romain Fontugne, Cristel Pelsser, Emile Aben, and Randy Bush.
Pinpointing Delay and Forwarding Anomalies Using Large-Scale
Traceroute Measurements.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Internet
Measurement Conference, IMC ’17, page 15–28, New York, NY,
USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[Gar]
Gartner.
Gartner
Reprint.
https://www.gartner.com/
doc/reprints?id=1-271SYZF2&ct=210802&st=sb. (Accessed on
06/15/2022).
[GJSG16]
Neha Gupta, Ankur Jain, Pranav Saini, and Vaibhav Gupta.
DDoS attack algorithm using ICMP flood.
In 2016 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Computing for Sustainable Global Devel-
opment (INDIACom), pages 4082–4084, March 2016.
[Gooa]
Google Cloud Platform.
Global Locations - Regions & Zones |
Google Cloud.
https://cloud.google.com/about/locations.
(Accessed on 07/01/2022).
[Goob]
Google Cloud Platform.
Pricing | Cloud Functions | Google
Cloud.
https://cloud.google.com/functions/pricing#
compute_time. (Accessed on 06/26/2022).
[Gooc]
Google
Cloud
Platform.
Pricing
|
Cloud
Run
|
Google
Cloud. https://cloud.google.com/run/pricing. (Accessed on
06/27/2022).
[Good]
Google
Cloud
Platform.
VM
instance
pricing
|
Com-
pute
Engine:
Virtual
Machines
(VMs)
|
Google
Cloud.
https://cloud.google.com/compute/vm-instance-
pricing#general-purpose_machine_type_family.
(Accessed
on 06/27/2022).
[GSAM11]
Hachem Guerid, Ahmed Serhrouchni, Mohammed Achemlal, and
Karel Mittig. A Novel Traceback Approach for Direct and Re-
flected ICMP Attacks. In 2011 Conference on Network and Infor-
mation Systems Security, pages 1–5, May 2011.
[HB96]
J. Hawkinson and T. Bates. Guidelines for creation, selection, and
registration of an Autonomous System (AS). BCP 6, RFC Editor,
March 1996.
[HBB+05]
Andreas Hanemann, Jeff W. Boote, Eric L. Boyd, Jérôme Durand,
Loukik Kudarimoti, Roman Łapacz, D. Martin Swany, Szymon
Trocha, and Jason Zurawski. Perfsonar: A service oriented archi-
tecture for multi-domain network monitoring. In Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Service-Oriented Comput-
ing, ICSOC’05, page 241–254, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer-
Verlag.
[Jac88]
Van Jacobson. traceroute. ftp://ftp.ee.lbl.gov/traceroute.
tar.gz, 1988.
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JR86]
R. Jain and S. Routhier. Packet Trains–Measurements and a New
Model for Computer Network Traffic. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, 4(6):986–995, Sep. 1986.
[KB12]
Ethan B. Katz-Bassett. Systems for Improving Internet Availabil-
ity and Performance. PhD thesis, University of Washington, USA,
2012. AAI3506518.
[KBMA+10] Ethan Katz-Bassett, Harsha V. Madhyastha, Vijay Kumar Ad-
hikari, Colin Scott, Justine Sherry, Peter Van Wesep, Thomas
Anderson, and Arvind Krishnamurthy.
Reverse Traceroute.
In
Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Conference on Networked Sys-
tems Design and Implementation, NSDI’10, page 15, USA, 2010.
USENIX Association.
[KZ99]
Sunil Kalidindi and Matthew J Zekauskas. Surveyor: An infras-
tructure for internet performance measurements.
In INET’99.
Citeseer, 1999.
[Luc10]
Matthew Luckie.
Scamper: A Scalable and Extensible Packet
Prober for Active Measurement of the Internet. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement,
IMC ’10, page 239–245, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[MAF05]
Alberto Medina, Mark Allman, and Sally Floyd. Measuring the
Evolution of Transport Protocols in the Internet.
SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev., 35(2):37–52, apr 2005.
[Man12]
Vesna Manojlovic. RIPE Atlas User-Defined Measurements Are
Here | RIPE Labs.
https://labs.ripe.net/author/becha/
ripe-atlas-user-defined-measurements-are-here/, 04 2012.
(Accessed on 06/30/2022).
[Mic]
Microsoft Azure. Global Infrastructure | Microsoft Azure. https:
//azure.microsoft.com/en-us/global-infrastructure/.
(Accessed on 07/01/2022).
[Mil83]
D.L. Mills. Internet Delay Experiments. RFC 889, RFC Editor,
December 1983.
[Mit13]
J. Mitchell. Autonomous System (AS) Reservation for Private Use.
BCP 6, RFC Editor, July 2013.
[Moy98]
John Moy. OSPF Version 2. STD 54, RFC Editor, April 1998.
http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2328.txt.
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[MPPKB13] Pietro Marchetta, Valerio Persico, Antonio Pescapè, and Ethan
Katz-Bassett. Don’t Trust Traceroute (Completely). In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 Workshop on Student Workhop, CoNEXT Student
Workhop ’13, page 5–8, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[Muu00]
Mike
Muus.
The
Story
of
the
PING
Program.
https://web.archive.org/web/20211215165637/https:
//ftp.arl.army.mil/~mike/ping.html, 2000.
(Accessed on
03/23/2022).
[PAM02]
V. Paxson, A.K. Adams, and M. Mathis. Experiences with NIMI.
In Proceedings 2002 Symposium on Applications and the Internet
(SAINT) Workshops, pages 108–118, Jan 2002.
[PAMM98]
V. Paxson, G. Almes, J. Mahdavi, and M. Mathis. Framework for
IP Performance Metrics. RFC 2330, RFC Editor, May 1998.
[Pax96]
Vern Paxson. Towards a framework for defining Internet perfor-
mance metrics. In Proc. INET’96. Citeseer, 1996.
[PCVB13]
Cristel Pelsser, Luca Cittadini, Stefano Vissicchio, and Randy
Bush. From Paris to Tokyo: On the Suitability of Ping to Mea-
sure Latency. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet
Measurement Conference, IMC ’13, page 427–432, New York, NY,
USA, 2013. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Phu20]
Sataponn Phutrakul.
Evaluation of Emerging Serverless Plat-
forms. Master’s thesis, Aalto University. School of Science, 2020.
[Pos81a]
J. Postel. Internet Control Message Protocol. STD 5, RFC Edi-
tor, September 1981. http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc792.
txt.
[Pos81b]
Jon Postel. Internet Protocol. STD 5, RFC Editor, September
1981. http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc791.txt.
[RIPa]
RIPE NCC.
New RIPE Atlas Version 4 Probes.
https:
//labs.ripe.net/author/alun_davies/new-ripe-atlas-
version-4-probes/. (Accessed on 06/23/2022).
[RIPb]
RIPE NCC. RIPE Atlas. https://atlas.ripe.net/. (Accessed
on 04/10/2022).
[RIPc]
RIPE NCC.
RIPE Atlas About.
https://atlas.ripe.net/
about/. (Accessed on 06/23/2022).
==PAGE:96==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[RIPd]
RIPE NCC. RIPE Atlas Probes Coverage and Statistics. https://
atlas.ripe.net/results/maps/network-coverage/. (Accessed
on 06/23/2022).
[RIPe]
RIPE
NCC.
RIPE
Atlas
Quarterly
Planning.
https:
//www.ripe.net/support/documentation/quarterly-
planning/ripe-atlas. (Accessed on 06/23/2022).
[Sav99]
Stefan Savage. Sting: A TCP-based Network Measurement Tool.
In Second USENIX Symposium on Internet Technologies & Sys-
tems (USITS 99), Boulder, CO, October 1999. USENIX Associa-
tion.
[SOBB11]
Mario A. Sánchez, John S. Otto, Zachary S. Bischof, and Fabián E.
Bustamante. Dasu - isp characterization from the edge: A bittor-
rent implementation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2011
Conference, SIGCOMM ’11, page 454–455, New York, NY, USA,
2011. Association for Computing Machinery.
[SZ05]
S. Suehring and R. Ziegler. Linux Firewalls, Third Edition. Sams,
2005.
[VSF+15]
M.E. Vermaat, S.L. Sebok, S.M. Freund, J.T. Campbell, and
M. Frydenberg. Discovering Computers, Essentials ©2016. Cen-
gage Learning, 2015.
[XFL11]
Guo Xiaodong, Qin Fenglin, and Ge Liansheng. A cooperative net-
work measurement platform: Design and implementation. In 2011
13th Asia-Pacific Network Operations and Management Sympo-
sium, pages 1–4, Sep. 2011.
