==PAGE:1==
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
With focus on multiple stakeholders and complex own­
ership
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
With focus on multiple stakeholders and complex ownership
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Carl Nørby Mouridsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis were developed at the Department of Civil Engineering of the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, over a period of five months. The thesis is credited 30 ETCS points
and were prepared as a part of the fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Archi­
tectural Engineering. The project topic and case investigation are a part of a larger focus
area investigated in a collaboration between students and supervisors.
Carl Nørby Mouridsen ­ s164624
Signature
Date
ii
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The project were initiated in collaboration with DTU and Niras. The thesis serve as an
investigation of early stakeholder involvement and digital twin development in AECO. To
serve as background for the investigation, the term digital twin and related concepts were
studied from mentions in literature. The research aimed to provide a theoretical frame­
work, from which the further investigations could draw upon. For practical experience a
case project were initiated. The case explored the initiation and development of a digi­
tal twin solution for the Lyngby campus of DTU. Possible technologies and frameworks
for development were considered, and a prototype were developed based open­source
documentation, samples and guides. The Community Architecture Development Method­
ology were used as a basis for stakeholder involvement. The relevant stakeholders and
interested parties were considered, and their opinions and ideas were taken into account
in the development of features and solutions. The case prototype showcase how utility
data for facilities can be linked to actual locations and visualized in a 3D environment. It
also show how logical frameworks can be developed to automatically generate links be­
tween data from multiple sources. Additionally, the case can be used as an example of
how stakeholder involvement and feature analysis can be accomplished in projects with
multiple interested parties.
The prototype explored possibilities and methods for development and the case can
thereby be used as a basis for reflection on digital twin development. From the practical
experience perspectives on further development for the DTU case, as well as digital twin
projects in general could be considered. Recommended development areas and specific
features are listed in the thesis. For AECO digital twin projects in general the necessity
of BIM and the link to smart city initiatives were explored. A method for suggesting the
BIM and digital twin maturity necessary for different use cases were developed. Addition­
ally, the benefits of stakeholder involvement and guiding principles were also considered.
Recommendations for and perspectives on the use of the Community Architecture Devel­
opment Methodology and Gemini Principles are listed in the thesis.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Initially, I would like to thank my university supervisor Associate Professor Tim Pat McGin­
ley for guidance, literature suggestions, references and general supervision. Similarly, I
would like to thank my external supervisors, BIM Specialist at Niras Andreas Fangel and
Expertise Director at Niras Thomas Lundsgaard for valuable feedback, guidance in my
casework, as well as assistance in forming my project. The many supervision sessions
were very valuable in idea generation, suggestions of further development and investiga­
tion, as well as general guidance.
Additionally, I would also like to thank the people I have been in contact with at DTU in rela­
tion with the case investigation. The assistance and talks with CAS were fundamental for
the project. I would like to thank Head of Section Bo Carlsen and his CAS colleagues for
allowing me access to data, BIM models and for providing insight in facility management
at DTU.
iv
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AEC
Architecture, Engineering & Construction
AECO
Architecture, Engineering, Construction & Operation
AI
Artificial Intelligence
API
Application Programming Interface
AR
Augmented Reality
BIM
Building Information Modeling
BIS
Base Infrastructure Schemas
BLM
Building Lifecycle Management
BMS
Building Management System
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CADM
Community Architecture Development Methodology
CAF
Community Architecture Framework
CAS
Campus Service
DT
Digital Twin
DTC
Digital Twin Construction
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
GIS
Geographic Information System
GUID
Globally Unique Identifier
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
ID
Identifier
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
IoT
Internet of Things
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
NDT
National Digital Twin
O&M
Operation & Maintenance
REST
Representational state transfer
SQL
Structured Query Language
VDC
Virtual Design & Construction
VR
Virtual Reality
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical framework
3
2.1
Building Information Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Internet of Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Digital Twins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Smart City and federated twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Project analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Community Architecture Development Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Case investigation
25
4.1
Project analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Community Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2.1
Collaborative Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2.2
Feature Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Prototyping and mock­up development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3.1
Software and technology introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3.2
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3.3
Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Discussion
47
5.1
Case ­ Further development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.1.1
Back­end optimization and front­end improvement . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.1.2
Feature addition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.1.3
Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Framework for digital twin development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2.1
BIM and digital twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2.2
Smart City and federated twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6
Conclusion
57
References
59
A Project Analysis Workshop
63
B Sustainability and procurement session
70
C Digital Twin Uses
72
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The implementation of digital twins can be seen as a benchmark for the AECO indus­
try, as digital operation, control and monitoring can ease workflows and cut redundant
processes. It can serve as a method for transferring knowledge and information through
project phases and in between stakeholders, as well as further automation in construction
management and facility operation. It can be linked to the core concepts of industry 4.0
and could be vital for optimizing the efficiency of asset and facility management. How­
ever, operation with digital twins are not yet an industry­wide practice, which means the
service is not yet provided as a standard when entering the facility management phase.
To bring the development of digital twins into standard practice, argumentation through
research and case studies would be beneficial. This thesis aims to investigate the subject
of developing digital twins for AECO, and discover how complex ownership and multiple
stakeholders can be taken into account in the design process. To explore the subject a
number of objectives will be investigated and considered.
• Study and investigate the term ’Digital Twin’ and related concepts in the context of
AECO
• Analyse possible interested parties, the potential and risks for a digital twin project
case
• Apply the ‘Community Architecture Framework’ on digital twin services for stake­
holders
– Generate a list of possible features and uses of a common digital twin platform
– Create a prototype to showcase features
– Pinpoint potential digital twin service and the feature requirements from differ­
ent stakeholders
• Discuss the investigations in a general context and relate the framework to generic
uses and stakeholders
The investigations will be based on casework related to the development of a digital twin
prototype application for the Lyngby campus of the Technical University of Denmark. For
the case investigation and subject discussion a theoretical framework will serve as back­
ground. The theoretical framework will consist of concept and technology presentations,
as well as a literature study on the subject matter. In chapter 3 the general methodology
of the case investigation will be presented. The case investigation is described in chapter
4 and discussed in a general context in chapter 5. Finally, perspectives on digital twin
development in AECO will be outlined in chapter 6. Here the findings of the thesis will
be presented and the recommendations for the case as well as future digital twin projects
will be listed.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
1
==PAGE:12==
2
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical framework
In order to be able to draw up a framework of digital twin implementation and specific use
case examples, the topic of digital twins should be properly investigated. In this chapter
the concept of digital twins and a number of related topics, technologies and terms are
presented. The concepts and technologies are presented in the context of Industry 4.0
and introduced through their descriptions in research articles, books and reports. The
topics are described through multiple sources, to gain a general understanding and to
provide a nuanced view of the subjects. Diagrams and figures are used for visual de­
pictions of systems and models. Most figures in the chapter are reimagined or modified
versions of diagrams and models presented in the referenced literature. To contextualize
and compare the the different literature sources comparison tables are used. In these
tables the ideas, definitions, properties and technologies used in the descriptions of the
concepts are compared. The tables aim to visualize where the literature sources overlap,
agree and use similar terms and technologies to describe a topic. Table 2.1 serves as an
example of such a comparison table. Here the terms and descriptive properties used to
describe a concept in four different references, can be seen.
Table 2.1: Literature comparison table. A, B, C & D represent different literature sources
Defining properties / technologies
A
B
C
D
Property/technology/term 1
X
X
X
Property/technology/term 2
X
X
X
Property/technology/term 3
X
X
...
Property/technology/term N
X
X
The literature sources referenced and used to describe concepts and theory were dis­
covered through databases and search engines, such as Google Scholar, ScienceDi­
rect, DTU Findit and ResearchGate. The literature study were a research process where
sources were discovered by their references in others and through database searches
with the use of key words and tags.
The term Industry 4.0 is widely used and describes automation and digitization in indus­
try. In an article in Computers in Industry (Oesterreich and Teuteberg 2016) the main
features for implementation of Industry 4.0 are listed. The features include horizontal
integration of data flows and processes between companies within the value chain, en­
gineering implemented across the value chain for further customization of products as
well as integration of IT systems within each section of the manufacturing companies.
The article aims to list the core concepts of industry 4.0 in relation with the construction
industry. This is done through a systematic literature review. Here Building Informa­
tion Modeling (BIM), Internet of Things (IoT), Cloud Computing, AR/VR and robotics are
found to be among the most commonly referenced technologies in practical publications.
In the business magazine Forbes, Bernard Marr lists the interaction, data­exchange and
independent decision­making of computers as the power of Industry 4.0. In his article
What is Industry 4.0? Here’s A Super Easy Explanation For Anyone (Marr 2018) current
applications of Industry 4.0 is described. Among the concepts mentioned, are additive
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
3
==PAGE:14==
manufacturing, robotics, IoT, information flows and notifications based on sensor data.
The last of which is mentioned in the research article Construction with digital twin infor­
mation systems (Sacks, Brilakis, et al. 2020). Here, Sacks et al. states how the possibility
to monitor and obtain accurate status information from a digital twin of a construction site
allow for proactive actions and optimization of ongoing processes, planning and design.
Figure 2.1: Development stages for the Industry 4.0 Maturity Index. Redrawn from depic­
tion in (Hoppe 2018; Li, Fast­Berglund, and Paulin 2019)
In the articles (Li, Fast­Berglund, and Paulin 2019) and (Hoppe 2018) the Industry 4.0
Maturity Index is introduced. The index function as a development path with six stages,
where each subsequent stage represent increased maturity. The first two stages, within
the digitalization paradigm lays the groundwork for introducing Industry 4.0 technologies.
They denote the use and connection of computers and IT systems within industry. The
visibility stage is characterized by the observation of truths or data capture. This can be in
visualisations of digital models or data flows from sensors. In the transparency stage the
data and observations from the third stage is analysed or processed to gain information.
The fifth stage revolves around using the data and information to forecast and predict
based on likelihood. In the adaptability stage the predictions are used for autonomous
decision­making and automated behavior adaption. The development stages can be seen
in fig. 2.1. The stages three to six represent the Industry 4.0 paradigm, and the stages
can be used as a technical development path for companies. The paradigm can be tied to
technologies such as IoT, Information and Communication Technology (ICT), data analyt­
ics, machine learning and digital twins. Some of which will be introduced in the following
sections.
The theoretical framework will be introduced according to four main concepts, Building
Information Modeling, the Internet of Things, Digital Twins and Smart Cities, as these
can encapsulate the subjects, terms and technologies related to the further case investi­
gations. The aforementioned concepts should not be seen as purely separate subjects.
The technologies and concepts link together in various ways to form specific uses and
provide smarter workflows within AECO. However, to investigate the uses, the different
concepts should be addressed and outlined.
4
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:15==
2.1
Building Information Modeling
As a core concept of Industry 4.0, BIM proves a valuable technology in the design and
management of AEC projects. BIM is an abbreviation of the words Building, Information
and Modeling, representing the creation of information models. Models, which can be in­
formative to stakeholders during all phases of a construction project. BIM is both a tool for
designing and planing during the early phases, but also a technology useful after the initial
design. By storing relevant information within the models, the data can be accessed in the
construction phase, as well as in facility management and building operation (Oesterreich
and Teuteberg 2016). In an article on Lean and BIM in construction (Sacks, Koskela, et al.
2010) key functionalities provided by BIM are listed. Among these are the possibility to
visualize and render designs, generation of multiple alternate designs through paramet­
ric models, automated drawing generation, as well as performance analysis. The latter
which covers both the engineering analysis capabilities of BIM products and automated
evaluation, such as lifecycle assessments and cost estimations.
In the Penn State document The Uses of BIM: Classifying and Selecting BIM Uses (Krei­
der and Messner 2013) presents a system of BIM uses and application areas. It builds
upon BIM project execution planning and guides determination and communication of the
purpose for BIM implementation. The document presents five categories of main pur­
poses for BIM use. The main purposes and subcategories can be seen in table 2.2. The
objective of the first category is to gather information through observation, measurement,
takeoff and tracking of elements. For the category 02 the objective is to create informa­
tion about an asset or facility. As prescription of needs and dependencies of elements,
placement, location or configuration of elements, as well as dimensioning and sizing of
elements in the design phase. The Analyze category represents examination and evalua­
tion of elements by coordination, error detection, simulation, prediction and validation for
accuracy. The objective of the fourth category is to communicate and present information
about assets or facilities. This is through rendered or visualization, symbolic representa­
tion, recordings of data in schedules or reports, as well as translation of data for direct
transfer or exchange. Category 05 represents realization of elements. Here, the objective
is to create, produce or control elements through asset or facility information. Fabrication
and manufacturing in the form of rapid prototyping, digital fabrication as well as prefabri­
cation and smart assembly using gathered and generated data. The category also spans
over control, manipulation and regulation of facility elements and assets through digital
operation.
Table 2.2: BIM Use purposes according to (Kreider and Messner 2013)
01
Gather
02
Generate
03
Analyze
04
Communicate
05
Realize
Capture
Prescribe
Coordinate
Visualize
Fabricate
Quantify
Arrange
Forecast
Transform
Assemble
Monitor
Size
Validate
Draw
Control
Qualify
Document
Regulate
As initially stated, the means of utilizing information models are many. In table 2.3 a com­
parison of applications areas mentioned in three distinct literature references can be seen.
The table provides an overview of a selection of uses offered by BIM. As the application
areas can be tied to the use purposes presented in (Kreider and Messner 2013) the last
column of the table lists what purposes relate to the referenced BIM applications. The use
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
5
==PAGE:16==
purpose offer a communication terminology describing the underlying reasoning behind
BIM implementation, whereas the application areas mentioned in the three sources spec­
ify what beneficial services can be tied to BIM. As seen in the table, BIM can be useful in
creating flexible designs through parametric object modeling, as well as automating work­
flows both in design and fabrication. As mentioned by (Sacks, Koskela, et al. 2010) the
information models can also serve as documentation and a basis for communicating de­
sign changes in between project teams. The use of VDC as well as 4D and 5D simulation
are also mentioned as valuable methods for validating designs prior to construction. The
possibility to estimate costs and schedule the construction process in relation with building
elements support decision making and planning in between suppliers and contractors.
Table 2.3: BIM utilization comparison. A: Understanding the implications of digitisation
and automation in the context of Industry 4.0 (Oesterreich and Teuteberg 2016). B: Inter­
action of Lean and Building Information Modeling in Construction (Sacks, Koskela, et al.
2010). C: BIM Handbook (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018)
BIM application areas
A
B
C
Related use purposes
Parametric modeling
X
X
Generate, Size
Change management
X
Coordinate, Validate
Automate drawing creation
X
X
Capture, Generate
Coordination and collaboration
X
X
X
Communicate, Visualize
Digital documentation
X
Document
Process management, 4D
X
X
Prescribe, Coordinate
Cost estimation, 5D
X
X
Quantify
VDC and construction simulation
X
X
X
Communicate, Analyze
BLM and facility management
X
X
Monitor, Coordinate
Digital fabrication
X
X
Fabricate, Assemble
The primary use purpose definitions and the respective subcategories, as seen in ta­
ble 2.2, can be useful in the planning of a project. As the categories can outline the pur­
pose and demands for BIM in the given project. This should be helpful in the creation of a
BIM execution plan and establish clear demands for the use of BIM within projects. The
International Standard ISO 19650 (ISO 2018) sets the framework for information manage­
ment and the principles of BIM use in project delivery. A certain BIM implementation is
thereby required. The standard describe the information delivery cycle and coordination
principles for projects. However, specific BIM requirements are decided for each project,
and the BIM expertise of the project team is often decisive for the resulting BIM level.
The BIM maturity model developed by Mark Bew and Mervyn Richards describes BIM
integration and the connected technologies. A modified version of the model can be seen
on fig. 2.2. Here, technologies and subjects related to the different BIM levels are arranged
on a timeline. Among these are the BIM dimensions. The dimensions 2D and 3D cover
geometry and space, whereas 4D and 5D describe time scheduling and economic cost
in projects. In the BIM handbook by Rafael Sacks, Charles Eastman, Chang Lee and
Paul Teicholz, the four BIM maturity levels are described. Level 0 covers mere text and
geometric information shown in two­dimensional drawings. Level 1 represents the mix
of 3D visualization, 2D drafting and documentation with shared project standards. In
level 2 the different parties collaborate by exchanging information through common file
6
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:17==
formats, such as IFC1. Here drawings and information are based on object oriented 3D
models and clash and consistency checks are performed between the shared models.
Full BIM compliance is obtained through level 3, where the different parties and disciplines
collaborate in shared project models. The cloud based centralized model allow for less
conflicting information and faster consistency checks (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018). The
BIM levels are widely referenced, both in academia and regulations.
Figure 2.2: BIM maturity levels. Modified from (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018)
The BIM maturity model links the levels with the four decades 1990s, 2000s, 2010s and
the 2020s, which points to a desired current average BIM maturity within the last two lev­
els. This implies, that collaboration across disciplines, cloud shared models and Building
Lifecycle Management (BLM) are what should be integrated in project workflows today.
Sacks, Eastman, et al. argues that BIM at the third maturity level could represent a lifecy­
cle platform from where information can be managed and stored throughout the building
lifetime. It is suggested that the information linked to objects could be stored in IFC files,
which is a common practice in Denmark. However IoT and direct data links to cloud
databases are also suggested. The latter of which can be contacted through the use of
open application interfaces.
With BLM, BIM can be used in facility and asset management. Chapter four of the BIM
handbook (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018) provides a list of application areas and beneficial
uses of BIM for developers, owners and operators of facilities. Among these are simu­
lation for operation, object tracking, visual utility performance overview and information
takeoff. In the chapter, the advantage of browser based platforms is noted. Platforms, in
which open access to BIM models are possible without specific software expertise and
the demand for identical service versions. The current state of BIM use in industry is
heavily software dependent, and most digital models are created using products from a
few companies. A 2019 British BIM survey showed Autodesk, Bentley, Graphisoft and
Trimble software being what was mainly used in the industry. With Autodesk products
accounting for 70% of the software tools used (Bain 2019). The interoperability and col­
laborative possibilities between tools from different companies are limited, but through
1Standard digital description of assets and elements (https://www.buildingsmart.org/standards/bsi­
standards/industry­foundation­classes/)
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
7
==PAGE:18==
implementation of openBIM2 the software flexibility is increasing (Sacks, Eastman, et al.
2018). The leading browser based BIM platforms are compatible with a wide range of file
types and at a minimum the industry standard IFC. The possibility to visualize multiple
files in the same environment provides a great communication and comparison tool for
design teams. Another benefit of the cloud based platforms is the possibility to distinguish
between file versions. This helps tracking when changes were implemented and shared
between project parties.
2.2
Internet of Things
Another important aspect of Industry 4.0, is the data flows from objects and the com­
munication between devices and assets. In 1999 Kevin Ashton introduced the concept
Internet of Things, the connection of things through the internet. Allowing objects, sen­
sors and devices to communicate and exchange information regardless of time and place
(Vermesan et al. 2010). In 2010 members of the Cluster of European Research Projects
on the Internet of Things authored a book on the subject of realising IoT. Here, the term is
linked to a vision of the future: ”in the nineteenth century, machines learned to do; in the
twentieth century, they learned to think; and in the twenty­first century, they are learning
to perceive ­ they actually sense and respond.” (Vermesan et al. 2010, p. 12). As the
quote suggests, the purpose of IoT devices is the ability to communicate perceived data.
By linking multiple devices, large sensing networks can be created. Networks able to col­
lect vast amounts of data points across large distances. The Internet of Things should
thereby be seen as an enabling group of technologies, which can be helpful in obtaining
and exchanging information quickly and efficiently.
Figure 2.3: IoT Manager. Modified from diagram in (Calderoni, Magnani, and Maio 2019)
IoT networks and platforms are widely available commercially; both, Microsoft, Cisco,
IBM, Google and Samsung provides IoT solutions. However, the general network de­
sign for the commercial platforms are not directly available for the user. An article aimed
to present a general framework for IoT management was released by the University of
Bologna (Calderoni, Magnani, and Maio 2019). In the article, a number of IoT platforms
2Collaborative, vendor neutral BIM processes (https://www.buildingsmart.org/about/openbim/)
8
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:19==
are compared after which IoT Manager is presented. The framework consists of three
layers. The purpose of the first layer is to sense and gather raw data. The layer contains
the two part sensor system of simple sensor devices and concentrator gateways. The
gateways collects raw data from multiple sensors and transfer the data to cloud hubs and
storage repositories. The data layer consists of both storage and the service gateway.
The main feature of the service gateway is to query and format the raw data. Making it
possible for client applications to access specific data through application programming
interfaces (API). As seen on fig. 2.3, the gateway retrieves data from both internal and
external data storage repositories. The external data is integrated through a logic module,
which assures compatibility in data formats. In the top layer, different client applications
on multiple platforms access the stored information from the sensor networks through
APIs. The IoT Manager framework relies on multiple APIs, and a logical data flow from
the sensing layer to the service layer. By providing full transparency of the platform, the
University of Bologna allow for others to learn and understand the subject.
Commercially available IoT platforms offer many of the tools and technologies neces­
sary for the Industry 4.0 development path depicted in fig. 2.1. Stefan Hoppe advocates
for subscription to the commercial services, as independent development can be time
and money consuming (Hoppe 2018). Most services offer a level of development guides
and documentation, which allows for extensions and front­end changes. Furthermore,
many open­source services and code snippits are also available, which can be incorpo­
rated into platforms and services. For the Industry 4.0 Maturity Index, Cloud connected
sensors, APIs, data repositories and visualization software are fundamental in the imple­
mentation of the third stage. The fourth stage relies primarily on analytical software and
data processing, whereas statistical operations and algorithms are elemental tools for the
fifth stage. The last stage represent handing over control to systems and machines and
there by achieving autonomous operating systems.
In table 2.4 IoT related concepts and enabling technologies mentioned in four different
literature sources are listed. The sources are compared, giving an overview of the most
commonly referenced concepts and technologies within the literature selection. As seen
in the table, the comparison showed sensor networks and cloud storage being essen­
tial parts of IoT, whereas geo­referencing and unique identifiers are the concepts with
the fewest references. Among the specific technologies mentioned are API, REST and
HTTPS, which are all correlated. API is an interface used for computer to computer com­
munication. REST is a software architecture style based on scalability, security and relia­
bility. REST APIs rely on service calls and can be based on the HTTP request methods.
HTTPS is an encrypted communication protocol for data transfers across the internet
and an extension of HTTP (Fielding et al. 1999). Lastly, the data formats JSON and
XML, which are commonly used for data storing and data exchange because of their high
readability for people and because they are easily parsed by computers. XML is also
considered a markup language, similar to HTML, which is a common language used for
front­end display in web browsers.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
9
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.4: Comparison of referenced IoT concepts and technologies. A: Understanding
the implications of digitisation and automation in the context of Industry 4.0 (Oesterreich
and Teuteberg 2016). B: IoT Manager (Calderoni, Magnani, and Maio 2019). C: Proceed­
ings of PICMET ’15 (Harmon, Castro­Leon, and Bhide 2015). D: Vision and Challenges
for Realising the Internet of Things (Vermesan et al. 2010)
Concepts and technologies
A
B
C
D
Sensor networks
X
X
X
X
Unique identifiers, GUID etc.
X
Geo referenced devices
X
Translation of data to information
X
X
Cloud storage and Web Hubs
X
X
X
X
Prediction and pattern detection
X
X
Application connections
X
X
Web API connections
X
X
REST architecture
X
X
Gateways, protocols, HTTP, HTTPS etc.
X
X
Data exchange formats, JSON, XML etc.
X
X
As described in Computers in Industry, the integration of internet accessible services and
cloud computing improves collaboration and the distribution of information. Furthermore,
IoT and Big Data solutions can be fundamental in identifying patterns among multiple data
sets (Oesterreich and Teuteberg 2016). The access to large networks of data, provides a
great opportunity for data mining and statistical investigations of sensed data. Linking data
mining with IoT networks will allow for the discovery of trends and patterns. By installing
sensor devices in assets, such as machines, vehicles, robotics, electronics and building
components, real­time performance data can be accessible from afar. Something that is
very beneficial for maintenance and management in the industry. By installing sensors
covering a city or campus, a geographical overview of the performance or behavior in
the area can be obtained. The behavioral information flow can be used to understand an
asset, facility or a system. The constant data flow allows for a digital representation of
specific entities or systems.
2.3
Digital Twins
Experts and academics of the field of digital twins define the term differently, and have
further defined different grades of advancement of the concept. This thesis relies on the
common consensus that a Digital Twin (DT) can be defined as digital representations of
a real world entity or system. The purpose of the twin can be monitoring, data analysis,
remote operation or management. In Digital twin­driven product design framework (Tao et
al. 2018), the concept of digital twins is said to consist of three parts: the physical object,
the digital representation and the link between the two. The link between the physical
object and the digital representation should according to Tao et al. work both ways. The
connection should both be able to transfer data from the physical asset to the twin, but
also send commands or data from the digital representation to the physical counterpart.
The connection should link the asset and the twin using instant interaction, for adjustment,
control and management in real­time. As mentioned by Tao et al. the connection between
a physical object and the corresponding digital object is what defines the digital twin. In a
2018 article (Kritzinger et al. 2018) the digital twin is classified and distinctions between the
digital model, digital shadow and digital twin are listed. As seen on fig. 2.4, the distinction
10
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:21==
can be found in the links and data flows.
Figure 2.4: Digital representation and level of integration. Modified from (Kritzinger et al.
2018)
The digital model serves as a representation of the physical object and can be used for
simulation, design and planning. However, the data exchange between the physical and
digital are manual. By automatic data flow from the physical to the digital counterpart,
the digital shadow is categorized. The digital shadow can thereby be used for real­time
representation of physical objects. The bidirectional automatic data flow between the
physical and digital objects are what defines the digital twin. The digital twin do not only
shadow the physical object, it is able to influence and direct change in the behavior of
the physical object. The use of digital models in AEC were popularized through BIM and
something that is widely used. Digital models can also be non geometric, something that
is mostly common for systems. The automatic data flow from an object to its digital rep­
resentation can prove vital in management of assets far removed from control centers.
Digital shadows and twins can thereby be necessary for smart management of windmills,
offshore structures, bridges, tunnels, buried utilities and other solitary assets. The DT
definition of Tao et al. and Kritsinger et al. overlaps, and there are many opinions of what
exactly defines the DT. In Seven Metaphors to Understand Digital Twins of Built Assets
the subject of how AEC and facility management practitioners describe and understand
DTs is explored. Practitioners from the public sector, project­based firms, software and
technology firms as well as universities and research institutes were interviewed. The
investigation saw no common shared definition of the DT among the interviewees, but a
number of commonly used metaphors in the description its attributes. The attribute de­
scriptions listed in the paper can be rewritten to the following, the DT allow for lifecycle
representation of a built asset; it can represent the processes of which a built asset is
involved; visualizations and user interfaces are used to display the DT; a DT is linked to
its physical counterpart; it is an IoT platform; DTs are managed in collaboration between
practitioners of different domains; DTs are a service ecosystem that provides value for all
involved parties (Camposano, Smolander, and Ruippo 2021). Furthermore, a compari­
son of key attributes of digital models and DTs are also provided in the paper. Here, the
primary aim of digital models are linked to representation, accurate depiction and identi­
fication, whereas it for DTs are linked to providing information of past, present and future
states. The past is described by tracing assets history, the present by monitoring oper­
ation and future through simulation and prediction. The varying definitions and defining
properties used to describe DTs are many. Table 2.5 presents a comparison of meanings
and qualities of the DT as mentioned in a selection of references.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
11
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.5: Comparison of DT definitions. A: Digital twin­driven product design framework
(Tao et al. 2018). B: Digital Twin in manufacturing (Kritzinger et al. 2018). C: Beyond buz­
zwords (Evans 2020). D: Integration of digital twin and BIM technologies within factories
of the future (Badenko et al. 2021). E: Construction with digital twin information systems
(Sacks, Brilakis, et al. 2020). F: The Digital Twin Paradigm for Future NASA and U.S.
Air Force Vehicles (Glaessgen and Stargel 2012). G: A digital twin smart city for citizen
feedback (White et al. 2021). H: The Gemini Principles (Bolton et al. 2018). I: A review
of digital twin applications in construction (Madubuike, Anumba, and Khallaf 2022). J:
Seven Metaphors to Understand Digital Twins of Built Assets (Camposano, Smolander,
and Ruippo 2021)
Defining properties
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Digital representation
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Multifaceted, probabilistic mirror of behavior
X
X
X
X
X
Automatic two­way interaction
X
X
X
X
3 parts: Physical, Virtual, Link
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lifecycle representation
X
X
X
X
X
Can simulate, forecast and predict responses
X
X
X
X
X
Can recommend changes and action
X
X
X
X
Can interact and adjust behavior
X
X
Varied capabilities
X
X
X
X
X
X
Even though the definitions presented in the literature do not correspond exactly, they
are not contradicting. As seen in the table, the definitions found in the references over­
lap somewhat. The function of representing a physical object or entity through sensors
and up­to date data flows are represented or hinted in all the different definitions. Further­
more, some sources defines the concept in depth, whereas others only touch it lightly and
reference the original definitions of Michael Grieves (Badenko et al. 2021). The qualities
and capabilities of the DT are more varied. In The Gemini Principles (Bolton et al. 2018)
the DT is said to vary in modelling type, spacial and temporal scale as the purpose for
the development often dictate the general properties. Some sources link DTs with simu­
lation and prediction whereas others mention the ultimate goal of autonomous behavior.
There are thereby not exactly agreement on the capabilities defining the DT, something
Kritzinger et al. touches upon in the formulation of the representation categories digital
model, digital shadow and digital twin.
The three digital representation terms can also be seen as levels of maturity, which starts
with digital models and evolves to shadows and finally twins. In a recent article, Simon
Evans describes a digital twin maturity spectrum (Evans 2020). Here it is argued, that
even though the total autonomous digital twin might be unachievable today, elements of
the fully developed twin can be beneficial in itself. With focus on those benefits Evans
presents a digital twin maturity spectrum. The spectrum is defined by a logarithmic scale
of elements with increasing complexity. Evans note that the journey towards the devel­
opment of the digital twin does not require linear implementation of the elements. Higher
order elements can be introduced earlier than lower ones if deemed fit. The logarithmic
scaled maturity spectrum is merely a function of complexity. On fig. 2.5 the elements
and defining attributes are listed. Maturity development of digital twins can be seen as
the continuous addition of complexity. The maturity elements can thereby represent the
development steps or building blocks that can be added to mature a twin.
12
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Maturity spectrum and corresponding elements. As described in (Evans 2020)
The spectrum starts out with low complexity. Here, the purpose is to capture and describe
existing conditions, whereas the next level provides tools for design and coordination. The
second element in the spectrum can be compared to the digital model as introduced by
Kritzinger et al. In the next two, data flows are introduced, which corresponds well with the
one­directional automatic data flow of the digital shadow. Kritzinger et al. linked the digital
twin with automatic two­way communication between the object and the digital represen­
tation. A bidirectional data flow, enabling remote operation which is also seen in element
4 of the maturity spectrum. In table 2.6, a comparison of Evans maturity spectrum, the
digital twin definition presented by Kritzinger et al. the BIM maturity levels introduced in
the BIM handbook (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018) and the Industry 4.0 Maturity Index can
be seen. Here, technologies related to the different categories are listed. From the table
it is evident that the digital twin requires a high level of technological maturity. The table
rows do not represent direct equivalence, but technological relation. For instance, stage
5 of the industrial maturity index, BIM level 3, DT Maturity Element 4 and digital twins
share a number of technological requirements and properties, which is also the case for
the other rows. Because of this relation, implementation of one concept might introduce
partial implementation of the rest. Both digital shadows and twins of varying complexity
are currently being introduced within the industry.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 2.6: Comparison of technological requirements for BIM levels and maturity spectra.
Based on (Badenko et al. 2021), with the addition of the DT maturity elements and Industry
4.0 Maturity Index stages
Digital
representation
Maturity
spectrum
Building
Information
Modeling
Industry 4.0
Maturity
Index
Technologies
­
Element 0
BIM level 0
­
2D, CAD
Digital Model
Element 1
BIM level 1
­
2D/3D
Digital Shadow
Element 2 & 3
BIM level 2
Stage 3 & 4
4D/5D, IoT,
data flow
Digital Twin
Element 4
BIM level 3
Stage 5
Cloud collaboration,
bidirectional
data flow, prediction
­
Element 5
­
Stage 6
AI, machine
learning
For buildings and infrastructure projects digital twins can be used for planning and con­
trol in both the design and construction phase. In a recent article (Madubuike, Anumba,
and Khallaf 2022), the DT applications in construction are discussed. In the article it is
argued how an essential prerequisite of the development of DTs is the definition of the
DTs purpose. By defining the purpose, the level of detail and necessary features become
more apparent. For purposes such as construction progress management or health mon­
itoring of a structure, the geometric model is fundamental, whereas for management of
installation systems, the asset network and current operational status are more important
than geometry. In another research article on digital twins in construction (Sacks, Brilakis,
et al. 2020), the concept of Digital Twin Construction (DTC) is defined. The aim of DTC is
for construction management to be more proactive. With real­time data streams from the
construction site and the supply chain, alternate plans can be evaluated through a DT and
active measures can be taken according to the results. This could be optimal reordering
of the construction plan as a result of delivery delay from certain suppliers. Sacks et al.
describes the DTC workflow in relation with the iterative management method; the PDCA
cycle, popularized by William Edwards Deming (Pietrzak and Paliszkiewicz 2015). The
PDCA cycle represents a cyclic learning workflow, which repeatedly goes through the
phases: planning ’Plan’, doing ’Do’, checking ’Check’ and action ’Act’. With a constant
stream of data DTC offer real­time observations of implemented strategies and changes,
which allow for iterative adjustments and cyclic verification of operation.
The concept of digital twins did not originate in the AECO industries, it have also been
employed in both aerospace and manufacturing. The concept was introduced by Grieves
and the first practical implementations were related to NASA3 missions (Glaessgen and
Stargel 2012), where initial uses were in­flight health monitoring, simulation, probabilis­
tic prediction and operation recommendations for vehicles. A reasoning for the use of
digital twins in management of spacecrafts, were the distance to and accessibility of the
physical vehicle. The possibility to monitor and adjust according to behavior of the ve­
hicle increased the reliability of the missions. For asset management in general, digital
twins provide a similar reliability increase. Economic incitement for digital twins are both
lowered maintenance fees as well as shorter down time due to unexpected repairs.
3National Aeronautics and Space Administration (https://www.nasa.gov/)
14
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:25==
The asset management aspect is where the DT can be vital in both infrastructure and man­
agement of the built environment. For infrastructure companies, the possibility to manage
vast networks of roads, utilities, installations and structures require oversight and a com­
prehensive overview of relevant information. Linking sensing devices on physical assets
with geo­referenced twins in a virtual environment can help managers plan maintenance
tasks and detect error patterns. For the built environment, a sensing network with behav­
ior insights can also be useful, as it allow for faster detection of issues. When managing
multiple buildings in a city, assets or structures in an area, managers can link all existing
resources to the relevant buildings. Making it easier to acquire an overview of a single
asset or facility when needed. In the journal, Molio Magasin, published in 2020, a dig­
ital trend article describe how DTs can be used for health monitoring and maintenance
management (Molio 2020). The article also address how the digital models can be used
in simulation of accident or catastrophe scenarios, and thereby serve as an analysis and
prediction tool as well. The article reference ongoing large infrastructure DT projects initi­
ated by Sund & Bælt4. The vision for the projects are for Sund & Bælt to be able to operate
technical assets digitally and from afar, and thereby accomplishing a smarter workflow in
regards to the administration and maintenance of assets and structures. A Doosan Ener­
bility project created in collaboration with Bentley and Microsoft showcase how a DT of
a windfarm can be created through IoT and 3D models (Microsoft 2020). The windfarm
DT grants users insights in current and predicted operation of individual or multiple wind
turbines. The DT also monitor the status of the turbines and alert the user with warnings
of deviating behavior5.
Also utility companies make use of DTs. The article (Pedersen et al. 2021) describes
how VandCenter Syd, a danish water supplier, use a DT in operation of a urban water
system network. The current DT system as well as planned extensions are described
in the article. The current state of the system mainly contains monitoring and detection
features, which implies a digital representation status of digital shadow. A shadow which
improves the insight and management of the large network of underground assets. The
possibility to predict and diagnose system errors is said to ensure smooth operation and
lower maintenance cost and downtime. Another important point noted in the article, is
the strive towards a DT which serves multiple purposes. With further development of the
twin, more features can be implemented and more workflows can be optimized. In the
article, use cases and purposes as defined by individual employees are listed. The pur­
pose perspectives and proposed functionalities range from documentation and design to
operational tasks, which illustrates the variety of benefits the DT can offer within a specific
company. Pedersen et al. conclude that developing a multi­purpose DT will improve the
value creation, as different departments require different features and functionalities.
The creation of a DT require a number of components. Sensors or devices coupled to
the physical object/objects for data retrieval; controller devices for commanding the ob­
ject/objects; a cloud connected database for data storing; a digital interface for control
and oversight; and lastly a back­end framework to tie the components together. IoT de­
vices can be used as the first components, and database services with IoT integration
is widely available commercially. Microsoft offer the cloud services Azure6 and similarly
Amazon offer AWS7. For the digital interface and back­end framework, it is possible to
4State­owned company, responsible for the management and operation of large infrastructure facilities in
Denmark (http://sundogbaelt.dk/)
5A demonstration video explaining the capabilities of the Doosan windfarm DT can be found at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foVIWE01zmA
6Microsoft Azure (https://azure.microsoft.com/)
7Amazon AWS (https://aws.amazon.com/)
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
15
==PAGE:26==
program software aimed for the specific DT project. Something that can be useful for large
projects with very specific feature requirements and use purposes. However, commer­
cial and open­source products and services are also available. For some projects using
already available products may prove a more viable route. Two of the market leaders for
software solutions within AEC, offer services compatible with the interface and back­end
framework for a DT. Autodesk offer Forge, a customizable cloud platform with an open
documentation and application samples (Autodesk 2022). Similarly Bentley offer the iTwin
Platform framework for the creation of DTs for infrastructure, also supplemented with an
open documentation and samples (ITwinjs 2022). Both frameworks offer 3D viewports,
BIM model integration, file storage and customizable user interfaces.
2.4
Smart City and federated twins
Even though the concept of smart cities is not necessarily related to architecture or con­
struction, the term is very much related to Industry 4.0 and the built environment. The
idea of interconnected assets in a larger information network relies on multiple Industry
4.0 concepts, such as IoT, connected data flows, cloud storage and possibly DTs. The
smart city is not generally defined, but commonly referenced in literature. In the proceed­
ings of Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology
(Harmon, Castro­Leon, and Bhide 2015) a number of smart cities definitions are listed,
with the common theme of improving infrastructure and efficiency of cities through the
use of information technology. A theme which is present in all three sources compared
in table 2.7. The purpose of the comparison is to generate an overview of some of the
defining properties mentioned in a selection of sources.
Table 2.7: Comparison of Smart City defining properties. A: Smart Cities and the Internet
of Things (Harmon, Castro­Leon, and Bhide 2015). B: A digital twin smart city for citi­
zen feedback (White et al. 2021). C: Urban Digital Twins for Smart Cities and Citizens
(Dembski et al. 2020)
Defining properties
A
B
C
Optimized and effective city management
X
X
X
Integration of social investment in modern infrastructure
X
X
Integration of information and communication technology
X
X
X
People centered, multi­capable and multi­motivated system
X
Virtual feedback environment
X
Rationalization and digitization of city administration
X
X
As seen in table 2.7 there is a general consensus of optimizing cities through integration
of information and communication technology being a core principle of the smart city.
Furthermore, the smart city should improve citizen inclusion in city management, both
through virtual feedback environments but also through social investment and openness.
The requirement of openness and citizen involvement is something also advocated for in
relation with the National Digital Twin (NDT) program, as presented by the Centre of Digital
Built Britain. The Centre for Digital Built Britain at the University of Cambridge published
a paper aimed to set common definitions in relation with the digital transformation of the
industry. The Gemini Principles (Bolton et al. 2018) defines the NDT and lists principles for
digital twins and the related information management framework. The paper defines the
NDT as a federation or network of connected digital twins, which would benefit society, the
economy, business and the environment by improving efficiency in multiple sectors and by
16
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:27==
optimizing infrastructure and security. The NDT can be seen as a method for implementing
smart cities and connecting data in larger networks. The paper lists a number of key
principles, which sets guidelines for the creation of the NDT. The principles can be seen
on fig. 2.6.
Figure 2.6: The Gemini Principles (Bolton et al. 2018)
The principles are divided into three main categories: purpose, trust and function. Accord­
ing to the paper the NDT must have a clear purpose, which benefits the public, enables
value creation and provide useful insights. The NDT must be trustworthy by being se­
cure, as open as possible and should be based on data of an appropriate quality. The
NDT must function effectively, have a clear ownership and be able to adapt to evolving
technologies. The principles are not only applicable for the NDT, but also for other large
scale DT networks or smart city initiatives. By using the principles in the development of
a NDT, smart city or in federated DT networks, the initiative should be able to benefit an
entire organization or a community. The principles serve as ethical guidelines for a social
sustainable solution.
Smart city projects should thereby be implemented with the Gemini Principles in mind, but
as initially stated, a core principle of the smart city is its capability to optimize real­world
systems. In the proceedings by (Harmon, Castro­Leon, and Bhide 2015) it is mentioned
how the goal for information flows in critical infrastructure and utilities is to shorten the
time between notification and action. The paper links the concept of smart cities with
cloud connected sensors and data analytics and it states that IoT are fundamental for
the development of smart cites. An understandable statement, as insight of real­time
status and behavior of the city will require direct data from specific assets and a proper
overview of a sector will require information flows from multiple sensors, devices or assets.
Generally, data is key requirement for the development of a smart city, and for publicly
open smart city platforms open data specifically. Since 2016, Danish municipalities and
regions have collaborated on collecting available data, which can be accessed through
their shared web­portal8 (Open Data DK 2015). As stated in Universal Digital Twin ­ A
dynamic Knowledge Graph (Akroyd et al. 2021) a DT system consisting of a network of
collaborating parts, could be fundamental in the management and design of infrastructure
8https://www.opendata.dk/
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
17
==PAGE:28==
and utility systems of the future. The presented core Industry 4.0 concepts are thereby
strongly related and all tied to the goal of constructing smarter management frameworks
for our cities, districts, facilities and assets.
As smart city initiatives and larger digital twin networks are interesting and useful for mul­
tiple diverse stakeholders, such projects should accommodate the goals and needs of
entire communities. For businesses and organizations, the Zachman Framework for En­
terprise Architecture is commonly used. The framework links the descriptive focuses:
what, how, where, who, when and why, with the different parties involved in the devel­
opment of a project or organization. Zachman advocates for answering the descriptive
focuses for each party, to highlight and address the project from multiple angles. Zach­
man uses the construction industry as an analogy. He propose that the scope will be
drawn up by a planner, the business model for the owner, the system model for the de­
signer, the technology model will be defined for the builder and detailed representations
will be outlined for subcontractors (Tupper 2011). However, the Zachman framework is
not applicable for projects with less clear ownership and multiple diverse stakeholders, as
the goals and motivations are defined from the owners perspective. In the article A Com­
munity Architecture Framework for Smart Cities (McGinley and Nakata 2015), a more
representative framework is presented. The Community Architecture Framework (CAF)
is introduced, a framework which expands the grid presented by Zachman to accommo­
date multiple stakeholders. The framework were developed as part of a research project
focused on incorporating citizens in the planning of smart city initiatives. The collaborative
model is introduced within the framework. A model which defines the needs, goals and
motivations of each stakeholder linked to the project. In fig. 2.7, the CAF is compared
with the original Zachman Architecture. The grid structure of the two frameworks can be
seen in the simple depictions shown in the figure.
(a) Enterprise Architecture
(b) Community Architecture
Figure 2.7: Comparison of the Zachman framework and the Community Architecture
framework as presented in (McGinley and Nakata 2015)
With the collaborative model, the framework presented by McGinley and Nakata enables
the creation of systems that benefit multiple stakeholders with diverse needs. In a smart
city context, the framework provides a method for tuning the product or solution and imple­
menting beneficial features for entire cities and communities. As the needs and require­
ment for different users related to a city or community can differ greatly, the framework is
valuable in a smart city context. In the 2015 article, a development methodology for the
18
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:29==
creation of tools and systems is introduced. The methodology can be seen in fig. 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Community Architecture Development Methodology as shown in (McGinley
and Nakata 2015)
The Community Architecture Development Methodology (CADM) is organized into six
steps. The first of which aim to evaluate a problem conceptually. Here mock­ups are
created for initial evaluation. In the second step, features and requirements are defined for
each stakeholder. The third step includes the development and design of the community,
system and technical architecture. In the forth step, the features are implemented and an
evaluation is performed. The result of the evaluation is discussed in the fifth step. Finally,
the results and solutions are documented.
The framework serve as a method for insuring the Gemini Principle category, purpose,
through stakeholder involvement. Within the purpose category, the ’public good’ principle
resides. A principle that states that a NDT must be beneficial to the public. However, the
public is a large umbrella and planning for a diverse stakeholder such as the public can
be hard. In their 2015 article, McGinley and Nakata advocates for citizen involvement in
the planning of smart cities, and with the CAF and CADM they develop a tool that allows
diverse stakeholders to participate in city planning. McGinley and Nakata developed the
PartiCity tool, which allowed planners, developers and the public to collaborate on city
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
19
==PAGE:30==
planning through different interfaces. The PartiCity case is an example of public involve­
ment in relation with smart cities, the Docklands DT is another. In (White et al. 2021) the
development and motivations for a twin of the Docklands area of Dublin is described. The
twin is powered by the unity engine, and allows for virtual exploration through a digital
model. Mobility and flooding simulations are features of the twin, as well as city planning
feedback and virtual citizen involvement. The possibility to allow the public to voice opin­
ions of the city is a large focus of the paper, and the twin offers a virtual way of storing and
location tagging the feedback. A third example of citizen involvement is the Herrenberg
DT, which were developed in conjunction with Urban Digital Twins for Smart Cities and
Citizens (Dembski et al. 2020). The paper set out to investigate how citizen participation
in city planning could be improved through virtual models and urban data could be democ­
ratized. The virtual participation process with VR and interactive models were compared
with the traditional 2D conceptual visualization, and generally the process were deemed
an improvement. However, as stated in the paper, larger surveys should be carried out
on the subject.
20
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:31==
3
Methodology
The investigations and studies conducted in relation with the thesis are performed ac­
cording to a selection of methodologies. The theoretical background are obtained and
introduced through an extensive literature study. Within chapter 2, the concepts Build­
ing Information Modeling, Internet of Things, Digital Twins and Smart City are outlined.
The chapter form a theoretical framework that describe current trends, technologies and
theories that relate to the research questions and overall thesis topic. The section on
BIM described how openBIM and cloud platforms can be useful for information sharing,
in avoiding vendor lock­in and as lifecycle platforms. The IoT section covered how cloud
connected sensors can be fundamental in the digital representation of assets. How behav­
ioral overview of facilities, campuses and cities can be powered by IoT. In the DT section
descriptions of how management and overview of physical objects can be performed dig­
itally through IoT powered representations. How performance data can be used in error
detection, prediction and as input for decision making. The Smart City section covered
how larger initiatives should use the Gemini Principles as guidelines and take interested
parties and stakeholder perspectives into account.
The theoretical framework function as a basis for the further investigation of digital twin use
in facility management. The digital twin uses in facility management are explored through
investigations of a real­world case. The project case is defined using project analysis. In
order to define the general requirements for a digital twin solution in the context of a real
case, the Community Architecture Development Methodology is used. The requirement,
feature and vision investigation, are combined with prototyping, in order to obtain direct
feedback of solutions and implemented ideas. In the following sections, the individual
methods will be described in the context of the project.
3.1
Project analysis
To properly define a project case for digital twin investigations, a selection of initial analysis
is performed. The book Proactive Project Management (Fangel 2013), introduce princi­
ples and guidelines for project management, both in preparation of and during projects.
The methodology were developed by the former president of the Danish Project Manage­
ment Association, which is not tied to a specific industry. In chapter six of the book, five
project analysis methods are presented. The aim of the analysis methods are to cap­
ture information concerning the project. With a well defined project, appropriate tools and
processes can be applied. In section 4.1, the project introduction form as well as the
situational, interested parties, result and risk analysis, is performed to outline the project
case and context.
The project introduction, serves as method for defining the project through a checklist.
The list goes through context, objectives, resources, processes and organisation. It can
be helpful in generating an overview of the project and thereby achieving a better un­
derstanding of how best to manage the project. The introduction can furthermore initiate
discussions and serve as a basis for the subsequent project analysis tools.
With the analysis of interested parties, potential stakeholders and their contributions and
interests can be listed. The analysis generates a characterisation of each stakeholder and
the success criteria related to the stakeholders. This can also be relevant for decisions
on which stakeholders to rely on and what initiatives can be performed with the individual
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
21
==PAGE:32==
parties. The interested parties form fields can be seen in table 3.1. The importance scale
goes from 1: Minimal, through 3: Important, to 5: Determining.
Table 3.1: Interested parties form (Fangel 2013)
Potential
interested parties
in the project
Role in
contributions
to the project
Interested parties’
importance for
the project
Interested
parties’ success
criteria
Potential
initiatives
­
­
On a scale of 1 to 5
­
­
The result analysis provides clarification of potential results, their probability and impor­
tance for project success. The analysis can thereby be used to clarify expectations as
well as manage what perspectives should be in focus. The result analysis form fields are
given in table 3.2. Column four, which represents the need for focus is estimated by mul­
tiplying the two previous columns. The importance scalee goes from 1: Minimal, through
3: Important, to 5: Determining. The Uncertainty scale goes from 1: Minimal, through 3:
Some, to 5: Major.
Table 3.2: Result analysis form (Fangel 2013)
Potential
results and
perspectives
Importance for
total success in
the project
Uncertainty on
achieving the
result
Need for focus
from project
management
Potential
initiatives
­
On a scale of 1 to 5
On a scale of 1 to 5
Score
­
The risk analysis serves as a prediction of potential problematic situations, their conse­
quences for the project and how they can be avoided. By contemplating the risks in ad­
vance, active measures to reduce the probability or the consequences can be considered.
This allows for a less reactive project process. The risk analysis form fields are shown
in table 3.3. The fourth column, which represents management effort needed is deter­
mined by multiplying the consequence and probability scores. The consequence scale
goes from 1: Without importance, through 3: Decisive, to 5: Impossible. The probability
scale goes from 1: Highly improbable, through 3: Rather probable, to 5: Almost certain.
Table 3.3: Risk analysis form (Fangel 2013)
Potential
risks in the
project
Consequences
for project
success
Probability
for risk event
Need for project
management
effort
Potential
initiatives
­
On a scale of 1 to 5
On a scale of 1 to 5
Score
­
3.2
Community Architecture Development Methodology
The CAF were introduced in chapter 2 in relation with Smart Cities, as the ontology can
be helpful in outlining the perspectives of multiple stakeholders. In section 4.2 of the case
investigation, the framework will be used to obtain an overview of the requirements and
visions for an intersectional digital twin of DTU, based on a selection of stakeholders.
The framework is used, as the requirements and perspectives can differ for the interested
parties and stakeholders relevant for a project aimed to represent a campus digitally.
22
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:33==
The investigation will provide a good starting point for the development of a solution that
benefits widely and can be useful across the community. The case project will follow the
CADM as shown in fig. 2.8 and presented by (McGinley and Nakata 2015). It will mainly
follow steps 1­3. A problem evaluation as mentioned in step 1, will be accomplished
through the project analysis. The system and feature requirements of step 2 will be de­
fined through the collaborative model and a feature analysis. The system design and
development of step 3 will include a technology model describing the prototype design.
3.3
Prototyping
The development of prototypes and mock­ups is common practice in manufacturing and
fabrication, but also in software development. Prototyping, as described in Information
Technology & People, is an iterative method where sequential versions of a product is
produced while experimenting with design and adjusting details (Budde et al. 1992). In
the article it is described how the goal of prototypes can be to determine solutions for
different challenges, as well as test different segments of the product.
In software development, Budde et al. distinguishes between four main prototype cate­
gories. The Presentation Prototype, which purpose is to showcase the feasibility of the
product. The prototype is developed rapidly, with focus on presenting features and inter­
face. The second category is the Prototype Proper, which is more detailed and generally
focuses on specific aspects or features. The second category aims to clarify challenges
and design of a part of the final product, and multiple different focused prototypes can be
developed simultaneously. The Breadboard is the third category and it is mainly focused
on development and the general system architecture. The Breadboard prototype is used
internally for making technical decisions and clarifying methods of software construction.
The fourth and last category is the Pilot System, which is more refined version of the prod­
uct. The Pilot System is used to test the product experimentally. It is usually deployed
in an initial program, where selected users can test the product and give feedback to the
developers.
The goals of prototyping in software development can be divided into three categories
(Budde et al. 1992). Exploratory Prototyping is prototyping with the aim of clarifying re­
quirements and features in between stakeholders. Exploratory Prototyping can be useful
for aligning visions between organizations and different professional backgrounds. Ex­
perimental Prototyping is for testing technical solutions and experimenting with feature
implementation. Here, users are involved in refining the product through various proto­
types. The third category is Evolutionary Prototyping, where the software is not seen as
a single product with a closed process, but rather a continuous development. In these
projects the developers become consultants who cooperate with users and stakeholders
to advance the software applications to suit the changing requirements.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
23
==PAGE:34==
24
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:35==
4
Case investigation
As described in the previous section, connected DTs and smart city initiatives are seen
in many countries and described in a number of articles. However, descriptions of the
creation and relation to diverse user profiles are not many. This chapter will serve as doc­
umentation and description of the initial steps in the creation of a specific intersectional
connected DT. The theoretical framework will serve as background in the case investi­
gation. The case deals with the development of a platform for data sharing, visualization
and management in multiple sectors and departments for the Lyngby campus of DTU.
To outline the project case a selection of project analysis methods are used. The analy­
sis are performed to sharpen the scope of the project and define the goals and potential
risks. Furthermore, the analysis will be helpful in listing potential stakeholders and general
requirements.
As a prerequisite for developing a common platform for multiple stakeholders, the individ­
ual visions and requirements for each stakeholder should be considered. This will allow
for a more holistic solution, which caters to the needs of all stakeholders. Furthermore,
the DT readiness of each stakeholder should be taken into account, as well as technol­
ogy and software use in current workflows. To generate an overview of the visions and
requirements of all the relevant stakeholders and form a holistic solution, the Community
Architecture Framework will be used. The collaborative model, as described in (McGinley
and Nakata 2015) will be applied in section 4.2.1. To create a prototype that caters to the
stakeholders a feature analysis will be performed. This is described in section 4.2.2. The
development of a prototype as well as the DT prototype itself will be described in section
4.3.
4.1
Project analysis
With the project analysis tools presented in (Fangel 2013), the project case is defined.
The analysis methods are introduced in the project analysis section of chapter 3. The
thorough project analysis is accomplished through a workshop and discussions during
project supervision meetings. The workshop is described in appendix A.
To obtain a sharp definition and project scope, the project introduction method is used.
The form can be found in the above mentioned appendix. It was filled out during the
brainstorming session in the project analysis workshop. The session showed that a main
project reason were to address the potential of a DT solution and the values it can provide.
All to better the argumentation for future projects and initiatives. A reason that leads to
the objectives of the project being a showcase for inspiration as well as a possibility to
suggest a framework for similar projects. Business wise, the DT product should be of
value for the users and a scalable prototype, for which future extensions is possible. The
value creation should be related to the individual users and interested parties, something
which can be accomplished through early dialog in between stakeholders.
As a basis for the collaborative model in the CAF, the relevant stakeholders must be found.
The interested parties analysis presented by Fangel, investigate potential stakeholders.
With the analysis, the contributions and importance of each stakeholder is considered
and the relevance of each stakeholder can thereby be assessed methodically. With the
interested parties analysis, potential stakeholders are examined, and the initiatives nec­
essary for the project to be deemed successful by each stakeholder is considered. The
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
25
==PAGE:36==
stakeholder contributions and success criteria can be used for project management and
stakeholder involvement. An overview of the interested parties analysis can be seen in
table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Interested parties overview. Full form in appendix A
Potential interested party
Contributions
Importance
Local facility manager /
dataowner
Data inventory,
management requirements
4
Institute management
Feedback on services
2
Sustainability department
Requirement specification,
potential uses
3
Local utility supplier
Data, potential uses
2
Procurement and
budgeting department
Use case and feature
development
3
Technology consultant
Software and feature
development
5
Maintenance and
renovation team
Insight of maintenance
tasks and workflows
2
Students and researchers
Feedback on services
1
As seen in table 4.1, the most important potential parties are the consultants and dataown­
ers, as they are fundamental for the platform development. The consultant bring ex­
perience and allocate resources to the technical development of the solution, and the
dataowner provide the necessary data inventory as well as technical requirements for
the solution. For a great solution, contributions from the main users are also necessary.
Here the sustainability and procurement departments can be beneficent in addressing use
cases as well as feature requirements. Potential external collaborators can also be help­
ful in use case specification. A local utility supplier, could even contribute with additional
data points. However, a few parties are chosen for early involvement in the project. The
dataowner and technology consultant as well as main users from the university adminis­
tration are involved through the CADM. They will feature as stakeholders in the following
sections. Additional interested parties should be involved after the project initiation, to
assist the addition of functionalities and expand the usefulness of the product.
To establish clear expectations and generate a list of reasons that can promote the project
for potential stakeholders, a result analysis is performed.
26
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.2: Result analysis overview. Full form in appendix A
Potential results and
perspectives
Importance
Uncertainty
Focus
necessity
Showcase of DT campus
project. Source of
inspiration
5
1
5
Insight and access to
locally generated data for
students and researchers
1
3
3
Forecast and predictions
of future consumption
and/or emission
3
4
12
Sensor based notification
of lowered operation output
for assets and installations
3
4
12
Detailed system model of
campus for geo­referencing
of assets and sensors
2
2
4
Improved collaboration
and knowledge sharing
in between sectors
3
1
3
Table 4.2 shows that the most important goal is one realistically accomplished. Creat­
ing a DT showcase, which can inspire future projects is a likely result, as it is the main
reasoning for the steering groups involvement. However, some of the important results
require much effort for success. Developing prediction features require implementation of
statistic and machine learning algorithms. Likewise, notification systems based on sensor
data require programming of rule based detection scripts which can automatically act and
notify based on limit values. However, the added results, such as improved collaboration
and insight caused by data visualization require smaller effort. They can both be tied to
the purpose category of the Gemini Principles. With data insight and improved collab­
oration, the product creates value for the users through insight in the built environment.
Furthermore, by involving stakeholders in the creation of a prototype, that generates in­
sight of information normally monitored by different departments, horizontal integration
improves. The knowledge sharing can lead to a less silo structured organization, and col­
laboration which better operation and create value in multiple sectors. Another potential
result, is a detailed system model, which can be used to localize specific assets and sen­
sors. Something that is useful for overview and understanding of system operation. By
geo­referencing assets, maintenance planning can be optimized, as multiple connected
assets can be planned for maintenance simultaneously. The detailed system model is not
deemed fundamental for the project, but a result which would generate additional value
without allocation of large effort or focus.
In addition to the list of results and outcomes related to the project, an awareness of
potential risks and concerns can be helpful in proactive project management. With the
risk analysis, potential risks, their consequence for the project, the probability of the event
as well as initiatives to remedy the concerns are listed.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.3: Risk analysis overview. Full form in appendix A
Potential risks
Consequences
Probability
Effort
necessity
Complexity of DT solutions
being an obstacle for
a common framework
2
3
6
Vendor lock­in
2
3
6
Limited data access,
because of privacy measures
2
4
8
Cyber attacks
3
3
9
In table 4.3 the first potential risk mentioned, is the possibility that DT projects could be
too complex for a common framework, which would simplify the framework and make it
less applicable. Another important technology risk is vendor lock­in which means being
tied to specific software distributors because the cost and disadvantages of switching are
too high. The risk of vendor lock­in can be tied to the evolution principle under the func­
tion category of the Gemini Principles. As mentioned in chapter 2 and described in the
British BIM survey (Bain 2019), a few software vendors account for a large share of the
BIM tools used in industry. Something that also applies to DT platform technology. The
vendor dependency decrease the solutions agility and adaptability. Furthermore, it ties
the product lifetime to that of the software and technological solution. However, open­
source solutions exist, and to resist vendor lock­in open­source solutions should be used
when possible, dependencies on specific software should be reduced, and additionally
common programming languages and file types should be used in development. The risk
analysis also lists limited data access being a potential consequence of privacy measures.
Something that is highly likely to a degree, as GDPR1 and additional country or organi­
zation regulations aim to protect specific data. The open solution should thereby abide
by the appropriate laws and some data should not be publicly accessible, which could
be handled through a user hierarchy with different rights and access. The data should
also be protected from malicious threats and data breaches caused by cyber attacks,
something that could also be handled by authorization and user login. The risk of data
breaches has a higher consequence, as it would remove the reliability of the solution. The
risk is probable, and authorization can not stand alone. Resources must be allocated to
develop or use commercial encrypted and secure data storage solutions and implement
endpoint protection throughout the organization and user base. The last two risks relate
to the trust category of the Gemini Principles, as security, openness and quality are im­
portant aspects of the trustworthiness of a digital solution. The DT should be as open as
possible, without compromising data security and privacy. To accommodate these areas,
development effort is necessary.
4.2
Community Architecture
For the collaborative model in the CAF the motivations and requirements for a selection of
stakeholders are investigated. The stakeholders are chosen from the interested parties
investigation performed in section 4.1. Stakeholders are selected based on importance
for the project. To address the facility management perspective CAS, and specifically the
Building Management System (BMS) department, represent a dataowner stakeholder for
1A privacy and data protection regulation adopted by the European Union in 2016 (https://eur­
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj)
28
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:39==
DTU. The engineering consultancy Niras represent a technology consultant, who develop
and design the digital services. The sustainability department in CAS and the university
procurement department provide insight in the analysis and reporting perspectives related
to consumption, emission and cost.
4.2.1
Collaborative Model
The stakeholders active in the initial project development can be seen in table 4.4. The
table shows the primary role of each stakeholder. However, the sustainability department
and administration mainly contribute to requirement specification and input to feature de­
velopment and use purposes.
Table 4.4: Stakeholders
Stakeholder
Role
S1
Niras
Technology consultant
S2
CAS
Dataowner, facility manager
S3
Sustainability department
& Administration
User consultant
(Sustainability management,
Procurement & budgeting)
The engineering consultancy Niras act as technology consultant in the project. Even
though the prototyping and development is mainly done in relation with the master thesis
project, Niras provide technology supervision and function as the consultant stakeholder
for the purpose of the stakeholder analysis. Niras provide experience with DT projects
and expertise in a range of software products related to BIM, ICT and DTs.
The stakeholder CAS function as facility manager for DTU. CAS are responsible for the
operation of systems and equipment at the DTU campuses and have developed a number
of smart campus platforms to monitor performance and status of utility systems and the
equipment network. The systems are monitored through IoT devices, which broadcasts
data into the cloud. The facility managers use BMSnet View as a platform for data monitor­
ing. The browser platform includes a campus viewer, which is fed utility data aggregates
to generate an overview of the consumption in different buildings. Through a building list
panel, a building equipment interface can be accessed. Here, the equipment and meter
hierarchy as well as specific timeseries can be examined. For wider use, CAS are cur­
rently developing a dashboard platform with utility consumption aggregates and building
insights. BMSnet Dashboard includes a viewer similar to that of BMSnet View. However
the dashboard include an overview of building user area allocation, as well as a selection
menu that enable the user to single out specific users and departments. Screenshots
from the two platforms can be seen in fig. 4.1. For system operation CAS use a SCADA2
platform to control and regulate building installations, electrical equipment and systems.
2Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
29
==PAGE:40==
(a) BMSnet View
(b) BMSnet Dashboard
Figure 4.1: Smart campus platforms
The primary role of the third stakeholder is to generate input for feature development
and capability specification. The sustainability procurement department administrate and
manage budgets as well as document costs and climate footprint across the university.
The DT platform can be useful in optimizing information gathering for the third stakeholder.
By hinting specific insights and useful features, the stakeholder can influence the final
product. The third stakeholder thereby represent a user profile. During the development
of a DT platform multiple user profiles should be included as stakeholders, to widen the
representation and ensure value creation across the community. However, for the initial
development described in the thesis, only a few stakeholders are represented.
In the development of a digital solution, understanding the user profile and general use
of the solution can be an important factor. If stakeholder 2 and 3 represent the most
common users, their workflows and DT readiness should be taken into account. Through
a number of meetings with the BMS department of CAS, the visions for development of
digital systems related to facility and data management for DTU were shared. The dis­
cussions addressed both current services, features under development as well as wishes
for the future. The technology provider perspectives were discovered through guidance
sessions and talks with project supervisors from Niras. Here the objectives and consid­
erations from an outside consultant were discussed. The visions for capabilities and use,
as well as specific requirements from a management and analysis perspective were dis­
cussed in talks with the sustainability and procurement departments. A document with
notes from the sessions with stakeholder 3 can be found in appendix B.
30
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.5: CAF Collaborative model for stakeholders S1: Niras, S2: CAS and S3: Sus­
tainability department and Administration
What
How
Where
Who
When
Why
Data
Function
Network
People
Time
Motivation
S1
Digital
transformation,
agile software
solution, common
data environment
Web based
platform or
dashboard,
plugins,
extensions
Cloud
Technology
consultant
Live
Providing technical
solutions for diverse
stakeholders,
periodic and
recurring services
S2
Data visualization,
system overview,
error detection,
error diagnosis
Dashboards,
graphs,
tables,
device status,
notifications
Cloud
connected
platform
Facility
manager,
dataowner
Live feed,
real­time
Overview of assets,
reliability and fast
correction of
errors, decision
support
S3
Data visualization,
historized
comparison,
aggregates, KPIs
Dashboard,
aggregates
characterized
in process
and use
Platform
Management,
administration
Live and
historized
More sustainable
operation, lower
emissions and
costs related to
consumption and
utility use
Table 4.5 shows the collaborative model for the selected stakeholders. From the table it
can be seen how stakeholder 2 and 3 have aligned objectives and needs, as both ask for
platforms to visualize data a provide overview. The feature requirements are overlapping
even though the motivations are different. The specific requirements and functionalities
does also fit with the objectives of stakeholder 1 who wish to help implement the de­
sired solutions and accelerate digital transformation. The meetings and talks with the
stakeholders showed what they wanted from a digital platform. Stakeholder 2 were pri­
marily interested in a digital shadows solution, that could be helpful in pattern detection,
status overview and general decision support. Stakeholder 3 wanted data visualization
and insights, which can also be linked to the digital shadow categorization of a DT solu­
tion. As stakeholder 1 are eager to initiate a digital transformation and develop a DT with
bidirectional data flows, the end goal is not entirely in compliance. However, digital trans­
formation can be done in multiple steps, and with the implementation of a digital shadow
the motivations for further development and transformation could very well arise.
4.2.2
Feature Analysis
Through the collaborative model, the motivations and overall goals for the stakeholder
group were discovered. The technology consultant is eager to accelerate digital trans­
formation and initiate a DT project. The second stakeholder want to optimize system
overview and error detection for faster maintenance and more reliable operation. Stake­
holder 3 are primarily interested in obtaining operation and consumption overviews, to
lower cost and emission. A digital shadow that link operation data with locations and
geometric data could provide a platform for system overview. The creation of a digital
shadow platform would provide a good starting point for digital transformation, as matu­
rity elements could be implemented in later versions. This would allow users to familiar­
ize themselves with the platform capabilities and suggest future improvements, without
overloading from the get go. The shadow could then change from pure digital represen­
tation to a twin from which facilities can be operated. To accommodate the motivations
of stakeholder 2 and 3, the platform should both be able to display general consumption
aggregates and insight of system status.
The aggregates and data visualization are features already implemented in the smart
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
31
==PAGE:42==
campus platforms developed by CAS, but through the use of BIM models, the insights
can be specified and related directly to building spaces or levels. Furthermore, emission
forecasts can be predicted by using the geometric data as a baseline for heating, cooling
and lighting requirements. Emission and consumption prediction would prove a valuable
feature in cost and sustainability management.
Error detection and system status insights are features that would benefit from being dis­
played in a 3D environment, as visualizing where errors occur can be helpful in diagnosis
and cause analysis. Maintenance status for building elements and physical infrastructure
could also be implemented through a BIM based DT platform. Here, current and future
maintenance tasks could be highlighted through links to geometric objects. This would
help specify specific tasks and allow for easier localization on site.
In table 4.6 possible features for the digital solution proposed for the project is listed. The
features are not ranked based on necessity or implementation difficulty, but merely listed
as suggestions. For the initial prototype of the digital solution, the list should be used as
input for feature development.
Table 4.6: List of possible features
Possible features
Description
Location based data visualization
Link between operation data and location
Geometric visualization
Display of buildings and facilities through BIM
Consumption aggregate insight
Display of utility data aggregates
System error detection
Rule­based detection of system and device errors
System status insight
Visualization of device status
Maintenance status insight
Visualization of physical asset status
Error notification
Notification system for errors and warnings
Task allocation
Allocation system for tasks related to O&M
Consumption prediction
Forecast of consumption data
Emission prediction
Forecast of emission due to consumption
4.3
Prototyping and mock­up development
To showcase the potential of DT services, literature references and studies are not suf­
ficient. A prototype of the solution exemplified with real services for real stakeholders,
provide a better representation of the final product. Prototypes, are not only efficient in
proving demand to the individual stakeholders, but also as an example which can inspire
others to implement similar solutions. Furthermore, the prototype will offer a common
understanding of requirements and capabilities of the final product in between stakehold­
ers and developers. For this project, something comparable with a Prototype Proper as
described in the methodology chapter is developed. The aim of the prototype will be to
showcase how the functionalities of a DT platform could be used.
In fig. 4.2 a simplified technology model of the prototype can be seen. The model show
the main components that constitute the digital part of the prototype.
32
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2: Simplified technology model of iTwin prototype
As the simplified model of the technology design only show the main components, many
processes and sub components are omitted from the figure. In section 4.3.3 with the
description of the prototype, the full technology design will be depicted in a similar model,
and the sub components and processes will be described.
4.3.1
Software and technology introduction
As depicted in fig. 4.2 the main components and software that comprise the DT prototype,
are the BIM model, the application back­end and the utility data API. The BIM models
used for facility management by the stakeholder CAS at DTU are Autodesk Revit models.
The utility system of the campus are monitored through sensors and the data is stored in
the BMS database, which is accessible through an API. To create the browser platform, a
back­end application framework is needed. As mentioned in chapter 2, the market leaders
Autodesk and Bentley offer such services. They offer the Forge and iTwin frameworks.
Both frameworks offer very similar capabilities, something that is compared in the master’s
thesis Towards an agnostic framework of Digital Twins (Apostolidis 2022). Here, four
software solutions for DT development are compared in regards to display, openness
and persistence. Autodesk Forge and Bentley iTwin rank best among the solutions, and
receive almost equal scores. However as stakeholder S1 have prior experience working
with Bentley and the iTwin framework offer compatibility with city planner tools, the case
platform application and viewer prototype will be based on Bentley iTwin.
Autodesk Revit
The stakeholder CAS use Revit BIM models in facility management. The models are
both used for visualization, documentation, planing and as input for future construction
projects. Revit is a commonly used BIM software offered by Autodesk, with model files
in .rvt format. In the DTU models owned by CAS, the correct naming of buildings, floors
and rooms are used. Something which makes links to other facility management tools
possible. BIM models for both old and new buildings are stored by CAS, and even though
the detail level vary, the general model setup is similar.
BMSdata
The stakeholder CAS use a set of browser based software solutions for facility manage­
ment. One of which is a visual consumption overview called BMSview, where summarized
values for all DTU buildings can be seen. The platform can also display the individual com­
ponents used for quantification and estimation of consumption totals. The sensor devices
are divided into reporting hierarchies for each building. A diagram showing the hierarchy
system of the devices in the BMS database can be seen in fig. 4.3. The hierarchy and
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
33
==PAGE:44==
device logic presented in this subsection is based on talks with CAS and through the use
of the API and BMSview platform.
Figure 4.3: Hierarchy of devices in the BMS database
As seen on the figure, the buildings visible in the database hold multiple virtual controllers.
The virtual main controllers contain specific meter components and submeters. They in­
herit data from the meter components and are divided into utility types, water, electricity,
gas etc. Each meter component corresponds to a physical device or installation panel
and hold multiple data end­points. The individual components include sensors that track
different values. All device names contain a building number prefix. After the prefix, a
subset of codes describe the device function, location and number. The codes EL_EM
and ELT_FM represent electrical components and meters. BF_FM and BV_FM repre­
sent water supply meters. KF_QM and KØ represent cooling energy meters and cooling
components. The electrical submeters are segmented into different use categories. L for
light and normal power outlets. K for power meaning, servers, workshop or laboratory
installations. N for No­break meaning installations with emergency supply in case of grid
failure. S for special installations. The device data points are named similarly, but with
suffixes describing value and data type. FL for flow, P for power, I for current, Q for ef­
fect, TT for temperature, U for electrical potential, AVG for averages, dif for change or
difference and tot for sums and timehistory totals. In fig. 4.4 naming examples of data
points for meter components in a specific building can be seen. Here the naming logic is
evident. The sequence of small x letters represent location and specify a room number.
The naming logic and hierarchy were discovered through the BMSnet View and clarified
in meetings with CAS.
34
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: Device naming and hierarchy example
The devices are accessible through the open BMSdata API. The API supports GET,
POST, DELETE and PATCH calls. Through GET­calls, entity properties, live­data and
timeseries are retrievable for individual devices. The response is returned in JSON for­
mat and the calls are secured through OAuth 2.0, which is an open standard protocol for
two way authorization (Hardt 2012).
Bentley iTwin
Bentley iTwin is a customizable web platform, with incorporated tools and APIs for DT ap­
plication development and customization (Bentley Systems 2022). Bentley describes the
platform as a back­end for infrastructure DT applications. The platform is constructed by
the open­source iTwin.js library, which is supported by a selection of tutorials and guides,
as well as a code documentation (ITwinjs 2022). Node.js is a prerequisite for the library
and TypeScript programming language is recommended for application development.
For iTwin viewer applications, BIM models can be displayed and the element properties
are accessible through iModel query. The iModel database schemas, data structure and
relationships are defined by Base Infrastructure Schemas (BIS). The property data of BIM
elements is accessed by performing query operations in ECSQL3. Through the queries,
specific properties can be called for single or multiple elements and element types in a
model. The iTwin viewer is powered by WebGL4 and the iTwin user interface controls are
based on React.js5 (ITwinjs 2022).
4.3.2
Development process
The iTwin documentation and Bentley learning resources were used as background for
the development of the iTwin prototype. Bentley share a number of tutorials and iTwin
samples within the iTwin Platform developer portal. Through guides, tutorials and the
API documentation a viewer application was customized to the prototype described in
subsection 4.3.3. The documentation were utilized for implementation of features and
feature customization that differed from the samples and guides.
For model query, the iModel Console were used to test ECSQL query calls and prop­
3The SQL command language implementation used in iTwin.js
43D graphics open standard for web applications (https://www.khronos.org/api/webgl)
5A JavaScript library for development of user interfaces (https://reactjs.org/)
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
35
==PAGE:46==
erty searches. As an extension of the iModel Console, the Schema Explorer provides
a detailed breakdown of specific models. Through the Explorer the correct naming of
propertysets and schemas can be determined. Examples from the iModel Console and
Schema Explorer can be seen in fig. 4.5.
(a) iModel Console
(b) Schema Explorer
Figure 4.5: iModel query
The prototype were generated through the use of the iModel.js and iTwin.js libraries6,
as well as the BMSdata open API7. JavaScript and TypeScript programming were used
to customize the viewer application and data visualization features. For prototyping, the
application were hosted locally. However, the prototype is meant to showcase a web
based platform without software dependencies. Hosting it locally is purely done during
development and in early prototyping.
The first iterations and initial prototyping focused on hosting the BIM model in the iTwin
environment and acquiring object data through model query. Another focus were to gen­
erate a link between the model and the BMS database.
(a) BIM model displayed in the iTwin viewer
(b) BMS data hosted in the iTwin environment
Figure 4.6: iTwin prototype at early iterations
In fig. 4.6 the BIM model of building 304 can be seen displayed in the viewer with device
icons and sensor data hosted in the iTwin environment. For the iteration shown at the
figures, the device markers were placed manually. A workflow that was automated in
later iterations. The automation were necessary for an application working for any building
without manual code changes.
The automation of marker placement required a link between the model and the sensors,
and as the building number are included in the device naming as well as the model name
6The libraries can be found at https://github.com/imodeljs
7Access were granted through collaboration with CAS
36
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:47==
it could function as the link. The automation were accomplished by generating markers
based on an API command that call for meters with names that include the building num­
ber. Next, a loop through the response JSON entities return meter names and the room
number for the individual meters. Below a code extract exemplifying how meters and
corresponding room locations are found in the prototype application.
public static async getMeters(buildingname: string, accessToken: any) {
//initial declarations
const _tag = 'meter';
const baseurl = 'https://bmsdata.cas.dtu.dk/api/v2';
const call = '/entities?name='+buildingname+'&tags='+_tag;
const userkey = accessToken;
const ent_meters = [];
const ent_rooms = [];
//api call
const response = await fetch(baseurl+call, {
headers: new Headers({
'accept': 'application/json',
'Authorization': userkey
}),
});
const Data = await response.json();
//loop through entities
for(var i
= 0; i < Data.length; i++) {
var instance = Data[i];
var meter = instance['entity']; //retrieve entity name
ent_names.push(meter); //push name to ent_names list
//split entity name and push second part to ent_rooms list
ent_rooms.push(meter.split(['_'])[1]);
}
return [ent_meters, ent_rooms] as const;
}
Listing 1: Initial structure of the getMeters() function
Through an ESQL query, the rooms in the BIM model are found. By running a loop over
the meter list the meters can be paired with rooms and markers can be placed automati­
cally. To avoid multiple markers overlapping each other due to identical room relations, all
marker locations are displaced slightly by a random addition to their x­ and y­coordinates.
For the devices with names that do not match any room numbers in the model, the mark­
ers are placed centrally above the building. The markers are decorated with an icon and
a tooltip fed with data from the BMS database. As shown in fig. 4.6b the tooltip initially
displayed the last data value and timestamp for the data points inherited by the individual
meter. However, in later iterations the data values were moved to a panel interface and
the tooltip were used to display device status.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.7: Device markers placed in rooms according to meter naming
To differentiate between meters and submeters, the meter retrieval function were changed.
Additional name and room lists for the submeters were added as well as a list describing
the meter each submeter refers to. The function kept the same structure but the loop over
entities were expanded. In listing 2 the changed code can be seen in an extract.
Figure 4.8: Meter and submeter markers displayed in the prototype viewport
38
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:49==
//loop through entities
for(var i
= 0; i < Data.length; i++) {
var instance = Data[i];
var meter = instance['entity'];
var check_virtual = 'False' //check parameter
var check_sub = 'False' //check parameter
//loop through tags
for(var j = 0; j < instance['tags'].length; j++) {
var tag = instance['tags'][j];
if(tag.includes('virtual')) {
check_virtual = 'True';
}
else if(tag==='submeter') {
check_sub = 'True';
}
}
//check if entity is meter
if(check_virtual==='False' && check_sub==='False') {
//push name and room to lists
ent_meters.push(meter);
room_names.push(meter.split(['_'])[1]);
}
//check if entity is submeter
else if(check_virtual==='False' && check_sub==='True') {
//push name, room and reference to lists
ent_submeters.push(meter);
subroom_names.push(meter.split(['_'])[1]);
for(var j = 0; j < instance['tags'].length; j++) {
var tag = instance['tags'][j];
//pick relevant tags
if(tag.includes('submeterOf')) {
var id = tag.split(['@'])[1];
var meterref = await getMeterNames(id, accessToken);
submeter_ref.push(meterref);
}
}
}
}
Listing 2: Change of entity loop in the getMeters() function
In the extract it can be seen how the code now accounts for device type. The 'meter' tag
used in the API call is seen in both virtual main controllers, meter components and subme­
ters. Through if­statements the changed code in listing 2 returns meters and submeters
individually. Because of the segmentation, the device markers can differ. In fig. 4.8 the
markers for meters and submeters can be seen. The meter markers are decorated with
green sensor icons and the submeters with smaller black icons, which were later changed
to blue due to visibility. Futhermore, the tooltip of the submeters contain the name of the
meter they refer to, which was pushed to the ’submeter_ref’ list in the getMeters() func­
tion.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
39
==PAGE:50==
The initial prototype, which were based on a simple BIM viewer, included a property and a
model tree panel besides the viewport. During development, two additional panels were
added. The utility insight panel and the device interface. The utility insight panel displays
consumption aggregates in a table. The values are determined by summing meter values
for different utilities. Listing 3 show how meter components are filtered and electricity,
water and gas aggregates are retrieved.
public static async getInsightTotals(name: string,time: any,accessToken: any){
//retrive entities and initial declarations
var data = [0, 0, 0, 0];
const [meterArray] = await getMeters(name, accessToken);
//loop over entities
meterArray.forEach(async (meterName, index) => {
var type = meterName.split(['_'])[1]; //entity type variable
if(meterName==='') {
}
else if(type.includes('EF')||type.includes('EL')){
var entName = meterName+'_Ptot' //totals data point variable
var val = await getTSTotals([entName], time, accessToken);
data[0] += val[0]; //add value to first index of array
}
else if(type.includes('BF')||type.includes('BH')||type.includes('DP')){
var entName = meterName+'_FLtot' //totals data point variable
var val = await getTSTotals([entName], time, accessToken);
data[1] += val[0]; //add value to second index of array
}
else if(type.includes('GA')){
var entName = meterName+'_FLtot' //totals data point variable
var val = await getTSTotals([entName], time, accessToken);
data[2] += val[0]; //add value to third index of array
}
else if(type.includes('KØ')){
var entName = meterName+'_Ptot' //totals data point variable
var val = await getTSTotals([entName], time, accessToken);
data[3] += val[0]; //add value to fourth index of array
}
})
return data
}
Listing 3: Structure of the getInsightTotals() function
As seen in listing 3, the getInsightTotals() function retrieves all building meters, filters
them based on what codes their names include. Next, the getTSTotals() function is
called for each type, which retrieves the value change for a specific timeframe.
In the latest iterations, the tooltip shown when hovering over the device markers were
changed. The changed tooltip can be seen on fig. 4.9.
40
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.9: Status tooltip
Instead of displaying values for each data point related to a device, the status of each data
point is listed. The current iteration only checks whether the data point returns a value and
a timestamp when called through the API, but more checks could be implemented. As
seen on fig. 4.9, the number of errors for the individual device is counted and listed in the
tooltip above the status table. With the tooltip change, the data table originally displayed
were moved to the device panel besides the viewport. Here, a dropdown selector were
implemented for selection of devices.
To investigate the potential of integrating BIM models into a smart city platform, the work­
flow of compiling iModels from iTwin projects in an OpenCities Planner8 project were
tested. While not being directly relevant for the prototype development, the test showed
a potential option for a city or campus DT platform. Something that will be considered in
the discussion of further development in chapter 5. In fig. 4.10 an example of an iModel
hosted in an OpenCities Planner project, as well as object data from the synchronized
BIM model can be seen.
(a) An iModel hosted in OpenCities Planner
(b) Object data tooltip
Figure 4.10: Showcase of iTwin and OpenCities Planner integration
The iTwin and OpenCities Planner integration test showed how detailed BIM models can
be used in smart city platforms, and how iModels can be used in other digital platforms
8Bentleys OpenCitis Planner is a software solution for city planning and city sized digital twins
(https://www.bentley.com/en/products/brands/opencities­planner)
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
41
==PAGE:52==
than iTwin powered applications. The OpenCities Planner platform could be used to host
multiple buildings and thereby provide overview. Beyond the possibility to display mul­
tiple models and object data, the integration also allows specifying whether displaying
messages, descriptions or running scripts on click. Something that makes it possible to
use the platform as a gateway to iTwin applications. This could be implemented through
triggering links by clicking on specific buildings.
4.3.3
Design
The prototype version designed during the course of this thesis project were developed
with focus on the feature analysis described in section 4.2.2. However, the design reached
during development only showcase some of the features mentioned, and further itera­
tions would see more features and capabilities implemented. For data aggregates and
KPIs, the version merely display aggregates of consumption based on sensor devices.
Something the current smart campus platforms from CAS are also capable of. For facility
management, the version display sensor status and sensor data for all meters related to
specific buildings. The individual meters and submeters are visualized through markers
hosted in specific locations. In section 5.1, the further development areas and possible
feature additions for the prototype is discussed.
A product of the third step in the CADM, is the technology design. Configuration of the
overall technology architecture is a basis for the final technological product. The archi­
tecture can be used to describe the product for developers and programmers for further
development planning. The architecture also provide an overview of the technological
system and how different sub processes link and relate. Through the prototype devel­
opment, a general idea of how the technology architecture could be designed, were ob­
tained. The technology design of the viewer based platform can be seen on fig. 4.11. The
basis of the technology architecture are as the integration of BIM models and IoT data in
a browser application, as depicted in fig. 4.2. The detailed architecture diagram is based
on the IoT Manager framework presented by (Calderoni, Magnani, and Maio 2019) and
described in chapter 2. This can be seen in the layered system break down.
42
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.11: Technology design ­ iTwin platform prototype
As seen on fig. 4.11, the technology can be described through four layers.
The physical layer, consisting of actual objects, elements and equipment. The scope
of the physical layer corresponds to the scope of the project, buildings and infrastruc­
ture elements are represented digitally through BIM. Installations and system assets are
equipped with sensors and monitoring devices in an extent appropriate to the desired
amount of oversight.
The sensing layer, which represents the sensors and devices that broadcast sensed data
from the physical to the digital world. For the DTU case the layer mainly constitute the
BMS data, which consist of multiple meters connected to a web database. The meters
monitor ventilation, lighting, heating, water and power systems in specific buildings. The
sensor data is stored in a cloud database and can be accessed through an open API.
The data layer is the ’engine room’ of the platform. It consist of internal data, such as BIM
models, relevant qualitative data and icons. The data layer is also where external data is
formatted for the front­end interface. In the data layer the data from multiple sources are
translated to information and useful insight, broadcasted in the service layer. The BIM
models are transferred to the iModel database for data query, compiling and visualization
in the browser viewer. The sensor data is formatted from JSON objects to descriptions
and values, which are displayed in the service layer.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.12: Prototype application service layer
The final layer is the service layer, which represents the client side. Here, operation and
monitoring of the DT is possible. In fig. 4.12 the service layer of the prototype application
can be seen. The front­end is constructed through the Bentley iTwin viewer. The BIM
model is shown in a viewport, with sensor markers hosting tooltips at geo­referenced
locations. User interfaces can be accessed through panels next to the viewport. The
device markers and a specific tooltip can be seen displayed in the model viewport in
fig. 4.13. The tooltip describes the status of the data points connected to specific meter
components.
Figure 4.13: Markers and tooltip feature of the prototype
The two panel interfaces developed for the prototype can be seen in fig. 4.14. In the
insight data panel consumption aggregates for a certain timeframe for the building can be
seen. In the device panel tabulated sensor data is displayed based on the meter name.
The table lists tag descriptions and last data values for each data point connected to the
chosen meter component.
44
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:55==
(a) Insight Panel
(b) Device Interface
Figure 4.14: Interfaces for consumption overview and device management
Both panels are generated based on the same logic as the markers. The building number,
aggregates and device data is retrieved based on the BIM model hosted in the application.
The application were tested on four BIM models from the CAS database. The represented
buildings differ in use, size and age, which provided a diverse test model selection. In
fig. 4.15 and 4.16 the four different BIM models used for prototype testing can be seen.
(a) Building 116
(b) Building 127
Figure 4.15: BIM models displayed in the browser application
Building 116 and 202 represent larger buildings, where 202 is multi­functional with both
study, meeting and office facilities, as well as laboratories and a cafeteria. Building 127
and 304 are smaller buildings, where 127 is mainly used for education and 304 primarily
a technical building without daily users. 127 and 202 represent newer buildings, where
BIM most likely have been used in the design phase, and 116 and 304 older buildings for
which models probably have been created for operation.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) Building 202
(b) Building 304
Figure 4.16: BIM models displayed in the browser application
The device types and amount of meters in the different buildings were also an important
difference, as it was used to test the automatic generation of markers, device selector
and insight data tables. As seen in fig. 4.15 and 4.16 markers are scattered over multiple
rooms and larger areas for building 116 and 202, whereas they are more densely packed
in building 127 and 304. This is partly because of the real device spread and physical
placement, but also due to the latter being smaller buildings with fewer sensors. For
building 304 it can be seen that the markers are placed above the buildings, something
that happens when no correlation between room numbers in the model and device names
are found. The reason for this inconsistency is the naming of devices for building 304.
Most of the meters and submeters belonging to building 304 have not been changed to
the naming system described in subsection 4.3.1.
The diverse selection of test models showed the flexibility of the prototype application. The
automatic marker generation and back­end logic proved effective in providing insights for
different buildings. Something that points to the scalability of the prototype.
46
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
Through the casework, the connections between the concepts BIM, IoT, DTs and smart
cities were investigated indirectly. More directly, the casework revolved around the de­
velopment process of a digital platform. The early project investigations and community
analysis were used to direct the prototyping towards the motivations and requirements of
the stakeholders. In section 5.1, the possibilities for and strengths of the case project will
be discussed. Whereas the larger theme of DT development will be discussed in section
5.2. The latter will focus on how DT projects fit into industry, both in regards to motivation
and requirements. The connections between BIM, IoT, DTs and smart cities will also be a
subject of the industry scoped discussion. Here, the necessity for BIM in DT development,
and federation of twins will be discussed.
5.1
Case ­ Further development
The DTU case investigated in this thesis included the development of a prototype, which
should be able to showcase how a digital twin platform could be included in workflows
related to campus operation. However, as the development of a web application require
both time and resources, the prototype developed only included a few features. In this
section, the possible improvements and additions to the prototype are discussed. If a web
application seems interesting to the stakeholders, the case investigation, the developed
prototype and the discussion of possible feature additions could prove useful in future
project work. The following subsections will list and discuss optimization of the prototype,
feature additions and the general scalability.
A more general discussion focus for the developed prototype are the technology choice.
For the prototype, Bentleys iTwin framework were used. The framework were used be­
cause of its openness and customizable features. However, the framework are not entirely
independent, as a level of vendor lock­in is inevitable with the dependency on Bentley.
But with the open documentation, development in common programming languages and
possibilities to store data in external clouds, the iTwin framework offer a very agile solution.
The choice of technology are part of an openness dilemma. On one hand, a DT solution
for a community should be open and independent of corporations, as hinted in the Gemini
Principles. However, the solution should also be secure, as it holds data describing the
behavior of the very same community. With the DTU case, the primary interested parties
are affiliated with the university and the general public might not be interested in the raw
data. Choosing a path more reliant of companies, but with greater security, might be the
right choice. Openness and public value, could be implemented in different interfaces or
through shared research.
5.1.1
Back­end optimization and front­end improvement
After initial prototyping, when the application is to be tested experimentally as a Pilot Sys­
tem, security and authorization handling is vital. Before the prototype would be able to be
deployed online, the back­end code protecting non­public and sensitive data should be
finished. The developed prototype described in section 4.3 merely functions locally and
for showcasing features. For deployment a security layer would have to be implemented.
Bentleys iTwin framework requires a Bentley login, and access to specific iModels have
to be granted on user level. The utility data from CAS is similarly only accessible with
authorization and valid userkeys. For a functional and secure prototype a login proce­
dure managing authorization and access to both iModels and BMS data should be imple­
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
47
==PAGE:58==
mented in the back­end code. Furthermore, a hierarchy describing feature access could
be implemented for users. That would allow for users to be divided into classes based
on access and rights. The class system could include a facility management user with
access to operation tools and device data. An analyst user with access to data insights
and overviews. A department user, who are only granted access to device data related
to a department or specific buildings. As well as a public user profile, who are only able
to see public and non­sensitive data.
Another optimization area is the utility data retrieval. The case prototype currently fetches
data through individual REST API calls, something that requires many web operations
fetching data from the same database. A different procedure would be to create a con­
nection directly between the iTwin application and the web database. This would enable
query operations, and scheduled data updates. The iTwin framework provides documen­
tation and samples showing how to establish links between Azure databases and iTwin
applications. This procedure could optimize the data retrieval and provide a faster and
more reliable data connection. Generally, the current data retrieval should be optimized,
as the generation of markers and data tables are rather slow when initiated locally. With
web deployment the data could be updated continuously at time intervals, and thereby be
visible to users just after login.
The front­end and user interface of the application is also something that could be opti­
mized. The interface, widgets, tooltips and panels could be changed to match the design
principles for the stakeholder. An interface and color palette similar to the smart campus
platforms BMSnet View and BMSnet Dashboard as shown in fig. 4.1. The device data
and consumption aggregates could also be supplemented with diagrams to emphasize
results, and the timeseries data for specific meters should be accessible. In the Doosan
windfarm demonstration project, as described in chapter 2, IoT data is displayed in a
timeline chart (Microsoft 2020). Visualizing timeseries data and the creation of timeframe
selectors are capabilities that would improve the device insights for the DTU application.
A display selection widgets for the device markers would also improve the front­end of
the application. It would allow users to specify which devices that are shown in the view­
port. Something that would ease location of specific device types. The iTwin framework
allows display of terrain and reality models for background to the twin. Including a terrain
or reality model with the campus surroundings, would better navigation and the general
understanding of the twin.
5.1.2
Feature addition
The initial prototype included a data link between building models and utility data. By
establishing this link, and the ability to digitally monitor status and current operation of the
technical equipment for specific buildings, the prototype application function as a digital
shadow of individual buildings. However, to prove a useful tool in facility management
and operation, the functionality of the application should be expanded. One of the core
motivations of the first stakeholder, were to initiate digital transformation that could lead to
the development of a true DT. The digital shadow categorization of the current prototype
only allows for monitoring and decision support. The implementation of features that
allows for manipulation and control of the physical trough the digital, would be in the
interest of the first stakeholder. Integrating SCADA like functionalities in the platform
would be an example of such a feature.
The functionality expansion could also be accomplished through improvements of and ad­
ditions to the current features. The consumption insights provided by the prototype could
be supplemented with predictions. Based on floor and window area as well as weather
48
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:59==
statistics and daily use, the necessity for electrical lighting could be estimated. The esti­
mation could be calibrated with historized data describing past use. Likewise, the heating
and ventilation energy demand could be estimated. These predictions could be plotted
and compared with true operation data for analysis. With the comparison anomalies could
be detected and unnecessary consumption could be cut. Emission aggregates calculated
based on the consumption data could also be displayed in the application. The emission
aggregates could be supplemented with a diagram showing current annual emission as
a proportion of a target value, or a comparison with the previous year.
The equipment insight and system management capability of the prototype could be im­
proved by optimizing the device checks performed. The error detection of the initial pro­
totype merely checks whether the meters broadcast data. The error detection could be
improved by creating rulesets for each datatype and testing whether the data are within
limit values. Furthermore, data from meter and submeters describing linked assets could
be compared. If discrepancies or inconsistency between related devices exist, a flag could
be raised. The error management should also be supplemented with notification systems
and a possibility to allocate errors to specific users for diagnosis and handling. With an
allocation system the overview of error handling of system assets would be clearer for the
facility manager. For errors where the diagnosis showed a physical issue with the asset or
equipment a second task allocation feature could be added. A feature with the possibility
to assign maintenance tasks to the O&M department and directly notify technicians with
an email describing the detected problem. The notification could include plan drawings
and 3D images from the twin, showing where the error were detected.
The O&M department could also receive their own management features in the platform.
The BIM models displayed in the twin application could be used as a basis for allocating
maintenance tasks on physical infrastructure. Painting tasks and building element repairs
could be marked in the digital shadow, allowing a manager to assign the tasks to specific
teams or employees. As for the equipment error handling, the maintenance tasks could
then be send to employees with plan drawings and 3D views specifying place and objects
in question.
5.1.3
Scalability
An important aspect of the project case is the ability of expansion. With the automation
of device marker generation in the prototype, it was tested whether creating iTwins for a
large amount of individual buildings would be feasible or too time consuming because of
manual tasks. The test showed a possibility of using the data logic of the BIM models
and BMS data, as a tool for automation. However, the scalability of the project do not
only relate to the automatic generation of single building twins, the project vision were of
larger scope. A form of federation is desired, and this could be accomplished through
connections to the already established CAS platforms. By creating links between the
smart campus platforms developed by CAS, the iTwin application could function as an
interface for building insights, whereas the CAS platforms could be responsible for the
cross facility scope. Another possibility is to expand through commercial smart city ap­
plications such as Bentleys OpenCities Planner. A platform created through OpenCities
Planner could be used as a digital shadow, from which information overview and insights
could be monitored. The shadow could then provide links to individual building twins for
building specific insight. However, with commercial services the risk of vendor lock­in is
greater. The link between the existing CAS platforms and the iTwin application could be
implemented by allowing users to jump to a specific building iTwin through a link from
the campus interface of the CAS platform. Furthermore, the campus insights could be
supplemented with predicted aggregates determined by analysis of data from all building
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
49
==PAGE:60==
twins, as well as device error totals generated in the individual twins. Feeding the iTwin
data to the campus interfaces and generating links between the platforms would improve
the functionality and value of both systems.
Another scalability factor is the expansion of the user group. As mentioned in section
4.2 of the case investigation, only three stakeholders were involved in the initial prototyp­
ing. Expanding the stakeholder group and obtaining feedback from the already involved
stakeholders will prove vital in the further development of the project, as the stakeholders
represent the users of the DT. In the further development differentiating between depart­
ments of CAS could prove valuable, as the workflows and jobs performed by different
employees of CAS differ greatly. The data­minded BMS responsible and more physical
O&M employees most likely have different perspectives on the features and requirements
of the DT. Involving researchers, students and workshop and laboratory employees could
also help generate different perspectives and new ideas.
The scalability of DT development is more a matter of motivation than technology. Smart
city initiatives such as the three examples mentioned in chapter 2 showcase the pos­
sibilities tied to publicly open citizen participation platforms, and possible technological
solutions to create such platforms. However, the motivations for citizen feedback and
data­driven facility management, as well as the feature requirements needed, are quite
different. Even though it is possible to handle both in digital platforms, doing both in the
same environment require developing multiple different interfaces and a user hierarchy
that handles feature access. The gain would primarily be in the back­end, as there would
properly be an amount of shared data and models in between the interfaces. Scaling the
platform by implementing user participation is a development path that could be consid­
ered. It would also provide the opportunity of showcasing how public participation can
be accomplished for cities and campuses. Something that might have been tested else­
where, but in supplementing it with other uses, interesting links and possibilities could
arise.
5.2
Framework for digital twin development
For the DTU case, the CADM and general project analysis methods were used to obtain
a good starting point for the creation of a DT solution that catered to the needs and vi­
sions of a selection of stakeholders. The CADM, as introduced by McGinley and Nakata,
were originally developed for smart cities initiatives but aspects of the methodology were
useful in for the project case. The multi­stakeholder approach and community motivation
mapping were helpful in generating an overview of the diversity of the interested par­
ties and in finding features that accommodate all parties. With further development of
the project case, and for other projects the further steps of the methodology should be
followed. Using feedback sessions with stakeholders to fine­tune solutions will improve
the final products. Making use of the CADM or a similar approach in development of DT
solutions with diverse stakeholders seems valuable, as it might serve as a method for
securing purpose. The Gemini Principles ’Curation’ and ’Public good’ advocate for public
benefit, clear ownership and governance. However, with digital shadows or smart city
solutions that aim to monitor and provide insight of entire communities, the ownership
can be somewhat complex. By tracking behavior of a community, some of the data could
be argued to belong to the very same community. If a solution are to follow the Gemini
Principles, be truly democratic and beneficial for a community, the relevant community
should have a say in the data use and solution features. With the CAF and stakeholder
analysis value creation across the community can be ensured. Furthermore, ensuring a
level of openness will heighten the trustworthiness and public perception of a solution.
50
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:61==
The motivations for initiating DT projects in AECO and developing digital representations
of built assets are many. The case project aimed to showcase some of the beneficial
aspects of digital representation in facility management. The theoretical framework intro­
duced in chapter 2 presented examples of DT projects in both construction, infrastructure
and O&M. Furthermore, DTs can be helpful in transferring information between phases
and during its lifetime. By initiating development during design and construction, the twin
will already have matured and gained experience when entering the operation phase. This
could increase its initial optimization reliability and predictive capabilities. However, many
other arguments for DT development exist. Decisions on whether to initiate a journey to­
wards workflows that make use of DTs should take the benefits as well the requirements
into account. The core requirements for the features developed for the case prototype
were primarily BIM and IoT, as the visual representation of specific buildings were gener­
ated based on BIM models and, the live­data enriching the platform were retrieved from
IoT devices. With IoT often being mentioned as a enabling technology for DTs, BIM is not
often mentioned as a necessity. In the following subsection, the links between BIM and
DTs will be discussed, and possible advantages for utilizing BIM in the development of
DTs will be listed. In the subsequent subsection twin federation and smart city initiatives
will be considered. Both discussions will consider the subject of developing DTs and the
advantages that might motivate such journeys.
5.2.1
BIM and digital twins
As previously touched upon, the links between BIM and DT are many. In (Camposano,
Smolander, and Ruippo 2021) it is argued that DTs can be effective in bridging the in­
formation gaps between BIM models created for AEC and facility management systems.
BIM can be used to enrich DTs through both geometric representation and object­based
information models. The addition of data tied to design and construction provides facility
managers with valuable information that can be used in O&M workflows. For project ini­
tiation the required maturity within each area can be hard to determine. This is because
the technological requirements differ for each specific use case. In digital transformation
specific optimization tools and automation of processes should be goals, rather than dig­
italization itself. When determining digital strategies, an analysis of required features can
lead to required technological progress. Figure 5.1 shows a diagram of different AECO
use purposes and their relation to BIM levels and DT maturity elements as introduced in
chapter 2. Each note represent a specific use, within a use category. Design related uses
are represented by blue. Red represent uses related to the category Build and orange
represent the category Operate. The uses are listed and placed based on experience
from real projects, the study of use cases described in academia and partly on the BIM
use purposes listed in the Penn State BIM Use document (Kreider and Messner 2013) as
introduced in chapter 2.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.1: AECO uses in relation with BIM levels and DT maturity elements
The axis of the diagram represent BIM levels and DT maturity elements, which are both
indexes of complexity and maturity. For the placement of uses in the diagram, the techni­
cal requirements and complexity should be assessed in relation with the level and element
descriptions from literature. As seen in table 5.1, point cloud scanning, simple sketching
and pure geometric modelling are tied to the first levels of both axis, which is why the use
cases ’reality capture’, ’early design’ and ’existing conditions modelling’ were placed here.
Existing conditions models can be enriched with metadata, but it is not a necessity. As the
use cases ’material takeoff’, ’cost estimation’ and ’construction simulation’ utilize geomet­
ric data and the metadata of BIM models, they are placed around 2 in both axis. The heavy
model sharing cases as ’clash detection’, ’change history’ and disciplinary model links are
placed near BIM level 3 and the second maturity element, as they require high integration
but not necessarily any connection to external data sources. For the operations related
uses such as ’maintenance status’, ’consumption monitoring’, ’weather monitoring’ and
’utility use prediction’ primarily data connections and IoT are required. Not necessarily
any 3D modelling or BIM, which is why they are placed in the low end of the BIM axis
and near 3 in the DT maturity axis. The uses placed in the top of the coordinate system
are all connected with autonomous operation. System related uses such as ’consumption
anomaly detection’ and ’automatic system rerouting’ are primarily related to data analytics
and thereby placed above the low BIM levels. Whereas uses as ’automatic reordering of
construction sequence’ and ’structural failure prediction’ require detailed BIM models and
52
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:63==
data connection integration and are thereby placed near the top in both axis.
Table 5.1: Tools and technologies related to BIM levels and DT maturity elements, ac­
cording to (Sacks, Eastman, et al. 2018; Evans 2020)
BIM levels
Related tools and
technologies
DT Maturity
Elements
Related tools and
technologies
0
Sketches, lines, text
0
Point cloud, sketches/drawings
1
CAD, 3D models
1
Object­based, no metadata
2
BIM models, IFC,
file sharing
2
BIM, data connection, 4D/5D
3
IoT, real­time data
3
Open BIM, full
integration
4
Bidirectional data flow
5
Autonomous operation
After placing the uses within the coordinate system, clusters appeared. The design related
uses primarily gathered diagonally in the lower section of the coordinate system. The Build
uses centered in the diagram and the Operation uses spread horizontally in the top half
of the coordinate system. From these clusters three typical user profiles could be drawn.
The design team, the contractor and the facility manager. The user profiles are illustrated
as circular boundary areas, and can be seen in fig. 5.2. A full page version of the diagram
can be found in appendix C. In the appendix all notes are readable through zoomed in
focus areas.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.2: AECO use cases and user types. Full page version of the diagram can be
found in appendix C
As seen on the diagram, the typical user profiles, fit well with three of the use categories.
The facility manager area contain most of the Operate notes, the contractor contains most
of the Build notes and the design team hold the Design notes. A more interesting point
seen in the diagram is the maturities linked with the use categories and user profiles. Most
Build notes do not require full maturity in either axis, whereas the Operate notes require
high DT maturity and Design have lower DT maturity requirements. For both the facility
management and design uses, there are a large spread on BIM requirements. However,
for design related uses it can be seen how detailed design and engineering tasks are
mostly linked with the higher BIM levels. For operation and maintenance uses, the dif­
ference mostly lies in the type of assets managed. For infrastructure such as roads and
bridges 3D representation provide a lot of value, whereas the benefits of BIM are less for
utility suppliers. Here, a detailed system diagram with IoT links are of great value and
3D representation less essential. For visualization purposes, simple geometry models or
reality capture can be used as a replacement for extensive BIM models. However, there
are advantages of implementing BIM for facility management as well. One being better
coordination in larger maintenance or renovation projects. External contractors will appre­
ciate detailed models of existing conditions as a basis for their work. Another advantage
is the possibility to track and locate individual assets within buildings and environments.
The assets can then be linked with documentation and relevant drawings through their
54
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:65==
IDs.
The purpose of the diagram are to draw connections between AECO practices and con­
ceptual maturity. Connections between use cases, BIM and DT maturity can be useful
in making decisions for further digital transformation. A technology consultant can use
the diagram, or something similar, to help clients decide if they would benefit from imple­
menting more BIM and DT practices into their workflows. By adding more uses and hiding
irrelevant uses, the consultant can focus the diagram for specific clients or client types.
The argumentation for implementing specific digital strategies and practices can be diffi­
cult without pinpointing exactly which workflows or tasks can be optimized or automated.
5.2.2
Smart City and federated twins
As for the DTU case, the federation of twins can be an important step the generation
of a smart city or smart campus. By generating links between multiple DTs and con­
necting IoT devices in a larger network, the operation of not only individual facilities can
be optimized. The federation allows the network of twins to learn and experience from
each other, which can be helpful in obtaining even smoother operation. If an error occurs
in a building, the error history of an entire campus would be valuable in the diagnosis.
Furthermore, some O&M workflows are cross facilities and with a federated twin greater
insights and larger scope decision­making is enabled. Maintenance of multiple similar
assets across a campus can be planned coherently and simultaneously. Something that
allows for better resource management, and possibly time reduction. In a more general
sense, the federation of twins can be very useful, especially if coupled with data analysis
and machine learning, as behavioral patterns and optimization options might be detected.
With DTC, as introduced in (Sacks, Brilakis, et al. 2020), twins are created before opera­
tion and used to optimize workflows at the site, and the construction motivated twin can
thereafter change to accommodate O&M workflows. This evolving twin concept can also
be used in larger scale. If a federated DT includes twins in construction, the whole net­
work stands to gain. Data from DTC projects can be used in a smart city context and vice
versa. The utility and traffic impact of larger construction projects would be captured by a
smart city network, and could be taken into account in planning. The instant notification
of traffic managers and general overview could allow for traffic redirection. Furthermore,
public feedback on new project can be useful, but often the public opinion is voiced dur­
ing construction or after completion, where the possibilities for change are difficult and
expensive. Obtaining citizen feedback early, during the design phase, is of much greater
use. As presented in chapter 2 in multiple smart city initiatives an amount of citizen in­
teraction is implemented. The involvement of the public in city planning and for feedback
on future designs of buildings, structures and urban areas, are one of the features often
linked to virtual city models and smart city initiatives. Using smart city platforms or urban
DTs as tools for citizen participation is a goal worth striving for, as it would improve the
transparency of city planning and give citizens greater sense of ownership of their city.
In regards to evolving federated twins into NDTs as suggested by the Centre for Digital
Built Britain, an investigation of data security and possible measures to ensure privacy
as well as openness, would be needed. The society gains of coupling data across com­
munities and cites might be large, but as stated in (Bolton et al. 2018), it should be with
ethical principles in mind. However, large quantities of shared data is already available,
and with the introduction of an open platform for sharing and visualizing the data more
would probably become accessible. Furthermore, just as it was considered for the DT
prototype, a user hierarchy handling access to different data groups could be a method
for enabling open smart city platforms enriched by multiple diverse data sources.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
55
==PAGE:66==
56
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:67==
6
Conclusion
As described in multiple sources and referenced in the theoretical framework chapter, a
digital twin can be defined as a digital representation of a physical entity connected by a
bidirectional data link. In AECO, the uses of digital twins are many. Through a smart city
platform or city digital twin citizen feedback could be acquired for new urban development
and future building designs. A digital twin for construction could optimize site manage­
ment, monitor the supply chain and predict delays. For asset and facility management a
digital twin could be helpful, as it could provide valuable insight, make statistical predic­
tions, allow remote operation of assets and enable automatic or autonomous operation.
Digital twins can even be used as lifecycle platforms that describe buildings, facilities or
structures throughout its lifetime. For such uses, the twin would be developed during the
design phase, and gradually mature through construction and operation. To showcase
digital twin possibilities and how a development process might be initiated, the DTU case
were investigated.
As the aim of the DTU case were to initiate the development of a digital twin solution
for an entire campus, the possible interested parties were many. With initial analysis of
interested parties, risks and results as well as the Community Architecture Framework,
a selection of stakeholders were chosen for further involvement. Through meetings the
motivations and feature suggestions of stakeholders were discovered. Despite the fact
that the prototype merely display digital shadow capabilities and only some of the potential
features were implemented, the prototype showcase how IoT data and digital models can
generate valuable insight and provide overview of the status of a facility. The prototype is
an example of how a link between the physical and digital can be accomplished, and how
facility behavior and properties can be visualized. Furthermore, the prototype function
as a base for further development. The specific solution can be optimized, both through
improvements in the back­end and user interface. Features can be added and improved.
Further maturity can be accomplished through addition of data analysis, statistical predic­
tion, notification systems, task allocation and direct system operation. The solution can
be scaled through integration with other platforms, city planning software and user group
expansion.
The case provided a practical investigation of how digital twin development can be initiated
through stakeholder involvement and prototyping. The recommendation of next steps, is
listed in section 5.1. Furthermore, it is recommended to actuate feedback loops with
stakeholders, for evaluation of the prototype and to direct further development. The use
of the CADM and project analysis proved valuable in securing purpose. Early stakeholder
involvement is thereby recommended for digital twin projects with diverse stakeholders
and complex ownership. Another recommendation is the use of the Gemini Principles as
guidelines for decision­making in regards to the purpose, trustworthiness and functionality
of a solution. Keeping the principles in mind, can direct the development along an open,
secure and publicly beneficial path.
In regards to the connection between digital twin development and smart city initiatives,
the DTU case primarily provided an exploration into the generation of multiple digital shad­
ows. But federation of the individual shadows could lead to a campus shadow providing
insight across facilities. The federation would provide a larger data pool for analysis,
prediction and error diagnosis. With further development twin capabilities could be im­
plemented, and O&M workflows for an entire campus could be optimized through digi­
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
57
==PAGE:68==
talization and automation. By scaling the case prototype to cover the entire campus, it
would not only showcase digital twin benefits for facilities but also how broader scoped
operation optimization and campus insights could be accomplished. From a general per­
spective, connections between smart cities and digital twins can easily be drawn. Some
of the defining properties of the smart city is optimization of city management as well as
integration of ICT. Something that can be accomplished through the use of digital twins
to monitor and control infrastructure or utility networks. Another property often linked
to smart cities is citizen inclusion, something that can be accomplished by implement­
ing transparency. Incorporating openness by giving insight and public access to selected
data and information, can serve as a method for providing transparency and public benefit
without compromising security.
For digital twin development in AECO in general, the requirement of BIM were consid­
ered. Even though BIM models were utilized in the case project, it is not a necessity for
all projects and uses. A diagram exploring the relations between specific uses, digital
twin maturity elements and BIM levels were created. The diagram showed a large spread
of necessary BIM and digital twin maturity, but an amount of clustering were discovered.
Clusters of uses in the categories Design, Build and Operate were found. Something that
points to the different approaches clients of either category should have to digital twin and
BIM maturity. The diagram and method of plotting uses in relation with maturity proved
interesting, and could easily be applied as background for investigating possible new ini­
tiatives for companies and organizations. Tying specific uses to their BIM and digital twin
maturity requirements could be used as argumentation for further digital transformation.
58
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:69==
References
Akroyd, Jethro, Sebastian Mosbach, Amit Bhave, and Markus Kraft (2021). “Universal
Digital Twin ­ A Dynamic Knowledge Graph”. In: Data­Centric Engineering 2.4, pp. 1–
25. ISSN: 26326736. DOI: 10.1017/dce.2021.10.
Apostolidis, Alexandros (2022). “Towards an agnostic framework of Digital Twins”. PhD
thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Autodesk (2022). Data Visualization | Autodesk Forge. URL: https://forge.autodesk.com/
en/docs/dataviz/v1/developers_guide/introduction/ (visited on Mar. 8, 2022).
Badenko, Vladimir L., Nikolai S. Bolshakov, Elana B. Tishchenko, Alexander A. Fedotov,
Alberto C. Celani, and Vladimir K. Yadykin (2021). “Integration of digital twin and BIM
technologies within factories of the future”. In: Magazine of Civil Engineering 101.1.
ISSN: 27128172. DOI: 10.34910/MCE.101.14.
Bain, David (2019). “UK BIM survey 2019 findings”. In: National BIM Report 2019 :The
definitive industry update, pp. 16–34. ISSN: 1098­6596. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3. URL:
https://www.thenbs.com/knowledge/national-bim-report-2019.
Bentley Systems (2022). iTwin Platform. URL: https://developer.bentley.com/itwinplatform
(visited on May 12, 2022).
Bolton, Alexandra, Mark Enzer, Jennifer Schooling, Barry Blackwell, Ian Dabson, Matthew
Evans, Tim Fenemore, Fergus Harradence, Emily Keaney, Anne Kemp, Alex Luck, Neill
Pawsey, Steve Saville, Miranda Sharp, Tom Smith, Jeni Tennison, Jennifer Whyte, and
Alan Wilson (2018). The Gemini Principles. Tech. rep. University of Cambridge. URL:
https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/284889.
Budde, Reinhard, Karlheinz Kautz, Karin Kuhlenkamp, and Heinz Züllighoven (1992).
“What is prototyping?” In: Information Technology & People 6.2­3, pp. 89–95. ISSN:
09593845. DOI: 10.1108/EUM0000000003546.
Calderoni, Luca, Antonio Magnani, and Dario Maio (2019). “IoT Manager: An open­source
IoT framework for smart cities”. In: Journal of Systems Architecture 98.March, pp. 413–
423. ISSN: 13837621. DOI: 10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.04.003.
Camposano, Jose Carlos, Kari Smolander, and Tuomas Ruippo (2021). “Seven Metaphors
to Understand Digital Twins of Built Assets”. In: IEEE Access 9. ISSN: 21693536. DOI:
10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3058009.
Dembski, Fabian, Uwe Wössner, Mike Letzgus, Michael Ruddat, and Claudia Yamu (2020).
“Urban digital twins for smart cities and citizens: The case study of herrenberg, ger­
many”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 12.6, pp. 1–17. ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/
su12062307.
Evans, Simon (2020). “Beyond buzzwords : digital twin maturity spectrum”. In: CDBB:
Digital Twin Hub June.
Fangel, Morten (2013). Proactive Project Management. 1st ed. Fangel Consulting as.
ISBN: 978­87­88818­09­3.
Fielding, R., J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, and T. Berners­Lee
(1999). Hypertext transfer protocol – HTTP/1.1. Tech. rep. DOI: 10.17487/RFC2616.
URL: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2616.
Glaessgen, E. H. and D. S. Stargel (2012). “The digital twin paradigm for future NASA and
U.S. Air force vehicles”. In: 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural
Dynamics and Materials Conference ­ Special Session on the Digital Twin. American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, pp. 1–14. ISBN: 9781600869372. DOI: 10.
2514/6.2012-1818.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
59
==PAGE:70==
Hardt, Dick (2012). RFC6749 ­ The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework. Tech. rep. Mir­
cosoft. URL: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749.
Harmon, Robert R., Enrique G. Castro­Leon, and Sandhiprakash Bhide (2015). “Smart
cities and the Internet of Things”. In: Proceedings of PICMET ’15: Management of the
Technology Age. Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering
and Technology, pp. 485–494. DOI: 10.1109/PICMET.2015.7273174.
Hoppe, Stefan (2018). “The Industrial IoT Maturity Model”. In: OPC Connect. URL: https:
//opcconnect.opcfoundation.org/2018/02/the-industrial-iot-maturity-model/.
ISO (2018). Organization and digitization of information about buildings and civil engineer­
ing works, including building information modelling (BIM) ­ Information management
using building information modelling ­ Part 1: Concepts and principles (ISO 19650­
1:2018).
ITwinjs (2022). iTwin.js Library Documentation. URL: https://www.itwinjs.org/learning
(visited on May 17, 2022).
Kreider, Ralph G. and John I. Messner (2013). The Uses of BIM: Classifying and Selecting
BIM Uses. URL: http://bim.psu.edu.
Kritzinger, Werner, Matthias Karner, Georg Traar, Jan Henjes, and Wilfried Sihn (2018).
“Digital Twin in manufacturing: A categorical literature review and classification”. In:
IFAC­PapersOnLine 51.11, pp. 1016–1022. ISSN: 24058963. DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.
2018.08.474. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.08.474.
Li, Dan, Åsa Fast­Berglund, and Dan Paulin (2019). “Current and future Industry 4.0 ca­
pabilities for information and knowledge sharing: Case of two Swedish SMEs”. In: Inter­
national Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 105.9, pp. 3951–3963. ISSN:
14333015. DOI: 10.1007/s00170-019-03942-5.
Madubuike, Obinna C., Chimay J. Anumba, and Rana Khallaf (2022). “A review of digital
twin applications in construction”. In: Journal of Information Technology in Construction
27.December 2021, pp. 145–172. DOI: 10.36680/j.itcon.2022.008.
Marr, Bernard (Sept. 2018). “What is Industry 4.0? Here’s A Super Easy Explanation For
Anyone”. In: Forbes. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/09/02/
what-is-industry-4-0-heres-a-super-easy-explanation-for-anyone/?sh=6739b0d59788.
McGinley, Tim and Keiichi Nakata (2015). “A Community Architecture Framework for
Smart Cities”. In: Citizen’s Right to the Digital City. Singapore: Springer Singapore,
pp. 231–252. ISBN: 9789812879196. DOI: 10.1007/978- 981- 287- 919- 6_13. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-981-287-919-6_13.
Microsoft (Nov. 2020). “Pushing the boundaries of renewable energy production efficiency
with Azure Digital Twins”. In: Microsoft customer Stories. URL: https : / / customers .
microsoft.com/en-gb/story/848311-doosan-manufacturing-azure-digital-twins.
Molio (2020). “Digital Trend: Digitale tvillinger til smartere bygningsdrift”. In: Molio Maga­
sin, pp. 18–19. URL: https://molio.dk/nyheder-og-viden/nyheder/seneste-nyt/digital-
trend-digitale-tvillinger-til-smartere-bygningsdrift.
Oesterreich, Thuy Duong and Frank Teuteberg (2016). “Understanding the implications of
digitisation and automation in the context of Industry 4.0: A triangulation approach and
elements of a research agenda for the construction industry”. In: Computers in Industry
83, pp. 121–139. ISSN: 01663615. DOI: 10.1016/j.compind.2016.09.006.
Open Data DK (2015). Åbne data til dig. URL: https://www.opendata.dk (visited on June 1,
2022).
Pedersen, Agnethe N., Morten Borup, Annette Brink­Kjær, Lasse E. Christiansen, and Pe­
ter S. Mikkelsen (2021). “Living and Prototyping Digital Twins for Urban Water Systems:
Towards Multi­Purpose Value Creation Using Models and Sensors”. In: Water 13.592.
ISSN: 20734441. DOI: 10.3390/w13050592.
60
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:71==
Pietrzak, Michal and Joanna Paliszkiewicz (2015). “Framework of Strategic Learning: The
PDCA Cycle”. In: Management 10.2, pp. 149–161. ISSN: 1854­4231.
Sacks, Rafael, Ioannis Brilakis, Ergo Pikas, Haiyan Sally Xie, and Mark Girolami (2020).
“Construction with digital twin information systems”. In: Data­Centric Engineering 1.6.
ISSN: 26326736. DOI: 10.1017/dce.2020.16.
Sacks, Rafael, Charles Eastman, Ghang Lee, and Paul Teicholz (2018). BIM Handbook.
3rd ed. Hoboken: Wiley, pp. 1–639. ISBN: 9781119287544. DOI: 10.1002/9781119287568.
Sacks, Rafael, Lauri Koskela, Bhargav A. Dave, and Robert Owen (2010). “Interaction of
Lean and Building Information Modeling in Construction”. In: Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management 136.9, pp. 968–980. ISSN: 19437862. DOI: 10.1061/
(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000203.
Tao, Fei, Fangyuan Sui, Ang Liu, Qinglin Qi, Meng Zhang, Boyang Song, Zirong Guo,
Stephen C.Y. Lu, and A. Y.C. Nee (2018). “Digital twin­driven product design frame­
work”. In: International Journal of Production Research 57.12. ISSN: 1366588X. DOI:
10.1080/00207543.2018.1443229.
Tupper, Charles D. (2011). “Enterprise Architecture Frameworks and Methodologies”. In:
Data Architecture. Elsevier. Chap. 2, pp. 23–55. DOI: 10.1016/b978- 0- 12- 385126-
0.00002-4.
Vermesan, Ovidiu, Mark Harrison, Harald Vogt, Kostas Kalaboukas, Maurizio Tomasella,
Karel Wouters, Sergio Gusmeroli, and Stephan Haller (2010). Vision and Challenges
for Realising the Internet of Things. Ed. by Harald Sundmaeker, Patrick Guillemin, Pe­
ter Friess, and Sylvie Woelfflé. March. CERP­IoT, European Union. ISBN: 978­92­79­
15088­3. DOI: 10.2759/26127.
White, Gary, Anna Zink, Lara Codecá, and Siobhán Clarke (2021). “A digital twin smart
city for citizen feedback”. In: Cities 110.November 2020. ISSN: 02642751. DOI: 10.
1016/j.cities.2020.103064.
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
61
==PAGE:72==
62
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:73==
A
Project Analysis Workshop
A project analysis workshop were conducted on the 17th of March 2022. The aim of
the workshop was to sharpen the scope of the overall Digital Twin project, as well as
define objectives, products and organization. The workshop were also used to address
the development path of the DTU DT pioneer initiative, and address how the master thesis
project exist in a series of digital twin investigations by Niras and DTU Byg.
Figure A.1 shows the workshop setup, as well as a part of board used to facilitate the
brainstorming session. The project introduction form, filled out during the workshop is
included in the following pages of the appendix. The other analysis forms were used
in subsequent discussions and meetings, and based on the discussions initiated in the
workshop.
Figure A.1: Workshop setup and brainstorming board
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
63
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
69
==PAGE:80==
B
Sustainability and procurement session
This appendix contains notes from meetings, talks and sessions with the CAS sustain­
ability department and the university procurement department. The sessions provided
a source for understanding the objectives, workflows and visions of the departments.
Knowledge which were used as a basis for the stakeholder profile described in the project
analysis and Community Architecture Framework.
Session 1, 23­03­2022: Sustainability Dashboard for DTU
Campus
Table B.1 refers specific investigation questions to the ownership hierarchy related to a
federated DT. Table B.2 lists questions answered during meeting with CAS sustainability
coordinator and procurement lead from DTU.
Additional notes:
• Prototype focus
– Both multi tenanted and complex from department perspective
– Representation of older and newer buildings (Different level of digitalization)
– Building 304 and 202
• Ownership ontology
– Describe ownership for hierarchy levels (Buildings in department in campus..)
– Use academic ontology
Table B.1: Questions related to different hierarchy levels
Level
Research questions
Notes
Municipality
What municipal / regulatory
requirements effect the campus?
This could include energy / water
suppliers. The suppliers can be
relevant to different CO2
calculation methods
Campus
Contains which departments?
Lyngby, Ballerup, Risø etc.
Departments
Responsible for which buildings?
Buildings
What purposes and processes?
Multi­purposed and used buildings
Assets /
equipment
Used by? In constant use?
Standby time?
Wind tunnel, nanolab, servers etc.
People
Part of which department?
Researchers, administration,
students, maintenance, other
70
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:81==
Table B.2: Session notes with questions and answers divided into topics
Topic
Question
Answer
What data is relevant
for current operation?
Electricity and heat consumption
What data is relevant
for new sustainability
initiatives?
Energy data divided
into process and daily use
What consumption /
sustainability
information is relevant
for procurement?
Electricity, heat, water
What additional
information and data
is required or desirable?
Gross floor percentage
of lab, teaching, office
areas in buildings
Data
Can higher accessibility
to campus­wide data or
information cut
consumption?
Yes, providing departments
with insight of average
consumption could
nudge to lowered values
How would you like
to receive / retrieve
data?
Dashboard
How are consumption
aggregates used in
your operations today?
Cost reports on
department level,
sustainability reporting
Current
operation
Are you using the
CAS BMSdata API?
No, but aware of the
possibility
Would a dashboard
solution be suitable
for sustainability
management?
Yes, it would generate
easy insight of KPIs
Dashboard
solution
What features should
a sustainability
dashboard provide?
Consumption aggregates
for buildings, departments.
Process use in specific buildings
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
71
==PAGE:82==
C
Digital Twin Uses
On the following page a different version of the use purpose diagram referenced in chapter
5 is shown. The full page version is included to show the specific use purpose notes
included in the diagram, as it might be hard to read the small text in the version within the
main document. The use purpose diagram were created in the online whiteboard platform
Miro (https://miro.com/app).
72
A Framework for digital twin development in AECO
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
