==PAGE:1==
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
Tool for the early stages of renovation projects
Master Thesis
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
Tool for the early stages of renovation projects
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Mikkel Stilling
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build­
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis concludes the MSc work entitled: LCA quick calculator for the early phase of
building renovation projects. The work was carried out between January and June 2022
between Department of Environmental Engineering and Department of Technology, Man­
agement and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration
with ERIK Architects, Denmark.
I would like to use this opportunity to thank my supervisors: Assistant professor, DTU
Morten Ryberg, Associate professor, DTU Kristoffer Negendahl, Architect and Partner,
ERIK Architects Morten Ørsager and Architect, ERIK Architects Johannes P. Manelius
Greisen. Furthermore, I would like to thank my brother, Morten Stilling, for supporting me
in my work of this project and the masters programme as a whole.
ii
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thesis counselors
Morten Ryberg,
Assistant professor, Department of Technology, Management and Economics at DTU
Kristoffer Negendahl,
Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering at DTU
Thesis company contacts
Morten Ørsager,
Architect, Partner at ERIK
Johannes P. Manelius Greisen,
Architect, Sustainability specialist at ERIK
Test group participants
Søren J. Sørensen,
Constructing Architect at Henning Larsen
Matias Sander Thomsen,
Architect at ERIK
Johannes P. Manelius Greisen,
Architect, Sustainability specialist at ERIK
Charlotte Lykke Pedersen,
Engineer, Senior sustainability specialist at ERIK & lecturer at UCL
Casper Vestergaard,
Building constructor at ERIK
Martin Horn Rasmussen,
Building constructor at ERIK
Vandi Fofanah,
Building constructor at ERIK
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Strategy for meeting the objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Quantity estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
LCA estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Cost estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Life cycle inventory data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.6
Testing the Quick tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.7
EPD/Generic data coherence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Case renovation projects
21
3.1
Office case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Single family house case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Apartments case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Results
27
4.1
System tests of the Quick tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
User acceptance test and user feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Uncertainty analysis of GWP for construction materials . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Coherence analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Discussion
45
5.1
The Quick tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Coherence analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
Appendix A ­ LCAByg estimates
53
Appendix B ­ Sigma cost estimates
61
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The past decade saw a great increase in public awareness of challenges resulting from
environmental impacts caused by human activities. In particular, global warming got a lot
of attention, to a degree that companies started advertising about their goals or initiatives
of CO2 reductions of their activities. On the political scene, global initiatives such as
the Paris agreement (UNFCCC, 2015) [1] was entered into force in 2016, legally binding
196 countries to limit global warming in the future. Despite a decline in 2020, due to
COVID, global emissions are expected to have returned to levels similar to pre­COVID
levels already in 2021 and are not expected to decline in the coming years (UNEP, 2021)
[2].
The construction industry constitutes a major contributor to GHG emissions, with the in­
dustry being accountable for 39% of global CO2 emissions in 2018, with an increasing
trend in emissions from 2010 to 2018 (IEA, 2019) [3]. Pressure on the industry to pro­
duce buildings with higher level of environmental performance, in particular lower levels
of GHG emissions, has therefore only grown over the past years and is expected to grow
further the coming years. This both in the form of political pressure as well as commercial
pressure. An example of the former unfolds in Denmark, where from 2023 the govern­
ment has set a limit value to GHG emissions from new buildings over 1,000 m2, a value
that will decrease biannually until 2030, and further require LCAs to be performed for
all new buildings (Bolig­ og planstyrelsen, 2022) [4]. Regarding the latter, the growing
commercial pressure, this can be seen, for instance, by the stark increase over the past
10­15 years in buildings obtaining sustainable certificates such as DGNB (DGNB, 2022)
[5], LEED (CA.GOV, 2021) [6], BREEAM and Code for Sustainable Homes (Gorse C et
al., 2016) [7].
Within the construction industry different actors play different roles in meeting the legal
and commercial requirements. While product manufacturers make changes to their man­
ufacturing processes to lower GHG emissions, architectural and engineering companies
change and add to existing processes to meet legal and commercial requirements for new
buildings, as well as a movement towards working on more renovation projects, which can
be expected, or even in some cases pushed for by the companies themselves. Clearly, a
movement towards more stakeholders choosing to renovate rather than building new will
be a part of the solution to meet the goal of reducing GHG emissions within the industry
and on the global scale as a whole.
1.1
Problem description
For danish architecture companies, one of the key challenges in taking LCA into account
in renovation projects is that tools available for conducting mainstream LCAs for renova­
tion projects do not support existing practices in the architecture companies particularly
well. In Denmark, documentation of environmental impacts of buildings has to be done by
use of the publicly available tool LCAByg (LCAByg, 2022) [8]. This tool is used for obtain­
ing DGNB certification of buildings in Denmark. LCAByg is not integrated with BIM tools
typically used by architects, such as Revit, Sketchup or ArchiCAD. Also, while LCAByg
certainly is well suited for documenting environmental impacts of buildings when quan­
tities of materials are known, that is, in the late stages of construction projects, it is not
made user friendly and it is not well suited for assisting decision makers in early stages of
construction projects when only rough estimates of quantities can be given and choices
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
1
==PAGE:10==
of materials have not been made. Since the major decisions regarding a buildings design
topologically and in terms of materials are made in the early stages, this constitutes a
significant challenge for the architect in the communication with the building owner requir­
ing more sustainable buildings. Ideally in such initial conversations, when a new project
is merely a set of ideas, having a user friendly tool that can quickly give rough estimates
based on these ideas would be of great utility, both for making decisions, but also for com­
munication between architects, building owners, investment funds, potential residents or
other relevant stakeholders.
Plug­ins to BIM tools such as Tally [9] or supporting tools such as OneClickLCA [10] are
also commercially available. While these are more user friendly than LCAByg, the results
these tools produce can not be used as documentation in Denmark, and these tools too,
while faster to use than LCAByg, still can not produce quick estimates for initial discus­
sions between architecture company and client. Further, for these tools to give realistic
impact estimates, the user of the BIM tool must make proper definitions of drawings in
the BIM tools, clearly defining materials and correct topology. This is rarely practised in
actuality and with the BIM tool user typically having limited to no knowledge of LCA, the
architect using these supporting tools will not be able to assess whether the estimates
given are realistic or not. To complicate things further, making detailed drawings in BIM
tools for renovation projects is typically not done at all, rendering such tools useless in
such cases.
Another challenge for architecture companies, not just danish, is that making environ­
mental budgets for projects, similar to cost budgets, is very difficult today. This, because
such budgets can not be defined based on experience, since near all stakeholders do
not have such experience today. It can not be defined on available data either, since the
data most typically used does not contain uncertainty estimates, neither for the data from
the product specific Environmental product declarations (EPDs) nor the generic data from
for instance the Ökobaudat database [11]. This is of importance to the companies with
respect to ensure buildings obtaining the aforementioned sustainable certificates. Thus
quantifying such uncertaintiy estimates could be of great utility.
As mentioned, documenting environmental impacts of building projects in Denmark has
to be done by use of the LCAByg tool. This tool makes use of the generic data supplied
by the Ökobaudat database as default. This generic data is generated based on a series
of assumptions and may be representative of actual materials more so for some materials
more than others. Describing quantitatively how well the generic data matches environ­
mental impact data found in EPDs is the closest description one can give on how well
generic data describes reality. Both generic data and EPDs are valid only for up to five
years for construction materials, thus data representativeness evolves as the data is being
continuously updated. Nonetheless, knowledge on how well generic data matches reality
certainly must be of interest to any LCA practitioner in the industry and in the academia.
2
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Objectives
Addressing the challenges mentioned, this project has the following objectives:
1. Enable key stakeholders in the early stages of construction renovation projects to
make quick LCA estimates to support decisions made in the early stages of such
projects
2. Give quantitative LCA uncertainty estimates of construction materials typically used
in projects that can also support decisions made by key stakeholders in the early
stages of renovation projects
3. Quantitatively assess how well generic data matches with data from EPDs
The first objective is met with the development of a tool, the Quick tool, designed for the
key stakeholders, while the other two objectives are met by analysis of EPDs and generic
data available.
Regarding the first objective, the stakeholders in the early stages of renovation projects,
who ultimately have to approve all decisions, either directly or by assigned mandate, are
the building owners. However, these stakeholders are typically dependant on expertise
from architectural companies and the recommendations these provide. Thus, it is the di­
alogues between building owner and architectural company in the early stages that has
the largest consequence on what the environmental impact of the buildings will be in the
end of the project. With the expertise having to be provided by the architects, this makes
these key stakeholders. The primary target audience of this project is therefore employ­
ees of architectural companies, architects and constructors, but with a large secondary
audience in mind as well, since the architectural companies need to be able to convey
and discuss their knowledge and recommendations to building owners as a minimum, but
also investment funds, residents or other relevant stakeholders.
Regarding the second objective, while this is meant to support the key stakeholders of ren­
ovation projects, that is, the same stakeholders as for the first objective, this objective also
should find relevance among LCA practitioners both within the industry and in academia,
since uncertainty estimates of materials clearly are relevant when making LCAs of build­
ings, but simply not a part of the methodology today.
The third objective is mainly targeted at LCA practitioners generating the generic data,
since if there is a gap between generic data and data from EPDs, closing this gap best
possible is their task. However, this objective should also find its relevance among LCA
practitioners in the industry as a whole and within academia, if nothing else just to be
informed on the matter.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
3
==PAGE:12==
4
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:13==
2
Methodology
2.1
Strategy for meeting the objectives
A holistic representation of the methodological strategy to meeting the three objectives is
presented in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: High level description of the methods used for meeting the three objectives
As indicated in the figure, the first and second objectives are methodologically tied to­
gether, as are the second and third, and the methods themselves are tied too. In practice,
this has resulted in two Excel documents supporting this report
• Quick tool ­ version 1.0.0
• EPD and Ökobaudat coherence and uncertainty analysis
which are tied in similar manner. Each of these two documents consists of several ele­
ments for which a method has been defined and applied. These are:
• Make quantity estimates with only very limited information available
• Make LCA estimates per dimensional unit of standard compositions of materials in
constructions
• Make cost estimates per dimensional unit of standard compositions of materials in
construction
• Make quantity uncertainty estimates with only very limited information available
• Make LCA uncertainty estimates of standard compositions of materials in con­
structions
• Make cost uncertainty estimates of standard compositions of materials in con­
structions
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
5
==PAGE:14==
Cost estimates is included in the Quick tool despite such estimates not being part of any
of the three objectives. The reason for including cost estimates is that these, according
to Morten Ørsager, partner at ERIK architects, in most cases will be given higher priority
than LCA estimates by the building owners. That is, if cost estimates are not included,
decisions will not be made. By including cost estimates the key stakeholders will be in no
need of using other tools to produce such estimates, and therefore conversations can be
conducted and decisions made in a more effective manner.
2.2
Quantity estimates
In order to make LCA estimates and cost estimates of buildings, knowledge of quantities
of materials used is required, as is knowledge of these materials’ environmental impacts
per dimensional unit and the cost per dimensional unit. One then simply needs to multiply
the quantity of each of the materials with their corresponding environmental impacts per
unit or cost per unit. Ideally, a full list with exact quantities of each material planned to
be used would be available. However, in the early stages of renovation projects, such a
list is not available, as quantities are unknown and choices of materials often have not
been made. In order to make quick LCA estimates and cost estimates of buildings, it is
therefore needed to make quantity estimates based on the very limited information that is
available or for which qualified guesses can be made.
Further, by defining material compositions of constructions typically used in renovation
projects per dimensional unit, it is sufficient to only make quantity estimates of these con­
structions, rather than quantity estimates of the materials themselves. Two examples of
such constructions are shown in table 2.1
Table 2.1: Examples of material compositions of constructions
Building element: Outer walls
Construction: 1 m2 of clay bricks facade
Material
Quantity
Clay bricks
0.11 m3/m2
Mortar
12.1 kg/m2
Building element: Outer walls
Construction: 1 m2 of fibre cement board facade
Material
Quantity
Plasterboard
0.69 m2/m2
Construction wood
0.0021 m3/m2
Fibre cement board
1 m2/m2
Fasteners/Skrews
0.15 kg/m2
The limited set of information provided by the stakeholders is not enough on its own to
make quantity estimates, but is in need of the supplement of a set of assumptions which
when combined will yield the desired quantity estimates of the constructions of the build­
ings that are in need of renovation.
6
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:15==
The limited set of information the stakeholders are assumed to be able to provide or, at
least, make qualified guesses for, includes:
• Building type
• Number of buildings
• Number of homes/apartments per building
• Number of floors per building
• Gross length of building (length inside of building)
• Gross width of building (width inside of building)
• Roof inclination
The assumptions required as supplement can be presented as a set of general assump­
tions, presented in table 2.2 and a set of construction specific assumptions, presented
in table 2.3. These assumptions are based on conversations with mr. Ørsager and Jo­
hannes P. M. Greisen, architect at ERIK architects, and their practical experience of what
dimensions constructions of buildings typically have.
Table 2.2: General assumptions used as basis for quantity estimates
Assumption
Applies for
All buildings are rectangular
All
All floors and buildings are identical
All
Gross area makes up 92% of net area
Office
Gross area makes up 88% of net area
Residential buildings
Floor height is 3.8 m
Office
Floor height is 3.0 m
Residential buildings
Table 2.3: Construction specific assumptions used as basis for quantity estimates
Assumption
Applies for
20% of decks area is non­purpose area
All
Decks of non­purpose areas are not renovated
All
Ceilings of non­purpose areas are not renovated
All
Inner walls area is 2.5 times area of outer walls
Office
Inner walls area is 1.6 times area of outer walls
Residence ­ Detached house
Inner walls area is 1.4 times area of outer walls
Residence ­ Multistorey building
Inner walls area is 1.0 times area of outer walls
Residence ­ Terraced house
Windows area is 10% of total gross area
All
Dimensions of all doors is 950x2050 mm
All
1 outer door for every starting 250 m2 gross area
Office
1 outer door for every starting 100 m2 gross area
Residence ­ Detached house
1 outer door for every apartment
Residence ­ Multistorey building
1 outer door for every starting 100 m2 gross area
Residence ­ Terraced house
2 inner doors for every starting 100 m2 gross area
Office
3 inner doors for every starting 60 m2 gross area
Residential buildings
All doors have the dimensions 950 x 2050 mm
All
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
7
==PAGE:16==
Length of water pipes is 20% of total gross area
All
Floor heating area is 80% of total gross area
All
One piece of heat supply aggregate for every
Office
10,000 m2 of deck area
One piece of heat supply aggregate for every
Residential buildings
building
0.7 m of ventilation duct (small) per 1.0 m2
All
gross area
Vertical length of shaft ventilation ducts (large)
Office and
is 2 · (No. of floors) · (Floor height) for every
Residence ­ Multistorey building
beginning length of 25 m per building
Horizontal length of shaft ventilation ducts (large)
Office and
is 2 · (Net length) per building for buildings with
Residence ­ Multistorey building
net length greater than 25 m
Length of shaft ventilation ducts (large) is
Residence ­ Detached house
2 · 4 m per home
Residence ­ Terraced house
One piece of Ventilation system for every
Office
10,000 m2 gross area
One piece of Ventilation system for every home
Residence ­ Detached house
One piece of Ventilation system for every building
Residence ­ Multistorey building
One piece of Ventilation system for every home
Residence ­ Terraced house
There is not differentiated between gutters and
All
These are summed as drain pipes
Gutters run along building’s length and width
All
Down pipes run down twice for every beginning
All
200 m2 of gross area terrain deck
The term ”non­purpose area” is a short description for kitchens, bathrooms, utility rooms
and similar rooms that do not directly serve the buildings’ purpose.
Testing if the Quick tool provides correct quantity estimates, based on the given assump­
tions, has been done by comparing these to manual calculations. A single family house
case, presented later, has been defined in a manner, that such manual calculations are
needed to demonstrate the validity of the Quick tool’s quantity estimates. This will be pre­
sented later in the report for the case, but has been done also throughout the development
of the tool as part of unit testing and integration testing, which is described in section 2.6.
2.2.1
Quantity uncertainty estimates
The user of the Quick tool has the opportunity to overwrite the quantity estimates given
by the limited set of information the user must provide. When the user does overwrite the
quantity estimates, it is not possible to know what the uncertainty of the quantity typed by
the user is. Further, in the Quick tool, the quantity given for a given construction applies
to all three scenarios the user can explore. For instance, the user may wish to explore if
ceilings should be of plasterboards, fibre cement or wood concrete. Regardless of what
the choice of material will be, the quantity in need of renovation is the same. For instance,
for ceilings, the quantity in question is area, which is independent of what construction
material is chosen. Therefore the quantity uncertainty estimate is of lessor importance,
since the relative differences in the total LCA estimates and cost estimates between the
three options will be the same irrespective of quantity and quantity uncertainty. For this
reason it has been disregarded. This only makes sense in the early stages of renovation
8
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:17==
projects. Once material choices are made, in later project stages, clearly uncertainties of
quantities are of importance.
For good order, if the quantity uncertainties are to be implemented into the Quick tool in
a future version, calculating uncertainty estimates of totals of LCA or cost estimates is
straightforward. For the product of a function f(x, y) = x · y it is (Taylor, 1997) [12]
∆f(x, y)
f(x, y)
=
√(∆x
x
)2
+
(∆y
y
)2
(2.1)
which, when applied to total GWP, GWPtot, quantity, Qty and GWP per dimensional unit,
GWPunit gives:
∆GWPtot
GWPtot
=
√(∆Qty
Qty
)2
+
(∆GWPunit
GWPunit
)2
(2.2)
Similarly for cost:
∆Costtot
Costtot
=
√(∆Qty
Qty
)2
+
(∆Costunit
Costunit
)2
(2.3)
where Costtot is the total cost and Costunit is the cost per dimensional unit.
Thus by making estimates of the uncertainties of the quantity estimates, the LCA esti­
mates per dimensional unit and the cost estimates per dimensional unit, the uncertainty
estimates of the total GWP and total cost can be calculated.
2.2.2
Scope of quantity estimates
While quantity estimates are of the upmost importance when making both LCA and cost
estimates, making best estimates with least amount of information given is a very difficult
task. Though the outcomes of making such best estimates are very simple by nature, the
algorithm behind is potentially quite sophisticated. The primary limiting factor for a more
nuanced method of making quantity estimates has been the limited time available. The
following has been considered out of scope for this reason.
Regarding the general assumptions, shown in table 2.2, the first assumption that buildings
are rectangular is quite influential and quite restrictive on building topology. Clearly, many
buildings are non­rectangular. This can be solved by making available for the user a list
of different building topologies to choose from, each of which then has a distinct set of
construction specific assumptions. While this has been considered out of scope for this
project, it could be a natural addition to a future version of the Quick tool.
The other five of the general assumptions could all be opened up for the user to be able
to alter. Indeed the assumption of a given floor height is possible for the user to change
in the Quick tool, but it is still implicitly implied that all floor heights are the same, which is
not always the case. Similarly to making available more topological options for the user,
making user options for the other assumptions is possible and would make the quantity
estimates more nuanced. This too has been considered out of scope. If undertaken
for a future version of the tool, enabling such new options should be balanced with the
complexity it adds to the user experience of the tool, which is designed to have as little
complexity as possible.
Regarding the construction specific assumptions, shown in table 2.3, all of these can be
directly tested by collecting data of construction quantities for a representative sample of
buildings. This could even be nuanced by year of construction of the buildings of such
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
9
==PAGE:18==
a data set, since how buildings are built develops over time. Collecting such data is a
substantial task and therefore out of scope of this report.
A couple of elements typically found in buildings have been omitted, not because of the
limited time available, but because they add to the complexity of the user experience.
These are basements, parking lot areas and terrain areas exterior to the building. These
elements too could be taken up for reconsideration of a future version of the tool, but again
must be balanced with the complexity they would add.
2.3
LCA estimates
The method for making LCA estimates of renovation projects follows that suggested by
Hasik et al. (2019) [13] shown in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Renovation LCA stage and boundary diagram as suggested by Hasik et al.
[13].
2.3.1
Default estimates
As mentioned, the LCA estimates are made per dimensional unit for pre­defined construc­
tions typically used in projects. As default, these are defined to exactly match the material
compositions of similar constructions found in LCAByg version 5.2.1.0 for all constructions
in the Quick tool. This was done to enable the estimates given by the Quick tool to be con­
trolled for up against estimates given by LCAByg while developing the Quick tool, since
both tools uses the Ökobaudat 2020­II database as basis. LCAByg thus serves as the
tool against which the Quick tool is tested regarding precision of LCA estimates, simply by
seeing how well estimates produced by the Quick match estimates produced by LCAByg
for the same constructions. For this report, the three case renovation projects introduced
in section 3 are used for these tests, and thus these tests are for totals of LCA estimates,
not LCA estimates per dimensional unit. More on this in section 2.6.
2.3.2
User defined estimates
The user of the Quick tool is also given options to make adjustments of the compositions
of the constructions found in the tool. For instance it is possible to change the distance be­
tween battens in a roof construction or the user may type in data from an EPD for roofing
tiles which will overrule the data provided by Ökobaudat. These user defined estimates
are calculated independently of the default estimates. The apartments case, presented
later, has been defined in such a manner, that user defined estimates are needed to
demonstrate the validity of the Quick tool’s LCA estimates, in particular this is demon­
strated for inner walls constructions, but unit and integration tests (see section 2.6) of all
building elements have been performed throughout the development of the tool as well.
10
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:19==
2.3.3
LCA uncertainty estimates
As mentioned, the data used as default is generic data from the Ökobaudat database.
This database does not contain uncertainties of the environmental impacts presented,
thus, it was needed to make estimates of the uncertainties of these impacts in some other
way. The method used to do so was by looking at EPDs of the construction materials
used for the tool and calculating stochastic uncertainties based on the impacts reported
in the EPDs in collection with the data available in Ökobaudat.
The impact estimates presented in an EPD are based on an LCA carried out for the spe­
cific product. The uncertainties of these impact estimates are not presented in the EPDs.
Literature on uncertainties of estimates presented in EPDs is sparse, unfortunately. At
the time of writing, no good estimate of what uncertainties EPDs typically carry was found.
For this reason, the uncertainty of the results in the EPDs are not taken into account in
the stochastic uncertainty analysis.
Despite having defined quantities of materials and LCA estimates of materials to be inde­
pendent from each other by taking LCA estimates per dimensional unit, the LCA estimates
per dimensional unit still are not entirely independent from having to take varying quan­
tities into account, even for similar materials. As an example of this, consider 1 m2 of
roofing tiles. Images of two kinds of tiles can be seen in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Curved clay tiles (left) and flat concrete tiles (right) [14]
Depending of the topology of the tiles, 1 m2 of tiles have different values of quantities in
terms of volume. When estimating stochastic uncertainties of 1 m2 of tiles, this must be
taken into account. This is done by introducing a ”penalty” to the estimated uncertainty,
if the differing topology is not taken into account. Similarly, products can have different
densities, which also makes them not directly comparable or, for instance, insulation has
different λ values. These kinds of differences are collected under the term quantity equiva­
lent uncertainty and will all add a ”penalty” to the estimated uncertainty of a given material.
Here, a such penalty was defined very simplistically as +20%­points for all materials, for
which the term quantity equivalent uncertainty applies.
Here, when talking about stochastic uncertainty, this is considered equivalent with the
standard deviation of the data sample in consideration divided by its average. With very
small data samples, which is the case for many of the materials, statistically it is quite
a stretch to calculate stochastic uncertainties in this manner (Taylor, 1997) [12]. Still,
when insisting on making such estimates, since these constitute better information for the
stakeholders to take decisions than no information at all, the best tools from the statistics
tool kit must be applied, with the note that the conditions for applying these tools are not
entirely met. The method is presented in figure 2.4.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Method for calculating stochastic LCA uncertainty estimates
2.3.4
Scope of LCA estimates
In order to enable making quick estimates at the early stages of renovation projects, meant
for dialogue between architects and building owners or other stakeholders, some stages
of the renovation LCA stage and boundary diagram are omitted, shown in figure 2.5.
According to mr. Ørsager, decisions on what is to be renovated have typically been made
by the building owner prior to such conversations. For this reason stage C/D in the renova­
tion process can therefore be omitted. Further, for most renovation projects, improvement
on the energy class is not of major concern in these initial conversations, rather an oppor­
tunity that may be pursued if initial decisions made open up for such an opportunity. For
this reason estimates of stage B is not critical and therefore omitted. Lastly, the reused
end of life stage C/D can be omitted since this is merely the part of the building that will
not be renovated and therefore no decisions need to be made on this.
12
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Renovation LCA stage and boundary diagram. Top: Diagram as suggested
by Hasik et al. [13]. Bottom: Diagram used to make estimates in the Quick tool.
Concerning stage D, this too is omitted. This is to match the results for constructions
obtained using LCAByg, which omits this stage.
For each building element a set of constructions have been made available to the user of
the Quick tool. The list of building elements itself can be expanded upon, as can the list
of available constructions of each building element. Expansion of these lists can be done
without adding to the complexity of the tool, which would be a natural addition to a future
version of the tool. It is only due to time, that this has been out of scope of this project,
where the most basic building elements and constructions have been prioritised.
Regarding the material compositions of the constructions, these have been defined so,
that the user can not make changes to the compositions, only to some dimensions of some
of the materials. This choice has been made to keep the balance between maximising
available user options and minimising tool complexity. This could be tested for by letting
user test groups try out a less complex version versus a more complex version of the tool
and get feedback on which of the two they prefer the most. This too has been considered
out of scope for this project, but could be interesting to assess for a future version of the
tool.
Consideration periods commonly used in construction is in the scale of decades, typi­
cally 50 or 80 years for new buildings, as can for instance be seen in Whole Life Carbon
Assessments of 60 Buildings (BUILD, 2021)[15]. For renovation projects, the choice of
an appropriate consideration period is not as straight forward as for new buildings. For
instance, a very old building can be expected to be in need of renovation again sooner
than a newer building. For the purpose of this report, however, exploring dependencies
between consideration period and different relevant parameters has been considered out
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
13
==PAGE:22==
of scope and the consideration period in the Quick tool has been set to 50 years.
Both EPDs and Ökabaudat include values for many different impact categories. While
the Quick tool does include data from all categories, only GWP estimates are made and
presented to the user. The reason for this is that GWP is the only impact category being
discussed in practice today. While one could argue that this only makes it more important
to include other parameters in the tool to the users, the counter argument to this, which
is employed here, is that this will introduce confusion to the users of the tool, since they
would now have to weight cost against not just GWP, but many categories, which do not
point to the same conclusions on what the decisions should be. For psychological reasons
this may incline the users to only consider GWP anyway or, in worst case, incline them to
not use the tool at all, since it leaves them with the feeling of not getting clear answers.
Seen from this perspective, introducing more impact categories requires the knowledge
level of LCA within the industry in general to be at a higher level than it is today.
Regarding the LCA uncertainty estimates, the data given in Ökobaudat includes estimates
for stages A1­A3, C3 and C4, however, most EPDs report only results for stages A1­
A3. Due to this practical limitation, the stochastic uncertainty analysis of the construction
materials is based only on impact estimates of stages A1­A3.
Further, for many impact categories other than GWP, it is not uncommon to find impact
estimates differing by orders of magnitude when comparing different EPDs of similar prod­
ucts. For this reason, stochastic uncertainty analysis was carried out only for the GWP
category and only uncertainties of GWP estimates are presented in the Quick tool.
For some construction materials, GWP (A1­A3) values found in some EPDs or Ökobaudat
are positive while they are negative in others. This leads to absurdly high uncertainty es­
timates, since the standard deviation is much higher than the average of the data sample.
The fact that similar products from different producers have positive and negative GWP
(A1­A3) respectively does not seem sensible. More likely is it that the system boundaries
have been defined differently for the different EPDs, resulting in such difference in the
nature of the results. While one can not say with certainty that this is the case, nonethe­
less, computationally in the Quick tool the uncertainty of these few materials have been
omitted when calculating the total uncertainty for all materials in all constructions. This is
equivalent to defining ucnertainties of these materials as out of scope.
2.4
Cost estimates
Cost estimates of constructions were found using Sigma Estimates version 7.0.1.11850
which looks up cost estimates from the Molio cost catalogues, an example of which is
shown in figure 2.6 of a tiled roof construction. These cost estimates are taken from
the ”Renovation ­ Building elements” (”Renovering ­ Bygningsdele” in Sigma Estimates)
catalogue. They include costs of materials, labour, transport and rent of machinery and
equipment.
14
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.6: Cost estimates of tiled roof construction in Sigma Estimates
Unlike LCA estimates per dimensional unit, the cost per dimensional unit does not scale
linearly. For this reason the unit cost (”Enhedspris” in the figure) is found for four orders
of magnitude of quantities for all of the constructions. For any given quantity, the unit cost
is then determined by linear regression between the two orders of magnitude the quantity
finds itself in. For instance, if we wish to estimate the unit cost uc of 350 m2 of the roof
tiles, this is determined as
uc(350m2) = uc(100m2) + (350m2 −100m2) · uc(1, 000m2) −uc(100m2)
(1, 000m2 −100m2)
(2.4)
which with values from Sigma Estimates yields
uc(350m2) = 970.07DKK + 250m2 · 818.29DKK −970.07DKK
900m2
= 927.91DKK
(2.5)
Contrary to constructions found in LCAByg, the constructions in Sigma Estimates are not
exact matches to those defined in the Quick tool in the sense that the material composi­
tions of the constructions are not entirely the same.
The three example cases are also used for testing if the Quick tool produces correct cost
estimates. This is done simply by checking that the unit costs of any construction of a given
quantity, produced by the Quick tool, lies within the two values of the quantities from the
Sigma estimates tables closest to the given quantity. For instance, in the example above it
was found that the unit cost of 350 m2 of til roof was 927.91 DKK. This value lies between
the two values of 818.29 DKK (for a quantity of 1,000 m2) and 970.07 DKK (for a quantity
of 100 m2).
2.4.1
Cost uncertainty estimates
Uncertainty of the cost estimates of constructions found in Sigma Estimates are not avail­
able. Unlike for LCA uncertainty estimates, the key stakeholders expectedly have plenty
of experience with cost estimates. That is, cost uncertainty estimates derived by means
of statistical tools are somewhat superfluous. According to Mr. Ørsager, by experience,
costs are estimated by making appropriate estimates using Sigma Estimates and then
setting up upper and lower budget boundaries for these based on experience. As the
project progresses, these boundaries shrink, since the project gets better and better de­
fined. From conversation with Mr. Ørsager, a simple version of these uncertainties are
presented in figure 2.7.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.7: Cost uncertainty estimates for different project stages of renovation projects
The method applied in the Quick tool simply is that the user defines the stage of the project
and the cost uncertainty estimates is then given by the percentages given in figure 2.7.
2.4.2
Scope of cost estimates
The constructions for which cost estimates have been provided by Sigma Estimates do not
match the constructions of LCAByg 1­to­1. This could be handled by manually assembling
constructions in Sigma Estimates to match those of LCAByg. This is however a quite
time consuming task to do for so many defined constructions, and the improvement in
precision of the cost estimates is expected to be only negligible. This, since the cost of
labour and transport will be more or less the same and material costs will not be very
different, since even though the constructions are not 1­to­1, they are still quite similar.
Therefore, expectedly, defining the constructions in Sigma Estimates to be 1­to­1 to those
in LCAByg is very time consuming and improves the estimates only little, and has been
considered out of scope of this project for this reason.
As mentioned, typically project cost budgets are given uncertainty margins based on the
experience of the architects assigned to the projects. The margins in the Quick tool are
defined trivially based only the stage of the project, as the estimated cost plus/minus some
percentage. In reality, the margins based on experience are more nuanced than this. This,
since the same percentages do not apply to all building constructions of a given project,
but vary from construction to construction. Further, the margin set below the projected
cost estimate is typically not the same size as the margin set above. Thus, despite the
method used in practice is manual, it is still much more nuanced than the simplified method
defined here. The reason for not refining the method here is that getting these nuances
down as computational rules is not as straight forward a task as it may seem, and time
available with Mr. Ørsager and Mr. Greisen was prioritised on other matters.
2.5
Life cycle inventory data
Data used for the assessment of LCA uncertainty estimates, and for assessing how well
generic data matches EPD data, was collected following the method shown in figure 2.8.
The generic data considered is entirely taken from the Ökobaudat 2020­II database. This
data has been chosen since this data is being used in LCAByg version 5.2.1.0, the tool
which the Quick tool check up against for validity of LCA estimates. Only data from ma­
terials used in the Quick tool was collected.
16
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.8: Method used for collecting data from EPDs
2.5.1
Representitativeness of data
Technological representativeness
With the ever increasing demand to reduce GHG emissions, many manufacturers are
currently taking steps to optimize existing processes or even introduce new ones. Exactly
how much of an impact these initiatives have is difficult to assess, it may also vary from
material to material. However, it is quite certain to say, that many of the EPDs published
in the coming years are expected to show lower values of GWP than today for the same
or similar products.
Geographical representativeness
The generic data provided by the Ökobaudat 2020­II data set has german origin, while
the EPDs found for analysis mostly are from manufacturers in the northern part of Europe.
Some EPDs do come from other parts of Europe and also some from outside of Europe.
Some construction materials do have different compositions from country to country, but
more importantly building construction compositions can differ a lot from country to coun­
try. For instance less insulation is required in warm regions, such as Spain, compared
to colder regions, such as Denmark. The estimates provided by the Quick tool are best
suited for northern Europe and regions where similar materials are typically used.
Temporal representativeness
Out of the 357 products found in the generic data and the EPDs, 11 had an overdue
expiration date, most of these with an expiration date in 2021. Both generic data and
EPD data is valid only for 5 years. Nearly all construction materials have lifetimes of
decades, thus the temporal representativeness of the data is of high quality.
2.6
Testing the Quick tool
A final important aspect in meeting the first objective is assessing how well the Quick tool
made available for the key stakeholders performs. This both in a technical sense, that
is, does the developed functions of the tool do as they are supposed to do, but also with
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
17
==PAGE:26==
respect to design, that is, to assess if potential users of the tool find it attractive to maybe
use in the future. The design of the Quick tool emerged through biweekly conversations
with Mr. Ørsager and Mr. Greisen, so testing if other users found the tool attractive was
important.
The Quick tool is structured as shown in figure 2.9, incorporating all of the quantity, LCA
and cost estimates and uncertainty estimates methodologically as described in the previ­
ous sections.
Figure 2.9: Structure of the Quick tool
The method used to test the tool consist of four steps, as suggested by Voorhees (2020)
[16], presented in figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: The four steps of testing the Quick tool
A more elaborate description of the four steps in their application to the Quick tool is given
below.
18
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:27==
• Unit testing ­ Done as the Quick tool was being developed. The purpose was to
verify that each function performed as intended, independent of all other functions.
For instance, if the user has chosen a scenario with a tiled roof, a function in the
LCA estimates module must call for the impact of the tiled roof per unit from the LCA
estimates per unit data table.
• Integration testing ­ Done while the Quick tool was being developed. The purpose
was to verify the design of each component/module, that is, testing the interactions
between functions.
For instance, when the user has defined a limited set of information (building type,
number of buildings, etc.) and chosen a scenario with a tiled roof, a function in the
Quantity module must give a quantity estimate of the area of the roof, a function in
the LCA estimates module must call for the impact of the tiled roof per unit from the
LCA estimates per unit data table. The LCA estimates module must then be able
to combine these two independent functions to produce a correct result of an LCA
estimate of tiled roof in its entirety.
• System testing ­ Done at certain project milestones and after the code is integrated.
The purpose is to verify that the Quick tool meets the requirements set by the de­
veloper. It is meant to test all components/modules that make up the tool.
Test cases were written to specific scenarios. These are the three case renova­
tion projects that were introduced in section 3. Descriptions of how LCA estimates
and cost estimates are system tested was described in section 2.3 and section 2.4
respectively.
• User acceptance testing ­ Done by end­users to validate that the Quick tool meets
their needs.
This test was done by letting people from the test group use the Quick tool unguided
and giving it scores and comments. The test group users were asked to comment
on what was important to them prior to trying out the Quick tool by giving a grade
from 0­100 on these five parameters:
– Flexibility
– Speed
– Precision
– Usability
– Visual quality
Then after having tried the Quick tool they were asked to grade their experience,
again by giving a grade from 0­100 on the five parameters, except for precision,
since this is tested for directly in the system tests.
Acceptance testing is often finalised by asking the users directly to answer ”yes” or ”no”
if they accept the tool in its final version. This is omitted here, since the Quick tool is not
ordered by any company for implementation and the test users do not depend in any way
on the tool working, which is the reason for asking the question.
Results of System testing and Acceptance testing are presented later in the report, but
results of unit testing and integration testing are not displayed, since these have been per­
formed throughout the development of the Quick tool and are considered of no relevance
to the reader of this report.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
19
==PAGE:28==
2.7
EPD/Generic data coherence analysis
The method used for assessing how well generic data matches with the data from EPDs,
the third objective of this project, was to simply compare the data from Ökobaudat for a
material to data for the same material found in EPDs. For the same reasons mentioned
in section 2.3.3, only GWP (A1­A3) data was analysed.
For each material the lowest and the highest GWP values from the EPDs define a span
against which it was then noted if the Ökobaudat value was lower than the minimum
EPD value, within the span or higher than the maximum EPD value. When done for all
materials in consideration, it was then counted up for how many materials the Ökobaudat
value belonged to which of the three categories.
Secondly, for each material the average of all collected GWP values was taken, both from
EPDs and Ökobaudat, each GWP value, both from EPDs and Ökobaudat, then normal­
ized against this average, and the now normalized span of EPD values and Ökobaudat
values prepared for graphical representation.
20
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:29==
3
Case renovation projects
To assess the validity of the LCA estimates provided by the Quick tool to meet the first
objective, three case renovation projects are introduced, serving as the basis for this
assessment. All three cases are entirely fictional and all of their constructions matches
1­to­1 with constructions available in LCAByg.
3.1
Office case
A company has decided to renovate their office building’s gutters, ventilation ducts and
system, ceilings and windows. Regarding ceilings, the company has not yet decided on
which type of ceiling is best suited for the building. The counseling architect has sug­
gested plasterboards, fibre cement and plywood as the possible candidates as primary
materials for the ceiling constructions. Similarly, the company is undecided on which win­
dows should replace the existing ones, whether it should be with wood, alu or wood/alu
framing. Details of the office renovation project is presented in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Office case
Total gross area
1,800 m2
Gross length
30 m
Gross width
20 m
Number of floors
3
Drain/Gutters
160 m, PVC
Ventilation ducts
1,260 m Ø125
Ventilation system
10,000 m3/h aggregate
Ceiling
1,440 m2
Plaster, fibre cement or plywood
Windows
160 m2
Wood, alu or wood/alu
In the office case, for two of the five building elements, it was not yet decided what the
construction should be. For the ceiling it was not decided if it should be a plaster, fibre
cement or plywood construction, nor was it decided if the windows should be with wood,
alu or wood/alu framing. Thus the user is interested in assessing 3x3 = 9 different sce­
narios. For the purpose of testing if the Quick tool produces correct results, it suffices
to only setup three scenarios, one for plaster ceiling and wood framing windows, one for
fibre cement ceiling and alu framing windows, and one for plywood ceiling and wood/alu
framing windows. This covers all constructions of the case project. Similarly for the two
other case projects, presented next, two scenarios suffice for each of the cases.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
21
==PAGE:30==
Material compositions of the constructions can be found in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Material compositions of constructions used in the office case
Building element
Construction
Material
Quantity
Drain/Gutters
1 m of downpipes
PVC drain pipe
1 m/m
Ventilation ducts
1 m of ducts Ø125
Ø125 ducts
1 m/m
800x1000 ducts
0.086 m/m
Ventilation system
1 pcs. 10,000 m3/h agg.
10,000 m3/h agg.
1 pcs/pcs
Ceiling
1 m2 of plasterboard
Plasterboard 13 mm
2 m2/m2
Acrylic paint
0.38 kg/m2
Primer, dispersion
0.19 kg/m2
Construction wood
0.024 m3/m2
Mineral wool
0.045 m3/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.1 kg/m2
Lime plaster
0.0089 m3/m2
Ceiling
1 m2 of fibre cement
Fibre cement board
1 m2/m2
board
Construction wood
0.0021 m3/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.1 kg/m2
Ceiling
1 m2 of plywood board
Plywood board
0.015 m3/m2
Sub roof membrane
3 m2/m2
Construction wood
0.0021 m3/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.1 kg/m2
Windows
1 m2 of wood framed
3 layers pane
1 m2/m2
window
Wood frame
5.63 m/m2
EPDM seal
7.78 m/m2
Windows
1 m2 of alu framed
3 layers pane
1 m2/m2
window
Alu frame
5.63 m/m2
EPDM seal
7.78 m/m2
Windows
1 m2 of wood/alu framed
3 layers pane
1 m2/m2
window
Wood frame
5.63 m2/m2
Alu frame
1.69 m/m2
EPDM seal
7.78 m/m2
22
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Single family house case
A family has purchased a house in need of a lot of renovation. Inside, floor heating pipes
need to be changed. In continuation of this they also wish to get a new floor with parquet
or carpet as surface material. Outside the existing tiled roof needs to be replaced entirely.
They have decided on keeping a tiled roof. The outer walls are constituted of a mix
of bricks and wooden boards. The family wishes to have a monotone facade, but are
undecided on whether it should be of bricks or wood. They do wish to replace the entire
existing facade with a new one. Details of the family house renovation project can be
found in table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Single family house case
Gross area
150 m2 (10x15 m)
Number of floors
1
Floor height
2.5 m
Roofing
Tiles
Facade
Bricks or wood
Terrain deck
80 m2
Parquet or carpet
Floor heating
80 m2
Material compositions of the constructions can be found in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Material compositions of constructions used in the family house case
Building element
Construction
Material
Quantity
Roof
1 Roofing tiles
Tiles
1 m2/m2
Construction wood
0.0097 m3/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.1 kg/m2
Facade
1 m2 of brick facade
Clay bricks
0.11 m3/m2
Mortar
12.1 kg/m2
Facade
1 m2 of pine board
Wood, pine
0.025 m3/m2
cladding
Plasterboard 13 mm
0.69 m2/m2
Lasur system
0.38 kg/m2
Construction wood
0.0021 m3/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.15 kg/m2
Terrain deck
1 m2 of parquet floor
Parquet floor
0.91 m2/m2
EPS insulation
0.006 m3/m2
Screed
96 kg/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.05 kg/m2
Terrain deck
1 m2 of carpeted floor
Carpet tile
1 m2/m2
Vapor barrier
0.2 m2/m2
Screed
96 kg/m2
Emulsion paint
0.19 kg/m2
Floor heating
1 m2 floor heating PEX
Pipes 100 mm distance
1 m2/m2
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Apartments case
A landlord wishes to increase the standards of their apartments to be able to charge a
higher rent. The ground floor level is used by stores, no renovation is needed there. The
landlord wishes to do renovation on some of the inner walls, all bathroom floor surfaces
and change some of the inner doors. The counseling architect imagines the inner walls to
be either brick or CLT walls. Further, the architect suggests considering linoleum or vinyl
as bathroom floor surface. The inner doors will be standard wooden doors. Details on
the apartments renovation project can be found in table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Apartments case
Number of apartments
24
Number of buildings
3
Number of floors per building
4
Gross area per apartment
70 m2
Inner walls
1,200 m2
Bricks or CLT
Separation decks
240 m2
Linoleum or vinyl
Inner doors
72 doors, 2.0x0.925 m
Material compositions of the constructions can be found in table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Material compositions of constructions used in the apartments case
Building element
Construction
Material
Quantity
Inner walls
1 m2 middle layer, bricks
Bricks
0.11 m3/m2
Mortar
12.1 kg/m2
Inner walls
1 m2 of painted wall side
Acrylic paint
0.38 kg/m2
Primer, dispersion
0.19 kg/m2
Lime plaster
0.0089 m3/m2
Inner walls
1 m2 middle layer, CLT
CLT element
0.15 m3/m2
Separation decks
1 m2 linoleum floor
Linoleum
1 m2/m2
EPS insulation
0.003 m3/m2
Screed
96 kg/m2
Vapor barrier
1 m2/m2
Emulsion paint
0.19 kg/m2
Separation decks
1 m2 of vinyl floor
Plast plate
0.002 m3/m2
EPS insulation
0.003 m3/m2
Screed
96 kg/m2
Inner doors
1 m2 inside door
Chipboard
0.025 m3/m2
Pine wood
0.0098 kg/m2
Emulsion paint
0.19 kg/m2
Fasteners/skrews
0.54 kg/m2
Here 1 m2 of brick wall is composed of 1 m2 middle layer, bricks and 2 x 1 m2 of painted
wall sides. Similarly for 1 m2 of CLT wall.
At a later stage in the project, a decision is made to not renovate the inner walls entirely
after all, but only re­paint them with Jotaproff Akryl 07 interior acrylic paint from Jotun, a
24
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:33==
product for which an EPD exists (EPD Norge, 2018) [17], including using primer and lime
plaster.
In the Quick tool this is done by going to the Inner walls tab and here changing Middle
layer from ”Yes” to ”No” and under Wall side 1 & 2 changing use of EPD to ”Yes” and
typing the values found in the EPD, as shown in figure 3.1.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: How to exclude middle layer and type EPD values in ths Quick tool
26
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:35==
4
Results
4.1
System tests of the Quick tool
Direct comparison between constructions in the Quick tool and LCAByg can be done as
shown in figure 4.1, where one can also check that the quantities entered in the two tools
are the same. The scenarios of all three cases have been built in LCAByg. They can
be found in the zipped file ”3 cases ­ LCAByg”. In this report, only the results for the full
case scenarios produced by LCAByg are displayed. If the reader wishes to explore the
LCAByg results further, this can be done by accessing the cases found in the zipped file.
Figure 4.1: GWP (A1­A3, C3, C4) estimates for 138 m2 of PVC drain/gutters for a 50
years period from the QuickTool (in front) and LCAByg (in the back) respectively
4.1.1
Office case
Results for these three scenarios produced by the Quick tool are presented in figure 4.2.
Results produced by LCAByg are presented in figure 1­3 in appendix A for each scenario
respectively.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.2: Estimates for the three scenarios of the office case provided by the Quick tool
28
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:37==
Results for GWP estimates for the office case produced by the Quick tool and LCAByg
respectively are presented in table 4.1 in a manner so as to make it apparent to the reader
that indeed the results produced by both tools match.
Table 4.1: LCA estimates for the office case produced by the Quick tool and LCAByg
Scenario 1
GWP (kg CO2 eq.)
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Drain
PVC pipes
1,302
1,302
Ventilation ducts
Ducts Ø125
5,858
Ducts 800x1000
6,142
Ducts, total
12,000
12,000
Ventilation system
Aggregate 10,000 m3/h
5,639
5,639
Ceiling
Plasterboards
25,860
25,860
Windows
3­panes windows
19,616
Wood frame
4,979
Windows, total
24,595
24,595
Scenario 2
GWP (kg CO2 eq.)
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Drain
PVC pipes
1,302
1,302
Ventilation ducts
Ducts Ø125
5,858
Ducts 800x1000
6,142
Ducts, total
12,000
12,000
Ventilation system
Aggregate 10,000 m3/h
5,639
5,639
Ceiling
Fibre cement boards
22,085
22,085
Windows
3­panes windows
19,616
Alu frame
16,950
Windows, total
36,566
36,566
Scenario 3
GWP (kg CO2 eq.)
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Drain
PVC pipes
1,302
1,302
Ventilation ducts
Ducts Ø125
5,858
Ducts 800x1000
6,142
Ducts, total
12,000
12,000
Ventilation system
Aggregate 10,000 m3/h
5,639
5,639
Ceiling
Plywood
10,993
10,993
Windows
3­panes windows
19,616
Wood/alu frame
9,591
Windows, total
29,207
29,207
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
29
==PAGE:38==
All unit coast estimates produced by Sigma estimates are presented in appendix B. In
table 4.2 the unit cost relevant for the three scenarios of the office case are presented.
Table 4.2: Unit cost estimates for the office case produced by the Quick tool and Sigma
Estimates
All scenarios
Building element /
Unit cost (DKK)
Construction
Quantity
Quick tool
Sigma
Drain /
100 m
443.90
PVC pipes
160 m
440.18
1,000 m
394.05
Ventilation ducts /
1,000 m
244.19
Ducts Ø125
10,000 m
220.72
Ventilation ducts /
100 m
1,930.81
Ducts 800x1000
1,000 m
1,709.33
Ventilation ducts /
1,000 m
443.00
Ducts total
1,260 m
409.07
(per m Ø125 duct)
10,000 m
391.65
Ventilation system /
1 pcs
14,310
14,310
Aggregate 10,000 m3/h
Scenario 1
Ceiling /
1,000 m2
871.15
Plasterboards
1,440 m2
865.67
10,000 m2
759.04
Windows /
100 m2
3,034.51
3­panes, wood frame
160 m2
3,026.53
1,000 m2
2,821.55
Scenario 2
Ceiling /
1,000 m2
800.84
Fibre cement
1,440 m2
796.59
10,000 m2
713.88
Windows /
100 m2
4,758.41
3­panes, alu frame
160 m2
4,621.82
1,000 m2
4,271.74
Scenario 3
Ceiling /
1,000 m2
596.44
Plywood
1,440 m2
592.57
10,000 m2
517.31
Windows /
100 m2
3,091.02
3­panes, wood/alu frame
160 m2
3,075.69
1,000 m2
2,766.42
As can be seen in the table, all of the unit cost estimates produced by the Quick tool fall
between the values for the relevant quantities from Sigma Estimates.
30
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:39==
4.1.2
Single family house case
As can be seen from figure 4.3, with the case information given, it was needed to make
some assumptions in order to get estimates from the Quick tool and LCAByg. The gross
length and width were assumed to be 15m and 10 m respectively (to give a gross area
of 150 m2, provided in the case description) and the roof inclination assumed to be 25
degrees. With these three assumptions quantity estimates provided by the Quick tool
is 188 m2 roof and 114 m2 of outer wall facade. Both of these quantity estimates seem
reasonable at face value, but need to be verified. This is done by use of the relevant
assumptions presented in table 2.2 and 2.3 in the method:
• All buildings are rectangular
• Gross area makes up 88% of net area for residential buildings
• Windows are 10% of total gross area for all buildings
• 1 outer door for every starting 100 m2 gross area
• all doors have the dimensions 950x2050 mm
For the roof, the quantity Qtyroof is
Qtyroof =
1
0.88 · 150m2 ·
1
cos(25◦) = 188m2
(4.1)
This is the same quantity as produced by the Quick tool.
For the facade, the quantity Qtyfacade∗of the facade including windows and doors is
Qtyfacade∗= 2 ·
( 15m
√
0.88 + 10m
√
0.88
)
· 2.5m = 133m2
(4.2)
while the quantity of windows Qtywindows,doors and doors is
Qtywindows,doors = 0.1 · 150m2 + 2 · 0.95m · 2.05m = 19m2
(4.3)
and thus the sought for facade quantity Qtyfacade is (133­19) m2 = 114 m2. This is the
same quantity as produced by the Quick tool.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Estimates for the two scenarios of the single family house case provided by the Quick tool
32
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:41==
LCA estimates produced by the Quick tool and by LCAByg are presented in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Results for the family house case produced by the Quick tool and LCAByg
Scenario 1
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Roof
Tiles
3,633
3,633
Outer walls
Bricks
7,193
7,193
Terrain deck
Parquet floor
2,216
2,216
Floor heating
Floor heating
2,309
2,309
Scenario 2
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Roof
Tiles
3,633
3,633
Outer walls
Wood
1,468
1,468
Terrain deck
Carpet
5,551
5,555
Floor heating
Floor heating
2,309
2,309
For scenario 2, one may notice the slight discrepancy between the Quick tool and LCAByg
results for the terrain deck, carpet construction. This Quick tool result is off by less than
a tenth of a percent, which can safely be considered negligible.
In table 4.4 the unit cost relevant for the two scenarios of the house case are presented.
Table 4.4: Unit cost estimates for the single family house case produced by the Quick tool
and Sigma Estimates
Both scenarios
Building element /
Unit cost (DKK)
Construction
Quantity
Quick tool
Sigma
Roof / Tiles
100 m2
970.07
188 m2
955.60
1,000 m2
818.29
Floor heating /
10 m2
3,663.60
Floor heating
80 m2
3,329.31
100 m2
3,233.80
Scenario 1
Outer walls / Bricks
100 m2
5.868.77
114 m2
5,857.95
1,000 m2
5,190.75
Terrain deck /
10 m2
1,469.97
Parquet flooring
80 m2
1,292.91
100 m2
1,242.33
Scenario 2
Outer walls / Wood
100 m2
1,109.55
114 m2
1,106.82
1,000 m2
938,63
Terrain deck /
10 m2
752.45
Carpet
80 m2
656.83
100 m2
629.51
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
33
==PAGE:42==
4.1.3
Appartments case
Estimates for the two scenarios produced by the Quick tool are presented in figure 4.4.
In table 4.5 LCA estimates for the two scenarios of the apartments case produced by the
Quick tool and LCAByg are presented.
Table 4.5: Results for the apartments case produced by the Quick tool and LCAByg
Scenario 1
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Separation decks
Linoleum
5,290
5,290
Inner walls
Bricks
89,424
89,424
Inner doors
Wood
1,928
1,929
Scenario 2
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Separation decks
Vinyl
8,500
8,500
Inner walls
CLT
57,890
57,890
Inner doors
Wood
1,928
1,929
The small discrepancy of the doors is due to the dimensions of the doors in LCAByg being
not exactly the same as the doors described in the case. Again the discrepancy is so small
that it can be ignored though.
In table 4.6 the unit cost relevant for the two scenarios of the apartments case are pre­
sented.
Table 4.6: Unit cost estimates for the apartments case produced by the Quick tool and
Sigma Estimates
Both scenarios
Building element /
Unit cost (DKK)
Construction
Quantity
Quick tool
Sigma
Inner doors / Wood
100 m2
2,700.68
133 m2
2,694.20
1,000 m2
2,415.38
Scenario 1
Inner walls / Bricks
1,000 m2
6,244.36
1,200 m2
6,233.60
10,000 m2
5,760.07
Separation decks /
100 m2
554.84
Linoleum
240 m2
542.63
1,000 m2
476.33
Scenario 2
Inner walls / CLT
1,000 m2
1,165.99
1,200 m2
1,162.72
10,000 m2
1,018.84
Separation decks /
100 m2
1,009.95
Vinyl
240 m2
990.00
1,000 m2
881.75
34
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: Estimates for the two scenarios of the apartments case provided by the Quick tool
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
35
==PAGE:44==
In the case description it was described that at a later stage of the project it was decided
to only paint the inner walls and to do this with Jotun paint. In the Quick tool, taking this
into account was described in the method section. To display the results in the Quick tool
one most go to the Quick tool tab and here change Show results for from ”Default” to
”User defined”. This is shown in figure 4.5 along with the resulting estimates.
For this part of the case description, the LCA estimates produced by the Quick tool and by
LCAByg are presented in table 4.7 and the unit cost estimates of the Quick tool and Sigma
estimates presented in table 4.8, displaying only results for the inner walls construction to
which the change was made.
Table 4.7: Results for the user defined scenarios of the apartments case produced by the
Quick tool and LCAByg
User defined scenario ­ EPD values NOT typed
GWP (kg CO2 eq.)
Building element
Construction
Quick tool
LCAByg
Inner walls
Acrylic paint
13,938
13,938
User defined scenario ­ EPD values typed
Inner walls
Acrylic paint
14,809
­
Table 4.8: Unit cost estimates for the apartments case produced by the Quick tool and
Sigma Estimates
Both scenarios
Building element /
Unit cost (DKK)
Construction
Quantity
Quick tool
Sigma
Inner walls / paint
1,000 m2
227.36
1,200 m2
226.72
10,000 m2
198.32
36
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: Estimates for the user defined scenarios of the apartments case provided by the Quick tool
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
37
==PAGE:46==
4.2
User acceptance test and user feedback
Results of the user acceptance test can be seen in table 4.9. In total 7 test users tried
the Quick tool and gave feedback. Results of precision after the users have tried the
tool was not asked for, since this has been tested separately by comparing the estimates
from the Quick tool with estimates from LCAByg and Sigma Estimates respectively, with
a demonstrated very high degree of precision of the Quick tool established.
Table 4.9: Test user results before and after trying the Quick tool
User scores on what they wished to experience before trying the Quick tool
Parameter
Minimum
Average
Maximum
Std. dev.
Flexibility
30
73
100
22
Speed
20
71
100
33
Precision
20
59
80
20
Usability
70
85
100
13
Visual quality
40
79
100
20
User scores of what they actually experienced when trying the Quick tool
Parameter
Minimum
Average
Maximum
Std. dev.
Flexibility
40
56
70
10
Speed
60
87
100
13
Precision
­
­
­
­
Usability
30
69
90
24
Visual quality
40
66
95
18
As can be seen from the results, the test users cared the least about the precision of the
tool. Also the users cared less about the speed than the other three parameters.
Many of the users were kind enough to write explicit requests as feedback, some of which
are presented below.
”The scale total GWP is difficult to understand. Is it possible to relate this to some ”fun
facts” regarding what it corresponds to.”
”There were not many options of materials. I hope these can be extended with time.”
”I see that for terrain deck you are locked to for instance choose flooring for all three
scenarios. It is possible that in scenario 1 you re­insulate on a raised floor structure,
while in scenario 2 you break up the floor and do full insulation and in scenario 3 you just
do a new floor cover.”
In general the feedback given give very specific requests and wishes mostly regarding
the flexibility and usability of the Quick tool. This is well in line with the test result scores
presented in the table.
The average test score across all parameters before the test user trying the tool was 73.4,
while the average after was 69.5.
4.3
Uncertainty analysis of GWP for construction materials
Results of the uncertainty analysis are available in tables 4.10­4.12, including all construc­
tions of all building elements available in the Quick tool.
38
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.10: GWP (A1­A3) uncertainty estimates of materials used for building construc­
tions and number of products the uncertainty estimates are based on
Roof
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Roofing, tiles
5
31%
Construction wood, KVH­quality
5
29%
Fasteners/skrews in galvanized steel
5
64%
Mineral wool, reg.
6
30%
Paper wool insulation, loose filling
2
234%
Vapor barrier PE
5
19%
Felt, bitumen submembrane
10
28%
Felt, bitumen top layer
10
32%
Bitumen emulsion
2
31%
Plywood board
4
43%
Steel, galvanized steel plate
6
23%
Surface, powder coating
7
40%
Fibre cement board
10
38%
Drain
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Pipe, drain pipe, PVC
6
55%
Ventilation ducts
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Ventilation ducts Ø125
5
23%
Ventilation ducts 800x1000
2
40%
Ventilation system
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Ventilation aggregate 120 m3/h
7
29%
Ventilation aggregate 120 m3/h
7
29%
Ventilation aggregate 10,000 m3/h
3
77%
Ventilation aggregate 20,000 m3/h
3
77%
Ceiling
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Plasterboard
6
35%
Surface, facade paint, acrylic paint
5
8%
Surface, facade paint, primer, dispersion
5
35%
Construction wood, KVH­quality
5
29%
Mineral wool, reg.
6
30%
Fasteners/skrews in galvanized steel
5
64%
Lime plaster, indoor
3
51%
Fibre cement board
10
38%
Wood concrete board
7
290%
Steel, roled profiles and plates
7
30%
Sub roof, PP membrane
3
34%
Plywood board
4
43%
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.11: GWP (A1­A3) uncertainty estimates of materials used for building construc­
tions and number of products the uncertainty estimates are based on
Outer walls
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Clay bricks, facade
6
34%
Mortar, tile adhesive
13
31%
Aerated concrete, 380 kg/m3
6
25%
Mineral wool, loose filling
3
89%
Fasteners/skrews in galvanized steel
5
64%
Surface, facade paint, primer, dispersion
5
35%
Surface, facade paint, acrylic paint
5
8%
Lime plaster, indoor
3
51%
Plasterboard, impregnated
6
35%
Wood, pine
8
46%
Surface, wooden facade, lasur system
5
40%
Construction wood, KVH­quality
5
29%
Fibre cement board
10
38%
Lime cement plaster
3
41%
Separation decks
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Screed, cement based
5
15%
Wooden floor, parquet
13
35%
EPS insulation for ceiling/floor
8
12%
Fasteners/skrews in galvanized steel
5
64%
Leight concrete, hollow core slabs
6
28%
Reinforcement mesh
5
22%
Cheramic tiles, glazed
6
53%
Mortar, tile adhesive
13
31%
Vapor barrier PE
5
19%
Surface, indoor paint, emulsion paint
5
50%
Carpet tile
10
78%
Linoleum flooring
14
343%
Plast plate, transparent, PVC
8
5%
Inner walls
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Surface, facade paint, primer, dispersion
5
35%
Surface, facade paint, acrylic paint
5
8%
Lime plaster, indoor
3
51%
Clay bricks, facade
6
34%
Mortar, tile adhesive
13
31%
Aerated concrete, 380 kg/m3
6
25%
Cross­laminated wood, CLT
6
6%
40
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:49==
Table 4.12: GWP (A1­A3) uncertainty estimates of materials used for building construc­
tions and number of products the uncertainty estimates are based on
Windows
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Wood frame, 3 panes
6
20%
Alu frame, 3 panes
3
62%
Wood alu frame, 3 panes
4
36%
Inner doors
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Inside door
3
19%
Inside glass door
10
15%
Outer doors
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Door, alu, front door
9
26%
Door, alu, T90/EI90
2
52%
Door, industrial gate
3
103%
Terrain deck
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Screed, cement based
5
15%
Wooden floor, parquet
13
35%
EPS insulation for ceiling/floor
8
12%
Fasteners/skrews in galvanized steel
5
64%
Concrete C25/30, ready­mix
7
11%
Reinforcement mesh
5
22%
Vapor barrier PE
5
19%
EPS insulation for walls and roof
8
14%
Gravel, dried
5
173%
Cheramic tiles, glazed
6
53%
Mortar, tile adhesive
13
31%
Surface, indoor paint, emulsion paint
5
50%
Carpet tile
10
78%
Linoleum flooring
14
343%
Plast plate, transparent, PVC
8
5%
Pipes
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Water pipes, stainless steel
5
14%
Floor heating
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Floor heating, PEX, 100 mm distance
8
43%
Heat supply
Material
No. of products
Uncertainty
Heat pump 10 kW
2
113%
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
41
==PAGE:50==
4.4
Coherence analysis
The results of the normalised GWP (A1­A3) uncertainties with respect to product average
are shown in figure 4.6­4.8
Figure 4.6: GWP (A1­A3) values of products from EPDs and Ökobaudat normalized with
the average for each material used for roof, drain, ventilation and ceiling. The span of
values from EPDs is represented by bars while values from Ökobaudat are shown as
triangles. Values in parentheses are numbers of products from EPDs. Materials marked
with a green triangle have negative GWP (A1­A3) values.
Figure 4.7: GWP (A1­A3) values of products from EPDs and Ökobaudat normalized with
the average for each material used for outer walls and separation decks. The span of
values from EPDs is represented by bars while values from Ökobaudat are shown as
triangles. Values in parentheses are numbers of products from EPDs. Materials marked
with a green triangle have negative GWP (A1­A3) values.
42
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.8: GWP (A1­A3) values of products from EPDs and Ökobaudat normalized with
the average for each material used for inner walls, windows, doors, terrain deck, wa­
ter/heat pipes and system. The span of values from EPDs is represented by bars while
values from Ökobaudat are shown as triangles. Values in parentheses are numbers of
products from EPDs. Materials marked with a green triangle have negative GWP (A1­A3)
values.
In table 4.13 a summary can be seen of the number of products for which GWP (A1­A3)
was lower for the generic data than what was found in EPDs, within the span of values
found in EPDs or higher than in EPDs.
Table 4.13: Summary results of the coherence analysis
Generic < EPD
Generic ∈EPD
Generic > EPD
12
21
20
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
43
==PAGE:52==
44
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
5.1
The Quick tool
5.1.1
Results produced by the Quick tool
The results of the three case projects introduced in this report demonstrated a high level of
compliance between the Quick tool and LCAByg and Sigma Estimates respectively. Only
two discrepancies between the Quick tool and LCAByg, both of which are negligible, and
no discrepancies with Sigma Estimates at all. This demonstrates that the machinery of
the Quick tool is well functioning. It does not demonstrate, however, that the estimates
produced by the Quick tool match actual emissions and costs of projects at their comple­
tion. When applied in practice, even if the Quick tool is only used in the design stages of
projects and not in the later stages, it is still advisable to compare estimates produced by
the Quick tool to final project LCA estimates and costs of any project where the Quick tool
was used. It is more likely than not that the user will then find patterns that repeat across
projects which calls for adjustments to the Quick tool, either to the quantity estimates, the
dimensional LCA estimates or the unit cost estimates. In other words, the optimal results
of early stages conversations between key stakeholders is obtained with a combination
of the Quick tool and experience, not with the Quick tool on its own.
Regarding quantity estimates, a separate study could be conducted improving on the
assumptions on which the quantity estimates are calculated, based on data from a rep­
resentative set of actual buildings. A separate study on improving the cost estimates is
suggested too.
5.1.2
User acceptance test results
From the user feedback it was found that the two parameters with the best performance,
speed and precision, was also the parameters the test users cared the least about. High
speed was even explicitly part of the first objective of this project. These test scores thus
indicate that the first objective itself was set a little bit off compared to what the users
express they wish for of a tool such as the Quick tool. Even so, it can not be concluded
that the objective was incorrectly defined, since speed and precision is a must for this
tool to have any basis of existence at all. Seen in this light, these test results can rather
serve as indicators of what the users wished to be improved in future versions of the
tool. This also very much shows the difficulty in finding the balance between usability
and flexibility on the one hand against speed on the other. Increase in the two former will
almost necessarily be at the expense of the latter.
The average scores given by the users before and after trying the tool were found to be
roughly the same. That is, the expectations of the users are roughly met, with the users
primarily seeing room for improvement on flexibility, usability and visual quality.
5.1.3
Benefits from using the Quick tool
In each construction project, environmental sustainability is only one of many parameters
building owners and other stakeholders are interested in and despite pending legal re­
quirements on limiting CO2 emissions, other parameters are typically prioritised higher.
Most often, if not always, a building’s finance is weighed higher than a buildings envi­
ronmental profile with regards to decisions made. With a machinery demonstrated to be
working and test user expectations met, the Quick tool is a strong candidate for enabling
key stakeholders to produce environmental estimates as they speak. This is particularly
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
45
==PAGE:54==
valuable in the initial meetings between architects and building owners, since the deci­
sions made here now can include considerations of environmental impacts in situ rather
than as something that will be considered after the meeting is over, when decisions have
already been made. Thus, since decisions made in the initial stages of projects have the
highest impacts in the end, the Quick tool can potentially push renovation projects in the
direction of being more environmentally sustainable, simply by helping stakeholders in
making good decisions in the early stages.
A second asset of the Quick tool is that it is quick to use. In an industry where com­
panies are in constant competition, minimising time spent on tasks is a key competitive
parameter, in particular for architectural companies whose product they sell to customers
is their time. In 2­3 minutes a person with little to no knowledge of LCA can still get an
assessment of the ideas the person has regarding a renovation project, based on very
little information required, ideal for the early stages of such projects. The Quick tool, in
its current version, can not be used for documentation, which is needed in later stages
of projects, but with the developed structure, which follows LCAByg, the tool used for
documentation, further development of the Quick tool can possibly be done so the initial
model design can be revisited and updated throughout the period, rather than having to
be rebuild from scratch using another tool, potentially saving the architects a lot of time.
5.1.4
Critique of the Quick tool
All of the LCA results produced by the Quick tool is for stages A1­A3, C3 and C4. This
was chosen to be in compliance with estimates from LCAByg and DGNB scoring. A
perspective that can challenge this is that it is better to make decisions that improve on
the level of CO2 emissions now, rather than what is best over a consideration period of 50
years. This, since it lowers emissions now and buys us time to develop technology and
improve on processes in the meantime. With this perspective, it would be more sensible
to make estimates for A1­A3 only (under the assumption that impacts from operations,
B6 will not be influenced by this). If estimates are made only for A1­A3, then wooden
constructions would almost always stand clearly as the preferred choice when assessing
LCA estimates, but this in turn can also be challenged, with the argument that the LCA
methodology itself gives wood products an unfair advantage, since it ascribes a large
negative GWP (A1­A3) for wooden products, even thought it takes many decades for new
trees, replacing the chopped trees, to grow to the same size as those that were chopped.
While the Quick tool could just get the additional user option to choose between which
life cycle stages to include in the estimates, this will not solve the dilemma that some
stakeholders argue for assessing A1­A3, while others argue for A1­A3, C3, C4 and while
many key stakeholders today that make the important decisions do not know one way
or the other, since taking environmental impacts into account is still such a new thing
in the industry. With respect to communication, adding such a user option could be very
confusing for many users, since the conclusions based on the estimates can vary a whole
lot when switching from an A1­A3/C3/C4 assessment to an A1­A3. Really, what needs to
be ensured is that key stakeholders have a general understanding of this dilemma, even
if just on a very basic level, which is probably better attained through dialogue than by
adding an option in a tool as the Quick tool alone.
5.2
Uncertainty analysis
The results show that for more than half of the analysed materials, their calculated uncer­
tainty lies between 20­50%. As argued previously, one does not need to also take into
account uncertainties of quantities when making decisions when making choices of mate­
rials, under the definitions of quantities given here. Therefore, on the face of it, uncertain­
46
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:55==
ties of 20­50% values seem like reasonable sizes to work with. However, some small set
of materials typically drive the total GWP estimate. If the uncertainties of these are higher
than 50%, this is problematic since the estimate then becomes questionable if it can be
used at all. This set of materials typically consists of concrete, structural steel, bricks, to
some degree also windows, insulation materials and other steel and metal products, since
these are typically used in large quantities and have high GWP values compared to most
other materials. For renovation projects structural steel and concrete is less used since
this most often constitutes elements of the building that does not require renovation.
For bricks an uncertainty of 34% was found, for windows uncertainties of 20%, 62% and
36% were found for wood, alu, wood/alu framed windows respectively, for regular mineral
wool an uncertainty of 30% was found, for ventilation ducts uncertainties of 23% and 40%
were found for Ø125 and 800x1000 ducts respectively. Therefore, in general, the total
uncertainty estimates given by the Quick tool will be in the range of 20­50% in most of
the cases. With an addition of 20­30%­points to these uncertainties, due to quantity un­
certainty, total uncertainties will typically be found in the range from 40­80%. This is quite
a bit higher percentages than typical cost uncertainty percentages at the same stages
of renovation projects, a learning that is quite important to convey when giving advice to
stakeholders.
A direct way for users of the tool to assess how well the uncertainty estimates given by the
Quick tool match actual uncertainties is by logging estimates of projects at the beginning
and at the end, even if other tools are used for producing the estimates in the end.
With the sparse size of data sample used for the analysis here, clearly a more comprehen­
sive collection of data would improve precision and degree of validity of the uncertainty
estimates. This could be done either by simply collecting more EPDs or alternatively ac­
cess a large EPD database such as the Building Transparency OpenEPD EC3 database
[18], which can be done by brute analytical force. Even better would be if uncertainties
were presented for each of the materials in Ökobaudat and the EPDs themselves, which
would require political pressure.
5.3
Coherence analysis
The results from the coherence analysis show that for roughly 20% of the products generic
GWP values were lower than EPD values, 40% of the products had GWP values within
the span of EPD values and 40% of the products generic values were higher than those
from EPDs. This slight tilt towards more products for which generic data GWP values
are higher than products for which it is lower is not surprising. Companies making EPDs
for their products is still in its infancy and, for commercial/marketing reasons, it is to be
expected that companies with greener products would tend to have EPDs made before
companies with less green products. This argues for generic values on average being
higher than EPD values in order to best represent actual emissions, as is the case today.
Nonetheless, for architects and other stakeholders in the early project stages, knowing
this to be the case only increases the incitement to work with EPD values rather than
generic values in the cases where the project aims at getting a certificate, DGNB or other,
simply because there is a potential to get a lower estimate just by looking at EPDs and
choosing products with lower GWP, rather than having to redesign the building in order to
obtain the sought after certificate.
With respect to data sample size, clearly a larger sample would also benefit the coherence
analysis, as is the case for the uncertainty analysis. A similar study conducted by BUILD
(2021) [19] found similar results as the study conducted here, but also some interesting
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
47
==PAGE:56==
differences between the two studies. For instance for bricks, GWP values found in EPDs
were found to be up to roughly 80% smaller or larger than the Ökobaudat value in the
BUILD study, whereas in this study the Ökobaudat value was found to be larger than
the EPD values considered altogether. This only emphasizes the importance of further
collection of data and analysis.
48
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
Today the construction industry is a major contributor to the problem of global warming
from CO2 emissions. A movement towards more renovation rather than building new is a
natural step to take in mitigating this problem. Regarding GHG emissions from buildings,
the decisions made in the early stages of construction projects have much higher impact
than decisions made later. However, existing tools and processes do not support key
stakeholders well in the early project stages of making quick LCA estimates with the limited
information available. In this project the Quick tool has been introduced as a suggested
solution to the problem, targeting architects and constructors as primary key stakeholders,
but also building owners, funds and other relevant stakeholders. 3 case examples were
introduced to demonstrate the tools validity in system tests, where results were compared
to results for the same 3 cases found by use of the established LCA tool LCAByg and
cost tool Sigma Estimates. As acceptance test, a small test group of 7 architects and
constructors from ERIK architects answered a questionnaire regarding flexibility, speed,
precision, usability and visual quality before and after having tried the tool out. Overall
it was found that the tool met the expectations of the test users, with the tool performing
best on speed and precision (in the sense that the tool estimates matches estimates from
LCAByg and Sigma Estimates).
Regarding quantity estimates, a key component of the Quick tool, it is recommended
that another study is conducted in which a more nuanced methodology is introduced,
preferably with assumptions based on data from a representative set of actual buildings.
Likewise it is recommended that another study is conducted in which a more nuanced
methodology is introduced for the sake refining cost estimates.
A method was developed to assess LCA uncertainties of materials and constructions com­
posed of these materials. Only materials and constructions defined in the Quick tool were
analysed. EPDs were found products, from which GWP (A1­A3) values were collected
along with generic data from Ökobaudat. This data was analysed to give quantitative
stochastic uncertainty estimates of materials used in the Quick tool. This report holds ta­
bles of stochastic uncertainties of more than 50 materials that were analysed, which can
be used as a lookup table or to be included in other tools.
It is recommended that a more substantive data collection and analysis is performed, both
to include building products that were not considered here, as well as to strengthen the
data basis for the analysis. It is also recommended for companies within the industry to
start logging their LCA estimates in the beginning and at the end of projects as an alterna­
tive and direct way to produce LCA uncertainty estimates for future projects. Lastly and
alternatively, it is suggested to push politically for the demand of including uncertainties
in EPDs.
A coherence analysis was performed in which EPD and generic data was collected, used
to compare GWP (A1­A3) values from EPDs to generic values from Ökobaudat. It was
found that for 40% of the products GWP (A1­A3) values of the generic data were higher
than values found in the EPDs, 40% of the time generic values were within the value
span of the EPDs and for 20% generic values were lower. From this it was argued that
generic data fairly well matches actual emissions, since companies with greener products
are more inclined to produce EPDs than companies with less green products. Even so, it
is recommended for industry stakeholders to make use of EPDs rather than generic data
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
49
==PAGE:58==
whenever possible, in particular in projects where wishing for a certificate, DGNB or other,
as this can potentially save the company from having to redesign building of projects.
As for the assessment of uncertainty estimates, it is recommended that a more substantive
EPD data collection and analysis is performed to expand and strengthen the basis for the
analysis performed here, as, again, more data can alter some of the conclusions drawn
here.
50
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
UNFCCC, 2015. The Paris Agreement. URL: https : / / unfccc . int / process - and -
meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement.
[2]
UNEP Copenhagen Climate Centre (UNEP­CCC) UNEP. UNEP, 2021. Emissions
Gap Report 2021: The Heat Is On. 2021. URL: https://www.unep.org/resources/
emissions-gap-report-2021.
[3]
Thibaut Abergel et al. IEA, 2019. 2019 Global Status Report for Buildings and Con­
struction. 2019. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/global-status-report-for-buildings-
and-construction-2019.
[4]
Høring om krav i BR18 om livscyklusvurdering af bygningers klimapåvirkning og
CO2­grænseværdi. 2022. URL: https : / / bpst . dk / da / Byggeri / Lister / Nyheder /
Nyheder/2022/04/H%C3%B8ring- om- krav- i- BR18- om- livscyklusvurdering- af-
bygningers-klimap%C3%A5virkning-og-CO2-gr%C3%A6nsev%C3%A6rdi.
[5]
DGNB ­ The DGNB in numbers. 2022. URL: https://www.dgnb.de/en/council/facts-
and-figures/index.php.
[6]
California LEED Certified State Buildings. 2021. URL: https://www.dgs.ca.gov/OS/
Resources/Page-Content/Office-of-Sustainability-Resources-List-Folder/California-
LEED-Certified-State-Buildings.
[7]
Chris Gorse and David Glew. Sustainability ­ BREEAM and LEED. 2016. URL: http:
//ckegroup.org/cexcellenceyh/wp- content/uploads/2017/01/UK- BREEAM- and-
LEED-CG-DG-SLIDES.pdf.
[8]
LCAByg. URL: https://www.lcabyg.dk/da/.
[9]
Tally. URL: https://choosetally.com/.
[10]
One Click LCA. URL: https://www.oneclicklca.com/.
[11]
Ökobaudat Database Archive. URL: https://www.oekobaudat.de/en/database/
archive.html.
[12]
John R. Taylor. An Introduction to Error Analysis, Second Edition. University Science
Books, 1997.
[13]
Vaclav Hasik et al. “Comparative whole­building life cycle assessment of renovation
and new construction”. In: Building and Environment 161 (2019).
[14]
Lamar roof tiles. URL: https://lamarhomegallery.com/roof-tiles/#.
[15]
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann et al. BUILD REPORT 2021:12 – Whole Life Carbon
Assessment of 60 Buildings. 2021. URL: https : / / build . dk / Assets / Whole - Life -
Carbon-Assessment-of-60-buildings/BUILD-Report-2021-12.pdf.
[16]
David P. Voorhees. Guide to Efficient Software Design. Springer, 2020.
[17]
EPD ­ Jotaproff Akryl 07, Jotun A/S. URL: https://www.epd- norge.no/maling/
jotaproff-akryl-07-jotun-a-s-marked-skandinavia-article1742-386.html.
[18]
OpenEPD. URL: https://www.buildingtransparency.org/openepd/.
[19]
Emilie Brisson Jørgensen et al. Tilgængelighed og betydning af EPD’er. Aalborg
University, Department of the Built Environment (BUILD, 2021. URL: https://www.
lcabyg.dk/en/download/76158.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
51
==PAGE:60==
52
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A ­ LCAByg estimates
Estimates produce by LCAByg for the three scenarios of the office case are shown in
figure 1, figure 2 and figure 3
Estimates produce by LCAByg for the two scenarios of the single family house case are
shown in figure 4 and figure 5
Estimates for the three scenarios of the apartments case are shown in figure 6 and figure
7.
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 1: Estimates for the office case, scenario 1, provided by the LCAByg
54
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:63==
Figure 2: Estimates for the office case, scenario 2, provided by the LCAByg
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 3: Estimates for the office case, scenario 3, provided by the LCAByg
56
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4: Estimates for the single family house case, scenario 1, provided by the LCAByg
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5: Estimates for the single family house case, scenario 2, provided by the LCAByg
58
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6: Estimates for apartments case, scenario 1, provided by the LCAByg
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 7: Estimates for apartments case, scenario 2, provided by the LCAByg
60
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:69==
Appendix B ­ Sigma cost estimates
Figure 8: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Roofing, tiles
Figure 9: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Middle layer, lattice rafters, mineral
wool and paper insulation
Figure 10: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Roofing, felt
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 11: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Middle layer, tree element, venti­
lated, flat/sloping roofs, 8m
Figure 12: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Roofing, steel, trapez plates
Figure 13: Cost estimates of the construction: Roof ­ Roofing, fibre cement
62
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:71==
Figure 14: Cost estimates of the construction: Drain ­ Downpipes
Figure 15: Cost estimates of the construction: Ventilation duct ­ Ventilation ducts Ø125,
single family houses and storey buildings, decentral
Figure 16:
Cost estimates of the construction:
Ventilation duct ­ Ventilation ducts
800x1000 and Ø500­Ø125, office, schools and institutions
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 17: Cost estimates of the construction: Ventilation system ­ Ventilation aggregate
120 m3/h, storey buildings, decentral
Figure 18: Cost estimates of the construction: Ventilation system ­ Ventilation aggregate
150 m3/h, one family house
Figure 19: Cost estimates of the construction: Ventilation system ­ Ventilation aggregate
10,000 m3/h for office
64
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:73==
Figure 20: Cost estimates of the construction: Ventilation system ­ Ventilation aggregate
20,000 m3/h for office
Figure 21: Cost estimates of the construction: Ceiling ­ Ceiling, plasterboards on wooden
battens
Figure 22: Cost estimates of the construction: Ceiling ­ Ceiling, fibre cement boards,
direct
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 23: Cost estimates of the construction: Ceiling ­ Ceiling, wood concrete, hung
Figure 24: Cost estimates of the construction: Ceiling ­ Ceiling, perforated plywood
Figure 25: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Outer wall, Clay bricks, facade
66
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:75==
Figure 26: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Middle layer, concrete, aer­
ated concrete block 100mm, mineral wool
Figure 27: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Wall side, painted, acrylic
paint, full spartling
Figure 28: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Outer wall, board cladding,
pine
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 29: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Outer wall, fibre cement
board, substructure in wood
Figure 30: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer walls ­ Outer wall, mortared, lime/ce­
ment based
Figure 31: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Floor, parquet, swim­
ming
68
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:77==
Figure 32: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Deck, concrete ele­
ment, light concrete 0.2/7.0 m
Figure 33: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Floor, tiles
Figure 34: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Floor, carpet
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 35: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Floor, linoleum
Figure 36: Cost estimates of the construction: Separation decks ­ Floor, vinyl
Figure 37: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner walls ­ Wall side, painted, acrylic
paint, full spartling
70
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:79==
Figure 38: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner walls ­ Middle layer, bricks, carrying
Figure 39: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner walls ­ Middle layer, aerated concrete,
100 mm
Figure 40: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner walls ­ Middle layer, wood, CLT
element
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 41: Cost estimates of the construction: Windows ­ 3 layers energy pane, wood
Figure 42: Cost estimates of the construction: Windows ­ 3 layers energy pane, alu
Figure 43: Cost estimates of the construction: Windows ­ 3 layers energy pane, wood/alu
72
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:81==
Figure 44: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner Doors ­ Door, inside
Figure 45: Cost estimates of the construction: Inner Doors ­ Door, inside, glass door
Figure 46: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer Doors ­ Door, front door
Figure 47: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer Doors ­ Door, Fire door T90
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 48: Cost estimates of the construction: Outer Doors ­ Door, industrial gate
Figure 49: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Floor, parquet, swimming
Figure 50: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Terrain deck, concrete, 120
mm
74
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:83==
Figure 51: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Base, insulation EPS 350
mm and singels
Figure 52: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Floor, tiles
Figure 53: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Floor, carpet
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 54: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Floor, linoleum
Figure 55: Cost estimates of the construction: Terrain deck ­ Floor, vinyl
Figure 56: Cost estimates of the construction: Pipes ­ Pressure pipes
76
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:85==
Figure 57: Cost estimates of the construction: Floor heating ­ Floor heating pipes, PEX,
100 mm distance
Figure 58: Cost estimates of the construction: Heat supply ­ Heat pump 10 kW, one family
residence
Figure 59: Cost estimates of the construction: Heat supply ­ Remote heat exchanger
<20 kW, one family residence and small construction
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 60: Cost estimates of the construction: Heat supply ­ Remote heat exchanger
20­120 kW, office, schools and institutions and storey buildings
Figure 61: Cost estimates of the construction: Heat supply ­ Remote heat exchanger
120­400 kW, office, schools and institutions and storey buildings
78
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
==PAGE:87==
LCA quick calculator for building renovation
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.env.dtu.dk
