==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Improvement of wind-resource/cost model 
for offshore wind farms
Killian Cabioch
DTU Wind Energy-M-0506 
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0506 
June 2022
Project period: 
January - June 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Jens Nørkær Sørensen
Gunner Chr. Larsen
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above 
education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Killian Cabioch
Title:
Improvement of wind-resource/cost model 
for offshore wind farms
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would very much like to thank my two supervisors, Jens Nørkær Sørensen and Gunner
Christian Larsen, for being readily available and providing useful and constructive feed­
back when I needed it. Thank you as well as for being here with new and original ideas
when I would be stuck.
In addition, I wish to thank Anthony Cazin­Bourguignon, whose work on obtaining and
processing of wind speed data at offshore wind farm sites served as the basis to part of
my work.
I would also like to thank Lena Kitzing, Alfie Wisdom, and everyone else with whom I have
exchanged and who provided feedback on this thesis. Their help and suggestions when
confronted with CAPEX issues towards the end of this thesis were especially useful.
Finally, I would like to thank the uncountable writers, authors and contributors of all the
papers cited and used in this thesis. Regardless of if the documents they wrote were
scientific, financial or press­related in nature, they all contributed immensely to this work.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Offshore Wind Energy is reaching the point where some recent auctions have proved its
viability at zero, or even negative subsidies. In light of these, it becomes of interest for the
public and policy­makers to have access to tools enabling them to estimate, with a limited
number of simple input parameters, the expected production and cost of past and future
farms.
With this in mind, this master thesis will work on improving the work of its supervisors, who
published in 2021 a similar model. With the goals of using more and better sources, de­
tailing the values that were not in the 2021­model, and extending validation to more farms,
this work will seek to both improve and extend the original model whenever possible.
Results seem good, despite some inevitable variation, for the production predictions.
OPEX is similarly improved, despite the limited sources and doubts on the accuracy of
the values used. Finally, farm CAPEX validation has revealed an unexpected result: that
capital costs seem to have evolved independently with time, due to a non­identified factor
external to the usual farm cost factors.
iv
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
WACC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.4
The ”CAPEX discrepency” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.5
Scope and outline for refined Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2
Methods
17
2.1
Special Purpose Vehicules (SPVs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2
Julia/Gurobi optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3
Weibull parameters and map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4
Grid connection cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5
Financing and other costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.6
LCOE, discount rate and cost of capital
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3
Data & Data treatment
25
3.1
SPVs data treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Weibull parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4
Grid connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.5
CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.6
Final validation sample (non­grid connection) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.7
O&M model building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.8
Finding the cause of the ”CAPEX discrepency” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4
Results & Validation
41
4.1
Original model behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
New model behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.3
Discussion on the CAPEX discrepancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Conclusion and future work
49
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
55
A.1 O&M evolution over time: other examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 CAPEX comparison between sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.3 Weibull parameter map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.4 OFTO farms list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
v
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Reported wind turbine transaction prices over time, according to [10] . . . .
4
1.2
Early model version result (excluding grid connection) . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.1
Barrow’s SPV 2020 accounts extract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2
Lincs offshore wind farm location and export cable route [43]
. . . . . . . . 20
3.1
Nominal yearly costs of the Barrow farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Evolution of the capacity factor of the Barrow farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Offshore O&M validation data from [48]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Territorial waters of the UK, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind farms
studied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
Value of OFTO assets as a function of farm capacity, with trendline . . . . . 31
3.6
Normalized value of OFTO assets as a function of export cable route length 32
3.7
Model behaviour as a function of export cable length, for two capacity levels 32
3.8
Model error for each of the wind farms accounted.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.9
Farm yearly costs as a function of its size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.10 Farm O&M as a function of its real life CAPEX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.11 Farm O&M as a function of commissioning year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.12 Farm CAPEX as a function of its sale price per MWh . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.13 Farm CAPEX as a function of its commissioning year
. . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.14 CAPEX correction function: factor as a function of year
. . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.1
Real and modeled (simple) farm capacity factor as a function of density . . 41
4.2
CAPEX (without grid connection) comparison between model and reality . . 42
4.3
OPEX comparison between model and reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Cf comparison between model and reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5
Comparison of real and modelled capacity factor for the sample of farms . . 43
4.6
Model efficiency for Cf prediction as a function of farm commissioning year
44
4.7
Model efficiency for Cf prediction as a function of number of turbines per
farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.8
OPEX comparison between model and real life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.9
CAPEX comparison between model and real life, including ”year correction” 46
A.1 Nominal yearly costs of the Thanet OWF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Evolution of the capacity factor of the Thanet OWF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.3 Nominal yearly costs of the Horns Rev I OWF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.4 Evolution of the capacity factor of the Horns rev I OWF . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.5 Comparison of reference, real­world CAPEX between [53] and this work.
. 57
A.6 Territorial waters of the UK, with weibull parameter k and wind farms studied 58
A.7 Territorial waters of Denmark, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind
farms studied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.8 Territorial waters of Denmark, with weibull parameter k and wind farms studied 59
A.9 Territorial waters of Germany, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind
farms studied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.10 Territorial waters of Germany, with weibull parameter k and wind farms studied 60
vi
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
1.1
Summary of different cost sources for wind turbine prices . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
O&M literature review ­ European values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
O&M literature review ­ International values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Danish Tech Catalogue ­ Real O&M data for comparison . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Simple comparison between the Burbo Bank Extension and Horns Rev 3
wind farms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1
List of offshore wind farms used for validation, with origin and size . . . . . 35
A.1 List of British farms with OFTOs used in this work and their characteristics . 61
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
vii
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Cf
Farm Capacity factor (in % of maximum theoretical production)
CAPEX
CAPital EXpenditures (costs paid before or at project start)
LCOE
Levelized Cost Of Energy
O&M
Operations & Maintenance
OPEX
OPerational EXpenditures (costs paid during project life)
WACC
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (cost of money; weighted average of
interest rate and equity return rate)
viii
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Recently, policy makers from the countries bordering the North Sea have met in Denmark
to discuss plans for the future of offshore wind in Europe. Mentioning the recent drastic
decrease in auction prices, they have agreed on plans for development of 65 GW by 2030,
and 150 GW by 2050. [1]
To better understand the factors at play in the production and costs of an offshore wind­
farm, a number of models have been built, with a variety of origins and goals in minds.
One such model is [2] from this study’s supervisors, which is presented in some detail
below.
The goal of this master thesis will be to work on this basic model, in such a manner as to
improve, detail or fix it when needed, as well as to add new features.
This thesis will be divided into four main sections. Section 1 (Introduction), will contain
a large review of relevant literature sources for a varied number of models, figures and
other items relevant to offshore wind cost and production. It will also give the scope of the
work to come, and discuss a few other topics of relevance before moving on. Section 2
(Methods) will discuss the tools used and relevant technical concepts and transformations.
Section 3 (Data & Data treatment) will go over the main data sources for this study, and
use the tools defined previously to transform and use this data. Finally, Section 4 (Results)
will go over the use of the collected data as validation.
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Other farm models
There exist in the literature a number of other papers and sources looking into offshore
wind farms with a holistic approach.
[3] works in 2017, as the name implies, on a Review of offshore wind farm cost compo­
nents, using a number of different wind farms as source.
[4] In their Guide to an offshore wind farm, BVG associates gives a full breakdown of the
different elements of an offshore windfarm and their cost.
[5] NREL’s yearly Cost of Wind Energy Review (offshore wind section) does a great job
at giving the different relevant elements of cost and production for a generic farm in the
US east coast.
[6] The Danish energy agency and Energinet’s technology data catalogue goes into some
detail on the cost and production components of offshore wind farms.
[7] The TOPFARM initiative, while mostly focused in the cited text on the optimization of
windfarm layouts, also goes into great detail into the cost and production aspects of the
farm.
[8] ECN developed a detailed tool to enable the computation of operations and mainte­
nance costs of windfarms. This tool is very detailed, and takes into consideration equip­
ment failure rates, crew transfer vessels and helicopter usage, maintenance strategies,
and a lot more. Sadly, model details were not available for this master thesis, and need
as an input a number of details that are not available publically for all farms.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
1
==PAGE:10==
Overall, none of these works have the same scope and focus as what will be done in this
thesis, hence the need to work beyond them.
1.1.2
Supervisor’s/Original model
Production
To sum it up really shortly, the original model considered windspeeds following a Weibull
curve. Two different offshore turbines categories would then be considered: an ”edge” tur­
bine, following the full external wind, and an ”interior” turbine, which would be subject to a
weaker wind due to wake losses. This ”interior” turbine would have its wind speed spectra
and production be computed based on number of different assumptions and parameters
of the farm (density, turbine rating, height...).
With the power production of these two turbines (”edge” and ”interior”) computed, the
model would then assume that 3 ·
√
N turbines would be from the edge (with N the total
number of turbines in the farm), and the rest from the interior (equivalent to two full sides
plus a few more turbines on the second row). Adding them all together would give the
total farm yield.
Wind turbine
The model used in the original publication [2] to estimate the cost of wind turbines as part
of the total costs is the following:
CWT = 1.25 · (0.15 + 0.92PG)M
(1.1)
This is based on a 2003 source, with the 1.25 factor accounting for inflation. PG stands
for the turbine power rating (in MW).
Support structure
Here, the authors give a cost model for monopile foundations (<35m) and one for jacket
foundations (>35m). These are based on water depth and turbine rating.
Array Cabling
Considering a simple, quadratic farm layout, an estimation for the length of array cables
is given, which needs to be financed at a level of 675€/m.
Grid connection
The original model only computes 75% of all capital costs. Of the remaining 25%, 6%
corresponds to the export cable, whereas 9% are attributed to the substation.
These 6% are then scaled with the distance to shore, with a baseline value of 20km: for
every doubling of the distance, prices would double, and vice versa.
Planning, development and financing
10% of all costs are set aside for those goals.
O&M
Section 2.6.4 of the original publication looked into modelling the cost of operations and
maintenance for an offshore windfarm.
The model was the following:
CO&M(PG, S, Y ) = CO&M,base(PG, S) + CO&M,L(Y )
(1.2)
With CO&M(PG, S, Y ) the cost of maintenance in €/MWh, dependant upon PG the tur­
bine rated power, S the farm ”wake loss” factor and Y the distance to shore. Details are
available below:
CO&M,base(PG, S) = fWT (PG|PG,Ref) · CWTRef · fC · fS(S)
(1.3)
with
2
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:11==
• CWTRef the reference price at 106€/kW/yr.
• fWT (PG|PG,Ref) a factor scaled with the turbine rated power, where doubling the
turbine size would yield 14% lower costs.
• fC the capacity factor for a solitary wind turbine at the site.
• fS(S) a ”wake loss” factor, with higher wake losses/turbine density leading to higher
turbulence intensity and thus higher maintenance costs.
On the other side,
CO&M,L(Y ) = ∆CO&M
∆Y
(Y −YRef)
(1.4)
with
• Y the distance to shore (in km) and YRef a reference distance of 20km.
•
∆CO&M
∆Y
the factor for cost changes with distance (based on the agreed prices for the
Danish wind farms Horns rev I and II).
LCOE
LCOE is simply computed as the sum of all costs over the life of the farm, divided by the
total production of the farm.
1.1.3
Issues and improvements points
Wind turbine
All costs models used in the following section will be based on cost/turbine rating, as most
sources are in agreement that turbine prices have mostly scaled linearly with rating (with
the rating increase compensated by increased weight and size ). While the results are, as
will be seen later, not that far from reality, the issue here is that the source for this model[9]
dates from 2003. Moreover, it bases itself on even older data, while its main focus is not
on wind farm economics but, as its title states, on ”Performance comparison of wind park
configurations”.
Expectedly, the publication’s authors take into account inflation, from 2003 to 2015. How­
ever, after looking at other sources, it appears very clearly that wind turbine costs did not
follow inflation the slightest. This is perhaps best exemplified in this report [10] by the US
office of energy efficiency & renewable energy.
In this, they go over the evolution of wind turbine prices from 1997 to 2019 (note: this is
for all types of turbine; not only offshore):
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Reported wind turbine transaction prices over time, according to [10]
The publication shows that there was a general increase of prices between 2000 and 2008
(far higher than inflation), driven notably (but not only) by increasing material costs, before
seeing a fast decrease over time, driven by the large economies of scale now present in
the wind sector. Offshore only turbines have followed a similar pattern, but have yet to
see full economies of scale apply yet, owing notably to the still increasing size of wind
turbines.
Indeed, another issue of using a 2003 source was that offshore wind turbines at the time
were much smaller, with the Middlegruppen wind farm, using 2MW turbines, while modern
projects have begun using 12MW turbines, a six fold increase.
O&M
There were multiple noted issues with this modelling, both by the original work’s authors
and by this thesis’ author.
The most important of these, however, by far, was the lack of validation of the model
based on any existing data. As it stands, The model was not tested with data from the
O&M costs of existing windfarms, because it was seemingly impossible to find. The au­
thors thus had to rely on a base, average cost combined with agreed prices and unrelated
declarations in order to build their model. This makes the model effectively impossible to
verify, despite the fact that the cost factors raised in it are relevant to the case, according
to literature.
There are also a number of other issues that can be raised:
Limited sources
Everyone of these cost factors are based on a single source:
• Scaling with distance is only based on agreed prices at Horns rev I&II.
• Scaling with wind turbine rated power is only based on one source.
• Scaling with wake losses/turbulence intensity does not have a source.
4
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:13==
• A single source is given for the base price (though this one is not too difficult to find
in literature).
Grid connection
The most important issue here was that this cost was only a percentage of CAPEX scaled
with distance to shore, with no validation. It was one of the main contention points men­
tioned at the start of this thesis.
CAPEX detail
The original model bases its validation of CAPEX on the press released costs of sev­
eral Danish farms. However, it seems that these values do not include the cost of grid
connection, paid for separately by Danish TSO Energinet.
For example, in Horns rev 3’s case, articles like [11] seem to suggest that the 1b€ cost
used in the original publication does not include an additional 150m€ of grid connection,
paid for by Energinet.
1.2
Literature review
1.2.1
Wind turbine: cost breakdown
One of the main sources of this thesis, [3] has a very interesting remark, surrounding wind
turbine costs:
The overall turbine cost consists of: acquisition cost (AC = 85%); shipping and assembling
(SA = 5%); and electrical installation (EI = 10%).
With this, and the remark in the previous section, three main considerations need to be
kept in mind when looking into subsequent wind turbine cost models.
• That real costs for wind turbines have actually been decreasing, and faster than
inflation, since 2010.
• That the stated costs may or may not include shipping, assembly & electrical instal­
lation, which might lead to the prices needing to be edited a bit.
• As will be seen in the next parts, offshore wind turbines are more expensive than
onshore wind turbines, for a number of reasons: stronger load requirements, need
for anti­corrosion protections, lower sales volumes and no settled size yet.
1.2.2
Wind turbine: cost review
This next section will go over the main sources used in determining the price of wind
turbines in this model:
Manufacturer quarterly results releases
The two main western manufacturers of wind
turbines, by a large margin, are Vestas and Siemens Gamesa. Both of them release
quarterly results reports, that can be looked into for average selling prices of wind turbines.
Siemens Gamesa gives 2018 onshore prices fluctuating around 0.70 and 0.75 m€/MW
[12], while Vestas, around the same period, fluctuates between 0.70 and 0.80 m€/MW for
the average of both turbine types. [13]
However, these numbers are most likely hiding the full picture. During the past few years,
Vestas has barely sold 10% of offshore wind capacity, according to their own reports (and
thus, any average will be completely biased towards onshore). As for Siemens Gamesa
(whose turbines equip the majority of european offshore wind farms to this day), a look at
their 2020 Q4 activity report [14] shows a split between offshore and onshore: while the
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
5
==PAGE:14==
revenue, from onshore Wind turbines, per MW, mostly matches their press release val­
ues, the value computed for offshore wind turbines from full year 2020 and 2021 revenue
and volumes gives results of 1240k€/MW and 1211k€/MW, nearly two times higher than
onshore wind.
Consulting companies, research publications and government estimates
The first
source here is the consulting company BVG associates, publically releasing estimates in
2017 giving offshore wind turbine cost prices of about 1040k€/MW in 2020. [15]
NREL, in their 2020 annual cost of wind energy review, gives a price of 1301k$/MW for
offshore wind turbines in an east coast wind farm [5] (note: this is opposed to 991$/MW
for onshore wind on the same paper, or a difference of 30%).
The US department of energy, in their 2021 offshore wind report [16] uses two main
sources: one is Siemens Gamesa financial statements, at about 1400k$/MW in 2020
(similar to the numbers quoted previously), and Bloomberg’s NEF (BNEF), with a number
of 1000$/MW, standing has somewhat of an outlier among the other numbers.
Finally, there is Gonzalez and al’s 2017 Review of offshore wind farm cost components
[3].
It gives a non­linear cost estimate, of (in M€ of 2017)
Cost = 1374 · Cap[MW]0.87
(1.5)
With the cost and capacity being that of the entire wind farm: the model considers economies
of scale.
However, several issues can be noted with this publication. First, it uses sources from
years as varied as 2015, 2010, 2009, 2007 and 2003 and only scales them with inflation,
which is a problem. In addition, as the earliest value used in the work is from 2015 (itself
based on older sources), it is somewhat outdated by 2020 standards.
In their article titled ”A life cycle cost model for floating offshore wind farms” in 2020,
Maienza and al give a slightly different model for turbines between 2 and 10MW (in M€):
[17]
Cost = 1.6 · PG[MW] −1.9
(1.6)
This model has the advantage of being recent, but it is specifically stated to only work up
to 10MW (which offshore wind farms have begun moving past).
Cost Model
Year of publication
Cost Model [M€/WT]
Currently used
2003 (adjusted for 2017€)
1.15PG −0.19
Gonzalo & Rodriguez
2017
1.347Cap0.87/PG
BVG associates
2017
1.04PG
NREL
2019
1.152PG
Siemens Gamesa
2020
1.23PG
BNEF
2020
0.88PG
Maienza
2020
1.6PG −1.9
Table 1.1: Summary of different cost sources for wind turbine prices
6
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:15==
Decision, conclusion and model
From table 1.1, a good overview of potential cost
models can be extracted. At first glance, a few outliers appear. The current model, with
the ridiculously small ­0.19 factor (especially small when 10MW turbines are taken into
consideration), has already been discarded previously. Maienza and al’s ­1.9 factor also
appears weird, given that it would be all but neglectable, given 8MW+ turbines, as are
installed nowadays.
With all but one of the remaining models linear, and no way to verify it, Gonzalo and
Rodriguez’s one will also be put aside.
Finally, the BNEF’s extremely low price appears as an outlier, in comparison to all other
costs models, including the discarded ones.
This leaves three sources:
• BVG associates, which specifically counts shipping, assembly and installation sep­
arately. The final factor here will be increased by a factor
1
0.85 to 1.22
• The same can be said for NREL’s cost estimate. As such, the final factor is 1.27. It
can be noted that this price is evaluated for american offshore wind turbines, which
do not have the same levels of industrial scale production as european manufactur­
ers.
• Finally, Siemens Gamesa’s estimate. It was obtained based on the revenue made
selling offshore wind turbines, meaning it most likely includes shipping and some
other related costs, but probably excludes VAT. As such, the factor will stay un­
changed, at 1.23
Averaging all three previous values, the final cost estimate, from reviewing the literature,
for offshore wind turbines will be:
CT = 1.24 · PG
(1.7)
which is about a 10% increase from what is currently used in the model.
Limitations and details
This model does not take into account the height of the tur­
bines, which play a role in determining the price of wind turbines; However, more detailed
models like [18] include an estimation of the price of all turbine elements, including height.
It suggests that, for a given turbine type (here, 8MW, 164m diameter), changing tower
height from 100m to 90m reduces the cost by a factor of 2%.
Considering that most offshore turbines of the same rating will have similar sizes, not
including heights seems like an acceptable simplification.
Another point of note in this model is that costs per MW remain mostly stable for all models,
despite the extreme differences in total costs, once more reinforcing this choice of cost
metric.
1.2.3
Substructure cost
The original model already contains a detailed weight­cost based substructure model for
wind farms, backed by a number of sources and examples, and as such will be kept the
same.
For a more detailed breakdown of the different elements coming into play for a foundations
and substructure, BVG’s guide to an offshore wind farm [4] offers detailed information.
They split the cost between the monopile/jacket itself, the transition piece, the corrosion
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
7
==PAGE:16==
and scour protection, and finally the installation. While detailed, however, it only works
for a set water depth of 30m.
1.2.4
Financing, commissioning, contingency and others
Farm building is not all turbine building and tower erection. A large part of the costs will
need to be spent on side assets:
• Farm development (surveys, studies...).
• Leasing the land (when necessary).
• Decommissioning. Farms will need to set aside money, often at the start of the
project (due to local legislation) in order to be able to afford the non­neglectable
cost of turbine removal.
• Contingency. Money in reserve to avoid the project going bankrupt in case of cost
overruns or unexpected large­scale failures.
• A few other smaller points: management, insurance, etc...
These will, when added up together, represent a sizeable part of the overall costs. Here
is a quick review of values found in the literature:
• NREL 2020 cost of wind energy review [5] has them all add up to a total of 0.818M€/MW.
• The Danish technology catalogue [6] (which is the source of the original paper’s es­
timate) gives 10% of the total CAPEX for part of those costs (planning, development
and financing).
• Gonzalez­Rodriguez’s Review of offshore wind farm cost components [3] estimates
at 0.214€/MW the cost of development and decommissioning on CAPEX (split in
about half for each).
• The IEA’s Wind Task 26 ([19] and [20]) set aside very similar amounts for all coun­
tries: 119k€/MW for development, about 300k€/MW for contingency, and about
200k€/MW for insurance and management
• Milne and al’s publication [21] on cost­modeling for decommissioning of offshore
wind farms concludes on an estimate range between 175k£/MW and 480k£/MW,
with each offshore wind farm’s conditions affecting the overall costs.
• Lastly, BVG’s guide to an offshore wind farm [4] also offers a detailed cost break­
down, including development, decommissioning, contingency, management and in­
surance, adding up to a total of 761k€/MW.
1.2.5
Grid Connection
Models review
Danish Technology Data for Energy plants
[6] Published jointly by the Danish energy
agency and Energinet (Danish TSO), this 400p review covers cost data for all types of
energy production technologies, including offshore wind. Two costs models are given,
but one works only for windfarms so close to shore that it will be disregarded here, seeing
recent trends in offshore wind development.
The relevant offshore model is as follows:
• A base cost of 0.254M€/MW for the different substations and other non­distance
related costs
• 2685€/MW/km for the export cable
8
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:17==
• 1342€/MW/km for onshore cables
Using a reference distance for the export cable of 55km (to serve as a comparison base
for use later), and of 50km for the onshore cable, the reference cost estimate of this model
will be 0.469M€/MW
As will be noted later, this value is much lower than that of the other models, which has
an easy explanation: picking grid connection costs of Danish windfarm whose data is
publically available (such as [22] ), and comparing them to similar British windfarms, will
show that Danish grid connections are much cheaper, all parameters equal, than British
ones, with the models designed for British farms yielding costs between 30 and 40%
higher than reality.
In addition, the cost breakdown provided by this document includes an ”assembly and
installation” section, though it is impossible to say whether or not it includes the assembly
and installation of the grid connection part, or not; in all likelihood, they are probably not
included
NREL 2019
In their 2019 ”Cost of wind energy” review [5] , NREL gives a reference
price for grid connections at 0.594M€/MW, for a windfarm 50km from shore. While they
state that these ”does not include installation costs for the electrical system, as they are
included in the assembly and installation costs.”, readers have access to a more detailed
breakdown of the assembly and installation costs, which does not seem to account for
those.
NREL 2015
In their 2015 ”Cost of wind energy” review [23] , NREL gives a different cost
for grid connection, as well as a detailed breakdown of the costs, with the following:
• 0.013M€/MW ”base” cost for substations and the like (which seems extremely low,
but parts of these costs are probably included in the parts below).
• if the length of the export cable is below 70km, 7364€/MW/km of HVAC cables
• in the other cases, 12264 €/MW/km of HVDC cables.
• 2215€/MW/km of onshore cabling
Using, again, 55km from shore and 50km onshore cables (for comparison with other data),
the final cost ends up on 0.528M€/MW. This would, however, increase drastically with
distance. Installation costs appear to be counted separately as well.
BVG associates
In their ”Guide to an Offshore windfarm” from 2019, BVG associates
lists a detailed breakdown of all costs affecting an offshore windfarm at 60km from shore,
of 1GW. The final sum for all elements linked to grid connections is at 0.650M€/MW,
though this includes array cables as well as assembly and installation.
Other factors
Country of origin
As has been shown previously, the cost of grid connection will highly
depend, all other parameters equal, on the country in which it is being built. This is caused
by a number of factors, the most notable of which is legislation. Coordination between
the farm builder and the connection builder seems to be a key factor at play, as well as
competition. [24] [25].
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
9
==PAGE:18==
Connection layout and setup
The distance to shore does not always match with the
length of the export cable. But other parameters can change for a windfarm and drastically
influence costs of grid connection:
• The length of the onshore cable and the size of the grid reinforcements will highly
depend on the location of the farm as well as its size, but they are very hard to
predict through a simple model.
• Farms can be subdivided into multiple sections, each with their own substation and
export cable, dividing the power between themselves.
• Even for a given route, different cable types can be chosen.
• As is notably the case for offshore wind farms on the American east coast, integra­
tion of different farms into a supergrid is a possibility. Already, the Kriegers Flak
export system serves as interconnection between Germany and Denmark [26].
1.2.6
O&M
A cursory review of the available literature has shown two major ”families” of publications
giving O&M costs estimates.
On the one hand, there are ”detailed, breakdown” cost models. These models usually
focus more on studying the impact of a more pro­active maintenance instead of reactive
maintenance, or looking at wear & tear models for turbine components to try and obtain the
maintenance cost of a given turbine.[8] These are extremely detailed, taking into account
nearly all parameters of relevance, but have the problem of being too detailed for this
work and scracely available..
On the other hand, finding reference/base prices is in general fairly easy, and available
in a number of ”generic model” sources (usually in €/MWh or €/kW/yr). Their problem is
that these sources rarely go into detail on how this price would evolve based on outside
factors (such a distance to shore). Still, they offer an relevant starting and reference point
for this work.
Cost review
Here is an overview of the results found from various sources in the litera­
ture. Do note that they were all converted to €, and the results in €/MWh were moved to
the more numerous €/kW/yr.
Since costs can vary drastically between regions, data will be split into two tables; for
European countries (mostly in the North Sea), and the rest of the world (USA, Japan,
China, India, etc).
10
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:19==
Source
Cost €/kW/yr
Notes
Wood­Mackenzie ­ 2021 [16]
56
Uncertain origin
World Energy Outlook 2020 [27]
59
European average
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
69
Netherlands
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
69
UK
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
64
Belgium
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
60
Denmark
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
67
Germany
Danish technology catalogue ­ 2020 [6]
53
Based on Ørsted interviews
BVG Associates ­ Guide to an OWF ­ 2019 [4]
86
UK
IRENA ­ Renewable generation costs ­ 2020 [28]
64
China and EU
Table 1.2: O&M literature review ­ European values
Source
Cost €/kW/yr
Notes
Lazard ­ 2021 [29]
64
Global average
Wiser et al ­ 2021 [30]
79
International experts
World Energy Outlook 2020 [27]
113
USA
World Energy Outlook 2020 [27]
66
China
World Energy Outlook 2020 [27]
62
India
IEA wind task 26 ­ 2018 [20]
61
USA
NREL cost of wind energy­ 2020 [5]
98
USA East Coast
IRENA innovation outlook OWF ­ 2016 [31]
84
2020 value ­ global
IRENA ­ Renewable costs ­ 2020 [28]
113
NOT China and EU
Table 1.3: O&M literature review ­ International values
As can be seen on these tables, estimates can vary from simple (Danish tech catalogue,
Wood­Mackenzie), to double (IRENA ­ Renewable costs outside of China/EU, NREL).
This is further worsened by the large number of parameters that can vary between the
sources, like the scope of the O&M estimate, the country of choice, the average capacity
factor and distance to port, the weather in the area, the existing experience and infras­
tructure, etc.
Some comparison
The Danish technology catalogue [6] (updated in 2021) gives some
information, in 2015€, about farms with tenders submitted in 2015­2016, obtained from
the bid winners (Ørsted/Shell/Vatenfall). They also give a +­2€/kW/yr margin of error.
Farm
Cost €/kW/yr
Commissioning year
Horns rev 3 (DK)
77
2020
Borssele 1+2 (NE)
71
2020
Krigers flak (DK)
62
2021
Borssele 3+4 (NE)
59
2023
Table 1.4: Danish Tech Catalogue ­ Real O&M data for comparison
These seem mostly on the upper range of the estimates seen for europe previously. But
four farms are not sufficient to build a big enough model.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
11
==PAGE:20==
Finding real­life O&M data
In order to gather real, yearly costs for offshore windfarms, a different approach might
need to be taken. Thankfully, in a 2019 publication [32], the authors use a unique method
to determine the LCOE of British wind farms; this method, based on publically available
company accounts for wind farm SPVs, can be used (with limits) to estimate wind farm
O&M of nearly all existing windfarms.
1.2.7
Production losses
With the new model yielding slightly higher production than the original one (due to differ­
ent sources for farm area and Weibull parameters), a literature review was done for loss
factors, not included in the original model. Those are, namely:
• Availability losses (for any reason, but notably component breakdowns, wear and
tear).
• Electrical losses (in the generator and array cables, but not including the export
cable and grid losses).
• Other losses (loss of turbine effectiveness).
Do note here that wake losses are, by definition of the production model, already included.
The most detailed sources on the topic are [19] and its country­by­country version [20].
While the numbers vary somewhat between countries (due to the differing conditions),
they consider availability at around 94 to 95%, electrical losses at 2%, and other losses
at 1%.
Less detailed are [6], [4] and [33], which only focus on the turbine availability number; with
given numbers respectively at 97, 95 to 98 and 93%.
SPARTA [34] is an organization that gathers a number of British offshore windfarms and
analyses their performance. Their portfolio, which included 4.5GW of offshore wind power
in 2018/2019, had an overall availability (energy­based) of 95.16%.
With all of this considered, an average value of 8% corresponding to non­wake losses has
been chosen for the new model. This could be further detailed, for example by looking
into the availability of the farm as a function of wind conditions or distance to shore, and
the electrical losses as a function of farm area, but this is beyond the scope of this work.
1.3
WACC
WACC stands for the weighted average cost of capital, useful in this thesis for computing
LCOEs.
The WACC can be pre or post­tax (with interest being tax­deductible), real or nominal.
This work, as will be explained later, follows a socio­economic point of view (instead of
a private one), and as such will have a pre­tax real point of view, meaning all values are
converted in the money of the year 2020, and tax is not accounted for. In that case, the
formula for WACC is
WACCreal,pre−tax = E% · ie + D% · id
(1.8)
with
• E% and D% the equity and debt share of the financing (usually somewhere from
20­80 to 35­65).
12
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:21==
• ie and id the real equity return rate and debt interest rate (with the debt rate usually
a lot lower than the equity rate).
Of course, financing structure and conditions will vary a lot from project to project and
country to country. As a simple rule, investors will require higher return rates from more
risky projects; but with offshore wind growing in scale by the year, WACC for these projects
has decreased noticeably in all major European countries for offshore wind.[35]
With this in mind, any WACC estimate will need to be very careful of its year of choice ­
as even five year old sources might lead to large changes in the end LCOE.
As for the literature, NREL’s 2020 cost of wind energy review [5] gives a real, after­tax
WACC of 2.72% for offshore wind projects, thanks to very low interest rates and high debt
to equity ratio.
The IEA’s Wind Task 26 [19] [20] gives a much higher estimate: an average (for the studied
countries) of 8% nominal pre­tax WACC, and 7.1% post tax, which assuming a future 2%
inflation rate would yield 5.9% and 5% respectively.
BVG’s guide to an offshore wind farm [4] yields a 6% WACC, in real terms and excluding
all tax calculations.
When soliciting experts on the topic [30], the average estimate for today’s WACC in nom­
inal terms is 5.77%, or 3.7% in real terms.
Finally, ORE Catapult [36] gives for 2020 an estimate of 4.2% WACC in real terms for
fixed bottom wind farms.
As one can see, estimates tend to vary a lot, even from ”generic” sources; and one can
expect that looking at specific project will yield even more uncertain results.
As such, for this work, a middle­estimate WACC of 5% will be selected.
1.4
The ”CAPEX discrepency”
While working on the results of an early model, it appeared clear that a predicting factor
for the CAPEX was missing. Some farms, with similar parameters, and for which the
model gave similar CAPEX predictions, actually ended up with costs going from simple
to double. The most striking plot for this is visible below:
As one can notice, the modelled cost range was fairly limited, with most costs ending up
in the 2.2 ­ 3 m€/MW range. However, their observed values in reality are often much,
much higher (and often not).
In order to better understand the issue, an example will be outlined:
1.4.1
Burbo Extension vs Horns rev 3
These are two farms with similar properties, for which the model yields similar results, yet
whose cost drastically differs:
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.2: Early model version result (excluding grid connection)
Farm
Burbo Extension
Horns rev 3
Developer
Ørsted
Vatenfall
Commissioning year
2017
2019
Size [MW]
258
406,7
Location
Liverpool Bay, Irish Sea
Danish North Sea
Water depth [m]
6­13
11­19
Distance to shore [km]
7
36
Turbine type
V164­8,0MW
Farm density [MW/km²]
6,51
3,5
Cf
41%
48%
CAPEX [2020M€/MW]
5,63
2,52
Selling price [€/MWh] in 2022
216
103,44
Length of fixed price [years]
15
10
Table 1.5: Simple comparison between the Burbo Bank Extension and Horns Rev 3 wind
farms
A few details can be described as well:
• Both locations have existing infrastructure due to nearby farms (Notably the original
burbo bank farm and the other two Horns rev farms).
• Both developers are experienced in offshore wind.
• Towers for the turbines in Burbo extension are actually 20m higher than those in
Horns rev, inducing some (limited) additional costs.
As one can see here, both farms have exceptional conditions, with low water depths and
limited distances to shore; both are built by experienced developers, have similar sizes,
and use the same turbine types. And yet despite all the similarities, one was drastically
more expensive than the other, for no visible reason; and it makes sense that a model
14
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:23==
built using simple, physical parameters would struggle to explain such a gap in costs.
One explanation could be the different country, but there have been other British farms
with similar properties and low costs (like the Dudgeon farm, built in 2018).
It is not a single outlier either, as a wide range of costs are covered by a wide range of
farms.
1.5
Scope and outline for refined Model
Many different objectives can be set for building a combined cost/production model for
offshore wind farms; and while this work will try to go in depth in its set objectives, a
number of limits will be set, in order to keep this work’s scope under control, and ensure
this work’s goals are met:
The goal of the model will be the following
Let’s say a farm was built in x spot, with
y wind conditions, using z turbines. How much would it produce, and how much would it
cost?
The model will need to be as ”generic” as possible
By this, it is meant that the model
should, as much as possible, work for all brands, under all conditions. This work should
be able to produce results for, say, the cost of a Vattenfall windfarm using Vestas V174­9.5
MW turbines in the Batlic sea at 5m water depth, an Ørsted windfarm using SG 6.6­170
MW turbines at 40m depth in the Irish sea, and anything else.
If there is an unavoidable difference between companies and/or countries, it should be
noted and accounted for.
The model will need to be as validated as possible
With a large number of offshore
wind farms already built as of 2022, a wealth of data is available to infirm or confirm
models, or even better, to build models with. This should be used.
The model will be based on sources and litterature as recent as possible
Over
twenty year, the offshore wind industry has gone from ten 2MW turbines a few kilometers
off the coast of Copenhaguen, in very shallow waters, to building 100 x 10MW farms
100km away from shore at 40m water depths. Similar trends can be seen in the scale of
the industry, in the evolution of support schemes, etc.
As for the more ”technical” aspects of this thesis
The currency used will be the
euro (€). Conversion rates to dollar, British pound and Danish kroner will be 0.88, 1.15
and 1/7.5 respectively. This is not particularly accurate for the first two, whose rate have
fluctuated a lot over time. Costs will be normalized to 2020. While this document is
written in 2022, most sources will come from earlier, and normalizing to 2020 will avoid
the COVID­affected years and inflation.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:25==
2
Methods
2.1
Special Purpose Vehicules (SPVs)
2.1.1
Description and sources
A SPV is basically, for all intents and purposes, a ”sub­company” (in reality a separate
legal entity), which contains all financial and auditing data for a single project of its parent
company/ies, set up for legal purposes.
For offshore wind farms, nearly all of them are insulated from their parent company/ies
under SPVs. The easiest example that can be given is the Danish farm Horns Rev III,
which is registered under the SPV ”Vattenfall Vindkraft Horns Rev 3 P/S”, owned at 100%
by its mother company Vattenfall.
One can note at this point that some SPVs are owned directly by their propetary com­
panies (in the example above, Vattenfall), while others are only indirectly owned, going
through holdings, whose sole purpose is owning the wind farm SPV. Example for this
could be ”ORSTED WALNEY EXTENSION HOLDINGS LIMITED”, as a holding for Ørsted
owning the Walney extension SPV.
The main idea behind SPVs is to insulate the risk related to the windfarm from its share­
holders: in case of failure/bankruptcy of a wind farm project, the rest of the company is
(mostly) safe.
However, as fully­fledged companies, their audits need to be made publically available
online, usually on government websites of their respectives countries. These are:
• in the UK, the company register [37].
• in Denmark, the CVR website [38].
• in Germany, the bundesanzeiger (federal gazette) [39].
Audits for Dutch windfarms seem to also be available online, but behind paywalls; other
countries were not investigated.
All that needs to be done afterwards is hitting the name of the offshore wind farm the
reader wants to find on the database, and one will usually get the desired results; though
it is sometime difficult when windfarms have really common names in their language.
In all three cases, and though the wording and laws fluctuate a bit from case to case (as
this thesis will come to later), yearly accounts for offshore wind farms can be found. This
will contain (but not be limited to) expenses, revenues, taxation, depreciation, asset value,
etc.
Below, the reader will find an example of such accounts; with a capture taken from the
2020 accounts of the British Barrow farm (whose SPV is BARROW OFFSHORE WIND
LIMITED, company number 04145993):
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.1: Barrow’s SPV 2020 accounts extract
From this, as stated before, one can usually extract the revenue, farm valuation, yearly
expenses, ownership, and a wealth of other information from the farms.
2.1.2
Limitations of SPVs
Despite the numerous advantages of estimating incomes and expenses of windfarms
based on SPVs, one needs to be careful. As these are financial reports that do not go
into detailed breakdown of their possessions, there is no telling if some costs are excluded
that should not have been, or included that should have been excluded.
For example, some assets from the parent company might have been loaned by the SPV
during development, and then given back. Some capital costs might have been consid­
ered as expenses over a few years, or the opposite. Expenses unrelated to the windfarm
maintenance itself might have been added (like the transmission fees in the UK) without
notice.
However, for the sake of simplicity, this work will consider that the developers are trust­
worthy in their financial statements. It will also consider that the stated amounts match
reality; which is to say, the stated yearly expenses of the farm actually match O&M ex­
penses, and that fixed assets match the full CAPEX value of the farm. Whenever possible,
the values obtained from SPVs will be compared to outside sources to ensure that they
are as close to reality as possible.
2.2
Julia/Gurobi optimization
Having access and needing to deal with a wealth of data, this master thesis will make
use of an optimisation software; this will be the JULIA language [40] using an academic
18
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:27==
license of the Gurobi optimisation/solver suite [41].
Optimisation will follow a classic linear programming ­ minimum finding formula, with the
following elements:
• An ”objective function” (usually the error between the modelled costs and the real
costs), that the program will need to minimize.
• A number of variables, that the program will need to optimize in order to meet the
objective.
• A number of constraints; with the most important one in this case defining the ”mod­
elled cost” as a function of the variables and a number of fixed, external parameters.
As this will be limited by the constraints of linear optimisation, the functions defining the
”modelled costs” will need to be linear in regards to their variables. For a number of
parameters A, B, C, D... (for example, water depth, turbine rating...) three simple options
are available to describe the ”modelled cost”, using variables w,x,y,z...: the ”linear” option:
Cost = w + x.A + y.B + z.A.B[...]
(2.1)
the ”polynomial” option:
Cost = w + x.A + y.A2 + z.A3[...]
(2.2)
and finally, the ”logarithmic” option
Cost = w.Ax.By.Cz[...]
(2.3)
which, while not linear, can be converted to a linear equation using a simple log transfor­
mation:
log(Cost) = log(w) + x.log(A) + y.log(B) + z.log(C)[...]
(2.4)
Other variants also exists, but will not be used here.
2.3
Weibull parameters and map
In order to be able to compute the electrical production for offshore wind farms on a larger
scale than that which was done in the original publication, a lot of data will need to be
collected from different sources; information that will then need to be processed in order
to obtain the desired results.
In this case, the end goal for this part is to obtain of the Weibull parameters at 100m height
(here named k and λ) for a list of offshore windfarms in Denmark, Germany and the UK.
Once these parameters are obtained, their processing will be (nearly) exactly the same
as what was done in the original publication, with the multiplication by a 92% ”loss” factor
as the only change.
Most of this will be based on a previous internship at DTU [42].
2.4
Grid connection cost
2.4.1
Main considerations and concerns
Grid connection costs is actually one large umbrella term. Here it what it does not include:
• Array cabling (this is already covered in the model, and usually separated).
And here is what it does include:
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
19
==PAGE:28==
• The (single or plural) offshore substation: some farms are divided into 2/3 parts
(especially the bigger ones), each with their own substation.
• The export cable(s). Again, due to the use of multiple substations, the need for
redudancies and/or the prefered choice to use many smaller cables in parallel than
a big one.
• The onshore cable(s) from landing point to onshore substation.
• The onshore substation (usually singular).
• Grid reinforcements needed after the onshore substation.
Legislation on these topics tends to vary a lot between countries and years, with Danish
tenders usually having the TSO pay for the connection, while the British prefer to have
them built by the wind farm manufacturer, then sold afterwards.
Main cost drivers
There are two main cost drivers for grid connection costs; and those
are the capacity of the wind farm (in MW), increasing the capacity needs for all electrical
installations with it (stations, cables, etc), and the distance to shore (in km).
A very important point to take into account is that the stated ”distance from shore” of a
windfarm does not always match the actual length the export cable will have. Distances
are usually 10­20% higher in the British case, but some exceptions can be far, far worse.
Figure 2.2: Lincs offshore wind farm location and export cable route [43]
20
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:29==
This image, taken from [43], shows the Lincs Offshore Wind farm.
While the farm’s
”stated” distance to the closest shore is only 8km from Skegness, the actual length of
its export cable will be 48km!
There can be multiple reasons for such discrepancies. Usually, the issue is that the on­
shore grid is not directly suitable to welcome the windfarm, which means landfall is better
off further away. There can also be issues with other existing cables, protected areas,
seafloor difficulties, etc. As such, the model will change its input from ”distance to shore”
to the more accurate ”export cable length”
As of 2022, wind farm development is mostly done on an isolated, farm by farm basis.
While it would seem that farms being built next to each other could benefit from sharing
export cables and/or substations, and that certain farms could serve as interconnections
between different countries, this is not something that is developed much yet, with a few
exceptions, like the Kriegers Flak farm [26]. As such, it will not be considered here.
2.4.2
British OFTOs
As required by British law, all electricity transmission activities must be strictly separated
from production ones. As such, in the case of offshore wind farms, ”OFshore Transmis­
sion Owners” have developed. In this case, the wind farm developer will construct both
the farm and the grid connection, then sell, at a price determined by its value, the grid
connection to an OFTO.
The OFTO will then own and maintain on its own everything between (and including) the
two substations. However, the value of these contracts is made publicly available by the
British OFfice of Gas and Electricity Markets (OFGEM) on their website [44].
In addition, looking for ”Offshore Transmission: Cost Assessment for the X transmission
assets” on the internet (with X being the name of the offshore wind farm), one will find
documents detailing the contract, with its value, capacity of the farm, and length of the
export cable. From this, it is possible to design a predictive model of the value of the
connection, based on the three main parameters at hand:
• Farm capacity in MW.
• Real export cable length in km.
• Asset value, including CAPEX and development costs, in m£. This is extracted from
the breakdown of the assessed transfer value.
2.5
Financing and other costs
As one can see in the previous section dedicated to these costs 1.2.4, the estimates follow
a wide range; with some sources that should be all­including (like [6]) missing a number
of major cost elements. Ultimately, very recent and detailed sources in NREL’s 2020 wind
review and BVG’s offshore wind farm guide end up on a similar figure of about 800k€/MW,
which is sizeable.
For this report, something slightly different will be done. The original estimate of 10%
of the CAPEX elements from previous parts (including grid connection) will be kept to
represent planning, development and financing; on top of that amount, 450k€/MW will
be added as a middle­estimate for decommissioning, contingency, lease of the land and
insurance.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
21
==PAGE:30==
2.6
LCOE, discount rate and cost of capital
2.6.1
Current model
As it stands, the LCOE is computed through the simplest way possible: total costs over
lifetime (CAPEX + N years of OPEX) divided by the total production (N years at average
capacity factor). While it does express the idea of an ”average cost of electricity over the
life of a farm”, this is not the definition of LCOE used in literature models.
All of them use a form of ”discounting”; as in, the revenue and expenses decrease in value
after the first year. This is to allow for multiple things:
• Comparison of projects with the same ”average cost”, but different horizons of ex­
penses and incomes.
• Comparison of the ”opportunity cost” of different projects. In other words, finding
which project is more profitable, quicker.
• But most importantly in wind energy, it serves to introduce the cost of capital of a
project. In other words, the rate of return at which the investors are happy with
financing the project.
2.6.2
LCOE model chosen here
When discussing what model of LCOE to use, a few choices need to be made.
Real vs Nominal LCOE
”Real” means referring to all costs to a reference year (every­
thing converted to 2022€) while ”Nominal” refers to the money of the year.
LCOE can be computed using these two ways, with ”real” LCOE preferred for compar­
isons and general analysis (as it doesnt not depend on inflation), while ”nominal” LCOE
is preferred by companies (as their accounts are in the money of the day).
This thesis will work with ”real” values, as it is not part of a company; this will mostly lead
to a decreased discount rate (as it does not need to account for inflation).
Tax and depreciation
Tax can be considered in a few different ways in a LCOE. Since
interest on debt is tax­deductible, tax directly affects the WACC. The amount of tax paid
will depend on the fiscal regime of the chosen country, as well as on its depreciation
regime (often different from the plant lifetime).
Most publications will consider an ”after tax” LCOE, adding the tax payments every year
as parts of the costs of the wind farm.
However, since this thesis does not focus on a specific country, and as such cannot pin
down a specific tax rate or depreciation schedule, only a ”pre­tax” LCOE will be con­
sidered. This also matches with the idea of computing a real LCOE (as taxes are not
expenses to society, but rather redistribution).
Simplify or not
The generic definition for the discounted LCOE is as follows:
LCOE =
∑
t
Ct+OMt
(1+r)t
∑
t
qt
(1+r)t
(2.5)
with
• r the discount rate in % (often the WACC).
22
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:31==
• t the year.
• Ct the capital costs (in €).
• OMt the O&M costs (in €/year).
• qt the yearly production (in MWh/year).
In the case of this study, r will correspond to the real, pre­tax WACC determined before
(= 5%).
However, with a few assumptions, this formula can be modified to a simplified LCOE
(sLCOE); those assumptions are:
• The capital cost happens only in year 0 C0.
• O&M and production is constant between year 1 and the last year OM, q.
The formula for the simplified LCOE thus becomes
sLCOE = C0 · CRF + OM
q
(2.6)
with N the lifetime of the farm and CRF the Capital Recovery Factor (in other words, the
annualisation factor for the capital costs)
CRF =
r(1 + r)N
(1 + r)N −1
(2.7)
this is this final formula for simplified LCOE that will be used in this thesis.
For a farm with a 25 years life and a 5% WACC, CRF ≈7% ≈1
14.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:33==
3
Data & Data treatment
3.1
SPVs data treatment
3.1.1
Processing: O&M
With the accounts of a desired windfarm at hand, one can then proceed to extract the
O&M yearly spending from them. This will, however, highly depend on the country of
choice:
Denmark
The Danish accounts are the easiest to process: one just has to sum up the ”operating
expenses” line and the ”other external expenses” line to get the yearly O&M of the wind­
farm; this data will naturally exclude depreciation, financial costs and taxes (accounted
for elsewhere).
Germany
While the accounts here are in German, which will be an issue for non­German speakers
(this thesis’ author included), they are also digital, meaning online translation tools can
easily be used if need be.
Here, the yearly spendings are usually found under the table named ”Gewinn­ und Verlus­
trechnung” (operating statement), with the lines of interest being ”Personalaufwand” (per­
sonnel expenses), ”Materialaufwand” (cost of materials) as well as ”sonstige betriebliche
Aufwendungen” (other operating expenses).
Accounting templates will sometimes be different, with material costs accounted under
”other costs” for example. However, depreciation, taxes and financial costs are always
accounted for separately.
UK
British accounts are bit trickier to deal with.
Basics
Summing up the ”cost of sales” and ”administrative expenses” will get one a
first, raw number. However, the British farms include depreciation of the farm as part of
these costs (and a non­neglectable part at that), which needs to be removed.
Government grants
Some of the earliest farms will include the payback for government
grants inside the costs (and not financial costs), which will need to be excluded.
OFTO and transfer fees
In the British system, most farms will have to build their electric­
ity transmission assets, then sell them to an OFTO (operator), before paying a fee to use
those same assets. These fees have very little to do with operations and maintenance,
but rather are here to ensure the transmission owner gets paid back on its investment.
The national grid publishes those fees yearly under [45], and these will be removed from
the yearly costs.
Balancing fees
Under the British system, Balancing Services Use of System (BSuoS)
costs are paid for through an increase in the electricity price, paid in half by the producers,
and in half by the consumer. These have increased drastically with the deployment of
renewable energy in the UK, and were in 2020 at an average of 5£/MWh [46]. It is a value
that suffers high periodic fluctuation, with the hour of the day, day of the week, or season.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
25
==PAGE:34==
As this cost is not directly related to the farm’s activities, it will be removed when computing
O&M. Though the argument could be made that the BSuoS costs are directly related to
renewable energy production, it seemed better left out of the computation here.
With this out of the way, a list of windfarms can be established. This will contain the farm’s
characteristics as well as yearly O&M costs, in an attempts to find cost trends.
Farm ownership & outliers
Even with this processing done, one has to look out for a number of other issues that
can arise and lead to false interpretation of data. Notably, a number of the SPVs asso­
ciated with windfarms own only parts of the farm. An example of that is with the West
of Duddon Sands SPV. While the farm is owned in half by Ørsted and in other half by
ScottishPower Renewables limited (source: [47]), the SPV is stated as owned 100% by
Ørsted, with ScottishPower probably owning another, separate SPV. Therefore, the data
from the company, which beforehand appeared as an extremely cheap outlier, is actually
very much standard.
O&M evolution with time
First, trends for the evolution of O&M plot with the age of the offshore wind farm can be
obtained. For this, the easiest method is to take a look at the accounts of a single farm
(old, if possible) across its existence. Below, this thesis will discuss such a thing for the
Barrow farm (UK)
Figure 3.1: Nominal yearly costs of the Barrow farm
The sale of the OFTO assets for the Barrow farm happened during the year of 2011. As
such, ”non­corrected” accounts show a drastic increase in costs, corresponding the trans­
mission fee paid by the farm. As was discussed before, those are not actual operations
and maintenance costs, and one can see that removing them shows a similar trend to the
data that comes before this sale.
Namely, the trend of stable (or slightly increasing) costs, at about 6m£/yr, with a lot of year
by year fluctuation. Looking at it side by side with the capacity factor of the farm (which
shows a small downwards trend), the two do not seem correlated.
The following conclusions can be obtained:
• A lot of fluctuation/noise is to be expected in the data. As is shown in this case
(and was also done for the Horns rev I and Thanet windfarms), cost increases or
decreases of +­50% between one year to the next are not uncommon.
26
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: Evolution of the capacity factor of the Barrow farm
• Other than the extreme amount of noise, costs seem to be ”mostly” stable, and
uncorrelated with the year by year change in production.
Other examples are available in Appendix [A.1].
SPV Data validation against other sources
In this section, the results obtained in the previous parts will be compared with external
estimates (press releases, exchanges with other publications, etc.) to see if they match.
The first source in that regard is [6], the Danish technology data catalogue. At page 240,
OPEX for the four Dutch Borssele farms, Kriegers Flak and Horns Rev III are given, with
numbers visible in 1.4. Sadly, SPV data was only available for the last one (with the Dutch
farms’ SPVs behind paywalls, and Kriegers Flak too recent to have a full year of accounts
available), but the value for HR3 is still comparable.
The number given here is OPEXHR3,2015 = 77 ± 2k/MW/yr.
From Vattenfall Vindkraft Horns Rev 3 P/S, one can extract for 2020 a total of yearly costs
of 242 mDKK, which once converted gives OPEXHR3,2020 = 79k/MW/yr.
The second source that can be used is [48] from the website Wind Power Monthly, which
has a figure visible below.
While the data may seem old, this is of little concern given that company accounts from
these years can be used. Data for the Barrow windfarm was already studied in Figure
3.1, with total costs at 5.6m£ in 2007 and 3.3m£ in 2008. While the farm has a capacity of
90MW, its capacity factor in the years is harder to estimate from [49] in Figure 3.2. Even
another source, such as [50], only has summer­to­summer numbers. Based on those
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.3: Offshore O&M validation data from [48]
two, one can estimate a (probably inaccurate) capacity factor of 27% in 2007 and 33% in
2008, yielding O&M costs of 26£/MWh in 2007 and 13£/MWh in 2008. Similar problems
and results are obtained on the other farms from Figure 3.3.
In HR3’s case and 2008 Barrow’s case, SPV data matches quite well with the value from
other sources, while 2007 Barrow is about 20% off (probably due to a wrong Cf estimate).
With this in mind, it would seem like SPV yearly cost data might be a pretty decent O&M
cost estimate.
3.1.2
Processing: Capital Cost
The capital cost of the wind farm, as estimated by the developer (and as shared with the
tax authorities) can also be found on these documents; It is generally available under
a line called ”fixed assets value”/”wind farm assets value”/”tangible assets value”. One
should be careful here as to make sure to take the value that is not depreciated, as that
would drastically reduce the value of the farm.
The wanted value does not appreciate with the years, unlike the currency; as such, it
needs to be considered as valued in the currency of the year the farm was built, even for
2020 accounts.
28
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:37==
3.1.3
Processing: Revenue/Income
Of less importance to this thesis (but still an interesting note), the revenue of the windfarm
(in € or £ per MWh) can easily be estimated: one has to look for the revenue of the farm
(which nearly universally only comes from electricity sales) on the company accounts,
and look for the yearly production, which is sometimes available in exact numbers in the
accounts. If not, one can look for external sources. With these two values obtained, esti­
mating the farm strike price/electricity price rate is as simple as dividing the two numbers.
However, one will have to be careful, as in certain specific cases (linked to farm holdings),
the holding will buy the farm’s electricity, but only give the farm a fraction of the revenue;
in Burbo Extension’s case, the holdings only paid the farm SPV half of the revenue per
MWh they got.
3.2
Weibull parameters
3.2.1
Data sources
This work will be based on two main sources:
The Global Wind Atlas
[51] Built in partnership with DTU, the Global Wind Atlas website
contains wind data for all the land and coastal areas of the globe; of particular interest to
this work is the section under Downloads ­> GIS files & API access, which allows for the
download of .tif files for specific countries, at specific heights, of underlying parameters.
Here, the relevant files are the weibull k and λ parameters at 100m from the ground (as
well as bathymetric data for fancier plots) for the three countries relevant here.
Wikipedia Coordinates
While Wikipedia as a source has its flaws (even for a topic
as grounded as the technical aspects of offshore windfarms), each page focused on a
windfarm has a section dedicated to its geographic position, with an interactive map, the
coordinates of the farm (in terms of latitude/longitude), and links to third party sources like
OpenStreetMaps or Google/Bing Maps.
These coordinates will be used to locate the farms in this section.
While one could consider that using first­party sources for the location of windfarms, these
are harder to find; and while more ”professional/focused” websites such as 4Coffshore
and Thewindpower (links [47] [52]) can also contain some or all of the data, a good part
of it is behind a paywall, and they are often the source of the wikipedia coordinates.
Not all windfarms have wikipedia pages in English; for the few of them that do not, a page
in their native language was used.
3.2.2
Processing
The .tif files are then processed in MATLAB; fundamentaly, those are glorified ”number
tables” files, which display a map of the parameters over the specified areas.
The processing follows the steps described below:
• Lloading/reading the files.
• Using bathymetric data to remove all data points above sea level.
• Extracting maximum and minimum values.
Then, the wind farms are placed into the MATLAB map; for this, the coordinates of one site
(for example, a triple point border between two countries and the sea, like the German/­
Danish/baltic sea border) are obtained, both in the real world and in MATLAB. Knowing
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
29
==PAGE:38==
the conversion between the two as well (400 pixels for 1 degree of lat/lon), and the real
coordinates of the farms, it thus becomes possible to place them on the Matlab map.
Finally, the weibull values are extracted at those coordinates, with a bit of smoothing/av­
eraging (over 8x8 pixels).
Figure 3.4: Territorial waters of the UK, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind farms
studied
The other maps used are available in Appendix A.3
3.3
Production
Real­life production numbers will usually be based on the lifetime capacity factors ex­
tracted from [49]; when they are not available here, one can usually look into corporate
reports or income statements (see: SPV section).
Real­life farm areas for the chosen samples of farms will be based on the data available
on the 4Coffshore website [47]; and while it has been noted that some divergence appears
between their numbers and the ones given in other sources, they will be used nonetheless,
given the fact they cover all the windfarms that are looked into.
The turbine type used is also based on the same source; for the vast majority of turbines,
this includes the diameter and rated power of the generator (with common turbine names
following a template similar to ” V164­8.0 MW”: 164m diameter, 8MW rated power); how­
ever, the height of the tower is not available without a full subscription, and needs to be
looked for each individual farm in press reports, or assumed based on similar farms using
the same turbine types.
30
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Grid connection
22 wind farms, commissioned between 2011 and 2021, will be looked at. Costs, of course,
will be converted to 2020£ thanks to inflation data. This covers nearly all of 6 British OFTO
tender rounds. The full list with numbers is available in Appendix A.4. Below is a first
graphical representation of what it looks like.
Figure 3.5: Value of OFTO assets as a function of farm capacity, with trendline
The trendline is very solid here, with R²=0.97 . However, a few outliers can be noted. At
the right edge, at 1200MW, is the Hornsea one wind farm. Its export cable route of 145km
makes it nearly two times further from shore than the next furthest windfarm, explaining
its higher cost compared to the trendline. The other higher outlier, at 270MW, is the Lincs
windfarm (no apparent reason is noted). Finally, the 3 very first wind farms also have low
outlier costs. While they are close from shore, other, close from shore farms are not noted
to have that trend.
Normalizing by the capacity and plotting as a function of distance shows similar results:
Hornsea one is not an outlier anymore, but Lincs (at 1.03m£/MW) still is.
Then, use will be made of the JULIA code, using the GUROBI solver, to optimize a linear
model that would, given the 3 input parameters, yield the output price. After a lot of
attempts with different models, 2 of them were selected for this thesis:
• a ”one variable” model (that variable being the capacity multiplied by the logarithm
of the distance to shore). This serves as the simplest possible model that is still very
much accurate. The logarithm part serves to factor in the non­linearities observed
with the distance to shore.
• a ”literature” model, to try and match the shape of the model found in the Danish
tech catalogue and other sources. It has two main variables: a ”base” price (in
€/MW), corresponding to the investments that do not scale with distance to shore,
and a ”distance” price (in €/MW/km) for the export cable. Attempts were made to
split between the close/far from shore farms for this second price, without any im­
provements.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Normalized value of OFTO assets as a function of export cable route length
Here is a good illustration of the two models:
Figure 3.7: Model behaviour as a function of export cable length, for two capacity levels
On the plot 3.7 above, one can clearly see the differences between the two models: they
are similar in the 20­50km range (where a lot of British windfarm stands), but the one­
variable model yields much lower prices for very short distances (where a number of
minor components can be saved) and long distances.
32
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.8: Model error for each of the wind farms accounted.
List of farms available in appendix. Some outliers stand out:
• Number 11 is the Lincs windfarm, talked about previously.
• 13 and 14 are West of Duddon Sands and Westermost Rough.
• 2 for litmod, and 3 for both: 3 is Barrow (the smallest windfarm in the pool here, at
90MW), while 2 (gunfleet sands 1 & 2) are tied to the closest farm to shore.
• 21 is Hornsea 1, extremely far from shore.
One can see the 1­var model performing better than the lit­mod. Sadly though, most mod­
els that will be seen in the literature will be closer to the lit­mod one, making comparisons
with the 1­var model harder.
In the end, based on this and the literature review done previously, the one­variable model
has been deemed better suited for the needs of this thesis (closer to both the literature
models in value, and the real life data extremes. The final formula for the cost of export
cables will be:
Costex = 0.156 · log(dcable) · N · PG
(3.1)
With Costex the grid connection cost in M€, dcable the length of the export cable in km, and
PG the turbine rated power in MW.
3.5
CAPEX
In order to have a value to compare the results of the model with, a list of CAPEX for the
sample of chosen windfarms will need to be settled on. This list will not include the cost
of the grid connection, for reasons that will be made clear below.
For the British farms,
the main source will be the list created in [32]. This list, in 2012£,
will be converted first to 2020£ considering inflation (a total increase of 20.8%), and then
to 2020€, with a 1.15 conversion rate.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
33
==PAGE:42==
For the Danish farms,
the ”fixed assets” line of their respective SPVs will be used,
inflated at a rate of 1.5% per year, and divided by 7.5 for the DKK to € conversion. This
matches the numbers obtained in the original publication.
For the German farms,
the ”fixed assets” costs will also be used, but inflated at a rate
of only 1% (with inflation lower in Germany in the last 7 years).
To verify the accuracy of these values, they are compared with numbers obtained from
[53]. Results are available in A.2.
3.5.1
Of Grid connections
In both Germany and Denmark, the costs of the studied windfarms DO NOT include the
cost of the grid connection, which is paid for and developed by Tennet and Energinet (the
countries’ respective TSO). As for the UK, the source used specifically removed this cost
from the farm costs.
And while, as shown before, data on the cost of the British grid connections are widely
available, it is not the case for all German and Danish farms (the later having an estimate
in [6]), which would make a global comparison difficult.
3.6
Final validation sample (non­grid connection)
Ultimately, a selection of 43 wind farms was used to build the O&M cost model, and 42
for the general model validation sample. Between the two lists, the Walney extension
windfarm was removed, as it used a mix of two turbine types (which is incompatible with
the model used). The final, 42­farms list actually contains only 40 bullet points, with the
German DanTysk and Sandbank farms being grouped together, as well as Gunfleet Sands
I and II in the UK, since they are owned by the same SPV.
Below is a list of these farms, as well as their country of origin and size:
34
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:43==
Farm name
Origin
Size [MW]
Barrow
UK
90
Burbo
UK
90
Burbo Extension
UK
258
Dudgeon
UK
402
Gunfleet Sands I & II
UK
173
Greater Gabbard
UK
504
Humber Gateway
UK
219
Inner Dowsing
UK
97,2
Kentish Flats
UK
90
Lincs
UK
270
Lynn
UK
97
North Hoyle
UK
60
Ormonde
UK
150
Race Bank
UK
573
Rhyl Flats
UK
90
Robin Rigg
UK
174
Scroby Sands
UK
60
Sheringham Shoal
UK
317
Teesside
UK
62
Thanet
UK
300
Walney
UK
368
West of Duddon
UK
389
Westermost Rough
UK
210
Beatrice
UK
588
Galloper
UK
353
Rampion
UK
400
Horns rev I
DK
160
Horns rev II
DK
209,3
Horns rev III
DK
407
Nysted I
DK
166
Veja Mate
DE
402
Gode Wind I
DE
330
Gode Wind II
DE
252
NordSee One
DE
332,1
Borkum Riffgrund I
DE
312
NordSee Ost
DE
288
EnBW Baltic II
DE
288
Global Tech I
DE
400
Arkona
DE
385
DanTysk + Sandbank
DE
576
Table 3.1: List of offshore wind farms used for validation, with origin and size
3.7
O&M model building
With access to a number of input parameters and an estimate for the O&M cost for each
of these bullet points, models can be built, attempting to estimate the operations and
maintenance cost for the farm as a function of these input parameters.
These models will be built using the GUROBI solver on Julia, as explained in a previous
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
35
==PAGE:44==
part. In addition, these will follow the logarithmic cost model defined in 2.3, which will allow
it to be closer to the original model and allow it to deal with each input variable individually.
A number of models were built. Among these, a number of observations were done, lead­
ing to better polish and improvements for the models, either from their results or external
feedback:
Yearly costs and farm capacity
Fundamentally, farm SPVs yield the yearly costs of
the windfarm, which vary widely between them. In order to ”normalize” them somewhat,
nearly all of the literature quoted previously uses costs in k€/MW/yr instead of m€/yr.
Indeed, plotting yearly costs as a function of farm capacity yields an excellent correlation:
Figure 3.9: Farm yearly costs as a function of its size
Here, one can notice that, despite a few low cost outliers among some British farms, there
is a R2 = 0.74 linear trend between these two values.
With this in mind, all subsequent plots and costs will be given per MW, rather than not.
CAPEX
”CAPEX” was excluded as an input parameter. Indeed, when first building the
model, CAPEX seemed to be a good predictor for O&M costs in the models (more ex­
pensive farms to build would cost more to maintain). But it was discarded, for two main
reasons.
First, the individual plot of O&M costs against CAPEX did not look to have much correla­
tion, as can be seen below.
And second of all, as pointed out by this work’s supervisors, indexing O&M to CAPEX
would lead to issues: for verification, what if the farm real­life CAPEX is different from the
modeled one? As for predictions, having O&M being based on CAPEX would mean the
O&M model would be highly complex (as CAPEX would need to be computed before),
and thus harder to use on its own.
Country­specific models
There was also an attempt to build models specific to each
country (mostly the UK and Germany, as Denmark in this work lacks sufficient data points).
36
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.10: Farm O&M as a function of its real life CAPEX
This failed however, due to the widely different properties of the farms between the coun­
tries: with most if not all German farms very far from shore and built on deep waters, the
German model would be unable to make decent predictions for shallow water farms. The
opposite also stood true for British farms, which mostly have very shallow waters and low
density farms. As it appears, the two countries have complementary data sets, mean­
ing a combined model yielded far better results overall while compromising little for each
country.
Farm commissioning year or ”age”
An interesting parameter added at first to the
model was the commissioning year of the farm (or its age). The idea was that older farms
would get slightly more expensive to maintain with their age, and/or that technological
improvements yielded lower costs as the years went on. However, there are a number of
issues with this and the result seen below.
First and foremost, there is no clear, linear evolution of the maintenance cost of a farm with
its age. Literature, like [54], seem to suggest distinct phases in the life of a windfarm, usu­
ally splitting into a ”warranty” period, where turbines are maintained by their constructor,
a ”maintenance” period where the farm owner would keep them running, and a ”decay”
period, at the end of its life, where only the most cost­effective maintenance is done.
Using the building year of the farm as a parameter would also lead to major issues, as the
model would need to be used in present and future years, where it could obviously not be
verified.
With all of these ideas in mind, age was not used as a parameter for model­building.
3.8
Finding the cause of the ”CAPEX discrepency”
While looking into the reasons for the unexpected CAPEX results, two parameters seem
to stand out. Others, more basic, were tested (like water depth or distance to shore), but
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.11: Farm O&M as a function of commissioning year
as seen on the comparison, cannot explain the difference.
3.8.1
CAPEX­Sale price
Most farms under the sample function under a regime similar to CfD (contract for dif­
ference); to make it simple, most farms have a guaranteed price at which they can sell
their production. Therefore, obtaining these prices on [47], one can plot the CAPEX as a
function of this income.
Figure 3.12: Farm CAPEX as a function of its sale price per MWh
Do note here that what is called ”Sale price” under this graph is extremely simplified;
namely, the nominal value of 4COffshore. While this value has been verified as correct
38
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:47==
using the accounts of a few of the farms, it hides large differences in the evolution of
this support (some scale with inflation, while others do not), its length, or the support
mechanism itself.
Nonetheless, one can observe firsthand on this graph what appears to be a direct corre­
lation between the CAPEX of a farm and its revenue scheme.
The ”simple” explanation for this is that more expensive projects require higher subsi­
dies, which make sense. Though the inverse can also be true (higher subsidies lead to
developers being more ”lax” on their expenses).
3.8.2
CAPEX­year
A very simple yet interesting plot is the one of the farm CAPEX as a function of the year
of its commissioning, as can be seen below
Figure 3.13: Farm CAPEX as a function of its commissioning year
The added trendline here shows the tendency: a large cost increase from around 2005
to 2015, then a quick decrease up to today.
3.8.3
Discussion
In both cases, a near­identical plot appears if one is to plot ”CAPEX % error between real
and model” instead of ”CAPEX”, meaning that this cost increase is not a direct cause of
the increase in water depths and distances to shore.
The two causes provide different explanations to the cost discrepancy: on the one hand, it
could be caused by extremely generous subsidies, which enabled developers to develop
and expand their activities, without being concerned too much by farm costs; on the other
hand, the temporal evolution of a third factor could have caused costs to increase, then
decrease.
Ultimately, this thesis will settle on the more precise (in terms of R2) and simple (in terms
of input parameter) trend, being the commissioning year.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
39
==PAGE:48==
3.8.4
CAPEX­year error correction
With the choice of the correction out of the way, the question becomes how to do this
correction.
A model will be built in JULIA using the GUROBI optimizer once more; the goal of this
model will be to build a ”CAPEX correction function” acting as a CAPEX percentage mod­
ifier that will change the CAPEX value based on the commissioning year. This will be
done with the goal to minimize the error between observed costs and modelled costs.
As for the choice of this function, two of them should give a close description of the situ­
ation:
• A ”chunk by chunk” function, that would be worth 1, then linearly increase, then
linearly decrease again.
• A third order polynomial function, like the one drawn by the excel trendline.
While both would describe accurately the graph at hand, the third order plot is both simpler
to implement, and can be compared to the trendline in excel.
Figure 3.14: CAPEX correction function: factor as a function of year
For the sake of implementing it into the model, the extremes will be cut: all values after
2019 will be set at their 2019 value, and the same for what happens before 2003.
40
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:49==
4
Results & Validation
4.1
Original model behaviour
With a list of farms to evaluate the models with, an in­depth performance investigation
can be done.
4.1.1
Capacity factor and density
In this section, a plot of the capacity factor as a function of density is done for the chosen
sample of windfarms, using their real life data. This is then compared with a generic curve
obtained by the model. This basic model curve is obtained using generic turbine and
wind conditions, and changing the number of turbines in the farm to increase/decrease
its density. The conditions are the following: 5MW turbine, 128m diameter, 95m height,
100km2 area, k = 2.24, λ = 10.8, N = 20 · i with i from 3 to 15. Other parameters are
irrelevant to the wind production. The result is as follows:
Figure 4.1: Real and modeled (simple) farm capacity factor as a function of density
One can see here that, as could be expected, wind farm production is directly correlated
to its density: the more (and bigger) turbines per unit of area, the lower the production.
Further, the model is able to follow that trend quite decently, considering that it does it on
a single given turbine and set wind.
4.1.2
CAPEX, OPEX, Cf
Here are the results of the original model, using the extended sample:
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.2: CAPEX (without grid connection) comparison between model and reality
The CAPEX prediction is really inaccurate. In this plot, one can see that two farms, pre­
dicted costing the same amount of money, can go from simple to double the cost.
In addition to this, even the Danish farms, tested in the previous model, have real costs
slightly higher than their model. This is because of a different assumption than that of the
original authors; that the press released costs for these farms (as well as the one readable
in their SPVs) does not include the grid connection costs (see: 1.1.3).
Figure 4.3: OPEX comparison between model and reality
The OPEX is, as one could expect from an un­validated model, mostly inaccurate. The
worst offenders here are the 4 German farms that are located very far away from shore,
with the original model predicting costs that are way too high for them.
Finally, the original model’s capacity factors generally show a small biais, with the model
prediciting capacity factors a few percent higher than reality; this is mostly due to the use
42
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.4: Cf comparison between model and reality
of slightly different values for the farms weibull parameters and areas.
4.2
New model behaviour
4.2.1
Production
Here is the result obtained for the new model, considering the updated wind conditions,
turbine data, farm area, and losses.
Figure 4.5: Comparison of real and modelled capacity factor for the sample of farms
The average error in absolute terms (simply subtracting the two Cf numbers with one
another) over the whole sample is 1.3%, and the standard deviation is 4%.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
43
==PAGE:52==
Looking into the causes of such a deviation, one interesting plot would be to add the
commissioning year of the farm in the plot below:
Figure 4.6: Model efficiency for Cf prediction as a function of farm commissioning year
On this plot, one can see that generally, the model predicts capacity factors that are too
high for the oldest farms, and a bit too low for the very newest ones; this makes sense,
given that these oldest farms will be the ones that will logically have the most losses due
to availability, wear and tear, and other factors, while the more recent farms will generally
have their turbines still insured.
Articles like [55] go into more detail on the topic of performance evolution of windfarm with
age, suggesting an average performance degradation of 1.57% year in relative terms.
However, they only covered a limited sample of onshore windfarms, with the publication
mentioning that the results can vary remarkably between countries as well as between
onshore and offshore.
A similar trend can be observed with the number of turbines: the smallest farms have
predicted capacity factors that are too high compared to reality. Incidentally, the smallest
farms are also the oldest ones, explaining why this plot is mostly similar to the previous
one. However, one can note here that the electricity production model is based on a
number of hypothesis that are not true anymore if the farm is too small. Notably, this
assumption: The wind farm is large enough for the vertical wind profile to be horizontally
homogeneous from the original source, is mostly inaccurate if the farm is too small.
4.2.2
OPEX
With all the lessons learned in the 3.7, a final model was built for this master thesis. It is
the following:
CO&M,k/MW/yr = 72.24 · C0.84
f
· d0.19
port,km · ρ0.22
MW/km2
(4.1)
With
• CO&M,k/MW/yr the yearly costs of the farm in k€/MW/yr
• Cf the capacity factor of the farm (no unit­value between 0 and 1)
44
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Model efficiency for Cf prediction as a function of number of turbines per farm
• dport,km the distance between the farm and its maintenance port, in km
• ρMW/km2 the farm density in terms of MW/km2
A number of remarks can be done on this model. First, the power for the capacity factor
is close to 1. This reflects why a number of other reputable sources and models give
their results in €/MWh: the more a farm produces, the more the turbines are strained, and
therefore the higher maintenance is. The other two factors have small powers (around
0.2), showing that the distance to port (the further the farm ­ the more expensive the
maintenance) and density (the denser the farm ­ the more turbulent air is within it, and
therefore the more stress the turbines will suffer) have some impact on costs, if limited.
Overall, a number of these factors were already present in the original model, under a
different formulation. The original model considered full load hours (here, Cf), loss of
production from solitary turbine to turbine in the middle of the farm (here, density) and
distance to shore (here, distance to port). Turbine rating, while present in the original
model, was considered for this one, but did not yield a significant correlation.
4.2.3
CAPEX (with yearly correction factor)
Once everything is taken into account, the results of the model for the sample of wind
farms can be obtained; below are the results including everything (notably, the ”year cor­
rection factor”). For data without that correction factor, see Figure 1.2.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.8: OPEX comparison between model and real life
Figure 4.9: CAPEX comparison between model and real life, including ”year correction”
4.2.4
Discussion and remarks
Energy production
Overall, the predictions are quite good, with other underlying factors
(such as farm age and size) explaining most of the remaining error. There are inevitably
a few exceptions to this trend, but this is to be expected: such a simple model is unable
to predict parameters like the maintenance schedule of the farms; some of these outliers
could have had a much more hands­on or hands­off approach to maintenance than the
average, leading to somewhat different results.
46
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:55==
O&M
On operations and maintenance, the prediction seems to be somewhat inaccurate,
with a large number of outliers both higher and lower than the model. Ultimately, however,
it is very hard to model what causes such fluctuation. In some cases, farms follow a
completely different maintenance strategy. As suggested in [54], these can vary a lot
between farms and developers, yielding different results.
Year­on­year maintenance costs for the farms, while usually stable, can sometimes see
large fluctuations, as can be seen in 3.1 and A.1. This is especially true for the first few
years of the farms, where unexpected events can happen, as were observed in Horns rev
I.
Ultimately, and as could be expected when starting to work on a predictive O&M cost
model, a large uncertainty is unavoidable, given all the parameters cited above. Further­
more, one needs to consider that yearly SPV costs may not reflect the real maintenance
costs accurately (as reflected in the number of transformations necessary for the British
farms).
CAPEX
Ultimately, even with the ”year correction”, CAPEX predictions remain widely
inaccurate (though much better than without it). It all comes back to the discussion on the
observed CAPEX discrepency, with the year correction being a band­aid fix to a problem
without an obvious solution.
4.3
Discussion on the CAPEX discrepancy
There have been a few suggested explanations on the cause of the observed CAPEX
difference between the model and reality.
First, however, one has to remember that the CAPEX is not set on the year of commis­
sioning; contracts are often decided months, if not years in advance; though the six year
delay between the spike in turbine prices seen in figure 1.1 (Turbine prices peak in 2009,
farm prices in 2015) means that it is probably not the correct answer.
During exchange with industry members, one of them suggested that this could be linked
with the availability of offshore platforms and logistics. It is important to consider that the
main user of those would be the offshore oil drilling industry. As such, the price decrease
would be matched with the late­2014 oil price crash and subsequent slump [56]. The drop
would have lead to largely decreased investments in offshore oil, and thus would have
increased the availability and lead to cheaper prices for offshore wind logistics.
Another suggestion would be the very high support schemes awarded by the British and
German governments, sometimes with little to no competitions and fixed prices. While
this lead to extremely fast­growing industries in their countries, it is possible that these
subsidies were higher than what was actually needed, leading to inflated costs.
For example, a document from the European Commission on British aid to five offshore
windfarms [57] indicates that the amount of aid given to these farms was only function of
the commissioning year, with no care for the underlying cost factors (like water depth and
distance to shore).
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:57==
5
Conclusion and future work
5.1
Conclusion
With the mass adoption of offshore wind energy expected as a tool to fight climate change,
it is of interest for the public and policy makers to have access to simple tools enabling
them to estimate the cost and production of farms. But it seems that such complex, billion­
euro projects can hardly be estimated with perfect accuracy using only simple tools.
This work mostly focused on the four main aspects of such a combined cost­production
model, and used a validation sample of more than 40 offshore wind farms to verify and
compare the results.
First is production. Here, it managed to improve on the previous model, and yield a highly
accurate wind and production prediction, despite the number of parameters outside of this
thesis’ control.
Next are operations and maintenance costs. These are much harder to predict, notably
due to the extreme limitations of the available real­life data used as validators. SPV ac­
counts were used as a way to gather real cost data on a number of farms, but these have
a number of flaws, mostly related to the lack of detail in the elements included (or not)
in the yearly costs. Nonetheless, a model was built, with similar yet different features
compared to the original. This new model improves the performance of the original one,
especially for farms really far from shore.
Grid connection costs were also predicted. These costs ended up in their own category,
as they are often not included in the CAPEX costs of farms in a lot of countries (as they
are typically paid for by the TSO). These were based on publically available data from the
estimation and sale of such assets on the British market. An accurate model was built
for the British assets; however, it seemed to be highly expensive in comparison to similar
assets in other countries.
Finally, CAPEX costs were estimated. What was thought to be the simplest element to
estimate yielded some of the most interesting results of this whole’s master thesis: values
that seemed to represent real­life CAPEX nearly always lacked grid connection costs and
a number of balance of plant costs (contigency, decommissioning, lease of land, etc.)
were either included or excluded depending on the source. Last, a number of seemingly
similar projects could end up yielding costs going from simple to double, with no good
explanation.
Despite these shortcomings, this work was based on a vast number of relevant, docu­
mented and recent sources on the topic. It developed and justified methods and equa­
tions for a number of cost and production elements relevant to offshore wind. Further,
it used them to build a model that can predict accurately the cost of past, present and
(near­) future farms.
5.2
Future work
Investigations into the root causes of what is here so­called ’CAPEX discrepency’ could
be done; this work raised a number of clues as to the cause of this issue (time­related?
subsidy­related?), but no clear answer could be given.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
49
==PAGE:58==
As suggested in its dedicated section, the production model could probably gain from the
addition of a ”efficiency loss over time factor”. Literature did not agree on a common result,
though the data at hand suggests a value of around 1.5% per year (in relative terms).
O&M could also use further work. This thesis (as well as many others) would highly
benefit from a common, yearly OPEX database, the likes of which is available for CAPEX
on websites such as 4COffshore. Most of the literature on the topic today seems to be both
generic (as in, independent of external factors) and self­referential, or extremely­detailed
models with limited validation.
50
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Nikolaus J. Kurmayer for EURACTIV.com. Germany, Denmark, Netherlands and
Belgium sign €135 billion offshore wind pact. https://www.euractiv.com/section/
energy/news/germany-denmark-netherlands-and-belgium-sign-e135-billion-offshore-
wind-pact/. May 2022.
[2]
Jens Nørkær Sørensen and Gunner Christian Larsen. “A Minimalistic Prediction
Model to Determine Energy Production and Costs of Offshore Wind Farms”. In:
Energies 14.2 (2021). ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10.3390/en14020448. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/2/448.
[3]
Angel G. Gonzalez­Rodriguez. “Review of offshore wind farm cost components”. In:
Energy for Sustainable Development 37 (2017), pp. 10–19. ISSN: 0973­0826. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esd.2016.12.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0973082616303647.
[4]
BVG Associates on behalf of The Crown Estate and the Offshore Renewable En­
ergy Catapult. Guide to an offshore wind farm, Updated and extended. https://
bvgassociates.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/BVGA-Guide-to-an-offshore-wind-
farm-r2.pdf. Apr. 2019.
[5]
Tyler Stehly and Patrick Duffy. “2020 Cost of Wind Energy Review”. In: Golden,
CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. (2021). ISSN: NREL/TP­5000­81209.
URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy22osti/81209.pdf.
[6]
Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Technology Data, Generation of Electricity
and District heating. https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/technology_data_
catalogue_for_el_and_dh_-_0009.pdf. Aug. 2016.
[7]
Pierre­Elouan Réthoré et al. “TOPFARM: Multi­fidelity optimization of wind farms”.
In: vol. 17. Dec. 2014. DOI: 10.1002/we.1667.
[8]
Ashish Dewan and Masoud Sørensen Asgarpour. “Reference O&M Concepts for
Near and Far Offshore Wind Farms”. In: 2016.
[9]
S Lundberg. “Performance Comparison of Wind Park Configurations”. In: Technical
Report No. 30R; Chalmers University of Technology: Göteborg, Sweden (2003).
ISSN: 1401­6176. URL: https://publications.lib.chalmers.se/records/fulltext/2691/
local_2691.pdf.
[10]
US Department of Energy, 2017 Wind Technologies Market Report. https://emp.
lbl.gov/sites/default/files/2017_wind_technologies_market_report.pdf. 2017.
[11]
Bregendahl Uffe, Røjle Helge, and Heltborg Asta Pil. “30 specialister rykker til Hvide
Sande: Skal vedligeholde gigantmøller i ny havmøllepark”. In: DR.dk (Aug. 5, 2019).
URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/midtvest/30-specialister-rykker-til-hvide-
sande-skal-vedligeholde-gigantmoeller-i.
[12]
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy Q1 19 Results. https://www.siemensgamesa.
com/- /media/siemensgamesa/downloads/en/investors- and- shareholders/periodic-
information/2019/q1/results-presentation.pdf. Jan. 2019.
[13]
Vestas Wind Systems A/S Second Quarter 2019. https://www.vestas.com/content/
dam/vestas- com/global/en/investor/reports- and- presentations/financial/2019/
201920Q2_pres_UK.pdf. Aug. 2019.
[14]
Siemens Gamesa ­ Activity Report, Fiscal year 2021 October­September 2021 re­
sults. https://www.siemensgamesa.com/- /media/siemensgamesa/downloads/en/
investors-and-shareholders/periodic-information/2021/q4/q4-activity-report-year-
2021-siemens-gamesa-en.pdf. Nov. 2021.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
51
==PAGE:60==
[15]
Bruce Valpy et al. Future renewable energy costs ­ Offshore wind. https://bvgassociates.
com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/InnoEnergy-Offshore-Wind-anticipated-innovations-
impact-2017_A4.pdf. BVG associates and InnoEnergy. 2017.
[16]
US Department of Energy, Offshore Wind Market Report: 2021 Edition. https://
www . energy . gov / sites / default / files / 2021 - 08 / Offshore % 20Wind % 20Market %
20Report%202021%20Edition_Final.pdf. 2021.
[17]
C. Maienza et al. “A life cycle cost model for floating offshore wind farms”. In: Applied
Energy 266 (2020), p. 114716. ISSN: 0306­2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2020.114716. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261920302282.
[18]
Kenneth Thomsen. OFFSHORE wind turbine cost and LCOE estimator. Model based
on initial work by Henrik Stiesdal. Apr. 2019.
[19]
Smart G. A. Smith E. Warner I.B. Sperstad B. Prinsen R. Lacal­Arántegui. IEA Wind
Task 26, Offshore Wind Farm Baseline Documentation. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy16osti/66262.pdf. June 2016.
[20]
Noonan M. T. Stehly D. Mora L. Kitzing G. Smart V. Berkhout Y. Kikuchi. Offshore
Wind International Comparative Analysis, International Energy Agency Wind Tech­
nology Collaboration Programme. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/71558.pdf.
Oct. 2018.
[21]
Callum Milne, Shahin Jalili, and Alireza Maheri. “Decommissioning cost modelling
for offshore wind farms: A bottom­up approach”. In: Sustainable Energy Technolo­
gies and Assessments 48 (2021), p. 101628. ISSN: 2213­1388. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.seta.2021.101628. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2213138821006421.
[22]
Energinet STATEMENT FROM ENERGINET ON COSTS FOR MAIN CONNEC­
TION OF ANHOLT, HORNS REV 3 AND KRIEGERS FLAK OFFSHORE WIND
FARMS. https://www.ft.dk/samling/20171/almdel/efk/spm/253/svar/1495662/
1906403/index.htm. May 2018.
[23]
Christopher Mone et al. “2015 Cost of Wind Energy Review”. In: National Renew­
able Energy Laboratory. (2017). ISSN: NREL/TP­6A20­66861. URL: https://www.
nrel.gov/docs/fy22osti/81209.pdf.
[24]
Hans Cleijne. Cost of offshore transmission. https://www.tennet.eu/fileadmin/user_
upload/Company/News/Dutch/2019/20190624_DNV_GL_Comparison_Offshore_
Transmission_update_French_projects.pdf. June 2019.
[25]
DIW ECON. Market design for an efficient transmission of offshore wind energy.
https://diw-econ.de/wp-content/uploads/DIW-Econ_2019_Market-design-for-an-
efficient-transmission-of-offshore-wind-energy.pdf. May 2019.
[26]
Energinet KRIEGERS FLAK ­ COMBINED GRID SOLUTION. https://en.energinet.
dk/Infrastructure-Projects/Projektliste/KriegersFlakCGS.
[27]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2021. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-
2021. Oct. 2021.
[28]
IRENA. Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2020. https : / / www . irena . org /
publications/2021/Jun/Renewable-Power-Costs-in-2020.
[29]
Lazard. Lazard’s levelized cost of energy analysis ­ Version 15.0. https://www.
lazard.com/media/451881/lazards-levelized-cost-of-energy-version-150-vf.pdf. Oct.
2021.
[30]
Expert elicitation survey predicts 37% to 49% declines in wind energy costs by 2050.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00810-z. Wiser, R., Rand, J., Seel, J. et al. Nat
Energy 6, 555–565 (2021).
52
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:61==
[31]
IRENA. Innovation Outlook: Offshore Wind. https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/
IRENA/Agency/Publication/2016/IRENA_Innovation_Outlook_Offshore_Wind_
2016.pdf?la=en&hash=B6F4FD194D8BC61DE5CBB90E1009442E287F72DD. 2016.
[32]
John Aldersey­Williams, Ian D. Broadbent, and Peter A. Strachan. “Better estimates
of LCOE from audited accounts– A new methodology with examples from United
Kingdom offshore wind and CCGT”. In: Energy Policy 128 (2019), pp. 25–35. ISSN:
0301­4215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.12.044. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421518308504.
[33]
D. Cevasco, S. Koukoura, and A.J. Kolios. “Reliability, availability, maintainability
data review for the identification of trends in offshore wind energy applications”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 136 (2021), p. 110414. ISSN: 1364­
0321. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . rser . 2020 . 110414. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032120307012.
[34]
SPARTA with its sponsors CATAPULT and The Crown Estate. SPARTA Portfolio
Review 2018/2019. https://pod.ore.catapult.org.uk/sites/default/files/associated-
documents/SPARTA-Portfolio-Review-201819.pdf. 2019.
[35]
PWC for Invest­NL. Financing Offshore Wind. https://www.pwc.nl/nl/actueel-
publicaties/assets/pdfs/pwc-invest-nl-financing-offshore-wind.pdf. Oct. 2020.
[36]
ORE Catapult. Floating offshore wind: cost reduction pathways to subsidy free.
https://ore.catapult.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/FOW-Cost-Reduction-
Pathways-to-Subsidy-Free-report-.pdf.
[37]
GOV.UK. Companies House, UK. https://find-and-update.company-information.
service.gov.uk. Feb. 2022.
[38]
Danish State. CVR ­ Central Business Register ­ Denmark. https://datacvr.virk.dk.
available in English, though not all accounts are in English. Feb. 2022.
[39]
German State. Federal Gazette (Bundesanzeiger) ­ Germany. https://www.bundesanzeiger.
de/pub/en/start?2. website in English, accounts in German. Feb. 2022.
[40]
Official website. The Julia Programming Language. https://julialang.org/.
[41]
Official website. Gurobi optimization. https://www.gurobi.com/.
[42]
Anthony Cazin­Bourguignon. Energy production and cost modelling of an offshore
windfarm. 2020.
[43]
RBC Capital Markets for Ofgem. Preliminary Information Memorandum Lincs Wind
Farm Offshore Transmission Assets. https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/sites/default/files/
docs/2010/11/lincs-pim_0.pdf. Oct. 2010.
[44]
Ofgem. Tender rounds and projects. https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/energy- policy-
and-regulation/policy-and-regulatory-programmes/offshore-electricity-transmission-
ofto/tender-rounds-and-projects.
[45]
National Grid Electricity System Operator Draft TNUoS Tariffs for 2021/22. https:
//www.nationalgrideso.com/electricity- transmission/document/181866/download.
Oct. 2020.
[46]
Watt­Logic. BSUoS charging reform: benefits and risks for all parties. https://watt-
logic.com/2021/08/13/bsuos-charging/. Contains historical data of the previous five
years. Aug. 2021.
[47]
4C Offshore. https://www.4coffshore.com/. Best accessed by typing ”4Coffshore
[farmname]” on a search engine, and creating an account. Feb. 2022.
[48]
David Milborrow for Wind Power Monthly. Cutting the cost of offshore wind energy.
https://www.windpowermonthly.com/article/1021043/cutting-cost-offshore-wind-
energy. Aug. 2010.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
53
==PAGE:62==
[49]
Andrew ZP Smith. UK offshore wind capacity factors. https://energynumbers.info/
uk-offshore-wind-capacity-factors. Also available for German and Danish farms.ORCID:
0000­0003­3289­2237. Feb. 2022.
[50]
WindPower Program. Comparison [...] on the performance of four UK offshore wind
farms [...]. https://wind-power-program.com/large_turbines.htm.
[51]
Global Wind Atlas. https://globalwindatlas.info/. GIS files & API access. Feb. 2022.
[52]
The Wind Power. https://www.thewindpower.net/index.php. Best accessed by
typing ”thewindpower [farmname]” on a search engine. Feb. 2022.
[53]
“DTU internal CAPEX reference sheet”. In: Mostly based on LORC and 4Coffshore
Data. 2020.
[54]
joe phillips joe et al. “A guide to UK offshore wind operations and maintenance”. In:
(June 2013). DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.12957.36328.
[55]
Iain Staffell and Richard Green. “How does wind farm performance decline with
age?” In: Renewable Energy 66 (2014), pp. 775–786. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.10.041. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960148113005727.
[56]
Robert J. Samuelson. The Washington Post Opinions Key facts about the great oil
crash of 2014. https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/robert-samuelson-key-
facts-about-the-great-oil-crash-of-2014/2014/12/03/a1e2fd94-7b0f-11e4-b821-
503cc7efed9e_story.html. Dec. 2014.
[57]
European Commission. United Kingdom Support for five Offshore Wind Farms:
Walney, Dudgeon, Hornsea, Burbo Bank and Beatrice. https : / / ec . europa . eu /
competition/state_aid/cases/253211/253211_1583612_84_2.pdf.
[58]
Carmen for Power Technology. Gode Wind 1, Germany. https : / / www . power -
technology.com/marketdata/gode-wind-1-germany/. Nov. 2021.
[59]
Dong Energy (now Ørsted). Dong Energy to build Gode Wind 1 and 2 offshore wind
farms in Germany. https://web.archive.org/web/20131221095612/http://www.
dongenergy.com/EN/Media/Newsroom/Pages/Company_announcements_details.
aspx?omxid=719602. Accessed through the Wayback Machine. Nov. 2013.
[60]
Equinor. Dudgeon Offshore Wind Farm official website. https://dudgeonoffshorewind.
co.uk.
54
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
A.1
O&M evolution over time: other examples
In order to look into O&M evolution over time, more examples can be looked into
A.1.1
Thanet windfarm
Figure A.1: Nominal yearly costs of the Thanet OWF
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.2: Evolution of the capacity factor of the Thanet OWF
The Thanet windfarm shows a remarquable trend: yearly expenses did not increase
yearly, but actually remained mostly stable; and might have even decreased if one is
to consider inflation (plotted are nominal costs). Production did not decrease either, and
arguably increased in the last year.
A.1.2
Horns rev I windfarm
Figure A.3: Nominal yearly costs of the Horns Rev I OWF
56
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.4: Evolution of the capacity factor of the Horns rev I OWF
In Horns Rev I, costs are quite stable too. The production and cost plots clearly shows
the first few rocky years of the farm, with numerous technical issues
A.2
CAPEX comparison between sources
Here, the numbers that will be used as reference for CAPEX in this work are compared
to the ones obtained in an external source, namely [53]. Results are available below:
Figure A.5: Comparison of reference, real­world CAPEX between [53] and this work.
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
57
==PAGE:66==
Overall, the values mostly match (with some fluctuation mostly due to a slightly differ­
ent choice of elements to include or exclude, different handling of inflation and currency
exchange, etc...). There are however two exceptions to this:
1)The German Gode Wind farms. In all likelihood, this is due to an error/typo in the
external source, which estimates the cost of building both farms at 1255m€ total (with
this paper’s estimate a bit more than twice that amount). However, sources such as [58]
give in 2021 an estimate of 1516m$ for Gode Wind 1 only (the biggest one), while [59]
estimate both farms at 2.2b€ in 2013 (before their construction).
2)Recent British farms (Galloper, Beatrice...) are estimated cheaper in this work than
in [53]. Here, it seems to be due to both works not comparing the same costs; with
the external source including the price of the grid/OFTO transmissions, and this work
excluding it. For example, [53] estimates Dudgeon’s CAPEX at 1.9b€ (=1.382b£ using
the 2015 conversion rate). Dudgeon’s own website page gives [60] 1.4b£ And this paper
came to an estimate of 1.1b£ plus an added 300m£ for the grid transmission.
With all this in mind, the present work’s real­world CAPEX estimate for offshore wind farms
will be kept as such, despite some apparent uncertainty, that will need to be kept in mind
when reaching this work’s conclusion.
A.3
Weibull parameter map
Below are the different maps that served as a visible output for the Weibull wind param­
eters and farm coordinates data.
Figure A.6: Territorial waters of the UK, with weibull parameter k and wind farms studied
58
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.7: Territorial waters of Denmark, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind farms
studied
Figure A.8: Territorial waters of Denmark, with weibull parameter k and wind farms studied
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.9: Territorial waters of Germany, with weibull parameter A (or λ) and wind farms
studied
Figure A.10: Territorial waters of Germany, with weibull parameter k and wind farms stud­
ied
60
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
==PAGE:69==
A.4
OFTO farms list
Wind farm
Award
year
Farm
capacity
[MW]
Export cable
length [km]
Water
depth [m]
OFTO sale
price [m£]
CAPEX
[m£]
Robin Rigg
East & West
2011
180
12,5
20
65,5
49,5
Gunfleet
Sands 1 & 2
2011
173
9,3
8
49,5
37,9
Barrow
2011
90
26,6
20
33,6
25,7
Walney 1
2011
184
45,3
21
105,4
87,7
Ormonde
2012
150
43
21
103,9
80,4
Walney 2
2012
184
43,7
21
109,8
93,7
Sheringham
Shoal
2013
315
22
18
193,1
159,3
Greater
Gabbard
2013
504
45
29
317,1
241,4
Thanet
2014
300
26,2
22
164,8
120,3
London Array
2013
630
54
25
444
343,9
Lincs
2014
270
48
12
307,7
234,4
Gwynt y Môr
2015
574
20
22
351,9
252,7
West of
Duddon Sands
2015
388
41
20
268,9
215,1
Westermost
Rough
2016
205
12
12
172,3
122,3
Humber
Gateway
2016
219
9
15
173,3
128
Burbo
Bank extension
2018
258
24,3
10
193,9
152,6
Dudgeon
2018
402
38
21
297,9
235
Race Bank
2019
573
71
15
472,5
382,1
Galloper
2020
340
45
32
281,8
223,1
Walney
Extension
2020
600
80
30
446,6
364,9
Hornsea 1
2021
1218
145
30
1170
997,3
Beatrice
2021
588
70
45
437,9
368,2
Table A.1: List of British farms with OFTOs used in this work and their characteristics
Improvement of wind­resource/cost model for offshore wind farms
61
