==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring CUAD using RoBERTa span-selection
QA models for legal contract review
Gustav Selfort Hartz ( s174315)
Supervisor: Søren Hauberg
Co-supervisor: Nicki Skafte Delftsen
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Deep learning models for span-selection question and answering have, with the advent
of transformer models such as BERT and RoBERTa, shown excellent performance on
established tasks like SQuAD and GLUE. Training these models requires large anno-
tated datasets, making them expensive to use in highly specialized domains.
The Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset (CUAD) is a new public dataset by
The Atticus Project, Inc., suitable for training span-selection models for legal contract
review. This thesis presents an in-depth analysis of the performance obtained from
the RoBERTa models presented by the authors of CUAD. It examines the models’
robustness to multiple diﬀerent new formulations of the original 41 questions, in ad-
dition to methods for reducing the number of model parameters by upwards of 20%
and model inference time by close to 50%, with little to no eﬀect on performance.
Moreover, ways of boosting model performance based on a thorough analysis of the
CUAD dataset in terms of annotation quality, question category annotation distri-
bution, and potentially unmarked answers were tested. Additionally, a new proposal
for pre-processing CUAD is presented to mitigate ambiguity in training data. The
thesis also argues for using other evaluation metrics than CUAD. These new metrics
show that performance across all 41 question categories is better than indicated in the
original paper and likely usable for a human-in-the-loop legal contract review system.
The thesis improves the top 3 Has Ans metric from 92.5% to 94.1%, but cannot
conclude that this is due to augmentations made to the dataset.
Additionally, it
suggests that performance gains can be found by adjusting objective functions to suit
the performance metrics better.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Decleration
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark, Department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring a Masters of Science degree in Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The
project was prepared by Gustav Selfort Hartz. The workload of the project is 30
ECTS.
The reader of this thesis is expected to have basic knowledge of deep learning, natural
language processing, and recurrent neural networks.
Kongens Lyngby, 24th June 2022
Gustav Selfort Hartz
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Decleration
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research question and objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Question Answering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Attention is all you need . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
The architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Tokenization, embeddings, and positional encoding . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
BERT & RoBERTa
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Training BERT Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Pre-training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Fine-tuning and transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Data and tools
17
3.1
Stanford Question Answering Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Quality of annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Question type occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Preprocessing of data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Experiment Environment and MLOps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Hugging Face Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Methodology
25
4.1
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.1.1
RoBERTa input and output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Making predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Evaluation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
31
5.1
Establishing the baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Validation loss as a proxy for test performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Evaluation framework considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Analyzing the baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.1
Qualitative attention interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4.2
Flexibility in formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4.3
Performance across categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Summary of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Enhancing CUAD
43
6.1
Dataset manipulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Consistent dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.2
Truly balanced dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.3
Adding answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Transfer learning from SQuAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Model size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Summary of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion
55
Appendices
57
Appendix A Deﬁnitions & Additional resources
59
A.1 Interactive plots and source code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Transformers & Tokenization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Appendix B Data
63
B.1
SQuAD text example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.2
CUAD Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Appendix C Results and Analysis
81
C.1 Correlation and distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.2 Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.3 Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.4 CUAD Paper Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years transformer models have made signiﬁcant improvements in Reading
Comprehension (RC) and Question Answering (QA) tasks that extract information
from real-world documents, even surpassing human performance on challenges like
SQuAD[51, 53] and GLUE[71]. To achieve this state-of-the-art performance large
quality annotated datasets are needed, making it expensive and challenging to utilize
the models for specialized domains. One industry that could beneﬁt dramatically
from these models is legal. Law ﬁrms use upwards of 50% of their time on contract
review [23], which can be categorized as a process of Information Retrieval (IR) from
unstructured legal documents. This contract review process can include assessing
risky clauses, liability, and ﬁnancial risks. Additionally, a major time consumer in
legal processes are extracting preamble information such as Parties, Document Type,
Agreement Date, and Eﬀective Date. These pieces of information are often used for
organizing the documents internally in folder structures with hundreds of folders, as
explained by an assistant project manager at a major danish law ﬁrm in an interview
for this thesis. This technology can potentially reduce the cost of legal services as a
direct consequence of the increased eﬃciencies rendering legal services more accessible
to companies and people that might have had limited access before.
The amount of research published within the area of legal has steadily increased
since 2011, as seen in Figure 1.1, with an increasing number of legal contract un-
derstanding datasets being published, such as ContractNLI [31], and LEDGAR [66].
According to Google Scholar, these datasets have seven citations each at the time
of writing, with little analytical derivative work. This ﬁeld of research within natu-
ral language processing is still young, and there are no well-established performance
measures that quantify the performance of legal understanding models, though they
are emerging[11]. This thesis will seek to contribute to the discussion and share in-
sights into the Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset, that hopefully will beneﬁt
future research within the ﬁeld, both for QA, and other areas of NLP within the
legal domain, that beneﬁt from deeper data insights than what is currently available.
Additionally, it will look at improving the state-of-the-art models based on the Trans-
former Architecture[68] for span-selection Question and Answering (QA) in a legal
context.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1. Publications and citations of material related to Natural Language Processing
and Legal1
1.1
Related work
Recurrent neural networks and advanced information retrieval systems has show de-
cent performance[3, 12] on Reading Comprehension (RC) challenges (see Section 2.1)
using static word embeddings such as glove [48] and word2vec [42]. Since the publica-
tion of the large labeled dataset such as the Stanford Question Answering Dataset[51]
and the CNN/Daily Mail dataset[24], the transformer models have dominated the
leaderboards of the standard RC challenges[53].
The area of span-selection QA within a legal context and for legal element ex-
traction can be classiﬁed as a closed or specialized domain RC challenge. Chalkidis
et al. [9] investigated contract element extraction for elements such as title, eﬀective
period, governing law, and more using manually written rules, linear classiﬁers such
as logistic regression and support vector machines, along with custom word embed-
dings and parts of speech tagging. The paper evaluates performance using precision,
recall, and f1 and shows promising results from their SW-SVM-ALL model. The paper’s
approach is to classify contract elements on a token level, determining whether or not
it is part of the answer. Every token is evaluated using a sliding window of 11-13
tokens. The extractions zones, where to search for potential questions answers, are
identiﬁed using a rule-based approach, but it is unclear how long these extractions
zones are in terms of tokens.
The authors later published another paper where they explore bidirectional long
short-term memory (BILSTM) models on a similar dataset[8], showing that deep
learning models "operating on word, POS tag, and token embeddings outperform
1Web of Science - Query: Legal OR LAW OR Contract (All Fields) and Natural Language Processing
(Topic) and Computer Science Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Web of Science Categories)
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Related work
3
the linear sliding-window classiﬁers of (their) previous work, without any manually
written rules"[8]. In this paper, the authors also evaluate the models’ ability to predict
the entire contract element as a sequence, instead of on a token level, as it drastically
decreases the complexity of adding new tasks due to the extensive requirements of
pre- and post-processing rules.
Both papers use the same dataset of 3500 contracts[8, 9] of which 1000 are labelled
with 11 types of contract elements. Due to privacy concerns, these tokens are provided
in an encoded format to the public.
Within the industry, Atrium, a law ﬁrm based in San Francisco, has been develop-
ing machine learning models to "save time for lawyers and paralegals by automating
some of the boring stuﬀthey have to do every single day"[76]. The company has
used similar approaches with deep learning models and sliding window techniques
and taken eﬃciency within intake, a category of tasks in legal companies, from 30 to
150 documents an hour[76].
In 2021 the Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset (CUAD) v1 was published
(see Section 3.2), which is the largest public annotated contract dataset to date[23]. It
includes over 13.000 annotations across 500+ contracts and with 41 diﬀerent types of
clauses. The paper experiments with transformer models (see Section 2.2) using the
Huggingface Transformers Library [75]. The task structure in this paper is deﬁned
in the same format as SQuAD [51], where the models are tasked with predicting start
and end token positions using a sliding window approach with a conﬁgurable step
size (see Section 3.1). The paper assesses model performance using AUPR due to
the large class imbalance since most contract parts do not have an annotation. The
primary ﬁndings are that the amount of data greatly impacts performance by decreas-
ing the dataset size by a factor of 10, AUPR is roughly reduced by ten percentage
points from 45-35%. Furthermore, the paper ﬁnds a strong correlation between model
performance and model size, with large versions of models outperforming the base
version across the line, similar to the ﬁndings of Chalkidis et al. [11].
Hegel et al. [22] showed that performance on the CUAD dataset could be increased
by incorporating visual queues into model inputs. Chalkidis et al. [11] introduced the
Legal General Language Understanding Evaluation (LexGLUE) benchmark to stan-
dardize an answer on whether current state-of-the-art models can generalize across
various tasks in the legal domain.
Vaswani et al. [68] initially presented the transformer, but the architecture has
since then been developed for many diﬀerent use-cases such as the encoder-only mod-
els BERT[14] and RoBERTa[37] and decoder-only models like GPT2[49] and GPT3[6].
Central for the performance of transformer models are the attention mechanism,
which has been the subject of much research[13, 26, 67, 69, 74]. Sajjad et al. [58]
showed that models like BERT, RoBERTa and XLNet can be reduced in size "up to
40%, while maintaining up to 98% of their original performance".
These works forms form the foundation of the thesis, which has the objectives set
forth in Section 1.2
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Research question and objective
This thesis aims to recreate, analyze, and enhance the closed-domain extractive Ques-
tion and Answering model proposed by Hendrycks et al. [23] based on the Contract
Understanding Atticus Dataset (CUAD) with the perspective of using it in a human-
in-the-loop legal contract review system. This is done by working with the following
sub-problems:
• Setup a modern single-node multi-GPU training environment that allows for
eﬃcient experiments with both model architectures and data manipulations
• Thoroughly examine the CUAD dataset to interpret and understand model
behavior and seek performance increases through data quality improvements
• Analyse and interpret attention weights from the model outputs on legal domain
task to enlighten model performance
• Assess model performance metrics from CUAD and litterateur to establish rea-
sonable evaluation metrics for the task.
• Explore the inclusion of other data sources to improve model performance
• Review methods and possibilities for boosting the usability of the RoBERTa-
based span-selection QA system in a production setting
Additionally, it is a clear goal of this thesis to provide easy access to the training
framework presented and the trained models.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Overview
5
1.3
Overview
This section gives an overview of what can be expected from the diﬀerent thesis sec-
tions. The associated source code can be found on the thesis authors’ Github page,
with a link in Appendix, Section A.1. Appendix, Section A.1 also contains links to the
Weights and Bias projects with in-depth data about model performance and results,
along with instructions for obtaining the best performing model(s) presented in this
thesis.
The following is an overview of the chapters in the thesis:
Chapter 2:
A theoretical motivation for Question and Answering within natural
language processing, along with fundamental theory about the transformer model
architecture and its training.
Chapter 3:
An overview of the datasets used in this thesis, along with the machine
learning operation tools used to facilitate the training and monitoring of the models
described.
Chapter 4:
In-depth descriptions of the initial modeling based on the original pro-
posal by CUAD implemented in a new framework along an evaluation setup
Chapter 5:
Deep dive into the analysis of model performance based on the archi-
tecture and evaluation framework presented in Chapter 4
Chapter 6:
Attempts to enhance the values of the models presented in Chapter
5 from a production perspective, including dataset manipulations, transfer learning
from other datasets, and experiments with dataset size reductions.
Chapter 7:
The conclusion of thesis
==PAGE:14==
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter presents background knowledge covering question answering (QA) and
the transformer architecture. It provides an overview of the mechanisms within trans-
formers and QA needed to understand the thesis but does not include all details of
their implementation and the theory behind them. For this, the reader is referred to
the papers written about the subjects in the bibliography.
2.1
Question Answering
Question Answering (QA) is a task from computer science within NLP and infor-
mation retrieval (IR)[12]. Information retrieval covers processes such as identifying
documents and paragraphs with high similarity to a search query. Due to the scope
outlined in Section 1.2 IR will not be covered in this thesis, as it falls outside the
scope, even though it is a central part of most production QA systems.
There are multiple QA task classiﬁcations based on the models’ goals, inputs, and
outputs, but most can be covered by the two major categories: open-domain QA and
closed-domain QA.
Deﬁnitions of the two terms vary across papers[4, 15, 43, 73], but in general open-
domain systems refer to systems where the input (question) does not include any
context, and the systems have a large corpus of documents that it processes to identify
relevant documents and paragraphs as shown by Chen et al. [12] on Wikipedia data.
This often entails document retrievers, a concept from IR, but it has been shown that
state-of-the-art performance also can be obtained from large transformer models that
"memorize" facts during pre-training[6, 54, 73]. Systems with access to a non-ﬁxed
database that relies on document retrievers or other techniques are termed open-book,
whereas a system with the entire corpus of knowledge "memorized" is considered a
closed-book system. The system presented by Brown et al. [6] is an example of a
closed-book system, whereas Chen et al. [12] is an open-book system.
Closed domain systems are designed only to answer questions about a speciﬁc
domain. This could be mathematics, physics, chemistry, or something completely
diﬀerent and it might very well entail only operating with a ﬁxed set of questions in
that domain [4, 15]
Reading comprehension, also referred to as extractive QA or span selection QA, is
a category of QA tasks where the answer is found in a provided context. Extractive
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Background
QA is, by some researchers, seen as a subset of the open-domain system[43], though
the terminology used in this thesis falls into both categories.
Open-book closed-
domain RC is the focus of this thesis, and models presented in Chapter 5 and 6
would constitute the process after IR in a more extensive system that extracts the
answers after the relevant subset of the corpus has been identiﬁed.
2.2
Attention is all you need
Natural language processing has received much attention in recent years due to the
advance of the transformer model. Models based on the transformer architecture are
at the time of writing among the top performers[53] on the most well know NLP
tasks such as SQuAD v1[51] and SQuAD v2[52]. Furthermore, it has shown massive
improvements in the task of machine translation, generally outperforming Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) [68], and transformer-based models are currently powering
Google Translate[21].
The transformer architecture was originally presented by Vaswani et al. [68]. This
paper presents an alternative to complex recurrent and convolutional neural net-
works (CNN) by reducing sequential computation as seen done with Extended Neural
GPU[27], ConvS2S[18], and ByteNet[28]. The proposed transformer architecture is
solely based on attention, a concept explained in Section 2.2.2, and thus more paral-
lelizable than the models mentioned earlier. This is due to the way it processes data.
Unlike the RNN, which needs to process input data sequentially, meaning that the
computation of hidden states hi of an input xi, is dependent on hi−1, the transformer
architecture is non-sequential and thus processes the entire input sequence at once
instead of word by word. This is also why transformer models are better at long-range
context dependencies, as they can evaluate the entire context simultaneously, whereas
RNNs and Long short-term memory (LSTM) models depend on previously computed
internal hidden states. To mitigate some of the problems with long-range context de-
pendencies, RNNs and LSTMs have been extended to be bi-directional, meaning that
the input is encoded from both start and end direction, allowing for words at the
end of the sentence to have an eﬀect on the hidden states in the beginning, but the
transformer-based architecture still outperforms these alterations[53]. Compared to
CNNs for sentence classiﬁcation, Transformers also has advantages due to the many
diﬀerent kernel sizes needed to handle a wide variety of text dependencies, based
on the notion of a 2x2 kernel modeling word duplets, 3x3 kernel handling triplets,
etc.[29, 68]
2.2.1
The architecture
As presented in its original form, the transformer architecture uses an encoder-decoder
structure, where the encoder consumes a sequence of symbols; in the case of text input,
this would be tokenized words or embedding. In general, the input can be described
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Attention is all you need
9
as [x1, x2, ..., xn], n < Dinputlimit, where n is the length of the input and Dinputlimit
a parameter of the model that deﬁnes the maximum inputs span. This parameter is
often ﬁxed at 512[14, 37, 68] as it provides a good balance between model complexity
and input size because the complexity of attention scales quadratically in the input
size.
The encoder then produces a continuous output [z1, z2, ..., zn].
Given z the
decoder then produces an output sequence [y1, y2, ..., yn] of symbols one by one in an
auto-regressive manner also consuming the previously generated symbols alongside
the output of the encoder for each step [56, 68].
Though it varies across implementations, the fundamental logic of the encoder-
decoder structure is that the encoder, in the text case, constitutes a language model
converting the tokenized input sequence and transforming it into a language represen-
tation in latent space. The decoder part of the model then takes this representation
and generates an output sequence. Vaswani et al. [68] showed this for a translation,
as the model is trained on the WMT 2014 English-German dataset[5]. In general,
some auto-regressive structure is needed in the model for the translation task else;
the entire output should be predicted at once, somewhat equivalent to translating a
sentence by translating each word individually without consideration to the rest of
the translation, which does not yield a good translation for apparent reasons. Trans-
former models can also exist as encoder-only and decoder-only forms, which will be
explained in Section 2.2.4
Figure 2.1. Visualizations from Vaswani et al. [68] of the transformer architecture
The encoder (left side of the model in Figure 2.1) consists of a stack of N = 6
identical layers.
Each layer receives the same input of symbols with a positional
encoding applied. This is then passed to the ﬁrst of the two sub-layers, the multi-
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Background
headed self-attention. Dropout is applied to the sub-layer’s output and then combined
with the residual connection and normalized. The normalized data is then passed
through a fully connected layer with a residual connection where the input is added
and normalized. As with the ﬁrst sub-layer dropout is also applied here. Please note
that the output of each layer is the same dimensionality to facilitate the residual
connections. This size is referred to as Dmodel.
The decoder part of the model also consists of a stack of N = 6 layers. The
decoder implements an extra sub-layer in addition to the ones implemented in the
encoder. This is a Multi-Headed Attention on the outputs of the encoder that also has
a residual connection. The self-attention layer of the decoder is also slightly modiﬁed
to "prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions"[68]. This ensures that
the predictions for position j cannot attend to position j + 1.
2.2.2
Attention
Attention is a mechanism for models to decipher what it should focus on in a given
input.
"It is inspired by the biological systems of humans that tend to focus on
the distinctive parts when processing large amounts of information"[45]. It has been
applied across many tasks in deep learning with various implementations [2, 40, 45].
The transformer architecture presented by Vaswani et al. [68] uses an attention
mechanism, doubt "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" by the authors, which is identical
to the dot product attention presented by Luong et al. [40] with the addition of a
scaling factor of
1
√dk where dk is the dimension of the queries and keys.
Figure 2.2. Visualizations from Vaswani et al. [68] of the multi-headed attention mechanism
The full multi-head self-attention architecture can be seen in Figure 2.2. The input
to the "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" is the query (Q) and key (K) vectors of dimen-
sion dk and value (V) vector of dimension dv, which are calculated from the product
between the input embeddings and the respective weight matrices W Q, W K, W v. In
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Attention is all you need
11
the base model these matrices have the size dk = dv =
Dmodel
hiddensize=64 and their param-
eters are part of the training process. The actual implementation of the attention is
compacted into a set of matrix multiplications described in Equation 2.1.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(2.1)
The multi-head attention is h stacked Scaled Dot-Product Attention layers which
allow the model to "attend to diﬀerent representation subspaces at diﬀerent positions"[68],
improving the capability to focus on diﬀerent positions. As mentioned earlier the out-
put of each sub-layer in the model should be Dmodel which is why the h attention
heads are concatenated and passed through a linear layer. This can be expressed as
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W O
where headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(2.2)
Having the projections W y
i being matrices of shape W y
i ∈Rdmodel×dy where y ∈
{Q, K, V }
2.2.3
Tokenization, embeddings, and positional encoding
Transformer models cannot work directly with text; thus, a tokenization strategy
must be used to break down the text into smaller discrete information elements. This
can be achieved by methods such as the SentencePiece algorithm[33] implemented
in ALBERT[35], XLNet[77], and T5[50] and the WordPiece algorithm[60] used in
BERT[14].
Both are subword-based tokenizers, which lie between a word tokenizer that splits
any sentence into words, usually on space, and the character-based tokenizer that
splits a given text into characters. The beneﬁt of a word tokenizer is that the model
receives a diﬀerent input for every word, which lets it better distinguish between
elements, but this comes with the drawback of a considerable vocabulary size since
the English language has 170k words, but only 256 characters[57].
The character level tokenizer resolves the issue but is faced by another. Since
each token is passed to the model and transformer models have a limit on the length
of input sequence accepted, a word like "contract" would have a tokenized size of 7,
making the text span a model can see at any given time minimal. This thesis will
not detail it, but the subwords-based tokenizers seek to combine the best from both
approaches. The output of all these tokenizations is a list of discrete values and a
lookup table to decode the encoding.
Transformers use learned embeddings comparable to other sequence transduction
models that convert the input tokens to vectors of size Dmodel [68].
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.3. BERT Embedding visualization from Devlin et al. [14]
Since the transformer architecture does not process data sequentially with a re-
currence or using convolutions, it does not have any sense of understanding of the
ordering of words. Thus we encode information about the absolute and relative posi-
tioning of the words into the embedding. This is done using "positional encoding"[68]
of the same shape Dmodel as the input embeddings, so they can be summed and not
aﬀect the input size, as seen in Figure 2.3. This is done using sine and cosine functions
of speciﬁc frequencies as seen in Equation 2.3, but other methods also exist[18].
PE(pos, 2i) = sin(
pos
1000
2i
dmodel
)
PE(pos, 2i + 1) = cos(
pos
1000
2i
dmodel
)
(2.3)
"where pos is the position and i is the dimension"[68]. A graphic representation
of the encoding can be seen in Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4. Positional encoding across embedding dimensions generated with code from
Tensorﬂow[1]. Shows the token position along the y-axis and embedding dimension along
the x-axis
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Training BERT Transformers
13
2.2.4
BERT & RoBERTa
The transformer model used in this thesis, is based on the Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers architecture (BERT) ﬁrst presented by Devlin
et al. [14] speciﬁcally the BERT-base model (see Section 5.1). This model uses an
encoder-only architecture similar to the encoder introduced by Vaswani et al. [68].
This is because the pre-training of the model does not require an auto-regressive
decoder structure. Instead, BERT is pre-trained using the unsupervised learning tech-
niques masked language modeling and next sentence predictions (see Section 2.2.4)
on 3,300 million words[14] and it achieved state-of-the-art performance when it was
initially published on a large set of tasks within NLP[14]. The BERT model uses a
30,000 token WordPiece[60] embedding with a special set of tokens, to indicate ele-
ments such as separation of inputs and a classiﬁcation token called [SEP] and [CLS].
Most transformer model a more extensive set of special tokens, some of which are
shown in Appendix Table A.1.
It was later shown by Liu et al. [37] (RoBERTa) that the BERT model performance
can be further optimized, extracting much more performance. As mentioned, BERT-
based models are encoder-only architectures, but decoder-only architectures also exist,
with the most well-known being the GPT-3 model presented by Brown et al. [6], which
is often used for tasks such as text generation. This thesis is limited to experiments
with encoder-only style architectures.
2.3
Training BERT Transformers
Learning strategies within machine learning can commonly be segmented into two
groups: supervised and unsupervised learning related to labeled and unlabelled data.
Unsupervised learning is often associated with outlier detection and clustering, whereas
supervised is often used for classiﬁcation and regression.
A large part of the dominance of the transformer-based model on NLP tasks has
been due to the excellent results obtained from deep unidirectional architecture with
rich unsupervised pre-training[14]. RoBERTa has been pre-trained on over 160GB of
uncompressed unlabelled text data, and with a relatively small ﬁne-tuning using su-
pervised methods, it has shown great results[37] across well know NLP challenges such
as SQuAD, GLUE[71], and RACE[34]. The implementation of this learning strategy
can be segmented into two phases: the unsupervised pre-training using Masked Lan-
guage Modelling and Next Sentence Prediction and the supervised ﬁne-tuning. This
second phase of the process often includes transfer learning where ﬁne-tuned mod-
els or model segments are further optimized and ﬁne-tuned for other tasks than the
original purpose, such as a model developed for the SQuAD dataset being used as a
starting point for the extraction of contract elements as seen in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Background
2.3.1
Pre-training
The MLM training procedure is focused on training a deep bi-directional representa-
tion within the models. It is done by taking a fraction of the tokens in the model
input, masking them, and then predicting the original label of those masked tokens.
The objective function of this task is a cross-entropy loss on the labels of the masked
tokens[37], that is obtained by passing the transformer output through an MLM-head,
similar to the logic presented for extractive QA presented in Section 4.1.2. However,
instead of having an output shape equal to the input span, the output size is equal
to the vocabulary size. The task looks like the one presented in Equation 2.4 for a
model using a word-based tokenizer.
[CLS] The name of this [MASK] is Supplier Agreement [EOS]
(2.4)
NSP is focused on incorporating cross-sentence relationships between two sen-
tences. It is a trivial training process where the model is provided with two sentences
A and B where there is a 50% chance that B is the correct sentence following A in
the corpus and 50% that it is not. Both these tasks have been shown to be very
beneﬁcial for RC and Natural Language Inference (NLI) tasks[14], but Liu et al. [37]
later proved that removing NSP from the pre-training actually can be beneﬁcial for
performance on some tasks. Like MLM training, a transformer on NSP also requires
a particular head, but in this case, it just has two output logits indicating if sentence
B is the next sentence. This is at the core of the versatility of the transformer models,
as adapting to a new task often only requires changing the model head.
2.3.2
Fine-tuning and transfer learning
Transfer learning is a learning strategy where performance on a target task is improved
by utilizing representations learned on a source task[55, 72] and it is part of the reason
why transformer models have performed so well on a wide range of NLP tasks[72] along
with the easy access to state-of-the-art pre-trained models like BERT and RoBERTa
through open-source frameworks like Transformers.
For usage of these pre-trained models in span-selection QA, the most straightfor-
ward approach is to pass the output of the transformer through a fully connected
layer, having the output produce two values for each position in the input related
to the likelihood of a given position being start- and end position of the answer (see
Section 4.1.1). Other tasks include spam classiﬁcation, where the simple implemen-
tation has a single or two output logits after a fully connected layer for predicting
spam or non-spam based on the entire input. Typical for these tasks is that they can
often be trained with very few resources compared to the unsupervised part, as will
be seen in Chapter 5 and 6 and shown by Liu et al. [36] for the binary classiﬁcation
problem related to spam ﬁltering. Due to computing restraints speciﬁed in Section
3.3 this thesis will not investigate the improvements that can be obtained from the
pre-training.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Performance metrics
15
2.4
Performance metrics
In QA tasks like SQuAD 2.0, rankings and performance measures are based on the
exact match EM and F1 scores. Exact match is deﬁned as predicting the exact answer
for a given context, often with the answer and prediction cleaned for whitespace
characters and punctuation and converted to lower case. F1 is a less strict metric
related to the average overlap between question ground truths and predictions. It is
calculated by treating the prediction and ground truth as a bag tokens and computing
their similarity as in Equation 2.5 where tp is the number of tokens that are shared
between the prediction and ground truth, fp is the number of tokens in the prediction
that is not in the ground truth label, and fn is the number of tokens that are in the
ground truth but not in the prediction[51].
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall , where
precision =
tp
tp + fp, recall =
tp
tp + fn
(2.5)
Evaluating a given model’s performance is done using a Macro EM[51], termed
EM in this thesis, which is the total percentage of prediction that matches any of its
ground truth labels across the dataset. The macro F1 score, termed F1, the maximum
F1 score between the predictions and the answers associated with a given question,
averaged over all the questions.
If the predictions have conﬁdence probabilities, one can seek to tune the model’s
precision/recall trade-oﬀby thresholding the conﬁdence probability that determines
whether something is a prediction.
In these cases, measures such as Area Under
the Precision-Recall, "Precision at %X Recall," and the AUPR curve are often used.
The measures used to assess model performance will be further discussed in multiple
sections throughout the thesis.
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Data and tools
This section presents central elements concerning the training setup, machine learning
frameworks, and data sources. As this thesis only experiments with the ﬁne-tuning
stage of the transformer model training, the pre-training dataset will not be discussed.
For detail surrounding that, the reader is referred to the original papers BERT by
Devlin et al. [14], Attention is all you need by Vaswani et al. [68], and RoBERTa by
Liu et al. [37].
3.1
Stanford Question Answering Dataset
The Standford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) is one of the largest and most
popular publicly available datasets for reading comprehension tasks within machine
learning[51, 52, 53].
It exists in two versions 1.1 and 2.0.
The 1.1 dataset is a
collection of "questions posed by crowdworkers on a set of reading passages from
Wikipedia articles, where the answer to every question is a segment of text, or span
from the corresponding passage. The 2.0 dataset expands this by adding questions
that are unanswerable[53]. Together, the dataset has 100.000 answerable and 50.000
unanswerable questions, where crowdworkers have written the impossible questions
to look similar to the answerable ones.
From table 3.1 one can see the general structure of questions posed to the reading
passage found in Appendix B.1. The reasoning for including unanswerable questions
is to make the models applicable to use cases where the answer is not guaranteed to
exist in the text[51]. In the remainder of this thesis SQuAD will reefer to version 2.0 of
SQuAD and the dataset will only be used in Chapter 6 for experiments with transfer
learning and its eﬀect on performance, thus for a more in-depth understanding of
Question
Answer
Who was the Norse leader?
Rollo
What century did the Normans ﬁrst gain their separate identity?
10th century
What is France a region of?
<EMPTY>
Table 3.1. Question examples from the SQuAD dataset. The associated text paragraph
can be found in the appendix B.1
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Data and tools
the dataset the reader is referred to the original papers presenting the dataset or
derivative analytical work.
3.2
Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset
The Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset (CUAD) is a collection of contracts
with more than 13.000 annotations created by legal experts related to 41 diﬀerent
questions[23]. The dataset and material associated with the paper[23] consist of the
510 contracts obtained from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
through the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR) system.
The dataset provides these documents in PDF and text formats, where the text ver-
sion likely is obtained using OCR since it contains Unicode characters one would not
expect from a human transcription, such as zero width space (\u200b) and no-break
space (\xa0), but this is not mentioned in the paper or any associated resources[23].
The paper also includes 8.6 gigabytes of unlabelled contract data from SEC ﬁlings
useful for MLM or NSP.
The authors of CUAD have provided the contracts in a pre-processed format sim-
ilar to the one presented with SQuAD[51, 52]. This is a JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) ﬁle that consists of a list of data entries where each entry corresponds to a
contract with the associated questions and their respective answer spans and a binary
variable indicating if the question is impossible to answer. This allows for the uti-
lization of the large ecosystem around the training of models on the existing SQuAD
dataset.
The 41 questions used for annotations are formulated in the same way as seen
below. The "<Label Category>" is one of the 41 categories seen in Appendix Table
B.1 such as "Non-Compete", and the "details" are deﬁnitions of that label category
created by the authors also found in Appendix Table B.1.
Highlight the parts (if any) of this clause related to "<Label Category>".
Details: <Label CategoryDescription>[23]
Every contract thus has 41 questions, each with ≥0 answers, that can be located
anywhere in the contact.
3.2.1
Quality of annotations
According to Hendrycks et al. [23], the CUAD dataset might be the best high-quality
publicly available dataset for the training of deep learning models for extracting legal
contract elements, which is also evident from the paper title "An Expert-Annotated
NLP Dataset for Legal Contract Review"[23], but it does have some caveats. During
an analysis of answer spans, it was discovered that the actual text marked as the
answer sometimes occurred multiple times in the contract text, but with only the ﬁrst
occurrence marked as the answer. As seen in Figure 3.1 the total number of marked
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset
19
answers in the training dataset is around 11k, but exact and fuzzy matching on the
answer spans reveals approx 110k and 920k matches, respectively.
Correcting for
categories with the signiﬁcant class imbalances, along with ﬁltering out dates where
it is diﬃcult to say with high conﬁdence that the text should have been marked as an
answer, the exact match on answers is 7227, fuzzy matching answers are 7617, and
the original dataset has 7103 marked answer.
Figure 3.1. Distribution of marked answers across categories on the training dataset. Exact
match is the answers as marked in the dataset. The fuzzy matching is the same, but with
the text cleaned of spaces and special characters.
There is an argument to be made that there will be some of these exact and
fuzzy matching answer spans that are false positives, where one cannot infer that
this is the correct answer to the question.
An example is the same date occur-
ring in a diﬀerent context. Another example is with acronyms for one of the par-
ties used where it is not immediately clear if it is a contractual party, a third
party, or something else. That being said, the dataset does contain examples like
the following: The contract named "XinhuaSportsEntertainmentLtd_20070221_F-
1_EX-99.4_645553_EX-99.4" is between "CHINA ECONOMIC INFORMATION
SERVICE OF XINHUA NEWS AGENCY" and "XINHUA FINANCIAL NETWORK
LIMITED".
"...THIS AGREEMENT is made the 15th day of December 2001.\nBE-
TWEEN \n \n(1) CHINA
ECONOMIC
INFORMATION
SERVICE
OF
XINHUA
NEWS
AGENCY , the organisation within the Xinhua
News Agency that is responsible for news and information operations and
business, registered in the People\’s Republic of China with oﬃces at 57
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Data and tools
Xuanwumen Xidajie, Beijing, the People\’s Republic of China ( " CEIS ");
and\n\n(2) XINHUA
FINANCIAL
LIMITED
LIMITED ..."
From the snippet above, only "CEIS" is marked as an answer to the Parties
question, even though the dataset has the full company name marked as an answer
elsewhere. In addition to this Chalkidis et al. [11] also raise the following concerns:
• Some answers can be semi-redacted such as "____, 1989" as an answer for the
agreement date
• Indirect mentions can be part of the answers such as "supplier" as answers to
the Parties questions
• The dataset contains both short entity-level and long paragraph-level answers
such as "Service agreement" for the Document Name and "Imprimis Pharma-
ceuticals, Inc. for Parties and paragraph-level (long) answers (e.g., If any of
the conditions speciﬁed in Section 8 shall not have been fulﬁlled when and as
required by this Agreement, or by the Closing Date, or waived in writing by
Capital Resources, this Agreement and all of Capital Resources obligations here-
under may be canceled [...] except as otherwise provided in Sections 2, 7, 9 and
10 hereof." for Termination for Convenience
These are all elements one must consider when evaluating training performance
and optimization. They will be further investigated and experimented with in Chapter
6 to search for improvements in model performance. Additionally, it should also be
noted that the unanswerable part of this dataset is not created in the same way
as SQuAD. The unanswerable questions in SQuAD 2.0 are written adversarially to
look similar to the answerable questions, but where the context does not contain
the actual answers[53]. In the SQuAD example in Appendix Section B.1, this would
be a question like "What is France a region of?" [52], which seems related, but is
unanswerable from the context. The unanswerable questions from CUAD are simply
a random selection of contract spans with one of the 41 diﬀerent questions associated,
which arguably is less informative and should be a more straightforward challenge.
3.2.2
Question type occurrence
There is a diﬀerence in where one can expect to ﬁnd the answers to the posed questions
dependent on the question category. The question types can be segmented into three
diﬀerent categories. The ones most commonly found on the contract’s ﬁrst couple
of pages in what is termed the preamble by Chalkidis et al. [9]. These are elements
such as the Document Name, Parties, Agreement Date, and Eﬀective Date. The small
group of elements that look to be located towards the end of the contracts, including
Governing Law, and Third Party Beneﬁciary and the remainder of questions that look
to be distributed more uniformly across pages such as Audit Rights, Cap On Liability,
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Contract Understanding Atticus Dataset
21
and Non-Compete. In Figure 3.2 one can see the distribution of the relative position
of the answers in their respective contracts using the segmentations mentioned above.
The answer location used in the ﬁgure is deﬁned at the position of the ﬁrst character
marked as the answer. The ﬁgure clearly shows that the marked answers for some
question categories have a noticeably higher probability of being in particular sections
of the contract. The plot is only based on the originally marked answers, as this
thesis does not have the resources or competencies to check and validate the potential
answers presented in Section 3.2.1.
Figure 3.2. Answer segmentation distribution using segmentation indicated in Appendix
Table B.1
3.2.3
Preprocessing of data
The preprocessing of the dataset takes the aforementioned JSON ﬁle and converts it
into three elements: a list of examples, a list of features, and a dataset. Each
example constitutes a single question, contract (q, C) pair. This pair consists of the
answers (if any), the context, which in this setting is the full contract text, an unique
id, and the actual question. As one example is created for each question and contract
pair a total of questions × contracts = 41 × 510 = 20, 910 examples exists.
The features are created from the examples and each feature constitutes a data
point for training/testing/validation and is a section of the contract that can ﬁt into
a transformer model, meaning that the feature’s total tokenized size ≤Dinput_size.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Data and tools
This also means that the features are dependent on a given model’s tokenizer. Thus
BERT and RoBERTa would be unable to use the same dataset due to the diﬀerent
tokenization strategies. The number of features is dependent on the hyperparameter
termed doc_stride, which controls how a context that is larger than Dinput_size is
tokenized. The context is split into multiple features using a sliding window, where
the sliding window is moved doc_stride tokens on each step. Thus each feature is
some section of the contract that potentially overlaps with other features, a question,
a boolean value indicating whether or not this section contains an answer, the answer
locations if there are any, and multiple helper methods for converting back and forth
from the tokenization and original contract.
The dataset is simply the features in a format that can be processed by the deep
learning framework consisting of the following: start and end positions of the answer
spans, the token type ids, the [CLS] token index, the p mask containing information
about where the tokenized answer is located, the binary indicator variable showing if
there is an answer the question, and ﬁnally an index variable for associating the data
point with the original feature object.
Figure 3.3.
Contract processing ﬂow for converting a single contract into a series of
features and data points
With more than 99% of sections not containing an actual answer using a sliding
window size of 256 tokens and a maximum question size of 64 tokens, the dataset is
heavily imbalanced towards non-answerable questions. This can have unintended ef-
fects on performance[32], and consequently, methods for extracting a balanced dataset
have also been implemented that randomly removes a portion of the impossible an-
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Experiment Environment and MLOps
23
swers.
Initially, the entire logic for preprocessing the data described above was imple-
mented from scratch, but to ensure better comparability between the work done in
this thesis and the work done by Hendrycks et al. [23], their framework, originating
from the transformers library, was eventually adopted.
This thesis does not experiment with the actual sliding window size thus it can be
assumed from hereinafter that the doc_stride = 256 and max_query_length = 64.
After pre-processing, which currently requires around 300GB of RAM for 60 workers,
the list of examples in its pickled size is 7.5GB, the list of features 12.5GB, and
the dataset 16.3GB. The train dataset has a total size of 1.134.631 datapoints with
15.519 being answerable and 1.119.112 being unanswerable. The test set has a total
size of 154.627 datapoints with 2.494 answerable questions and 152.133 unanswerable
questions using the same notion. Please note that the number of answerable dat-
apoints is larger due to the sliding window procedure and for reasons explained in
Section 6.1.1.
3.3
Experiment Environment and MLOps
Prior to and throughout the modeling phase of the thesis, a large amount of resources
went into creating a reproducible and capable machine learning setup that could al-
low for proper training and testing of the models in diﬀerent conﬁgurations. This
also includes experiments with distributed data processing to speed up training and
validation. This thesis will not cover these experiments, which are evident from the
source code.
All machine learning experiments listed in the report have been performed on
Google Cloud AI Workbench, a hosted instance of JupyterLab1, using the open-source
machine learning framework Pytorch[46]. This was chosen as it provided a controlled
environment for experiments and allowed for easy infrastructure scalabilities such as
memory and GPUs. The compute instance was an n1-highmem-32 instance hosted in
the europe-west4-b zone with 4 Nvidia Tesla T4 GPUs. The details of the compute
instance and python library versions can be found in the thesis source code repository.
To facilitate the training of the models and streamline the process of setting up and
maintaining the multi-GPU environment, the Pytorch Lightning framework[17] was
chosen in combination with the Weights & Biases developer tool2 for tracking progress
and sharing results.
1https://jupyter.org/
2https://wandb.ai
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Data and tools
3.4
Hugging Face Transformers
Hugging Face is a leading NLP company that has built a large community around
its open-source NLP frameworks and it is the company behind the popular Python
library Transformers[75]. Transformers provides pre-built and pre-trained standard-
ized implementations of popular transformer models such as RoBERTa[37], BERT[14],
and XLNet[77] built directly on top of the Pytorch ecosystem. Furthermore, it allows
for the loading and sharing of model checkpoints in a well-documented and simple
way.
As part of the initial phase of research into the transformer architecture, the
ﬁrst transformer model was built from scratch in Pytorch, based on the architecture
presented by Vaswani et al. [68] and implemented it as by Rush [56]. It was trained
and tested on the SQuAD RC challenge to have a known benchmark to conﬁrm
correct workings.
This approach was discarded for multiple reasons. Firstly, the goal of this project,
as described in Section 1.2, is to improve the model performance on the CUAD dataset
and share the results, with the aim of letting it be used by others. Thus it does not
make sense to invest resources into developing a new transformer framework, when one
already exists that is widely adopted. Furthermore, the Transformers library comes
with the beneﬁt of better optimized vectorized operations, rapid experimenting with
multiple model architectures, and most importantly pre-trainied model checkpoints
for BERT and RoBERTa. This thesis is limited to a single host multi-GPU setup,
rendering training a full model impossible as the authors of RoBERTa used "1024 V100
GPUs for approximately one day"[37]. Consequently, Transformers was chosen for
the transformer architecture part of the model. In Appendix Figure A.1 is an example
of how simple an extractive QA prediction can be made using the library.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter covers the initial modeling choices used in the experiments and analysis
presented in Chapter 5. The modeling is based on the RoBERTa-base model from
Hendrycks et al. [23] along with the associated CUAD source code. In addition, the
chapter presents how the task-speciﬁc heads have been modeled and the logic for
calculating predictions along with the loss function and evaluation strategy.
The
architecture and framework presented here will be evolved in Chapter 6 to enhance
model performance.
4.1
Model architecture
The answers to the dataset question are not common knowledge that the models
can internalize. Thus we formulate the problem of obtaining contract elements as
an extractive QA task where the models should mark the correct answer span in the
context if there is one.
The model architecture is as seen in Figure 4.1 with the transformer output of
shape Dinput_size × Dmodel. To use the model for extractive QA, the output of the
transformer model gets passed through a simple, fully connected layer termed the
QA head to obtain the prediction logits, a process explained in Section 4.1.1. A post-
processing procedure is applied to these output logits to extract the actual model
predictions.
The learned tokenizations will not be discussed in this thesis as Liu et al. [37]
showed, based on the work of Radford et al. [49], that changing the tokenization
from the learned character-level Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE)[61] in the original paper
transformer paper to a larger byte-level BPE only slightly altered performance on
some NLP tasks for the worse. Furthermore, the limitations outlined in Section 3.3
hinder experiments with other tokenizations as it could require rerunning parts of
the unsupervised learning described in Section 2.2.4, which is something outside the
computational budget of this thesis.
4.1.1
RoBERTa input and output
Inspired by Devlin et al. [14]’s approach to solving the SQuAD v1.1 challenge, the
models tested by Hendrycks et al. [23] take the question and context (q, c) pair as a
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Methodology
single packed sequence model input. This utilizes the model’s learned structure from
NSP, where the input is split an A and B embedding separated by a special [SEP]
token and with each segment having a learned embedding added to every token to
indicate which segment it belongs as seen in Figure 2.3. The question and answering
head QAh implemented uses a in_features : Dmodel and out_features : 2 fully
connected layer. The notion is that each vector constituting the transformer output
of an input token is converted into two logits, with the ﬁrst dimension termed S ∈RH
related to the likely hood of the answer starting at this token position and the second
termed E ∈RHis related to the likelihood of the answer ending at this location. Thus
a (q, c) pair results in a 2 × Dinput_size output.
It should be noted that any (q, c) sequences that do not have a length of Dinput_size
in its tokenized state is padded or truncated to the Dinput_size mentioned in Section
3.2.3, as the model does not have a mechanism for handling other sizes of inputs.
This thesis used Dinput_size = 512 as this is the shape used in RoBERTa-base and
BERT-base [14, 37].
Figure 4.1. Illustration of the QA task adaptation of BERT presented by Devlin et al. [14]
4.1.2
Making predictions
Using the notation from Figure 4.1 where T ′
i is element i of the output sequence
corresponding to the context segment B and Ti the element i in the question segment
A.
Converting the transformer outputs to probabilities is then done as shown in
Equation 4.1.
PSi =
eS(Ti)
∑
j eS(Tj) and PEi =
eE(Ti)
∑
j eE(Tj)
, where S(Ti) and E(Ti) are the logits obtained from QAh(Tok(q, c))
(4.1)
The probability of a prediction for a candidate pair is deﬁned as PSi ×PEj. This
implementation uses the same logic as CUAD, where the prediction score is deﬁned
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Model architecture
27
as the sum of logits Si and Ej for a candidate pair where i ≤j because S and E are
treated as independent and since softmax is a monotonic increasing function. In the
general topk = 1 case we predict sˆ= maxi≥j Si + Ej, where sˆis not the empty/null
answer when sˆ≥snull + τ with τ being a threshold values for the conﬁdence needed
for predicting a non-empty answer. This values is often selected on a dev set. How
the model actually makes an empty prediction is presented in Section 4.2. This is
the theoretical notation underlying the idea of the prediction logic. However, the
implementation, as seen in Section 4.2 diﬀers a bit from it due to implementation
choices and data processing considerations, which often leads to the set of possible
values for i, j being drastically reduced. It should also be noted that i, j ̸∈T as we
never predict the answer to be part of the question.
4.1.3
Objective function
The objective function of the training is the average cross-entropy loss between the S
and the start position of the answer plus E and the end position of the answer. The
loss is implemented using Pytorch[46] and can be described as
ℓ(x, y) = L = {l1, . . . , lN}⊤,
ln = −wyn log
exp(xn,yn)
∑C
c=1 exp(xn,c)
· 1{yn ̸= ignore_index}
(4.2)
where x is the predicted logits, y is the target logits, w is a weight matrix for scal-
ing class loss, N is for the batched setting and spans the data points, and the
ignored_index is used for the case where the start/end positions are outside the
model inputs (these terms are ignored). In the batched cases, as done in this thesis, a
mean reduction is applied to the output ℓ(x, y) = ∑N
n=1
1
∑N
n=1 wyn·⊮{yn̸=ignore_index}ln.
The target logit for an empty prediction is the [CLS] token at index 0. This is because
the "ﬁnal hidden state corresponding to this token is used as the aggregate sequence
representation for classiﬁcation tasks" [14] and has been used extensively in the model
pre-training.
The optimizer used for the ﬁne-tuning is the weight decay variant of the Adam[30]
named AdamW[39]. The conﬁguration is the same as in CUAD[23] with γ = 0.0004(lr),
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, (betas), λ = 0.01(weight decay), ϵ = 1e −08(epsilon). The
optimizer is implemented using a learning rate scheduler that decreases γ linearly
from the initial setting to 0 across the entire training. In this thesis’s training loop, a
warmup period of 100 steps was used where γ increases linearly from 0 to the conﬁg-
ured γ. A setting that seems to be close common in transformer ﬁne-tuning[23, 75].
The full list of speciﬁc training hyperparameters used can be found from the WandB
interactive plots in Appendix Section A.1. The selection of these hyperparameters is
based on what has shown good performance in literature [14, 22, 23, 37] and a few
experiments. This thesis will not cover model optimizations through RoBERTa train-
ing hyperparameters, though the author acknowledges the potential for performance
increases it has.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Methodology
4.2
Evaluation framework
The evaluation framework is based on the notion that a paralegal or lawyer should
verify all predictions and that the model should be presenting a thresholded topk or
n-best set of elements for each (q, C) pair. This diﬀers from the objective function,
but it is assumed that the task is close enough for the objective function to be a good
proxy for optimization, something that will be investigated in Chapter 5 and 6.
The ﬁrst step of the evaluation framework is computing the n-best predictions from
the model outputs. The outputs are passed through Algorithm 1 that calculates the
n-best predictions for each example, which consitutes a (q, C) pair, as presented in
Section 3.2.3. It should be noted that n-best is a parameter determining the number of
predictions to extract for a given example while Nbest is the set returned by Algorithm
1 containing the actual predictions with meta-data. In the algorithm, the term valid
predictions reefers rules determining what candidates are allowed. For example, a
prediction where the start position is after the end position would be discarded. All
inputs to the model are padded or truncated to the size Dinput_size. This also means
that the actual context inside the tokenization might stop at token Dinputsize
2
. These
padded predictions are also eliminated.
All example predictions get their highest
likelihood empty prediction added to Nbest if it is not already a part of Nbest. The
probability of each prediction is then calculated by computing the softmax over the
prediction scores in Nbest. For additional information on the ﬁltering of candidates,
the reader is referred to the source code repository that can be found through the
link in Appendix Section A.1.
P(si) =
exp(si)
∑
j∈Nbest exp(sj) ,
Where si and sj are candidate scores ∈Nbest
(4.3)
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Evaluation framework
29
Algorithm 1 Calculate top-n predictions from the model output
The algorithm makes use of function calls to improve readability. For a more in-depth
explanation, the reader is referred to the associated source code.
1: procedure Compute-Predictions(Examples, outputs, n-best)
2:
N_best ←array[]
3:
feature-to-output ←lookup table from feature to associated output
4:
for each example in Examples do
5:
prelim-preds ←array[]
6:
for each feature in example do
7:
result ←feature-to-output(feature)
8:
start_pred = get_n_best(results.start_logits,n-best)
▷Sorts logits
and outputs n-best of them
9:
end_pred = get_n_best(results.end_logits,n-best)
10:
prelim-preds.append(extract_valid(start_pred, end_pred, feature)) ▷
Obtain all valid permutations of start and end logits
11:
end for
12:
sorted_preds ←top-n-preds(prelim-preds,n-best)
▷n-best predictions
determined by sum of start and end logits
13:
N_best.append(postprocess(sorted_preds)) ▷Add empty prediction if not
present and include metadata
14:
end for
15:
return N_best
16: end procedure
The model performance is evaluated based on the Nbest predictions by the AUPR
metric, AUPR @ 80% recall, and AUPR @ 90% recall making the output dependent
on the n-best parameter. This parameter is ﬁxed at n-best = 20 in this thesis, as
this is the default value in the CUAD source code, and the value is not mentioned
in the paper. First precision and recall are calculated at 100 uniformly distributed
conﬁdence steps between 0 and 1, meaning that at each step, all predictions in Nbest
with lower conﬁdence than confi are not considered. Using the ﬁltered predictions,
precision and recall are then calculated for every question and using these values, the
area under the curve is calculated using the trapezoidal rule implemented in scikit-
learn[47]. This is the evaluation approach presented as relevant for the problem at
hand by Hendrycks et al. [23]. This thesis extends the evaluation to some of the
metrics used in SQuAD, such as evaluating the top prediction using EM and F1 on
both unanswerable and answerable questions. These approaches uses the methodol-
ogy presented in Section 2.4 with a normalized answer for EM and the bag of token
approach for F1. This is included as it provides a more nuanced picture of model
performance across a wider set of tasks, in the authors’ opinion.
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
CUAD
Reimplementation
and Analysis
This section will on the basis of Chapter 3 and 4 explore the performance of the
CUAD RoBERTa-base model presented by Hendrycks et al. [23]. It seeks to reproduce
the results presented in the paper.
From there, it will do a thorough analysis of
the model performance. This analysis will dig into the ﬂexibility of the model in
question formulations, along with explorations and interpretations of the attention
weights produced by the models in a qualitative way. Furthermore, it will look at the
evaluation metrics presented in the paper along with the proposed ones from Chapter
4 to assess the model’s performance and ﬂexibility. It also seeks to understand the
performance diﬀerence across the diﬀerent question categories put forth in CUAD.
5.1
Establishing the baseline
The RoBERTa-base model is the smaller of the two RoBERTa models presented in
CUAD, and the only model experimented with in this thesis even though it has
been shown that task can beneﬁt from training wider and deeper models and then
compressing them.
It has the following parameters (L=12, H=768, A=12, Total
Parameters=110M) where L is the number of layers, A is the number of attention
heads, and H is the hidden size.
Table 5.1 shows the paper listed performance for RoBERTa-base, RoBERTa-large,
the performance of the paper RoBERTa-base model checkpoint obtained through the
CUAD source code repository[23], and the best performance found from training a
RoBERTa-base model from scratch using the CUAD source code hyperparameters.
The original results table presented in CUAD can be found in Appendix Table C.2.
From the results, it is evident that we can reproduce the results presented in
CUAD. The RB-S improves the performance in terms of AUPR and Precision @ 80
% Recall, compared to the paper listed performance. It is also clear that the provided
==PAGE:40==
32
5 CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
Metric
Eval on
Model/Measure
RB-P
RL-P
RB-P-C
RB-S
CUAD
n-best
AUPR
42.6
45.2
33.17
50.39
PREC @ 80%
31.1
34.1
15.26
37.32
PREC @ 90%
-
-
-
-
OWN
top 1
Has Ans F1 (1244)
-
-
81.26
80.73
No Ans (2938)
-
-
55.07
81.62
EM
-
-
58.92
77.60
F1
-
-
62.86
81.37
Table 5.1.
Comparison table from results obtained from model checkpoints, reported
scores, and training of the RoBERTa base model from scratch. RB-P is the RoBERTa-Base
paper reported score. RL-P is the RoBERTa-Large paper reported score. RB-P-C is the
RoBERTa-Base paper checkpoint as the inference model in the thesis validation loop, RB-S
is the RoBERTa-Base model trained from scratch using paper hyperparameters. - indicates
not applicable
checkpoint has not been ﬁne-tuned to the state of model performance listed in the
paper, which is evident from the large discrepancy in AUPR between RB-P and RB-
P-C. Looking at the results, it seems like the increase in performance of the model
AUPR of RB-S is related to it being better, 81.62% vs 55.07%, at correctly predicting
the empty span in the top 1 prediction. The RB-S checkpoint is the checkpoint
obtained from training with the highest AUPR, but the Has Ans F1 measure is lower
for RB-S than RB-P-C. Other checkpoints from the same RB-S run, have a higher
score for the non-AUPR measures, thus AP REC@80% > BP REC@80% ̸⇒AAUP R >
BAUP R, but a high AUPR generally seems to indicate to good performance measures
by the remaining metrics as will be seen in Section 5.2.
It should be noted that the evaluation framework used in this thesis, although
based on the same logic, can be performed a conﬁgurable amount of times through
a training epoch, meaning it has the option to save checkpoints "mid" epoch. This
is not the case for the CUAD source code. The CUAD training loop does not eval-
uate performance as part of training but saves the model weights every epoch and
calculates the scores for checkpoints afterward.
5.2
Validation loss as a proxy for test performance
As mentioned in Chapter 4, we do not directly train the models on the evaluation
metrics, but instead on the cross-entropy loss presented in Section 4.1.3.
This is
the standard for training transformer models[14, 37, 51, 53, 75] for extractive QA.
The CUAD paper does not argue that the objective function chosen is a good proxy
for the evaluation metrics, but looking at the source code, it is directly using logic
implemented in Transformers for the SQuAD extractive QA task. This is an implicit
argument that the same objective function used for SQuAD will obtain good results
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Validation loss as a proxy for test performance
33
on CUAD as the task is fairly similar.
The Pearson Correlation Coeﬃcient depicted in Figure 5.1(b), is a measure of
linear correlation between two variables and is calculated as the relationship between
the covariance of the variables and the product of standard deviations of the sam-
ples. The ﬁgure shows a clear linear correlation between the validation loss and the
evaluation metrics, indicating that the objective function should embed some helpful
knowledge into the model for the task at hand.
The correlation coeﬃcient looks as expected with a negative sign due to the goal
of maximizing the evaluation metrics by minimizing the validation loss. Extracting
the R2 values reveals that there still is much variance that the correlation model
cannot explain, and though 0.55 is a decent correlation, this also means that there
is room for improvements. The Spearman Rank Correlation Coeﬃcient[16] showed
similar patterns that can be found in Appendix Figure C.1.
((a)) Metrics and loss
((b)) Pearson correlation
Figure 5.1. (a) RB-S training run metrics and loss with signs of overﬁtting in validation
loss, but little to none eﬀect on metrics. (b) Pearson correlation between validation loss and
the monitored metrics based on 74 samples obtained from 3 training runs on CUAD using
the RB-S training setup.
It should be noted that Pearson correlation looks at a linear correlation between
the variables; thus, the connection between minimizing the loss and improving model
performance might be more robust than suggested by the plot.
In Figure 5.1(a) is a scatter plot of the training and validation loss along with
the top 1 F1 and EM metrics.
This plot further supports the notion of room for
improvements between the evaluation metrics and the model objective function, as
the training and validation loss "curves" indicates that the models start overﬁtting
around step 300, but the evaluation metrics seem to be aﬀected little to none by it.
Looking at Figure 5.2 it is noticeable that there are many AUPR samples where a
high AUPR does not necessarily lead to a low validation loss. These ﬁndings combined
suggest that in the ﬁnal steps of the training, where the learning rate is relatively low
due to the linear scheduler, the model might not be ﬁnding a local minimum optimal
for the metrics. This will be further discussed in Section 6.4.
==PAGE:42==
34
5 CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
An appropriate next step could be to investigate this correlation between the
metrics and SQuAD, as the modeling used for CUAD has shown excellent results
here[51, 52, 53], and SQuAD does not have the challenges faced by CUAD raised in
Section 3.2.1 and by Chalkidis et al. [11], but this has been left for future work.
Figure 5.2. Evaluation metrics as a function of validation loss based on 74 samples obtained
from 3 training runs on CUAD using the RB-S training setup
5.3
Evaluation framework considerations
As mentioned in the Introduction (Chapter 1) and in the Research Question and
Objective (Section 1.2) an obvious implementation of these models with the current
performance is to work in unison with lawyers and paralegals to speed up and improve
processes like contract review or analysis. The metrics used to assess this performance
are AUPR, Precision @ 80% Recall, and Precision @ 90% Recall. CUAD brings up
the argument that precision of around 30% at these recall levels is roughly equivalent
to 1
3 clauses being relevant, meaning that a lawyer would need to read two irrelevant
clauses/predictions for every correct one[23]. These metrics leave out some critical
information about the performance.
In Table 5.1 it’s evident that 1244 of the (q, C) pairs has an answer and 2938 does
not. The same table also shows that performance increases can be obtained in terms
of AUPR and Precision @ 80% Recall by improving the performance on the empty
predictions.
Based on two interviews with digital transformation project managers at a major
Danish legal company and a New York-based legal technology startup, this thesis will
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Evaluation framework considerations
35
argue that a better indicator of value created by this technology is in the precision
at a low top n like top 3 or top 5 for the Has Ans predictions. This is because the
No Ans predictions would need to be conﬁrmed, as the model architecture does not
present an argument for why the answer is not in the contract. Thus there is not an
easy way of checking the model prediction in a human-in-the-loop system. This is
due to the way the model predicts the empty span: this is "just" predicting the [CLS]
token as seen in Section 4.1.2. Though it might provide an excellent indication to
the lawyer or paralegal, model performance is not good enough to rely on. On the
other hand, the Has Ans predictions include an argument for what the answer is -
the predicted span, allowing the lawyer or paralegal to validate the prediction quickly.
An analogy for this is ﬁnding and validating a solution to NP-complete problems.
In Figure 5.3 the relationship between recall and the number of predictions is
shown. Though the standard deviation and number of predictions are relatively low
on the high conﬁdence threshold (left side) sections, one notices that around the 80%
recall point, the number of predictions grows drastically. With a µ = 1.4 and σ = 2.7
at 80% recall, the number of contracts requiring review might change drastically from
case to case. The distribution of the number of predictions at this recall level can be
found in the Appendix Figure C.2
Based on the this, it is in the opinion of the author that a better evaluation of
extractive QA models intended to work with humans should be evaluated by the
SQuAD-inspired metrics presented in Section 4.2 and seen in Table 5.1, but also
evaluated on the top 3 predictions.
This works by the same logic as top 1, but
Figure 5.3. Mean number of predictions across recall levels with single σ marked, based
on a RB-S model checkpoint on the test set using the standard conﬁdence intervals deﬁned
in Chapter 4
==PAGE:44==
36
5 CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
instead of only using the best prediction, it uses the highest EM, F1, across the top
3. If one of them is correct, it will be a single TP; if all are incorrect, we will treat
the predictions as a single FP. These metrics will provide a much clearer image of
how the model performs across the border. It will also provide more insights into
the expected performance in a production specialized QA system, where the user
will likely be presented with three results as potential answers to a given question.
top 3 was chosen as it seems a reasonable number of answers a person could be
presented in a production system, but depending on the challenge, this value might
vary.
Additionally, top 1, top 3, and top 5 seems to be commonly used in NLP
evaluations[11, 14, 51, 64]. That being said, the only way to truly determine a good
value would be to run a large-scale human study presenting the solutions to lawyers
and paralegals and investigating their interactions with them.
This additional evaluation metric will be included and calculated from the three
highest probability predictions from the n-best = 20 output in the remainder of the
thesis.
Reusing the n-best = 20 instead of simply using n-best = 3 logic is done
because on line 8 and 9 in Algorithm 1 the algorithm extracts the n-best start and
end logits, but since some of them can be invalid due to line 10, we risk getting
sub-optimal predictions, evaluated by the formula set forth in Section 4.1.2, for low
values of n-best. Setting n-best = 1 with the RB-S model on the full test set results in
AUPR≈10; that being said n-best = 20 should overcome this problem and produce
the best predictions as it is unlikely to have such a large set of invalid predictions. It
also has the beneﬁt of allowing to include both measures in model results.
5.4
Analyzing the baseline
5.4.1
Qualitative attention interpretation
Attention is at the transformer’s core; hence interpreting the model’s predictions
ought to be rooted in the attention weights. This dissection of attention weights in
transformer models has been the subject of many papers and the explanation it oﬀers
for model predictions is still debated [13, 26, 69, 70, 74].
Though it does not always provide explanations for model predictions, it can oﬀer
indications of the model’s inner working, as has been shown by Vig and Belinkov [70]
on the decoder-only GPT2 model and Clark et al. [13] on BERT.
Appendix Figure C.4 and C.5 shows the full Model View, a bird’s-eye view of atten-
tion across all layers[69], between the ﬁrst section of contract LIMEENERGYCO_09_09_1999-
EX-10-DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT and the Document Name question seen in
Appendix Section C.2. The patterns described by Clark et al. [13] are identiﬁable
here, such as the precise attention to the next word in layer 0, head 9, the attention to
the previous word in layer 0, head 11, and the aggregation of attention to the [CLS]
token. This is as expected since the ﬁne-tuning performed on the CUAD dataset is
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Analyzing the baseline
37
very small compared to the pre-training; hence, it would be likely to see reoccurring
patterns.
Clark et al. [13] hypothesized that high attention activation to the [SEP] token
could be a sort of no-op for the model. Though there does not exist good evidence
of this, comparing the SQuAD Model View in Appendix Figure C.6 and C.7 with
the CUAD in Appendix Figure C.4 and C.5, it does look like there are fewer cases
in SQuAD. This could indicate that we make better use of the model layers in the
SQuAD trained model, which one would also expect due to the much larger dataset of
160k labeled data points with unique questions instead of 12k data points with a set
of 41 diﬀerent questions. These ﬁndings indicate that the CUAD ﬁne-tuned model
size could be reduced by removing layers and likely still obtain similar performance.
Something that will be investigated in Section 6.3.
Inspecting the Head View, a visualization of attention for one or more attention
heads in a particular layer[69], across the layers, an example of which can be found
in Appendix Figure C.3, it looks like the attention between the question and context
(q, c) is relatively low. Only the second part of the question, the details part described
in Section 3.2, seems to have any connection with the answer span. Though the ﬁgure
only shows a single layer of the model, this seems to be the case across all model
layers. Looking at the same Head View with the SQuAD model, there is a much
larger activation between the question and answer span. Knowing that the CUAD
only contains 41 diﬀerent questions, an explanation could also be that the model has
memorized the questions and that it is maybe not learning properly to connect the
question and context, something that will be tested in Section 5.4.3
The CUAD paper shows that pre-training increased the RoBERTa-base model’s
performance measured by AUPR from 42.6 to 45.2, using 8GBs of unlabelled contract
data. One could expect to ﬁnd a stronger connection between the legal terms using a
model pre-trained for this speciﬁc case, as legal formulation and terms are not a large
part of the pre-training dataset of BERT or RoBERTa. Using the LEGAL-BERT[10]
obtained through Transformers1 and inspecting the Head View using the same (q, c)
pair did not reveal noticeable diﬀerent patterns by visual inspection. Furthermore,
the results in Table 5.1 have shown that the model can achieve at least the same level
of performance without it.
5.4.2
Flexibility in formulations
As mentioned in Section 2.1 closed-domain QA systems can operate with a ﬁxed set
of "allowed" questions or a ﬂexible set. In Section 5.4.1 we hypothesized that the
model might have memorized the set of 41 questions, thus not making it useful for
other questions than the original set or diﬀerent formulations of the original questions.
Investigating the model on a new type of question should be done by increasing the
labeled test dataset, as removing a question from the training set would decrease the
dataset’s size, which has been shown to aﬀect performance across all categories[23]
1nlpaueb/bert-base-uncased-contracts
==PAGE:46==
38
5 CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
severely. This thesis does not have the resources for that and has instead chosen
to look at the adaptability to new question formulations of the existing set, as poor
performance here would support a hypothesis that the model would not work well on
an unseen question. Thus, three new formulations with varying degrees of "similarity"
have been created for every question.
The three new formulations are depicted in Table 5.2. The full-text versions can
be found in Appendix Table B.2 and B.3 or in the source code repository.
Question Set Name
Description
J(A, B)
Reversed
Reversed order of the "details" and "high-
light" parts of the question
-
Altered Small (Alt-S)
Small alterations of the wording
0.48
Altered Large (Alt-L)
Larger alteration of the wording, validated
to have the same meaning by a senior law
student
0.685
Table 5.2. Dataset descriptions and the average Jaccard distance between the tokenized
and original questions. Since the tokenization is case and order insensitive, the score is zero
for the reversed question set
The model ﬂexibility has been tested by running the test inference using the RB-
S model checkpoint with all questions converted to new formulations. The results of
this are depicted in Table 5.3.
The results clearly show that the model does generalize decently to these new
question formulations with no signiﬁcant degradation in performance measures in the
"OWN" category. The new questions formulations do contain a high similarity to the
original question posed, and hence one would also expect the reformulation to have a
close distance to the original one in the embedding vector space discussed in Section
2.2.3, but even the most diﬀerent one, Alt-L, obtains good scores. This indicates that
the model might perform well in a specialized domain as a search engine with ﬂexible
question formulations where the user’s end goal is to obtain the answer to one of the
original questions. To further investigate the model’s ﬂexibility, an experiment could
be to provide the question details for each question to crowdworkers and have them
come up with question formulations that would obtain that piece of knowledge if they
could as a question to a contract. This experiment will be left for future work, along
with the analysis of the adaptation to new question types.
The Degradation in Alt-L measures by the CUAD metrics can be explained by
the fact that Alt-L only contains 34 questions of the original 41 questions. This is
because the author could not formulate the questions diﬀerently enough from the
original formulation within the limited resources of the thesis without imposing a risk
of changing the question’s meaning.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Analyzing the baseline
39
Metric
Eval on
Model/Measure
Original
Reversed
Alt-S
Alt-L
CUAD
n-best
AUPR
50.39
50.53
50.59
44.83
PREC @ 80%
37.32
36.86
-
-
PREC @ 90%
-
-
-
-
OWN
top 1
Has Ans F1
80.73
79.74
80.52
73.12
No Ans
81.62
82.44
83.39
83.49
EM
77.60
77.80
78.76
77.07
F1
81.37
81.64
82.54
80.41
top 3
Has Ans F1
93.27
93.01
92.83
88.12
No Ans
91.73
92.58
92.85
92.65
EM
89.86
90.39
90.41
88.71
F1
92.19
92.71
92.85
91.30
Table 5.3.
Comparison table of performance one the test set with variety of diﬀerent
question formulations. Results obtained from the RB-S model checkpoint. - means not
applicable
5.4.3
Performance across categories
The best performing model assessed by AUPR found by the CUAD paper is the
DeBERTa-xlarge [23], and in Appendix Figure C.11 the papers reported results
by question category are seen using this model. However, as argued in Section 5.3,
the author believes that the implementation of AUPR in CUAD does not provide a
complete picture of the model performance. Thus the performance across question
categories using the RB-S model checkpoint has been investigated.
In Figure 5.4 the model performance across categories assessed by AUPR, along
with top 1 and top 3 based EM and F1 scores is reported using the previously discussed
implementations.
Looking at the AUPR metric, the picture painted is very much the same in Figure
5.4 as in the CUAD paper, with a clear diﬀerence in performance across categories
and with preamble measures at the top. However, the other measures paint a very
diﬀerent picture.
Take Uncapped Liability as an example. This question category has an AUPR
score of 15.9%, whereas the Document Name has a score of 94.4%. This could lead
one to believe that model performance is much better for Document Name.
The
reason for the low score of Uncapped Liability is that AUPR is calculated across
n −best = 20 predictions as presented in Section 5.3. There are 102 examples in the
test set, but only 13 of those have non-empty predictions, and with 20 predictions
for each, the model can get a high FP rate easily as there can only be a single null
prediction among the top 20. One could argue that the model should learn to give
these incorrect predictions a low conﬁdence score so that they will only be included
close to the ﬁnal conﬁdence interval of the AUPR calculation, but the AUPR measure
implemented by CUAD handles empty predictions as follows: if the ground truth is
==PAGE:48==
40
5 CUAD Reimplementation and Analysis
((a)) 20 best performing questions by AUPR
((b)) The remaining 21 questions
Figure 5.4. Model performance across questions categories using the RB-S model check-
point sorted by AUPR (Blue)
empty then any prediction by the model, including the empty prediction, will be a
false positive 2, making the evaluation of question category very dependent on the
test set impossible questions
answerable questions ratio.
Looking at the F1 and EM scores, it looks like the model is performing well across
all categories. The lowest F1 score for the Top 3 predictions is 68.9% and 54.9% for
the top 1. Another interesting result is that for the Parties category, the model has
the lowest EM top 1 score of 50.0% indicating that the model might be good at picking
that a text section is referring to a contractual party, but not the precise location of
where it starts and ends. It could also be due to unmarked answers in the dataset,
as indicated in Section 3.2.1, something that will be further investigated in Section
6.1.3.
2https://github.com/TheAtticusProject/cuad/blob/67faa0e6023b04fcaae6cc09497ab00e5d63a2a2/
evaluate.py#L90
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Summary of findings
41
5.5
Summary of findings
This chapter aimed to provide the reader with a good understanding of the baseline
performance of the RoBERTa-base models on CUAD. It showed that it was possible to
obtain results in a comparable range to Hendrycks et al. [23] using the same training
approach implemented in a diﬀerent framework.
It looked at the correlation between the objective function, the validation loss,
and the diﬀerent evaluation metrics using Spearman and Pearson correlation. Here
it was shown that there exists a decent linear correlation between the measures, but
with room for improvement as the optimal validation loss does not necessarily result
in the best performance across all metrics, something that will be further discussed
in Chapter 6.
The chapter discussed the relevance of AUPR as a quantiﬁer for model perfor-
mance in relevant industry tasks. It was concluded that top 1 and top 3 EM and
F1 provided a better picture of the quality of a given model’s predictions. This was
due to multiple reasons. First, metrics like Precision @ 80 % used in CUAD, tells
something about the model performance on the average case, meaning that it can
have scenarios where a lawyer or paralegal would need to look through many more
predictions. Furthermore, it was argued that the model performance in the unanswer-
able question category is not of signiﬁcant interest. This is because the model does
not provide an argument for its decision that a human can easily verify as with the
answerable prediction. It was also shown that the AUPR metric does not paint the
complete picture of how well the models were performing on particular question cat-
egories, as it was very dependent on the question category distribution of answerable
and unanswerable questions due to the implementation of the AUPR measure chosen
in CUAD. Based on this argument, it was also shown that performance across all
question categories was very similar, with good scores across the board measured by
the newly proposed metrics. Furthermore, a hypothesis based on attention patterns
extracted from the RB-S model on a CUAD feature, about the model not being
generalizable to diﬀerent formulations of the same set of 41 questions was investigated.
It was shown that the model performed well on three new sets of question formula-
tion applied to the test dataset, with a decreasing degree of similarity to the original
questions measured by the average Jaccard distance between the tokenized questions.
The signiﬁcant ﬁnding was that the model worked well on all three formulations, but
the results did not constitute a basis for concluding the model’s generalizability to
new questions within the legal realm. However, it did raise the question if the model
would be able to adopt new question categories with a reasonably little amount of
training data as question categories like Third Party Beneﬁciary obtained close to
the same level of scores as the top marked answers categories with only 17 marked
answer in the training dataset. This has much uncertainty associated as it similarly
only has a few marked test examples.
==PAGE:50==
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Enhancing CUAD
This chapter will, based on the ﬁndings in Chapter 3, 4, and 5 make alterations
to the data, evaluation, and training methodology to enhance model performance
measured by the SQuAD inspired top 1 and top 3 metrics and the general usability
of the model in the industry. This will include rewriting the dataset creation logic,
experiments with programmatically adding annotations to the datasets, altering that
balancing between impossible and answerable questions on a question category level,
and a complexity and optimization review of the RoBERTa-base model.
6.1
Dataset manipulations
6.1.1
Consistent dataset
At the time of writing, the latest release of the Transformers library was v4.19.2.
This release, along with the one used in the thesis v4.18.0, has the same code for
converting the raw data in a SQuAD format to examples, features, and a dataset
as seen in Section 3.2.3. The code creates an example for each (q, C) pair, but this
example only contains the ﬁrst answer in the list of correct spans1. To mitigate this,
CUAD uses a dataset where each question with multiple answers is split into separate
identical questions with diﬀerent answer markings, thereby creating an example for
each answer associated with a (q, C) pair.
This approach faces other issues, as the model can be exposed to the same data
point multiple times with diﬀerent answer markings, thereby introducing ambiguity.
Ignoring the balancing of the dataset that removes features randomly, the number
of times the "correct" answer span is marked in a feature, in the multiple answer
case, is ≤the number where it is not. The extent of this problem is dependent on
the question category, as some question categories have more answer-markings than
others which is evident from Figure 6.1.
1https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/v4.19-release/src/transformers/data/
processors/squad.py#668
==PAGE:52==
44
6 Enhancing CUAD
Figure 6.1. Distribution of the number of examples pr. question category. The purple
zone indicates the number of contracts in the training set
To investigate the eﬀect of this on the model performance, the pre-processing
script from Transformers, has been rewritten to allow for examples to have multiple
answers. This means that each question type now has the same number of examples
and when it gets converted into features, multiple of them can contain answers for
a given (q, C) pair.
Since the loss implemented is a binary cross-entropy, described in Section 4.1.3,
that does not allow for multi-label predictions, the implementation of the new feature
creation scripts is such that each feature only gets the ﬁrst occurring answer, or-
dered by the answer start position if multiple are available for a given span. The
question category most aﬀected by this is Parties, as this is the category with the
most answers, as seen in Figure 6.1. The new dataset creation methodology is termed
Consistent, as it removes the probability of ambiguity in the features and the old
methodology is termed Inconsistent for the opposite reason. The results from train-
ing two models using the same RB-S setup, with the two diﬀerent dataset creation
strategies, produce the results in Figure 6.2. The ﬁgure shows the models EM and
F1 scores of the Parties question, and it is clear that the top 1 prediction in the
Consistent dataset outperforms the top 1 prediction in the Inconsistent dataset,
which likely is due to the removal of ambiguity in the correct answer for a given span.
Looking at the categories of Audit Rights, Insurance, and Post-Termination Services,
the three question categories with the most answer markings after Parties, there does
not seem to be a clear diﬀerence. The same is the case for overall model performance
measures, as they do not indicate that one strategy outperforms the other, which will
be covered in Section 6.4.
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Dataset manipulations
45
((a)) EM
((b)) F1
Figure 6.2. Model performance on the Parties question category measures by F1 and EM
metric on the Consistent and Inconsistent datasets trained using the RB-S hyperparam-
eters
6.1.2
Truly balanced dataset
In Section 3.2.3, it was mentioned that a method is implemented to balance the empty
and labeled predictions equally. This method achieves the goal by randomly removing
empty data points from the dataset until there is a class balance without ensuring
stability within the individual question categories. The issue is that for some seeds,
the ratio between classes can be quite oﬀfrom the desired 1
1. In Figure 6.3(a) the
distribution of these marked and impossible answers in the training dataset using the
CUAD random seed.
For the question category Aﬃliate License-Licensor the imbalance is upwards of
5x with 285 impossible questions and 62 answerable questions. This plot also shows
why it is hard to conclude that some question categories are more diﬃcult than others
to predict, as there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the number of data samples and the
ratio of class balance varies a lot.
To investigate the eﬀect of this on performance, a new strategy that randomly bal-
ances all question categories was implemented. This strategy includes a hyperparam-
eter δ for conﬁguring the ratio. The results presented below is based on running the
training using the Consistent dataset and using δ ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3} parameter for
the balancing producing training set sizes of {16.258, 21.694, 27.105, 32.541, 43.388}
respectively. This wide range of balancing is chosen due to the wide range of question
ratios in the test set, which is not altered. In Figure 6.3(b) we see the distribution
of the impossible and answerable questions in the test set, and there are roughly 2.3
times as many impossible questions as there are answerable.
In Figure 6.4 it is noticeable that Most Favored Nation seem to to beneﬁt from a
higher class imbalance towards impossible questions than Parties. This is expected
since the test dataset for the Most Favored Nation has 99 impossible and 3 answer-
able questions, whereas Parties has 0 impossible questions and 102 answerable. Many
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Enhancing CUAD
((a)) Distribution of marked and impossible answers in training dataset using the CUAD
random seed
((b)) Distribution of impossible (2938) and answerable(1244) questions in the test set.
Figure 6.3. Distributions of impossible and answerable questions
other categories are inconclusive in performance change as a function of δ. As men-
tioned in Section 5.2, the variation in performance at diﬀerent global optimizer steps
seems more random than one approach working better than another. Looking at the
Top 3 Has Ans F1 measures for the run using δ = 1, it achieves a slightly better
score 94.06 at peak performance, but it does not outperform the δ = 3 trained model
at every checkpoint. As the results vary quite greatly across question categories, an
aggregate results table has not been provided, as it does not provide a good repre-
sentation of model performance across categories. However, the link to the WandB
project has been provided in Appendix Section A.1 to allow for further analysis by
the reader.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Dataset manipulations
47
((a)) Most Favored Nation
((b)) Parties
Figure 6.4. RB-S model performance in the Parties and the Most Favored Nation ques-
tions categories trained on the Consistent dataset with varying δ values
6.1.3
Adding answers
In Section 3.2.1, Figure 3.1, a presentation of the distribution of marked answers
across categories was presented, along with potentially unmarked answers, deﬁned
as exact and fuzzy matches of the answer texts. These unmarked answers have only
been probed for validity, but an experiment was done with the inclusion of the exact
match answers during training to understand the eﬀect (not)including them has on
performance. As in Section 6.1.2 the impact this procedure has on question categories
is varied. Three experiments were done using the Consistent, balanced dataset with
δ = 1 and the standard CUAD hyperparameters described with RB-S. Model one
RB-S-Con-δ-1-E has all the exact matched presented in Figure 3.1 added. Model
two, named RB-S-Con-δ-1-E-D has the additional answers added, excluding the
ones related to dates as it is likely there are multiple dates in the contract where the
answer cannot be inferred from the context. Model three, named RB-S-Con-δ-1-
E-DP, is excluding extra answers related to both Parties and dates, with Parties
being removed for the reasons presented in Section 3.2.1. Some questions also include
indirect references to the company name, posing the potential issue that the model
could learn to predict a speciﬁc set of pronouns or nouns referring to a contracting
party.
In Figure 6.5 all three models are compared to the baseline model: RB-S-Con-
δ-1. The categories initially chosen for analysis was Parties, Document Name, Anti-
Assignment, Agreement Date, but during an investigation of the added answers, it was
discovered that question "NEOMEDIATECHNOLOGIESINC... ...Anti-Assignment_1"
had "." marked as an answer, meaning that the majority of additional 205 answers in
the question category to the original 517 answers were useless. This was discovered
after running the model inference for the three new datasets, and an interesting fact is
that it did not seem to signiﬁcantly worsen performance, as seen in Appendix Figure
C.9. This ﬁnding raises the question of the general quality of the markings in other
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Enhancing CUAD
categories, but revisiting Figure 3.1 no other question category seems to have signs
of similar issues.
((a)) Agreement Date
((b)) Parties
((c)) Document Name
Figure 6.5.
Performance across the question categories from models trained on three
diﬀerent datasets along with a baseline constructed by adding the exact match answers,
described in Section 3.2.1, to the Consistent dataset with δ = 1
In Figure 6.5(a) there does not seem to be a diﬀerence between the model perfor-
mance across models. All seem to follow the same pattern, and looking at the larger
perspective agreement date has an increased from 383 marked answers to 826, which
might not be enough to improve the model understanding with an original total of
11180 marked answers. For Parties and Document Name the performance seems to be
slightly worsened in RB-S-Con-δ-1-E and RB-S-Con-δ-1-E-D with their nbest=3
curves lower than the ones of RB-S-Con-δ-1-E-DP and the baseline RB-S-Con-
δ-1. That being said, the variation in performance found on both question category
and model level falls within the expected randomness range mentioned earlier, which
will be further discussed in Section 6.4.
6.2
Transfer learning from SQuAD
The balanced CUAD dataset presented in Section 6.1.1 is approximately 150000
20000 = 7.5
times smaller than SQuAD, and in many NLP tasks, the amount of training data has
a large impact on performance[11, 23, 51, 52]. The authors of CUAD also showed
that this was the case for the RoBERTa-base model in their paper evaluated by the
AUPR measure [23].
The market price for CUAD is estimated at $ 2.000.000 by the authors [23], making
it a costly aﬀair to increase the dataset size. As mentioned throughout this thesis, the
CUAD modeling is very similar to the one used in SQuAD, and thus it’s relevant to
investigate whether utilizing the SQuAD dataset in combination with CUAD during
training can improve model performance on CUAD.
To explore this, a RoBERTa-base model that has been ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD
was used as a starting point for training a balanced RB-S-Con-δ- model using δ ∈
{1, 1.5}. These two runs are compared to the δ ∈{1, 1.5} runs from Section 6.1.2.
The results are reported in Table 6.1 from the model checkpoint that achieves the
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Model size
49
best Top 3 Has Ans F1. The results indicate no diﬀerence in the performance when
comparing the models using a SQuAD ﬁne-tuned model2 with a normal RoBERTa-
base pre-trained model. The only noticeable diﬀerence is that the training loss starts
much lower as seen in Appendix Figure C.10. Presumably this is due to the ﬁnal
fully connected layer, QAh, not being randomly initialized for the SQuAD ﬁne-tuned
model, but that it instead can utilize previously obtained knowledge. These models
also face the issue of models reaching a decent performance level very quickly, usually
within 1-2 epochs, but then not improving much further, as seen in Appendix Figure
C.8, and as discussed in Section 5.2 and 6.1.2. The results also show much variation in
the scores across checkpoints for these models, and even though we pick the checkpoint
with the maximum Top 3 Has Ans F1, the other reported scores might not be at their
max.
Eval on
Model/Measure
SQuAD-δ=1.5
δ=1.5
SQuAD-δ=1
δ=1
top 1
Has Ans F1
84.18
85.28
85.69
85.47
No Ans
69.30
69.71
53.64
54.70
EM
70.70
71.28
60.19
60.33
F1
73.73
74.34
63.18
63.81
top 3
Has Ans F1
93.53
93.63
93.88
94.06
No Ans
84.28
81.11
67.50
66.34
EM
84.79
82.59
73.41
72.17
F1
87.03
84.83
75.34
74.58
Table 6.1. Model performance of the maximum Top 3 Has Ans F1 checkpoint for SQuAD
ﬁne-tuned models compared against the baseline from Section 6.1.2
6.3
Model size
As outlined in the Introduction (Section 1) and the Research Question and Objective
(Section 1.2), extractive QA within the legal domain is something both large law ﬁrms
and startups are allocating vast resources to[65]. Since this thesis has a perspective of
how the models presented could be used in a production environment and the consid-
erations it requires, a relevant area to cover is the model size. Though Chalkidis et al.
[11] have shown that the RoBERTa-large model leads to substantial performance im-
provement over the RoBERTa-base model on LexGLUE[11], a proposal for a standard-
ized evaluation framework for legal domain deep learning models based on open-source
data, it also comes with drawbacks. The size of RoBERTa-large (355M) is more than
2× the size of RoBERTa-base (110M)[14, 37] which leads to worse space and time
complexity parameters for inference. Running inference on the SQuAD example from
Appendix B.1 1000 times on a single Nvidia T4 GPU yields µ = 0.0197s, σ = 0.0044
2Huggingface model: deepset/roberta-base-squad2
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Enhancing CUAD
for the RoBERTa-base model and µ = 0.306s, σ = 0.0012 for RoBERTa-large. Fur-
thermore, the binary ﬁle containing the model state RoBERTa-base has a size of
501MB whereas the RoBERTa-large requires 1430MB using Transformers3.
As compute expenses generally increase with larger space and time complexities[38],
reducing model sizes is both interesting from a business and a machine learning per-
spective, as it can provide potential savings on computing resources and reveal under-
utilization of models and deeper insights into why it is performing as it is.
This
is illustrated in Figure 6.6, with the model inference time for the SQuAD example
illustrated as a function of layers in the RoBERTa-base model.
Figure 6.6. RoBERTa-base inference time as a function of model layers removed on the
SQuAD example from Appendix C.2 with a single σ highlighted. Each data point is based
on 300 runs on an Nvidia Tesla T4 GPU.
Investigating the signiﬁcance of all layers in terms of the inﬂuence on model per-
formance and their combinations requires 2L = 212 = 4096 experiments, each one
taking around 32 minutes to complete using the 4 Nvidia T4 GPU setup described in
3.3; thus only a subset has been analyzed. In Section 5.4.1 it was shown that there
seems to be a strong connection between the question and correct answer span in
layers 5-6 for in the RB-S model. It was also noted that the model seems to contain
multiple layers with high attention activations to the [SEP] token, which has by Clark
et al. [13] been hypothesized as a no-op for the model.
Based on this, and experiments on a smaller randomly selected test dataset, the
model performance was tested with the δ = 1 model from Section 6.2 using the min-
imum validation loss checkpoint obtained at global step 1864 with Top 3 Has Ans
F1= 92.95 and Top 1 Has Ans F1= 84.04. This model then ran inference on the test
set with L ̸∈{{9}, {10}, {11} , {5}, {6}, {2} , {1}, {3} , {3, 6}, {9, 10}, {11, 3}, {2, 4, 6},
{5, 2, 4}, {1, 2}, {5, 9}, {8, 9}, {10, 9}} and based on those run L ̸∈{{}, {9, 10, 1}
, {9, 1, 3}, {10, 1, 3}, {10, 1}, {1, 3}, {10, 9, 4, 11}, {10, 9, 3}}. A selected subset of re-
sults of running model inference with these layers removed is listed in Table 6.2.
Each removed layer reduces the model size by around 6%. The best-performing
model with three removed layers, speciﬁcally {1, 9, 10} ̸∈L, was re-trained using
3Huggingface models: roberta-base & roberta-large
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Model size
51
the RB-S hyperparameters. From this re-trained model, it is evident that model
size can be decreased upwards of 20% without sacriﬁcing much performance, as it
potentially can be recouped by re-training the model using the original parameters.
The results also show that diﬀerent layers and layer combinations have very diﬀerent
eﬀects on performance if removed. The model with {2, 4, 5} ̸∈L has the same model
size reduction as {1, 9, 10} ̸∈L but a much lower performance score.
The approach to reducing model size presented here is simple, only removing
entire layers but using the argument of no-op predictions as the basis of the size
reductions. It would be more precise to remove individual attention heads instead
of entire layers, but this requires more extensive model alterations as it alters the
shape of the concatenated attention matrix described in Section 2.2.2. Michel et al.
[41] showed that "a large percentage of attention heads can be removed at test time
without signiﬁcantly," making this a good candidate for model reductions.
Other
simple approaches could be by utilizing quantization, using a smaller precision of
network weights, or weights pruning, simplifying some network connections as done
by Suík [62] on BERT. A more advanced approach to reducing the model size could
be distilling the model as done by Sanh et al. [59] with DistilBERT. DistilBERT is
signiﬁcantly smaller than BERT, reducing the number of parameters by 40% and
inference time by 60% while preserving over 95% of the BERT performance on the
language understanding challenge GLUE[59, 71]. This approach termed knowledge
distillation[7, 25] or teacher-student learning, "is a compression technique in which a
compact model - the student - is trained to reproduce the behaviour of a larger model
- the teacher - or an ensemble of models"[59].
HA F1
NA F1
EM
F1
HA F1
NA F1
EM
F1
̸∈L
Top 3
Top 1
-
93.27
78.82
80.56
82.84
83.30
61.13
66.44
67.72
1, 9, 10
92.97
85.60
85.27
87.79
83.83
76.96
75.47
79.00
9
92.94
83.56
84.00
86.35
84.04
73.49
73.24
76.62
91.27
84.96
84.29
86.83
82.35
72.97
72.12
75.76
1, 10
90.12
86.93
85.13
87.88
80.23
74.06
72.24
75.90
5, 9
89.88
74.95
76.18
79.39
80.66
65.11
64.75
69.74
1, 9, 10
87.20
74.51
75.82
78.28
76.55
54.66
58.06
61.17
6
80.66
94.55
86.49
90.42
60.30
86.49
74.84
78.70
1, 3
75.04
97.79
86.90
91.02
52.86
93.09
78.43
81.12
1, 3, 10
69.19
8.20
13.39
26.34
54.49
3.95
7.60
18.98
4, 9, 10, 11
65.98
89.79
78.07
82.71
44.83
78.69
65.21
68.62
1, 2
38.94
20.18
19.99
25.76
27.18
16.13
14.97
19.42
2, 4, 5
Table 6.2. Subset of Appendix Table C.1, showing model performance for diﬀerent conﬁg-
uration of deleted layers from the δ = 1 model presented in Section 6.2 using the checkpoint
from global_step = 1864. HA = Has Ans and NA = No Ans. The bold marking is the
model with deleted layers retrained using the same parameters as the model checkpoint
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Enhancing CUAD
6.4
Summary of findings
The goal of this chapter was to enhance the usability of CUAD by attempting to
increase performance measured by the SQuAD top 1 and top 3 scores in the Has Ans
category and by presenting optimizations such as decreasing model size, which can
be of much value in production systems[59].
One way this was attempted was by creating a more consistent dataset, as it
was discovered that some question categories had multiple identical data points but
with diﬀerent answer markings. Another alteration was balancing the ratio between
impossible and answerable questions on a question level instead of on the dataset
level and experimenting with diﬀerent ratios between these two question types. Trails
with utilizing models ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD as a starting point revealed little to no
diﬀerence in performance other than a faster convergence, which most likely is due to
the ﬁnal fully connected layer not being initialized randomly, but from a state similar
to the challenge at hand. Experiments with adding the found unmarked answers from
Section 3.2.1 were also done but did not increase model performance.
Though all these experiments improved the quality of the dataset, which consti-
tutes an integral part of well-functioning machine learning systems [19, 20], little to
no eﬀect on the performance measures was found for all experiments on a dataset
level. In Figure 6.7 one sees the training loss, validation loss, and model performance
for all models discussed and tested in this chapter. Every single model seems to be
facing the same issue of quickly reaching a decent level of performance, but the opti-
mization that yields better scores appears to be more random than one the training
approach embedding more helpful knowledge into the model than another after epoch
2. Thus it is in the author’s opinion that it cannot be concluded that the performance
increase from 92.5% to 94.1% in the top 3 Has Ans metric obtained by the best per-
forming model compared to the CUAD RoBERTa-base model checkpoint is due to
a better training approach. The authors’ central idea for mitigating this issue is to
increase the correlation between the objective function and the actual metrics, and a
hypothesis for how this could be done is by an alteration of the loss function. This
is left for future work, but there seems in general to be room for improvement in the
loss function. The model is evaluated on a binary cross-entropy loss, but that does
not encapsulate the way the model is used. In the evaluation metrics, it accepts all
predictions with F1 > 0.5 as correct predictions, thus, changing the loss function to
reﬂect this through approaches like label smoothing[44, 63, 68] might be beneﬁcial.
This chapter also showed that the current model performance could be obtained
from a RoBERTa-base model reduced upwards of 20% in size and with a mean pro-
cessing time close to 50% better, with little to no performance loss measured by Top
3 Has Ans F1.
Though it was not shown in this chapter, it was noticed that the methods for
extracting model predictions vary across implementations4.
4QA
pipeline
approach
to
extracting
model
predictions
https://github.com/huggingface/
transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/pipelines/question_answering.py#L377
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Summary of findings
53
In Section 4.1.2 the approach from CUAD originating from BERT for extracting
predictions was presented[14, 23]. This is P(S and E) = P(S)P(E) where S and
E are the start and end logits using the notion from Equation 4.1. Recall that the
implementation uses S(Ti)+E(Ti) where i ≤j, which is the sum of the output logits
from the start and end positions. The output probabilities is a relative ranking of the
nbest = 20 predictions, as the ﬁnal step for outputting the predictions is performing
a softmax across the prediction scores. Other implementations perform the softmax
on the output probabilities for each feature ignoring the P-mask and [CLS] token
and then calculating the model conﬁdence directly. Though these two approaches, in
theory, should produce approximately the same results, their implementation was so
diﬀerent that an experiment was done to compare the two strategies. It did not reveal
any major diﬀerence in performance. The new approach also evaluates all predictions
before extracting the n−best scores, a pain-point about the original method discussed
in Section 5.3. This did not inﬂuence performance either.
((a)) Training loss
((b)) Validation Loss
((c)) Top 1 Has Ans
((d)) Top 3 Has Ans
Figure 6.7. Training loss, validation loss, top 1 has ans, and top 3 has ans across all 18
runs presented as part of this chapter.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis presented a deep dive into span-selection question answering models based
on the RoBERTa transformer architecture for legal contract review and extraction
of contract elements, along with a thorough analysis of the Contract Understanding
Atticus Dataset (CUAD), to enhance the value of the dataset and models trained on
it in the perspective of using the models in a human-in-the-loop production setting.
Based on the work of Hendrycks et al. [23], a new training and validation frame-
work for the models was built using PyTorch Lightning for a single node multi GPU
environment. This allowed for eﬃcient and repeatable experiments and extensibil-
ity to adapt to new transformer architectures or change the data manipulations by
altering a single command in the training CLI. Using this framework, it was shown
that performance from the CUAD could be reproduced and improved measured by
AUPR, though the paper argued that the top 1 and top 3 Has Ans F1 and Has Ans
EM measures provided better insights into the model performance for the task at hand.
The thesis analysis of the data quality of the CUAD, shed light on elements that,
to the knowledge of the author, have not been discussed in academic research yet,
due to the recent publication of the dataset [23] and the small community covering
the topic, as seen in Figure 1.1. This analysis covered potentially unmarked answers,
the quality of the unanswerable questions, and the distribution of model annotation
across both test and training datasets. Furthermore, it was shown that the dataset
creation process could introduce ambiguity in the training data due to text spans
appearing with both marked and unmarked answers. Additionally, potential unin-
tended consequences of the logic implemented for the class balancing were shown,
and a solution for handling it was discussed, implemented, and tested.
Based on these ﬁndings, it was attempted to enhance the model performance.
Some question categories’ performance beneﬁtted from the alterations, but the overall
model metrics did not signiﬁcantly improve. It was shown that this was the case across
almost all experiments presented in the thesis.
The model would reach a decent
performance within 1-2 epochs, and then the movements in the evaluation metrics
from additional training would act what appears to be random. It was hypothesized
that this was due to a correlation between the performance measures and objective
function that could be improved, supported by an analysis of Spearman and Pearson
correlation.
Together, these ﬁndings indicate that the optimization space for the
performance measures does not align well with the objective function’s space in the
ﬁner training stages. This was also the case for training trails started from models
==PAGE:64==
56
7 Conclusion
previously ﬁne-tuned on other span-selection QA datasets like SQuAD.
Additionally, it was shown that model performance on most question categories
was much better than indicated by the AUPR measure if evaluated by the proposed
top 1 and top 3 F1 and EM measures. Furthermore, model size was reduced by upwards
of 20% in terms of parameter count and 50% in inference time with little to no
performance loss.
The thesis also presented proposals for experiments to improve the production
value of the models further, with the primary one being an alteration of the loss
from binary cross-entropy to a more smooth quantiﬁcation of a correct prediction
inspired by the F1 measure and label smoothing. Another proposal was related to
the reduction of the model size using quantization, weights pruning, or by distilling
the model as done by Sanh et al. [59] with DistilBERT. Additionally, as discussed
by Chalkidis et al. [11], the use of transformer models designed for handling longer
inputs sequences than the standard RoBERTa model, such as the Longformer, was
also suggested.
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Definitions &
Additional resources
A.1
Interactive plots and source code
The project source code can be found on the authors Github: https://github.com/
gustavhartz/transformers-legal-tasks
The Weights and Bias project for the training of the diﬀerent model described
in Chapter 6 can be found here: https://wandb.ai/gustavhartz/cuad_training_
balanced_features?workspace=user-gustavhartz
The Weights and Bias project for the model size experiments described in Chap-
ter 6 can be found here: https://wandb.ai/gustavhartz/cuad_test_model_size?
workspace=user-gustavhartz
The best performing model(s) presented throughout the thesis will be made avail-
able through the authors Huggingface proﬁle https://huggingface.co/gustavhartz
==PAGE:68==
60
Appendix A Definitions & Additional resources
A.2
Transformers & Tokenization
Tokenizer notation
Notation
Description
[PAD]
The BERT token used to increase the size of sentences shorter
than the expected input size. PAD is short for padding
[CLS]
The BERT token used for classiﬁcation which is also where it gets
it’s name from
[SEP]
The BERT token used for separating sentence A and Sentence B
in the next sentence prediction
[UNK]
The BERT token used to represent an unknown word which does
not exists in the model vocabulary
[EOS]
Token used for marking the end of a sequence
[BOS]
Token used to mark the beginning of a sequence
Table A.1. Common tokenizer special tokens notation
Huggingface Transformers Example
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A.2 Transformers & Tokenization
61
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForQuestionAnswering
import torch
model_path = "huggingface-course/bert-finetuned-squad"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
model = AutoModelForQuestionAnswering.from_pretrained(model_path)
text = """Some context"""
question = """Some questions"""
inputs = tokenizer.encode_plus(question, text,\textbackslash
add_special_tokens=True, return_tensors="pt")
input_ids = inputs["input_ids"].tolist()[0]
text_tokens = tokenizer.convert_ids_to_tokens(input_ids)
answer_start_scores, answer_end_scores = model(**inputs)[0], model(**inputs)[1
# Highest probability answer start
answer_start = torch.argmax(answer_start_scores)
# Highest probability answer end
answer_end = torch.argmax(answer_end_scores) + 1
answer_tokens = tokenizer.convert_ids_to_tokens(input_ids[answer_start:answer_
answer = tokenizer.convert_tokens_to_string(answer_tokens)
print(f"Question: {question}")
print(f"Answer: {answer}\n")
Figure A.1. Huggingface Transformers span-selection QA example
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Data
B.1
SQuAD text example
The Normans (Norman: Nourmands; French: Normands; Latin: Nor-
manni) were the people who in the 10th and 11th centuries gave their
name to Normandy, a region in France. They were descended from Norse
("Norman" comes from "Norseman") raiders and pirates from Denmark,
Iceland and Norway who, under their leader Rollo, agreed to swear fealty
to King Charles III of West Francia. Through generations of assimilation
and mixing with the native Frankish and Roman-Gaulish populations,
their descendants would gradually merge with the Carolingian-based cul-
tures of West Francia. The distinct cultural and ethnic identity of the
Normans emerged initially in the ﬁrst half of the 10th century, and it
continued to evolve over the succeeding centuries.[52]
B.2
CUAD Questions
Table B.1. Categories and questions from CUAD. The capital letter in parentheses indi-
cates the segmentation category the question belongs to for the answer occurrence analysis
in Section 3.2.2
Category
Question
Document Name (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Document Name" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: The name of the contract
Parties (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Parties" that should be reviewed by a lawyer. De-
tails: The two or more parties who signed the con-
tract
Agreement Date (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Agreement Date" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: The date of the contract
Continued on next page
==PAGE:72==
64
Appendix B Data
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Eﬀective Date (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Eﬀective Date" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: The date when the contract is eﬀective
Expiration Date (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Expiration Date" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer.
Details: On what date will the contract’s
initial term expire?
Renewal Term (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Renewal Term" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: What is the renewal term after the initial
term expires?
This includes automatic extensions
and unilateral extensions with prior notice.
Governing Law (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Governing Law" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Which state/country’s law governs
the interpretation of the contract?
Exclusivity (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Exclusivity" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Is there an exclusive dealingň commitment
with the counterparty? This includes a commitment
to procure all ÄúrequirementsÄù from one party of
certain technology, goods, or services or a prohibition
on licensing or selling technology, goods or services
to third parties, or a prohibition onň collaborating
or working with other parties), whether during the
contract orň after the contract ends (or both).
No-Solicit Of Customers
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "No-Solicit Of Customers" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is a party restricted from con-
tracting or soliciting customers or partners of the
counterparty, whether during the contract or after
the contract ends (or both)?
No-Solicit Of Employees
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "No-Solicit Of Employees" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is there a restriction on a par-
tyÄôs soliciting or hiring employees and/or contrac-
tors from theň counterparty, whether during the con-
tract or after the contract ends (or both)?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
65
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Rofr/Rofo/Rofn (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Rofr/Rofo/Rofn" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Is there a clause granting one party
a right of ﬁrst refusal, right of ﬁrst oﬀer or right of
ﬁrst negotiation to purchase, license, market, or dis-
tribute equity interest, technology, assets, products
or services?
Anti-Assignment (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Anti-Assignment" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Is consent or notice required of a
party if the contract is assigned to a third party?
Price Restrictions (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Price Restrictions" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Is there a restriction on theň ability
of a party to raise or reduce prices of technology,
goods, orň services provided?
Minimum
Commitment
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Minimum Commitment" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is there a minimum order size
or minimum amount or units per-time period that
one party must buy from the counterparty under the
contract?
License Grant (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"License Grant" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Does the contract contain a license granted
by one party to its counterparty?
Post-Termination Services
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Post-Termination Services" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is a party subject to obliga-
tions after the termination or expiration of a con-
tract, including any post-termination transition, pay-
ment, transfer of IP, wind-down, last-buy, or similar
commitments?
Warranty Duration (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Warranty Duration" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: What is the duration of anyň war-
ranty against defects or errors in technology, prod-
ucts, or servicesň provided under the contract?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:74==
66
Appendix B Data
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Insurance (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Insurance" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Is there a requirement for insurance that
must be maintained by one party for the beneﬁt of
the counterparty?
Covenant Not To Sue (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Covenant Not To Sue" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is a party restricted from con-
testing the validity of the counterpartyÄôs ownership
of intellectual property or otherwise bringing a claim
against the counterparty for matters unrelated to the
contract?
Change Of Control (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Change Of Control" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Does one party have the right to
terminate or is consent or notice required of the coun-
terparty if such party undergoes a change of control,
such as a merger, stock sale, transfer of all or sub-
stantially all of its assets or business, or assignment
by operation of law?
Audit Rights (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Audit Rights" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Does a party have the right toň audit the
books, records, or physical locations of the counter-
party to ensure compliance with the contract?
Uncapped Liability (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Uncapped Liability" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Is a partyÄôs liability uncapped
upon the breach of its obligation in the contract?
This also includes uncap liability for a particular type
of breach such as IP infringement or breach of conﬁ-
dentiality obligation.
Cap On Liability (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Cap On Liability" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Does the contract include a cap on
liability upon the breach of a partyÄôs obligation?
This includes time limitation for the counterparty to
bring claims or maximum amount for recovery.
Continued on next page
==PAGE:75==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
67
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Non-Compete (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Non-Compete" that should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Is there a restriction on the ability of a party
to compete with the counterparty or operate in a
certain geography or business or technology sector?
Competitive
Restriction
Exception (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Competitive Restriction Exception" that should
be reviewed by a lawyer. Details: This category in-
cludes the exceptions or carveouts to Non-Compete,
Exclusivity and No-Solicit of Customers above.
Volume Restriction (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Volume Restriction" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Is there a fee increase or consent
requirement, etc. if one partyÄôs use of the produc-
t/services exceeds certain threshold?
Termination
For
Conve-
nience (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Termination For Convenience" that should be re-
viewed by a lawyer. Details: Can a party terminate
thisň contract without cause (solely by giving a no-
tice and allowing a waitingň period to expire)?
Ip Ownership Assignment
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Ip Ownership Assignment" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Does intellectual property cre-
atedň by one party become the property of the coun-
terparty, either per the terms of the contract or upon
the occurrence of certain events?
Irrevocable Or Perpetual
License (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Irrevocable Or Perpetual License" that should be
reviewed by a lawyer.
Details: Does the contract
contain aň license grant that is irrevocable or per-
petual?
Notice Period To Termi-
nate Renewal (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Notice Period To Terminate Renewal" that should
be reviewed by a lawyer. Details: What is the notice
period required to terminate renewal?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:76==
68
Appendix B Data
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Liquidated Damages (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Liquidated Damages" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Does the contract contain a clause
that would award either party liquidated damages for
breach or a fee upon the termination of a contract
(termination fee)?
Revenue/Proﬁt
Sharing
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Revenue/Proﬁt Sharing" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is one party required to share
revenue or proﬁt with the counterparty for any tech-
nology, goods, orňservices?
Third
Party
Beneﬁciary
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Third Party Beneﬁciary" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Is there a non-contracting party
who is a beneﬁciary to some or all of the clauses
in the contract and therefore can enforce its rights
against a contracting party?
Non-Transferable License
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Non-Transferable License" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer.
Details: Does the contract limit the
ability of a party to transfer the license being granted
to a third party?
Aﬃliate License-Licensee
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Aﬃliate License-Licensee" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Does the contract contain a
license grant to a licensee (incl. sublicensor) and the
aﬃliates of such licensee/sublicensor?
Most Favored Nation (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Most Favored Nation" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Is there a clause that if a third
party gets better terms on the licensing or sale of
technology/goods/services described in the contract,
the buyer of such technology/goods/services under
the contract shall be entitled to those better terms?
Joint Ip Ownership (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Joint Ip Ownership" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Is there any clause providing for
joint or shared ownership of intellectual property be-
tween the parties to the contract?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
69
Table B.1 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Unlimited/All-You-Can-
Eat-License (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Unlimited/All-You-Can-Eat-License" that should
be reviewed by a lawyer. Details: Is there a clause
granting one party an Äúenterprise,Äù Äúall you can
eatÄù or unlimited usage license?
Source Code Escrow (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Source Code Escrow" that should be reviewed by a
lawyer. Details: Is one party required to deposit its
source code into escrow with a third party, which can
be released to the counterparty upon the occurrence
of certain events (bankruptcy,ň insolvency, etc.)?
Aﬃliate License-Licensor
(R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to
"Aﬃliate License-Licensor" that should be reviewed
by a lawyer. Details: Does the contract contain a
license grant by aﬃliates of the licensor or that in-
cludes intellectual property of aﬃliates of the licen-
sor?
Non-Disparagement (R)
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related
to "Non-Disparagement" that should be reviewed by
a lawyer. Details: Is there a requirement on a party
not to disparage the counterparty?
Table B.2. Altered small (Alt-S) question formulations
Category
Question
Document Name
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Document Name" . This is the name
of the contract.
Parties
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Parties" of the agreement. This is the
entities/parties who signed the contract
Agreement Date
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Agreement Date". This is the date of
the contract
Eﬀective Date
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Eﬀective Date". This is the date when
the contract is eﬀective
Continued on next page
==PAGE:78==
70
Appendix B Data
Table B.2 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Expiration Date
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Expiration Date". This is the date
when the contract’s initial term expires
Renewal Term
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Renewal Term". This is the renewal
term after the initial term expires and includes auto-
matic extensions and unilateral extensions with prior
notice.
Notice Period To Termi-
nate Renewal
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Notice Period To Terminate Renewal".
This is the notice period required to terminate re-
newal
Governing Law
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Governing Law". This which state or
country’s law governs the interpretation of the con-
tract
Most Favored Nation
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Most Favored Nation".
This is a
clause that if a third party gets better terms on
the licensing or sale of technology/goods/services de-
scribed in the contract, the buyer of such technolo-
gy/goods/services under the contract shall be enti-
tled to those better terms
Non-Compete
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Non-Compete". This is a restriction
on the ability of a party to compete with the counter-
party or operate in a certain business or technology
or geography sector
Exclusivity
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Exclusivity". This is an exclusive deal-
ing commitment with the counterparty and includes
a commitment to procure all requirements from one
party of certain services, technology, or goods or a
prohibition on licensing or selling technology, goods
or services to third parties, or a prohibition on work-
ing or collaborating with other parties), whether dur-
ing the contract, after the contract ends, or both
Continued on next page
==PAGE:79==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
71
Table B.2 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
No-Solicit of Customers
Details: Is a party restricted from contracting or so-
liciting customers or partners of the counterparty,
whether during the contract or after the contract
ends (or both)?. Highlight the parts (if any) of this
contract related to "No-Solicit of Customers" that
should be reviewed by a lawyer.
Competitive
Restriction
Exception
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Competitive Restriction Exception".
This is an exception or carveouts to the non-compete,
exclusivity, and no-solicit of customers clauses
No-Solicit of Employees
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "No-Solicit of Employees". This is a
restriction on a party’s soliciting or hiring employees
and/or contractors from the counterparty
Non-Disparagement
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Non-Disparagement".
This is a re-
quirement on a party not to disparage the counter-
party
Termination
for
Conve-
nience
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Termination for Convenience". Can
party terminate this contract without cause
Right
of
First
Refusal,
Right of First Oﬀer, Right
of First Negotiation
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Right of First Refusal, Right of First
Oﬀer, Right of First Negotiation". This is a clause
granting one party a right of ﬁrst refusal, right of ﬁrst
oﬀer or right of ﬁrst negotiation to purchase, license,
market, or distribute equity interest, technology, as-
sets, products or services
Change of Control
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Change of Control". Does one party
have the right to terminate or is consent or notice re-
quired of the counterparty if such party undergoes a
change of control, such as a stock sale, merger, trans-
fer of all or substantially all of its assets or business,
or assignment by operation of law?
Anti-Assignment
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Anti-Assignment". Is consent or no-
tice required of a party if the contract is assigned to
a third party?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:80==
72
Appendix B Data
Table B.2 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Revenue/Proﬁt Sharing
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Revenue/Proﬁt Sharing". This is a
clause related to if one party is required to share rev-
enue or proﬁt with the counterparty for any services,
technology, or goods?
Price Restrictions
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Price Restrictions". This is a restric-
tion on the ability of a party to raise or reduce prices
of technology, goods, or services provided
Minimum Commitment
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Minimum Commitment". This is a
minimum minimum amount, order size or units per-
time period that one party has to buy from the coun-
terparty under the contract
Volume Restriction
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Volume Restriction".
This is a fee
consent or increase requirement, etc. if one party’s
use of the product/services exceeds certain threshold
IP Ownership Assignment
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "IP Ownership Assignment". Does in-
tellectual property created by one party become the
property of the counterparty, either upon the occur-
rence of certain events or per the terms of the con-
tract?
Joint IP Ownership
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Joint IP Ownership".
Is there any
clause providing for joint or shared ownership of in-
tellectual property between the parties to the con-
tract?
License Grant
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "License Grant".
Is there a clause
granting a license by one party to its counterparty?
Non-Transferable License
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Non-Transferable License". Is the con-
tract limited to the ability of a party to transfer the
license being granted to a third party?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:81==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
73
Table B.2 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Aﬃliate License-Licensor
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Aﬃliate License-Licensor". Is the con-
tract containing a license grant by aﬃliates of the
licensor or that includes intellectual property of aﬃl-
iates of the licensor?
Aﬃliate License-Licensee
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Aﬃliate License-Licensee". Is the con-
tract containing a license grant to a licensee (incl.
sublicensor) and the aﬃliates of such licensee/subli-
censor?
Unlimited/All-You-Can-
Eat License
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Unlimited/All-You-Can-Eat License".
Is there a clause granting one party an enterprise, all
you can eat or unlimited usage license?
Irrevocable or Perpetual
License
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Irrevocable or Perpetual License". Is
the contract containing a license grant that is perpet-
ual or irrevocable?
Source Code Escrow
Show the sections of this contract (if there are
any) related to the "Source Code Escrow".
Is one
party required to deposit its source code into escrow
with a third party, which can be released to the
counterparty upon the occurrence of certain events
(bankruptcy, insolvency, etc.)?
Post-Termination Services
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Post-Termination Services". Is a party
subject to obligations after the expiration or termi-
nation of a contract, including any post-termination
transfer of ip, transition, payment, wind-down, last-
buy, or similar commitments?
Audit Rights
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Audit Rights". Is there a clause re-
lated to a party having the right to audit the records,
books, or physical locations of the counterparty to
ensure compliance with the contract?
Continued on next page
==PAGE:82==
74
Appendix B Data
Table B.2 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Uncapped Liability
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Uncapped Liability". Is there a clause
in the contract related to a party’s uncapped liability
upon the breach of its obligation in the contract? In-
cluding uncap liability for a particular type of breach
such as breach of conﬁdentiality obligation or IP in-
fringement.
Cap on Liability
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Cap on Liability". Is there a clause
in the contract related to a cap on liability upon the
breach of a party’s obligation? Including time limi-
tation for the counterparty to bring claims or maxi-
mum amount for recovery.
Liquidated Damages
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Liquidated Damages".
Is there a
clause in the contract that would award either party
liquidated damages for breach or a fee upon the ter-
mination of a contract?
Warranty Duration
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Warranty Duration". This is the du-
ration of any warranty against defects or errors in
products, technology, or services provided under the
contract?
Insurance
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Insurance".
Are there any require-
ment for insurance that must be maintained by one
party for the beneﬁt of the counterparty?
Covenant Not to Sue
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Covenant Not to Sue". Are there any
restrictions on a party from contesting the validity of
the counterparty’s ownership of intellectual property
or otherwise bringing a claim against the counter-
party for matters unrelated to the contract?
Third Party Beneﬁciary
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Third Party Beneﬁciary". Are there
any non-contracting parties who is a beneﬁciary
to some or all of the clauses in the contract and
therefore can enforce its rights against a contracting
party?
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
75
Table B.3. Altered Large (Alt-L) question formulations
Category
Question
Document Name
What is the name of this legal document?
Parties
Who are the parties to this legal document?
The
parties to the contract are the two or more parties
who signed the contract.
Agreement Date
What is the agreement date of this contract? Agree-
ment Date means the date as of which this Agree-
ment is dated.
Eﬀective Date
In contract law, the eﬀective date is the date that an
agreement or transaction between or among signato-
ries becomes binding. What is the eﬀective date of
this contract?
Expiration Date
What is the expiration date of the initial terms of this
contract? The expiration of a contract puts an end
to all the engagements of the parties, except to those
which arise from the non- fulﬁllment of obligations
created during its existence
Renewal Term
What sections are related to the "Renewal Term" in
this contract?
Renewal is keeping an existing ar-
rangement in force for an additional period of time,
such as a lease, a promissory note, insurance pol-
icy or any other contract. Renewal usually requires
a writing or some action which evidences the new
term.
Notice Period To Termi-
nate Renewal
Show everything related to the notice required to
terminate renewal
Governing Law
What is the "Governing Law" of this contract?. Gov-
erning law is the law stipulated in a contract to de-
termine a dispute
Most Favored Nation
Is there any sections of this contract related to
most favored nation?. Most Favored Nations (MFN)
clauses (also known as antidiscrimination clauses or
most-favored customer clauses) are common in busi-
ness today. These provisions require that the sup-
plier will treat a particular customer no worse than
all other customers.
Continued on next page
==PAGE:84==
76
Appendix B Data
Table B.3 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Non-Compete
Is there a any sections of this contract related to
"Non-Compete". A non-compete agreement is a con-
tract between two parties, usually two individuals or
one company and one individual, in which one of the
individuals promises not to compete with the other
individual or company once their relationship with
the company has ended. That is, he or she will not
start, join, or buy a business that is similar to, and
in competition with, the other.
Exclusivity
Highlight any parts of this contract related to an
"Exclusivity" clause.
An exclusivity clause is part
of a bigger legal document that restricts the signer
from buying, selling, or promoting any goods or ser-
vices from any person or company other than the is-
suing company associated with the contract. In other
words, the company or individual works exclusively
with the issuer of the contract.
No-Solicit Of Customers
Show everything related to "No-Solicit of Employees".
This is a clause that prohibits one party from solicit-
ing the customers of another party during a speciﬁed
period of time
No-Solicit Of Employees
Show everything related to "No-Solicit of Employees".
This is a clause that prohibits one party from solicit-
ing the employees of another party during a speciﬁed
period of time
Non-Disparagement
Show everything related to "Non-Disparagement" in
this contract?. Non-disparagement clauses prevent
parties from making derogatory comments about the
other party.
Termination
For
Conve-
nience
Is there a clause related to "Termination for Conve-
nience"?. A contractual right to terminate an agree-
ment for any reason. It may also be referred to as
termination without cause. A right to terminate for
convenience usually requires the terminating party
to provide a certain period of notice before the ter-
mination is eﬀective and usually in writing
Continued on next page
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
77
Table B.3 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Change Of Control
Highlight any parts of this contract related to the
"Change of Control". A provision in an agreement
giving a party certain rights (such as consent, pay-
ment or termination) in connection with a change in
ownership or management of the other party to the
agreement.
Anti-Assignment
Show any section of this contract related to "Anti-
Assignment".
An anti-assignment clause prevents
either of the parties to a contract from assigning
tasks to a third party without the consent of the
non-assigning party.
Revenue/Proﬁt Sharing
Highlight all sections related to "Revenue/Proﬁt
Sharing".
Revenue sharing is a somewhat ﬂexible
concept that involves sharing operating proﬁts or
losses among associated ﬁnancial actors.
Revenue
sharing can exist as a proﬁt-sharing system that en-
sures each entity is compensated for its eﬀorts.
Minimum Commitment
Highlight any parts related to "Minimum Commit-
ment". Clause sets out the minimum quantities of
the goods or products that the buyer must purchase
under the agreement and could include remedies for
the buyer’s failure to meet the minimum purchase
requirement
Volume Restriction
Highlight any section related to "Volume Restriction"
in this contract. This is a fee consent or increase re-
quirement, etc. if one party’s use of the product/ser-
vices exceeds certain threshold
Ip Ownership Assignment
Highlight the sections of this contract related to the
"IP Ownership Assignment". The assignment of intel-
lectual property (IP) refers to the process by which
ownership of work product created for one party is
assigned to another party?
Joint Ip Ownership
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Joint IP Ownership".
Joint owner-
ship of intellectual property refers to the sharing of
intellectual property (IP) rights to a particular in-
vention between two or more parties. It usually oc-
curs as a result of two or more people co-inventing a
patentable product, creative work, design, or concept
Continued on next page
==PAGE:86==
78
Appendix B Data
Table B.3 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
License Grant
Show the sections of this contract related to the "Li-
cense Grant". The object of the a license grant clause
is to grant permission to the one party to use certain
intellectual property rights of the other party
Non-Transferable License
Show the sections of this contract related to the "Non-
Transferable License". Clauses ensuring that the en-
tire agreement, or some of its rights, obligations, and
terms; may not be transferred to a party that has not
signed the original contract?
Aﬃliate License-Licensor
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Aﬃliate License-Licensor". A licens-
ing agreement is a contract between a licensor and
licensee in which the licensee gains access to the licen-
sor’s intellectual property. Does this legal document
include a license grant that includes IP of partners
of the licensor?
Aﬃliate License-Licensee
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Aﬃliate License-Licensee". A licens-
ing agreement is a contract between a licensor and
licensee in which the licensee gains access to the li-
censor’s intellectual property. Is the legal document
containing a license grant to a licensee (incl. sublicen-
sor) and the aﬃliates of such licensee/sublicensor?
Unlimited/All-You-Can-
Eat-License
Show the sections of this contract related to the
"Unlimited/All-You-Can-Eat License". Are there any
clauses giving one of the contracting parties and un-
limited usage license also refeered to as an all you
can eat license?
Irrevocable Or Perpetual
License
Show the sections of this contract related to the "Irre-
vocable or Perpetual License". The terms irrevocable
and perpetual mean diﬀerent things. A perpetual li-
cense is one that has no given end. An irrevocable
license cannot be cut short. Either a perpetual li-
cense or a license with a stated term can be either
revocable or irrevocable.
Continued on next page
==PAGE:87==
Appendix B.2 CUAD Questions
79
Table B.3 – Continued from previous page
Category
Question
Source Code Escrow
Show the sections of this contract related to the
"Source Code Escrow".
Source code escrow is the
deposit of the source code of software with a third-
party escrow agent. Escrow is typically requested by
a party licensing software, to ensure maintenance of
the software instead of abandonment or reelease in
occurrence of special events.?
Audit Rights
Show the sections of this contract related to the "Au-
dit Rights".
This is clause that entitles one party
to review another party including but not limited to
work, records, physical locations, and books which
may include self-assessments, third-party audits and
other, oﬃcial documents detailing the suﬃciency of
internal systems and controls?
Uncapped Liability
Show the sections of this contract related to the "Un-
capped Liability". A clause stating that there is no
limit to the damage a party incurs if things go wrong,
and thus no limit to the money to be paid out in
respect of that damage upon the breach of the con-
tract.
Includes but not limited to ip infringement
and breach of conﬁdentiality obligations.
Liquidated Damages
Show the sections of this contract (if there are any)
related to the "Liquidated Damages". A ﬁxed or de-
termined sum agreed by the parties to a contract to
be payable on breach of the contract by one of the
parties
Covenant Not To Sue
Show the sections of this contract related to the
"Covenant Not to Sue". A covenant not to sue is a
legal agreement that obliges a party that could seek
damages to refrain from suing the party that it has
cause against? This could be for reasons of intellec-
tual property, or for other reasons.
Third Party Beneﬁciary
Show the sections of this contract related to the
"Third Party Beneﬁciary". A third-party beneﬁciary
is a person or business that beneﬁts from the terms
of a contract made between two other parties. Are
there any such parties in the contract that can en-
force its rights against a contracting party?
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Results and Analysis
C.1
Correlation and distribution
Figure C.1. Spearman correlation calculated from the data presented in Figure 5.1(b)
==PAGE:90==
82
Appendix C Results and Analysis
Figure C.2. Distribution of the number of predictions at a recall level between 0.75 and
0.85 non-included, based on the RB-S model checkpoint on the test set using the standard
conﬁdence intervals deﬁned in Chapter 4 and n-best=20
C.2
Attention
CUAD text
Question
Highlight the parts (if any) of this contract related to "Document Name" that should
be reviewed by a lawyer. Details: The name of the contract
Context
EXHIBIT 10.6 DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT THIS DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT
is made by and between Electric City Corp., a Delaware corporation (’Company’) and
Electric City of Illinois LLC (’Distributor’) this 7th day of September, 1999A. The
Company’s Business. The Company is presently engaged in the business of selling an
energy eﬃciency device
SQuAD text
Question
When was the Latin version of the word Norman ﬁrst recorded?
Context
The English name "Normans" comes from the French words Normans/Normanz, plu-
ral of Normant, modern French normand, which is itself borrowed from Old Low
Franconian Nortmann "Northman" or directly from Old Norse Norðmaðr, Latinized
variously as Nortmannus, Normannus, or Nordmannus (recorded in Medieval Latin,
9th century ) to mean "Norseman, Viking".
==PAGE:91==
Appendix C.2 Attention
83
BertViz
Figure C.3.
BertViz Head View[69] of: The text in Section C.2 (left) and C.2 (right)
using the RB-S model for CUAD and the deepset/roberta-base-squad2 model from
Transformers for SQuAD
==PAGE:92==
84
Appendix C Results and Analysis
((a)) Layer 1
((b)) Layer 2
((c)) Layer 3
((d)) Layer 4
((e)) Layer 5
((f)) Layer 6
Figure C.4. Attention Model View[69] on the CUAD text from Section C.2 from layer 1-6
in the model where each column in the subﬁgures represents an attention head
==PAGE:93==
Appendix C.2 Attention
85
((a)) Layer 7
((b)) Layer 8
((c)) Layer 9
((d)) Layer 10
((e)) Layer 11
((f)) Layer 12
Figure C.5. Attention Model View[69] on the CUAD text from Section C.2 from layer 7-12
in the model where each column in the subﬁgures represents an attention head
==PAGE:94==
86
Appendix C Results and Analysis
((a)) Layer 1
((b)) Layer 2
((c)) Layer 3
((d)) Layer 4
((e)) Layer 5
((f)) Layer 6
Figure C.6. Attention Model View[69] on the SQuAD text from Section C.2 from layer
1-6 in the model where each column in the subﬁgures represents an attention head
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C.2 Attention
87
((a)) Layer 7
((b)) Layer 8
((c)) Layer 9
((d)) Layer 10
((e)) Layer 11
((f)) Layer 12
Figure C.7. Attention Model View[69] on the SQuAD text from Section C.2 from layer
7-12 in the model where each column in the subﬁgures represents an attention head
==PAGE:96==
88
Appendix C Results and Analysis
C.3
Model performance
Figure C.8. Training and validation loss along with selected metrics for the RB-S-Con-
δ = 1 model
==PAGE:97==
Appendix C.3 Model performance
89
Figure C.9. Model performance with added answers as described in Section 6.1.3 on the
Anti-Assignment question category
Figure C.10. Training loss from SQuAD pre-trained model analysis in Section 6.2
==PAGE:98==
90
Appendix C Results and Analysis
HA F1
NA F1
EM
F1
HA F1
NA F1
EM
F1
̸∈L
Top 3
Top 1
-
88.75
81.55
80.20
83.69
80.52
70.80
69.06
73.69
3, 9, 10
69.19
8.20
13.39
26.34
54.49
3.95
7.60
18.98
4, 9, 10, 11
80.66
94.55
86.49
90.42
60.30
86.49
74.84
78.70
1, 3
91.27
84.96
84.29
86.83
82.35
72.97
72.12
75.76
1, 10
75.04
97.79
86.90
91.02
52.86
93.09
78.43
81.12
1, 3, 10
78.63
97.17
86.99
91.66
54.16
89.86
75.56
79.24
1, 3, 9
89.88
74.95
76.18
79.39
80.66
65.11
64.75
69.74
1, 9, 10
92.94
83.56
84.00
86.35
84.04
73.49
73.24
76.62
90.78
73.96
76.06
78.97
83.44
65.45
66.55
70.80
9, 10
91.04
89.79
87.28
90.16
79.67
80.26
75.97
80.08
8, 9
90.12
86.93
85.13
87.88
80.23
74.06
72.24
75.90
5, 9
65.98
89.79
78.07
82.71
44.83
78.69
65.21
68.62
1, 2
38.94
20.18
19.99
25.76
27.18
16.13
14.97
19.42
2, 4, 5
39.64
36.28
31.90
37.28
27.17
24.17
21.04
25.06
2, 4, 6
87.75
69.91
72.55
75.22
80.47
66.27
66.86
70.49
3, 11
90.78
73.96
76.06
78.97
83.44
65.45
66.55
70.80
9, 10
72.89
65.59
64.40
67.76
58.94
44.01
45.22
48.45
3, 6
91.68
75.73
78.22
80.48
82.51
60.04
63.32
66.72
4
91.95
87.99
86.82
89.16
82.48
78.45
76.23
79.65
3
92.28
82.64
83.33
85.51
82.20
72.36
71.71
75.29
1
91.87
82.20
82.83
85.07
80.84
71.44
70.64
74.24
2
87.20
74.51
75.82
78.28
76.55
54.66
58.06
61.17
6
91.02
82.37
82.54
84.94
81.22
69.09
69.49
72.70
5
90.87
78.25
79.41
82.00
84.45
73.28
73.29
76.60
11
92.16
84.82
84.62
87.00
84.62
73.89
73.70
77.08
10
92.97
85.60
85.27
87.79
83.83
76.96
75.47
79.00
9
Table C.1.
Full results table from Section 6.3 showing model performance for diﬀerent
conﬁguration of deleted layers from the δ = 1 model presented in Section 6.2. The results
are obtained using the model checkpoint from the global_step = 1864
==PAGE:99==
Appendix C.4 CUAD Paper Results
91
C.4
CUAD Paper Results
Model
AUPR
Prec @ 80% R
Prec@ 90% R
BERT-base
32.4
8.2
0
BERT-large
32.3
7.6
0
ALBERT-base
35.3
11.1
0
ALBERT-large
34.9
20.9
0
ALBERT-xlarge
37.8
20.5
0
ALBERT-xxlarge
38.4
31
0
RoBERTa-base
42.6
31.1
0
RoBERTa-base + Pre-training
45.2
34.1
0
RoBERTa-large
48.2
38.1
0
DeBERTa-xlarge
47.8
44
17.8
Table C.2. Results table from CUAD: An Expert-Annotated NLP Dataset for Legal Con-
tract Review[23] on the test set using a range of diﬀerent models
==PAGE:100==
92
Appendix C Results and Analysis
Figure C.11. Performance measured by AUPR by question category ﬁgure from Hendrycks
et al. [23] based on DeBERTa-xlarge model checkpoint
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen,
Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, San-
jay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard,
Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Lev-
enberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris
Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal
Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas,
Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and
Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous
systems, 2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/. Software available from
tensorﬂow.org.
[2]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate, 2014.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.
[3]
Petr Baudiš and Jan Šedivý. Modeling of the question answering task in the
yodaqa system.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Ex-
perimental IR Meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interaction - Volume
9283, CLEF’15, page 222228, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015. Springer-Verlag. ISBN
9783319240268. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24027-5_20. URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-24027-5_20.
[4]
Payal Biswas, Aditi Sharan, and Nidhi Malik. A framework for restricted domain
question answering system. Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on
Issues and Challenges in Intelligent Computing Techniques, Icict 2014, pages
613–620, 2014. doi: 10.1109/ICICICT.2014.6781351.
[5]
Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp
Koehn, Johannes Leveling, Christof Monz, Pavel Pecina, Matt Post, Herve
Saint-Amand, Radu Soricut, Lucia Specia, and Aleš Tamchyna.
Findings of
the 2014 workshop on statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the
Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 12–58, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi:
10.3115/v1/W14-3302. URL https://aclanthology.org/W14-3302.
==PAGE:102==
94
Bibliography
[6]
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeﬀrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Ben-
jamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[7]
Cristian Buciluundeﬁned, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model
compression. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’06, page 535541, New York,
NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 1595933395. doi:
10.1145/1150402.1150464. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1150402.1150464.
[8]
Ilias Chalkidis and Ion Androutsopoulos. A deep learning approach to contract
element extraction. In JURIX, 2017.
[9]
Ilias Chalkidis, Ion Androutsopoulos, and Achilleas Michos. Extracting contract
elements.
In Proceedings of the 16th Edition of the International Conference
on Articial Intelligence and Law, ICAIL ’17, page 1928, New York, NY, USA,
2017. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450348911. doi: 10.1145/
3086512.3086515. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3086512.3086515.
[10] Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malakasiotis, Nikolaos Aletras,
and Ion Androutsopoulos.
LEGAL-BERT: The muppets straight out of law
school. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2020, pages 2898–2904, Online, November 2020. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
doi:
10.18653/v1/2020.ﬁndings-emnlp.261.
URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.261.
[11] Ilias Chalkidis, Abhik Jana, Dirk Hartung, Michael Bommarito, Ion Androut-
sopoulos, Daniel Martin Katz, and Nikolaos Aletras. Lexglue: A benchmark
dataset for legal language understanding in english. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Dubln, Ireland,
2022.
[12] Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine Bordes. Reading wikipedia
to answer open-domain questions. CoRR, abs/1704.00051, 2017. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1704.00051.
[13] Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D. Manning.
What does bert look at?
an analysis of bert’s attention, 2019.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1906.04341.
[14] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT:
pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
95
[15] Hai Doan-nguyen and Leila Kosseim. Improving the precision of a closed-domain
question-answering system with semantic information. 2008.
[16] Yadolah Dodge. Spearman Rank Correlation Coeﬃcient, pages 502–505. Springer
New York, New York, NY, 2008. ISBN 978-0-387-32833-1. doi: 10.1007/978-0-
387-32833-1_379. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-32833-1_379.
[17] William Falcon and The PyTorch Lightning team. PyTorch Lightning, 3 2019.
URL https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning.
[18] Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N.
Dauphin.
Convolutional sequence to sequence learning, 2017.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1705.03122.
[19] R. Stuart Geiger, Kevin Yu, Yanlai Yang, Mindy Dai, Jie Qiu, Rebekah Tang,
and Jenny Huang. Garbage in, garbage out?
In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, jan 2020. doi: 10.
1145/3351095.3372862. URL https://doi.org/10.1145%2F3351095.3372862.
[20] R. Stuart Geiger, Dominique Cope, Jamie Ip, Marsha Lotosh, Aayush Shah,
Jenny Weng, and Rebekah Tang. garbage in, garbage out revisited: What do
machine learning application papers report about human-labeled training data?
Quantitative Science Studies, 2:795–827, 2021.
[21] Google.
Recent advances in google translate.
https://ai.googleblog.com/
2020/06/recent-advances-in-google-translate.html.
Accessed: 2022-05-
05.
[22] Allison Hegel, Marina Shah, Genevieve Peaslee, Brendan Roof, and Emad El-
wany. The law of large documents: Understanding the structure of legal con-
tracts using visual cues. CoRR, abs/2107.08128, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2107.08128.
[23] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Anya Chen, and Spencer Ball. CUAD: an expert-
annotated NLP dataset for legal contract review. CoRR, abs/2103.06268, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06268.
[24] Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomás Kociský, Edward Grefenstette, Lasse Espeholt,
Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman, and Phil Blunsom. Teaching machines to read and
comprehend. CoRR, abs/1506.03340, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.
03340.
[25] Geoﬀrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and JeﬀDean. Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
[26] Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not explanation, 2019. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10186.
==PAGE:104==
96
Bibliography
[27] Ł ukasz Kaiser and Samy Bengio. Can active memory replace attention?
In
D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/file/
fb8feff253bb6c834deb61ec76baa893-Paper.pdf.
[28] Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Karen Simonyan, Aaron van den Oord, Alex
Graves, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural machine translation in linear time, 2016.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.10099.
[29] Yoon Kim. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation, 2014. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5882.
[30] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,
2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[31] Yuta Koreeda and Christopher Manning. ContractNLI: A dataset for document-
level natural language inference for contracts. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 1907–1919, Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.164.
[32] Sotiris Kotsiantis, D. Kanellopoulos, and P. Pintelas.
Handling imbalanced
datasets: A review. GESTS International Transactions on Computer Science
and Engineering, 30:25–36, 11 2005.
[33] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language in-
dependent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing, 2018.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06226.
[34] Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. Race:
Large-scale reading comprehension dataset from examinations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04683, 2017.
[35] Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush
Sharma, and Radu Soricut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of
language representations, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11942.
[36] Xiaoxu Liu, Haoye Lu, and Amiya Nayak. A spam transformer model for sms
spam detection. IEEE Access, PP:1–1, 05 2021. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.
3081479.
[37] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen,
Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A
robustly optimized bert pretraining approach, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1907.11692.
[38] Google LLC. Google cloud platform. URL https://console.google.com.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
97
[39] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2017.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
[40] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning.
Eﬀective ap-
proaches to attention-based neural machine translation, 2015.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1508.04025.
[41] Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better
than one?, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10650.
[42] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeﬀrey Dean. Eﬃcient estimation
of word representations in vector space, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1301.3781.
[43] Lukas Muttenthaler.
Subjective question answering:
Deciphering the inner
workings of transformers in the realm of subjectivity, 2020.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2006.08342.
[44] Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoﬀrey Hinton. When does label smooth-
ing help?, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02629.
[45] Zhaoyang Niu, Guoqiang Zhong, and Hui Yu.
A review on the attention
mechanism of deep learning.
Neurocomputing, 452:48–62, 2021.
ISSN 0925-
2312. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2021.03.091. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092523122100477X.
[46] Adam Paszke,
Sam Gross,
Francisco Massa,
Adam Lerer,
James Brad-
bury,
Gregory Chanan,
Trevor Killeen,
Zeming Lin,
Natalia Gimelshein,
Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary De-
Vito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala.
Pytorch:
An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library.
In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pages 8024–8035. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-
imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[47] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine
learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[48] Jeﬀrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. Glove: Global
vectors for word representation.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543, 2014. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/D14-1162.
==PAGE:106==
98
Bibliography
[49] Alec Radford, Jeﬀrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya
Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Ope-
nAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[50] Colin Raﬀel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang,
Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer, 2019. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
[51] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad:
100, 000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. CoRR, abs/1606.05250,
2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05250.
[52] Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. Know what you don’t know:
Unanswerable questions for squad, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.
03822.
[53] Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang.
Squad leaderboard.
https:
//rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/, 2022. Accessed: 2022-06-01.
[54] Adam Roberts, Colin Raﬀel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you
pack into the parameters of a language model?, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2002.08910.
[55] Sebastian Ruder.
Neural Transfer Learning for Natural Language Processing.
PhD thesis, National University of Ireland, Galway, 2019.
[56] Alexander Rush. The annotated transformer. pages 52–60, 01 2018. doi: 10.
18653/v1/W18-2509.
[57] Beth Sagar-Fenton and Lizzy McNeill. How many words do you need to speak
a language? https://www.bbc.com/news/world-44569277. Accessed: 2022-06-
23.
[58] Hassan Sajjad, Fahim Dalvi, Nadir Durrani, and Preslav Nakov. On the eﬀect of
dropping layers of pre-trained transformer models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2004.03844.
[59] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert,
a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter, 2019. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108.
[60] Mike Schuster and Kaisuke Nakajima. Japanese and korean voice search. In
2012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 5149–5152, 2012. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2012.6289079.
[61] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation
of rare words with subword units, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.
07909.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
99
[62] Samuel Suík. Compressing bert for faster prediction, 2019. URL https://rasa.
com/blog/compressing-bert-for-faster-prediction-2/.
[63] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioﬀe, Jonathon Shlens, and Zbig-
niew Wojna. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision, 2015.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.00567.
[64] Igor V. Tetko, Pavel Karpov, Ruud Van Deursen, and Guillaume Godin. State-
of-the-art augmented nlp transformer models for direct and single-step ret-
rosynthesis. Nature Communications, 11(1):5575, 2020. ISSN 20411723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-020-19266-y.
[65] Rob
Toews.
Ai
will
transform
the
ﬁeld
of
law.
Forbes,
2019.
URL
https://www.forbes.com/sites/robtoews/2019/12/19/ai-will-
transform-the-field-of-law/?sh=198aad317f01.
[66] Don Tuggener, Pius von Däniken, Thomas Peetz, and Mark Cieliebak. Ledgar: A
large-scale multi-label corpus for text classiﬁcation of legal provisions in contracts.
In LREC, 2020.
[67] Betty van Aken, Benjamin Winter, Alexander Löser, and Felix A. Gers. How
does bert answer questions? a layer-wise analysis of transformer representations.
In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, CIKM ’19, page 18231832, New York, NY, USA, 2019.
Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9781450369763.
doi: 10.1145/
3357384.3358028. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3358028.
[68] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.
CoRR, abs/1706.03762, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[69] Jesse Vig. A multiscale visualization of attention in the transformer model, 2019.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05714.
[70] Jesse Vig and Yonatan Belinkov. Analyzing the structure of attention in a trans-
former language model, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04284.
[71] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and
Samuel R. Bowman. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for nat-
ural language understanding, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.07461.
[72] Sandra Wankmuller. Neural transfer learning with transformers for social science
text analysis [arxiv]. Arxiv, page 67 pp., 2021.
[73] Lilian Weng. How to build an open-domain question answering system? lilian-
weng.github.io, 2020. URL https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2020-10-
29-odqa/.
==PAGE:108==
100
Bibliography
[74] Sarah Wiegreﬀe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation, 2019. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.04626.
[75] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement De-
langue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz,
Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien
Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin
Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language
processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online, October
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-
demos.6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6.
[76] Zack Written. Zack witten: Extracting structured data from legal documents,
2018.
URL https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrXJmaSHBJU&ab_channel=
PyData.
[77] Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Quoc V. Le.
Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language
understanding, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08237.
