==PAGE:1==
Machine learning techniques for communica-
tion over complex channels
Optimizing optical modulation through AI
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of Communication Technologies
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
Optimizing optical modulation through AI
Master Thesis
July 3, 2022
By
Sergio Hernandez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Communication Technologies,
Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over four months at the Section of Communication
Technologies, Department of Photonics, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc.
Eng. Communication Technologies and System Design.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of digital signal
processing, algebra, calculus, statistics and electronic design.
Sergio Hernandez - s202769
Signature
Date
ii
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
03/07/22
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Machine learning has experienced a great leap in the last years, opening a new
era of development in various fields. Despite its constant technological progress,
optical communications are not free of challenges: the strong nonlinearity intro-
duced by the various components that drive fiber-optic systems reduces their per-
formance and hinders the reach of their full potential. The case of optical modula-
tors is particularly interesting, given that depending on their functioning principle
their characteristics vary significantly, making one-fits-all solutions less desirable.
The proposed model aims to combine the training of autoencoders with domain-
specific knowledge in the signal processing domain to enhance the performance
of optical systems. After a comprehensive testing of the proposed setup, the au-
toencoder structure was able to overcome the performance of traditional solutions
in the context of Mach-Zehnder modulator compensation in both 4PAM and 8PAM.
Despite the good behaviour of the model, further research must be conducted in
order to analyze its potential for improvement.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
The present project was developed by:
Sergio Hernandez, MSc Communication Tech. and System Design, DTU
under the supervision of:
Darko Zibar, Supervisor, DTU Fotonik
Francesco da Ros, Supervisor, DTU Fotonik
Christophe Peucheret, Supervisor, University of Rennes
Miquel Masanas, Supervisor, UPC
Josep Prat, Supervisor, UPC
I would like to thank my supervisors and professors for their knowledge, patience
and priceless advice throughout the development of the present solution. I must
also thank my family and friends, specially my parents, Jorge and Guillermina, for
their love and support.
iv
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Machine Learning techniques in Optical Communication
5
2.1
Basic concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Neural network and autoencoder design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Training and optimization of Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Hyperparameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Optical communication systems
25
3.1
Information Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Optical system design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Mach-Zehnder and EAM modulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Non-linearity relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Simulations and numerical results
39
4.1
System and simulation structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Simulation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
59
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Bibliography
62
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Impact of the optical system distortion on the received constellation
2
2.1
Effect of under- and over-fitting in regression models . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Error vector in the I/Q plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Behaviour of softmax for an arbitrary model input . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Example of K-fold cross-validation for K = 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Schema of a generic 4x6x4 artificial neural network . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Plot of a single-variable function with multiple local minima
. . . .
15
2.7
Schema of the backpropagation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Performance of SPSA for estimation of a quadratic function . . . .
20
2.9
Effect of learning rate on the gradient tracking of the optimizer
. .
21
2.10 Comparison between SPSA loss plots for different models and learn-
ing rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.11 Effect of the perturbation size in various training scenarios . . . . .
23
3.1
Example of a generic linear, real digital communication system . .
25
3.2
Mutual information of various 1D constellations . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
SER limits for equiprobable 1D constellations . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Spectrum of a raised cosine pulse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Generic components of an optical communication system . . . . .
31
3.6
Representation of the internal structure of a Mach-Zehnder inter-
ferometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Internal layer doping of electroabsorption modulators . . . . . . . .
34
3.8
Measurement-based EAM estimated response of a real modulator
35
3.9
Impact of MZMs in system performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.10 Projection of the maximum range of 4PAM constellation on the MZM
transfer function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.11 Main branch of the arcsine function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1
Internal structure of the proposed autoencoder model for 4PAM
constellations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Block diagram of the MI and SER calculation for testing . . . . . .
40
4.3
Progressive approximation of the MZM’s sinusoidal response . . .
41
4.4
Input power after scaling for various SNRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Block diagram for linear per-sample 4PAM setup . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Obtained results for linear per-sample 4PAM case
. . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
Block diagram for the linear, filtered 4PAM setup . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.8
Obtained results for linear filtered 4PAM case . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.9
Block diagram for the linear, per-sample 8PAM setup . . . . . . . .
45
4.10 Obtained results for linear per-sample 8PAM case
. . . . . . . . .
46
4.11 Block diagram for the linear, filtered 8PAM setup . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.12 Obtained results for linear filtered 8PAM case . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.13 Block diagram for the nonlinear, 4PAM setup
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
vi
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:9==
4.14 Obtained results for nonlinear O(5) approximation, 4PAM case . .
49
4.15 Geometric constellation shaping for 4PAM MZM, order 5 polynomial 50
4.16 Obtained results for nonlinear O(7) approximation, 4PAM case . .
51
4.17 Geometric constellation shaping for 4PAM MZM, order 7 polynomial 52
4.18 Block diagram for the nonlinear, 8PAM setup
. . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.19 Obtained results for nonlinear O(5) approximation, 8PAM case . .
54
4.20 Geometric constellation shaping for 8PAM MZM, order 5 polynomial 55
4.21 Obtained results for nonlinear O(7) approximation, 8PAM case . .
56
4.22 Geometric constellation shaping for 8PAM MZM, order 7 polynomial 57
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) have experienced a significant
leap in the last decades, partially due to the abundance of affordable computing
platforms and data to be analyzed. Its introduction to several fields, like image
recognition and segmentation or natural language processing, has revolutionized
the system performance in such contexts, facilitating tasks that were unthinkable
not long ago. The key to such techniques is the generalization potential of certain
ML models, where the underlying patterns of the data presented to them allows
reliable inference on inputs that the model has never inspected before.
This translates into solutions that are able to transcript speech recordings from
the voice of a speaker they have not been shown before, or to distinguish items
within an image from virtually any perspective. Neural networks (NNs) are one
of the most popular approaches among ML models, as the complexity and vari-
ety of mathematical activations they are based on yield a large space of potential
linear and nonlinear transfer functions to optimize a certain task. It must also be
noted that some AI models can be particularly difficult to correct and understand
from a numerical perspective, as the amount of parameters to be trained within
them can be relatively large even for simple problems. This entails that such so-
lutions must be extensively tested and compared with standard models of known
behaviour, in order to test their performance and find any caveat in their function-
ing. A particular case among supervised (ground-truth-based) machine learning
is gradient-less optimization methods i.e. models trained using derivative-free
algorithms that make no assumptions on the ”good behaviour” (continuity, differ-
entiability) of the succession of operations within model to be evaluated. This
is a substantial advantage in cases where gradients cannot be directly computed
due to complexity constraints or simply because the physical nature of the system
hinders the acquisition of reliable measurements. Although the gradient-less opti-
mization problem has been solved in many applications with noteworthy success
in its different variants [1, 2, 3], the analysis on the present report will be focused
on Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation, [4] a finite difference ap-
proximation method, along with other traditional gradient-based approaches.
Digital communications and digital signal processing are not free of challenges ei-
ther: although the theoretical basis for both of them is well established and proven,
it may crumble when studying non-linear systems where some of the usual as-
sumptions are no longer valid. Optical communications are a classic example
where the properties of the equipment used can differ severely from ideal lin-
ear models, leading to the subsequent impact on performance. One of the main
sources of distortion in the scope of such systems is fiber dispersion [5]. This ef-
fect yields channels that are not only non-linear but non-memory-less (past inputs
affect present outputs) thus leading to intersymbol interference (ISI). Nonetheless,
there are specific components within optical transceivers that represent a signif-
icant challenge. It is the case of optical modulators/demodulators, (the electron-
ics behind the conversion of electrical signals into optical pulses and vice versa)
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
1
==PAGE:12==
(a) Comparison between Linear and
Mach-Zehnder modulator response
(b) Example of distortion introduced by
optical fibre channels on 8APSK
constellation
Figure 1.1: Impact of the optical system distortion on the received constellation
where a variety of effects can affect the quality of the signal: the changing ther-
mal response of the circuits, caused by sudden amplitude changes on the driving
voltage signal, can introduce instability in the wavelength of the obtained optical
signal, thus arising mismatches on the receiving end. A specially interesting prob-
lem from the signal perspective comes from the spectral distortion of symbols due
to changes in the input bias voltage of modulator. As mentioned in [6] and [7], this
phenomenon calls for an adaptive equalization for the different inputs in order to
minimize the dispersion in the final constellation. The time and amplitude nonlin-
earity becomes specially noticeable when using more complex constellations (like
8 APSK, shown in Figure 1.1b, or 8+ QAM), as the combination of phase and am-
plitude modulation usually comes with additional difficulties on the receiver (RX)
side. In a society where optical systems are at the core of most high-capacity links
and the strain on the global communication structure is increasingly higher both in
terms of energy consumption and throughput, machine learning has the potential
to push the efficiency of the current physical infrastructure.
Thus, one of the areas of digital systems where AI has the most potential is con-
trolling complex optical modulators to overcome the physical nature of fiber com-
munication, where remarkable results have already been achieved in previous
literature in terms of performance estimation of QAM signals [8] and automatic
recognition and detection of different modulation schemes [9] among others. In
the field of geometric constellation shaping, the approach in [10], based on the
simulation of AWGN communication channels through the use of autoencoders
(AEs) has led to a variety of models that tackle more specific scenarios, like in the
presence of optical non-linear distortion [11] using unsupervised learning mod-
els [12]. The results in the latter case have shown that the use of AEs can yield
significant performance gains over traditional approaches. In [13] an equalizer
neural-network-based approach with a single hidden layer was able to achieve
2
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:13==
SNR gains of up to 5dB for directly-modulated long-range fiber. The use of au-
toencoders to dynamically learn the optimal constellation layout and the impact of
initialization in such task is discussed in [14], where different results are achieved
depending on the metric used. It must also be noted that certain distorting ef-
fects cannot be completely avoided at certain data rates or fiber lengths and are
intrinsic to the nature of the system itself.
1.1
Problem Statement
The goal of the present thesis is to implement an autoencoder-based model,
trained through gradient-based and gradient-less optimization approaches, in or-
der to act as a mapper-detector tandem to overcome some of the intrinsic limita-
tions of nonlinear channels. Specifically, the model will be focused on the equal-
ization of the undesired effects of coherent transceivers to compensate their im-
pact on the signal SNR, thus pushing the boundaries of the current optical tech-
niques. This document will elaborate on the different theoretical and applied ap-
proaches that play a role in the optimization of optical modulators through AI,
specifically within the topic of pre-distortion and detection of complex modulation
signals. A series of simulations will be performed and methodically compared,
each following slight modifications that lead to the optimal solution. Finally, a
common benchmark will be established to objectively compare the performance
between the different approaches.
1.2
Thesis outline
The document is organized in five chapters. Apart from the introduction, Chap-
ter 2 describes the different principles and techniques used to build and train
autoencoders, specifically in the scope of digital communication systems. This
includes basic theory and terminology within AI that will be used throughout the
report. Chapter 3 outlines the fundamentals of optical communications from a
physical layer perspective, the components that build an optical transceiver and
the consequences of such design choices. A section about Information Theory
and channel capacity estimation will also be included here. In Chapter 4 the dif-
ferent simulations performed will be properly described from both a high-level and
an analytical standpoint. The numerical results exposed here will prove crucial
for drawing conclusions and establishing the path for future work, as described in
Chapter 5.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:15==
2
Machine Learning techniques in
Optical Communication
According to Turing’s definition, machine learning (ML), enclosed within Artificial
Intelligence (AI), can be defined as any sequence of instructions that allow ma-
chines to resemble human behaviour. Nonetheless, this raises the question of
how such goal can be achieved. Turing suggested that in order to fully imitate
humans, a machine must be created with basic knowledge and have the ability to
learn based on past experience [15]. This concept is key in any machine learning
system: although it is a large field with a great deal of different approaches and
use cases, it must acquire knowledge from a source of data that allows it to spe-
cialize in a task or group of tasks. The present chapter aims to introduce the usual
terminology to define and test a ML model and the most relevant methodologies
to apply it in the scope of a digital communication system.
2.1
Basic concepts
One of the main distinctions when a system designer decides to use ML for carry-
ing out a certain task is defining the learning scheme that will be used. Depending
on how the data is fed to the system, we can distinguish between 3 types of mod-
els:
• Supervised learning utilizes data to predict a certain quantity of interest
by progressively comparing the output of the model to an a-priori-known
ground truth. Thus, the system can assess its own performance and ad-
just its behaviour according to a certain score, known as loss or cost of the
model. This category is usually subdivided in 2: they are either regression
tasks, where the prediction is expected to be a continuous value, or classi-
fication tasks, where every input is meant to be corresponded by a discrete
predefined output. An example of classification task could be to determine
the genre of a certain song, while a regression task could be predicting the
numerical value of the temperature tomorrow in degrees Celsius.
• Unsupervised learning is based exclusively on previous data inputs to
perform some action, without relying on any ground truth to correct its be-
haviour. In such scenarios, the performance achieved lies entirely with the
quality of the data and the structure of the utilized model. A possible exam-
ple could be detecting anomalies in solar panel cells by showing the model
a large amount of cells in good condition.
• Reinforcement learning assumes that the model has certain control over
an environment (real or simulated) from where it receives data and its ac-
tions can trigger a certain reward signal. This encourages the system to
learn the consequences of its actions and whether those outcomes are de-
sirable, thus obtaining a model than can quickly react to a varying environ-
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
5
==PAGE:16==
ment without retraining. A possible application could be bomb-neutralizing
robots, where the model is rewarded for every neutralization achieved.
Focusing on the supervised learning approaches, one of the most significant de-
sign choices is the cost function to be used as benchmark of the model perfor-
mance. Even if the dataset used and the model structure is otherwise the exact
same, a divergence in the loss metric used can yield completely different results,
given that the changes on the trainable parameters are made based mainly on
it. Thus, regression and classification tasks usually use different generic cost
functions, and in many cases they may be replaced by field-specific metrics that
become more relevant for the task to be performed.
2.1.1
MSE and the bias-variance trade-off
Within regression, one of the most popular choices as loss function is Mean Square
Error (MSE). MSE derives from Euclidean distance, and therefore it yields a pos-
itive value that approaches 0 as the predicted data and ground truth converge. It
is described in Equation 2.1.
L = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
e2
i = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −y′
i)2 = E[(y −y′)2]
(2.1)
where L is the cost or loss of the model, ei is the error at element i, y′
i and yi
are the predicted and true values of the target (respectively) and N is the number
of parameters to be optimized. By playing with the terms and definitions within
MSE it is possible to decompose it into a compromise between 2 distinct kinds
of error than can proof extremely useful when it comes to diagnosing the training
of a model. This is the so-called bias-variance trade-off of the MSE: it essentially
consists on showing the necessary compromise between the generalization ca-
pabilities of an ML system and its degree of variation when trained with different
sets of identically-sourced data. Following the notation in Equation 2.1 and taking
x as the observations taken from the training dataset D:
MSE = ED,y|x[(y −y′(x))2] ⇒
¯y(x) = Ey|x[y] ⇒
MSE = ED,y|x[(y −¯y(x) + ¯y(x) + y′(x))2] =
= Ey|x[(y −¯y(x))2] + ED[(¯y(x) −y′(x))2]
(2.2)
where the cross-term is not included as Ey|x[y −¯y(x)] = 0. Following the same
approach with the mean of y′(x) in the second term of Equation 2.2:
ED[(¯y(x) −y′(x))2] = ED[(¯y(x) −¯y′(x) + ¯y′(x) + y′(x))2] ⇒
ED[(¯y(x) −y′(x))2] = ED[(¯y(x) −¯y′(x))2] + ED[(¯y′(x) −y′(x))2] ⇒
MSE = Ey|x[(y −¯y(x))2] + ED[(¯y(x) −¯y′(x))2] + ED[(¯y′(x) −y′(x))2]
(2.3)
6
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:17==
A careful look on the final expression reveals that the first component is the vari-
ance of y conditional to x, the second term is independent of D and therefore the
expected value operator can be omitted, and the third one is the variance of y′(x)
with respect to x. This yields the expression of MSE in terms of variance and bias:
MSE = Ex[V ary|x[y] + (¯y(x) −¯y′(x))2 + V arD(y′(x))]
(2.4)
Equation 2.4 summarizes mean square differences between true and predicted
outputs in 3 factors: V ary|x[y], representing the intrinsic difficulty of the problem
to be solved, regardless of the model proposed. It is therefore an unavoidable
source of error that the designer cannot actuate on. (¯y(x) −¯y′(x))2 is the differ-
ence between the mean predicted values over many datasets and the mean of
the true values. It reflects on how accurate the model is predicting the pursued
ground truth, and it is usually denominated bias. Lastly, the third term represents
how much the predicted values vary when using different training sets. If the pre-
dictions of the model are too specific to the data it is shown, it will probably be less
resilient to new unseen data i.e. it loses generalization capabilities. An example
of the consequences of excessive bias and variance can be seen in Figure 2.1,
where these phenomena are shown over a regression problem for discrete data.
(a) High bias model (underfitting)
(b) High variance model (overfitting)
Figure 2.1: Effect of under- and over-fitting in regression models
As the plots clearly show, minimizing solely the variance or the bias of a certain
model is usually counterproductive from a performance perspective, but due to
vastly different reasons reasons. In 2.1a, the model is simple and therefore its
loss will probably be quite consistent across different datasets, in other words,
the value of MSE has a very low variance with respect to the utilized dataset. At
the same time the prediction power of the system on both training and test data is
very poor, that is, the bias between them is large. This case is usually referred to
as underfitting, as the model is not specific enough to the data it has been trained
on.
Figure 2.1b shows the opposite behaviour: the model is quite complex and it
predicts on the training values almost perfectly. The problem in this case is that
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
7
==PAGE:18==
even if the model does a good job on data it has seen before, it is tremendously
inaccurate on unknown data, as the divergence from the test data clearly shows.
In this case the bias is almost null, but the variance of the model with respect to the
training data is very high, as the predicted function would probably be completely
different if the input training values were changed. We call this overfitting, as the
model has been so ”optimized” for the shown data that it is not suitable to predict
on any other distribution.
Extrapolating these terms to a generic supervised ML problem, a system display-
ing poor performance on both seen and unseen data is usually a sign of excessive
simplicity, and a richer model will probably deliver better results. If on the contrary
the model does well on training data but the testing performance is unable to
improve after a certain point, it may be recommendable to feed the model with
more data that allows it to generalize to more diverse cases or simply removing
elements from the model to decrease its complexity.
2.1.2
Error Vector Magnitude
Certain types of distortion in communications are not zero-mean, that is, some of
these systems come rather as an amplitude or phase bias rather the traditional
normally-distributed noise in either dimension. An alternative loss function to MSE
(although similar in its philosophy) often used in the context complex-constellation
digital communication systems is Error Vector Magnitude (EVM). Instead of com-
paring each of the components of the received symbols and compare them to the
ground truth, using EVM as cost measure of a model allows further analysis on
the distortion that the constellation presents, thus facilitating compensation tasks.
In other words, while MSE yields only the Euclidean distance between outputs
and labels, using the vector space enables to distinguish between amplitude and
phase distortion. Figure 2.2 shows how the error vector is drawn from true and
measured symbols in complex modulations.
As the figure shows, the error vector’s norm is indeed equal to the square root of
the MSE (RMSE) between both points, however it yields some insight that is lost
in the former. Apart from the aforementioned norm, we can distinguish 2 extra
measures: the phase error and the magnitude error between the true vector T
and the measured vector M [16]:
Merr = |T| −|M|
(2.5)
Pherr = tan−1 I{E}
R{E}
(2.6)
EV M = RMSE
Ps
= |E|
Ps
(2.7)
where E is the error vector and Ps is the average symbol power. The different
metrics in Equations 2.5 to 2.7 allow the designer to create a custom loss function
where the different kinds of distortion are weighted according to the necessities of
8
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Error vector in the I/Q plane
the task, but they are specially useful when used as test metric. For example, if the
phase noise is relatively high in comparison with the magnitude distortion, it may
point to a phase bias in all the symbols due to certain effect in the communication
system that the model is not able to compensate, and therefore it may be advisable
to account for this effect within the inference model itself.
2.1.3
Cross-entropy and multinomial logistic regression
In the case of classification models, MSE is usually discarded as measure of cost
due to the lack of synergy with the philosophy of classification tasks. When in-
ferring the category of a certain input the most relevant factor is whether the true
class has been given the highest probability. This is specially true in multi-class,
mutually-exclusive classification where only 1 category can be assigned per input
vector and hard decisions need to be made, which is often the case in communi-
cation systems. In such scenarios, the probability value assigned to the rest of the
classes other than the true one are less relevant, as only the highest one would be
taken into account. Thus, given that classification models often yield probabilities
or outputs interpretable as such, a feasible approach is to compare the probability
distribution of input and output using metrics from information theory. This is the
case of cross-entropy, a measure of the ”amount of surprise” when using a cer-
tain probability distribution q to represent the true distribution p [17]. In the case of
ML systems, the purpose is to ascertain the effectiveness of the model at ”under-
standing” the intrinsic parameter relations of the model to make predictions. The
expression of cross-entropy for discrete distributions is defined in Equation 2.8:
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
9
==PAGE:20==
H(p, q) = −
∑
xϵX
p(x) · log2 (q(x))
(2.8)
where X represents the distribution from where x is drawn. It is intuitive to see
how when using cross-entropy as cost function in a supervised learning scenario,
the true distribution p is represented by the labels of the model (the ground truth)
while q represents the inferred probabilities. In the case of the aforementioned
multi-class mutually-exclusive-categories model this means that for every input xi
evaluated, the cross-entropy sum within the loss function will be non-zero solely
for the true category K, as the p vector will be sparse (one-hot encoded). What
this essentially means is that the model will only take into account the probability
assigned to the true category to establish the performance of the inference as a
whole. The difference this represents with respect to MSE is quite significant and
it can make a great difference while training this type of model. Additionally, cross-
entropy is of special interest when evaluating communication systems, provided
that the probability distributions are drawn from the true symbols and the output of
the decoder on the receiver side. Doing so, it is possible to directly relate cross-
entropy to the capacity of the studied channel, as explained in Chapter 3.
In multinomial logistic regression models, the probability of a certain input xi to be
within a class K is usually obtained based on the classic definition of probability
using exponential functions, described in Equation 2.9
P(xi ϵ K) =
eβKxi
∑Nc
k=1 eβkxi
(2.9)
where the Nc vectors βn are to be optimized for the desired classification task
(training). This ensures that the model will yield an actual probability distribution
where the total probability is 1. In systems where the range of the output is highly
irregular or is not bounded the softmax function is utilized:
P(yi ϵ K) =
ey′
i,K
∑Nc
k=1 ey′
i,k
(2.10)
This is done to provide an exponential (therefore non-linear) activation for sys-
tems that need to accept a variety of possible values avoiding any normalization
that could distort the relation between parameters in the model. Thus, bipolar out-
puts can be interpreted as logarithmic likelihoods where positive values represent
high probabilities and negative values converge asymptotically to 0. A numerical
example is shown in Figure 2.3.
2.1.4
Cross-validation
Data is the engine of any ML model, and therefore its usage once it has been
obtained has an undeniable impact on its performance. Once the designer has
made sure that the selected data is representative, diverse and relevant to the
task to be carried out, the next step is to partition it for the different stages of the
learning process: training, testing and validation. Although the selection of each
10
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Behaviour of softmax for an arbitrary model input
of them can be more complicated than simply shuffling the input tensors, in the
case of communication systems the main factor to keep in mind is to preserve the
desired symbol probabilities, as otherwise there could be a significant bias in the
performance of the system. Training data can be defined as the input that the sys-
tem will use to optimize its weights for a fixed model structure. The more diverse
and abundant it is, the better the model will adapt to the task to be performed,
avoiding overfitting. Test data should be drawn from a fairly similar distribution
than the training data, but without reusing any element of the training set, as this
would deceitfully boost the observed performance of the model. For the testing
process to be meaningful, the test set should be as representative of the data the
system will actuate on during the production (final) phase of development, there-
fore there is a trade-off between the inference quality of the model (by increasing
the size of the training set) and the generalization error accuracy, i.e. the capacity
of the testing set to represent the true dataset from where all future inputs will
be drawn from [15]. Lastly, the purpose of validation data is to ascertain the per-
formance of the model when specific hyperparameters within it are tuned. This
allows the system designer to find the model structure that fits the problem on the
best possible way.
Once the partitions have been probably set, the issue of how to split the original
dataset arises. As mentioned before, the training set must be large enough to
maximize the performance of the model, but an excessive reduction of the size
of test and validation sets will yield misleading cost scores that may result on
suboptimal choices. For either generalization error estimation (trade-off between
training and test sets) or model selection (training vs validation) we can distinguish
3 distinct approaches:
• Hold-out cross-validation is the simplest method available: we simply split
the original dataset D into 2 subsets of arbitrary size, where the size of the
training set Dtrain is usually equal or larger than the testing set Dtest. In this
case we assume the test set is representative of the true distribution with-
out further analysis. This method is specially popular when computational
limitations apply or when the quality of the data set is ensured.
• K-fold cross-validation is a substantially more demanding approach in terms
of computational resources, as it entails an iterative progression where D is
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Example of K-fold cross-validation for K = 4
divided into K subsets of equal size, as shown in Figure 2.4. Once the set
has been divided, the model is tested on every subset and trained on all
the other, thus utilizing every data point as both training and test tensors.
This yields a potentially more accurate performance assessment, at cost of
repeating the training process K times.
• Leave-one-out cross-validation is an special case of K-fold splitting where
K = N, being N the total number of observations in the dataset. This is
specially practical when the available dataset is rather limited in size, so
using every single data point available in training becomes a necessity. The
obvious drawback of this approach is that it requires N iterations, making it
unfeasible for large models.
2.2
Neural network and autoencoder design
Since the discovery of the neuron as elementary building brick of the human brain
and the nervous system, a number of pioneers from diverse disciplines have tried
to replicate such structure mathematically, hoping to reproduce the mechanics
of biological information processing with the available computational resources.
Although the original inspiration of replicating the synaptic links between organic
neurons has been somehow left aside in many cases, artificial neural networks
(ANNs) have been very much utilized for a large variety of applications with great
success, like text recognition [18] or brain tumor diagnose [19], to name some.
Even if they experienced their original impulse several decades ago, the inces-
santly increasing amount of data available due to the leap in computing power
and storage has brought the field to a whole new level in recent years. The broad
spectrum of ANN variants available makes a general definition somehow com-
12
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:23==
plicated, but they can be defined as a succession of interconnected linear and
nonlinear operations performed on a set of N-dimensional inputs and based on
the tuning of coefficients (also called weights or parameters) to carry out a cer-
tain task. A simple example of ANN is the feed-forward neural network (FFNN).
FFNNs perform linear operations over each real element of the input separately,
to then perform a nonlinear activation. This procedure is reiterated over a series of
stages (layers) that combined yield a large output space depending on the linear
coefficients chosen. The nonlinear activations represent a crucial part of the sys-
tem, as without them the successive scaling and biasing could be substituted by a
single linear operation, therefore making the network unable to represent the vast
variety of nonlinear schemes it may need to reach to be optimal. The choice of
activation functions is also quite broad and application dependant, but in general
they are continuous and somehow smooth in order to enable differentiation [20,
21]. The reasons for this will be explained later in this chapter. A representation
of the FFNN architecture can be seen in Figure 2.5.
Mathematically, we can define FFNNs as a recursion of linear operations based
on the per-layer weights w{L}
ab , where L is the number of network layers selected
and a, b denote the neuron index in the previous and following layer, respectively.
We can then define the input to each layer l in the network as:
z{l}
b
= h(
Nl−1
∑
a=0
w{l}
ab x{l−1}
a
)
(2.11)
where h(x) denotes the chosen activation function and xa denotes the output of the
previous layer. As the data fed to the network is not under the control of the model,
the actuation of the system over the final output is exerted from the modification
of the weights according to the desired goal. The process of tweaking the weights
belongs to the field of optimization, and will be explained in the next section.
A particular case of neural network that has special importance in the present
case are autoencoders (AEs), artificial network structures designed originally for
dimensionality reduction. Thus, the goal of an autoencoder is to replicate the
value of its input to its output, but under the constrain of having a compressed
representation in between. This makes AE architectures usually narrower in the
hidden layers of the network than in its sides, so the system is forced to represent
the data-generating distribution in a lower dimensionality space without falling into
triviality. If no activation function is selected (i.e. linear activation), the problem to
be optimized is equivalent to Principal Component Analysis (PCA), a traditional
dimensionality reduction technique broadly used in linear algebra [22]. When a
non-linear activation is used, parallel to FFNNs, the output space becomes much
richer, thus yielding a great potential for compression [23]. Given that commu-
nication systems make extensive use of encoding-decoding schemes in order to
adjust the characteristics of the data stream to be transmitted to the channel avail-
able, the use of autoencoders has also gained popularity in the last years. A par-
ticularly interesting example on the topic of geometrical constellation shaping is
mentioned in [24] (a similar to the approach in the present solution, but apply-
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.5: Schema of a generic 4x6x4 artificial neural network
ing Gauss-Hermite quadratures), where it was concluded that no additional gains
where obtained when utilizing hidden layers on the encoding side. Following the
outcomes of the previously cited literature, this project aims to replicate similar
results by extrapolating the state of the art in dynamic constellation shaping to
optical-modulator-based systems.
2.3
Training and optimization of Neural Networks
As mentioned in past sections, supervised learning tasks rely on some kind of
score, usually called loss or cost function, to assess the performance of a certain
model. The analysis of the loss at a certain training iteration (also called epoch)
allows to judge whether the modification of the weights has lead the model towards
improvement, i.e. it has optimized it, or on the contrary they have negatively
affected the behaviour of the model towards the task it is supposed to perform.
This entails that the field of optimization has a considerable impact on the training
effectiveness of the system, given that a more suitable optimizer will arrive to the
solution faster or even get to solutions that other algorithms would never have
obtained.
This is due to the complex nature of multivariate minimization (or maximization),
where a global analysis of the function is no longer tractable, and therefore only
local analysis can be performed within a reasonable time. The main downside
of such approaches is that local minima are prone to be considered global, and
14
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.6: Plot of a single-variable function with multiple local minima
therefore the model may be unable to analyze further and yield the optimal solu-
tion. Looking at Figure 2.6, where a single-variable function is shown for simplicity,
and assuming that the function is not defined beyond the represented input range,
the global minimum is clearly around an input value of -6.3. However, if the op-
timization algorithm takes a large positive value as initial point it may consider
either of the local minima as its final solution, thus hindering the correct training
of a hypothetical model whose loss function follows this tendency.
Another important distinction on the type of optimization utilized is whether the
system to be optimized can be reproduced solely by continuous differentiable
functions or not.
Calculus provides a powerful tool for the search of minima:
derivatives. Assuming preconditions are met and regardless of the amount of
variables implicated or the complexity of the model to be studied, it should in the-
ory be possible to establish an analytical relation between each variable and the
loss function, that is, to analyze the marginal impact of each independent variable
on the performance of the model. This is what we know as partial derivatives
of the loss function over each independent variable. The traditional ML optimiz-
ers, like Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), are fully based on the evaluation
of partial derivatives of the functions within the studied model and represent a
good balance between complexity and performance [15]. As long as the func-
tions within the model have been properly optimized for the task, this approach is
usually preferable as it has a clear foundation on well-known mathematical prin-
ciples while being computationally affordable.
Nevertheless, when the preconditions of the gradient-based approaches are not
met, alternative methods are needed. These are know as gradient-free or gradient-
less optimization algorithms, and they are widely used for systems where either
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
15
==PAGE:26==
the variables of interest cannot be measured in situ or the internal operations
performed are either non-differentiable or simply discontinuous [4]. Provided that
these algorithms have no further information about the function that their output for
some discrete input, they try to find a compromise between the number of func-
tion evaluations they perform (that translate directly to computational cost) and
the minimization performance in terms of sensitivity to local minima and gradient
noise and convergence speed. The present section will outline the theoretical ba-
sis of the optimizers used throughout the project in order to enrich the analysis on
the final sections of the project.
2.3.1
SGD-based methods and backpropagation
Neural networks in general and autoencoders in particular have the ability of ob-
taining a large space of possible output distributions in order to converge to the
pursued result. Nevertheless, none of them have the standalone ability to perform
the desired task in the absence of an algorithm that finds the optimal parameter
combination for the minimization (or maximization) of a given metric. As men-
tioned, within a supervised learning scheme it is necessary to establish both a
criterion for determining the suitability of the model to perform a certain task (i.e.
the difference between the predicted output and the ground truth) and a method
for improving that suitability of the model as the desired outcome is approached
through data. The former is usually denominated a cost or loss function, while the
latter is in many cases the backpropagation algorithm.
The main designer choice when pursuing the best optimization approach is to es-
tablish a direct relation between autoencoder parameters and final model loss.
This entails considering all the calculations performed throughout the operation
of the autoencoder: multiplications, activations, additions, etc. As in any multidi-
mensional function, this can be expressed mathematically as the partial deriva-
tive of the cost with respect to each parameter that the model has control over,
usually called weights. The use of partial derivatives on recursive functions (that
depend on the result of previous functions in order to be executed) leads to ap-
plying the chain rule to extract the relations between all the internal sub-results
from the final to the initial layers of the model (the mathematical nature of the op-
erations that each individual component of the autoencoder executes), for then
finding their corresponding derivatives. After such dependencies are estimated,
the parameters tuned by the model (usually initialized in a random manner, de-
pending on the application) can be modified accordingly to find the values that
fit the ground truth in the best way possible. The direction of maximum descent
effectively propagates throughout the network based on the relations between the
final and the initial layers, obtaining individual sub-gradients for each neuron in the
system (∇wLi). Such principle represents the essence of the so-called backprop-
agation algorithm, given that even if the network works in a feed-forward manner,
the real improvement in its actuation happens through the corrections made on
its weights based on the information from the loss function. The full process is
summarized in Figure 2.7.
Even if the intrinsic functioning of the procedure might seem trivial, as the network
grows in deepness the complexity of the minimization algorithm can grow critically,
16
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.7: Schema of the backpropagation algorithm
regardless of the computing platform utilized. The fields of calculus and computer
science have developed a number of algorithms aimed to enable the resolution of
this complex problems using the minimum amount of resources, called optimizers.
Among the numerous approaches available, gradient descent is one of the most
extensively used. Its expression can be seen in Equation 2.12.
wj = wj−1 −ϵ · ˆg
(2.12)
where wj is the network parameter in epoch (iteration) j, wj−1 is the value of the
parameter in the previous epoch, ϵ is the learning rate of the model and ˆg is the
approximation of the gradient. The learning rate is a hyperparameter (initialized
by the designer of the network) that establishes the precision of the tracking of the
gradient approximation. This entails that low values of ϵ will make the autoencoder
weights vary at a slower pace (the model is more ”cautious” on their variation), but
the stability of the training process and the accuracy of the final minimum obtained
will likely be improved. The estimation of the gradient is based on the directional
derivative of the loss function with respect to the model weights:
ˆg = 1
N ∇w
N
∑
i
L(f(x(i); w), y(i))
(2.13)
Based on the fraction of examples used for every step of the gradient estimation, 3
different variations of the the gradient descent algorithm can be discerned: batch,
stochastic and mini-batch gradient descent. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
and batch gradient descent follow opposite approaches: while the former uses
one example per epoch to calculate the gradient, thus minimizing computational
complexity, the latter uses the whole dataset on a single run, thus guaranteeing
the maximum accuracy possible in the approximation of the directional deriva-
tive. Mini-batch gradient descent is meant as a middle way between stochastic
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
17
==PAGE:28==
and batch gradient descent: it utilizes a fraction (usually between 16 and 256) of
the total examples available after shuffling them, making sure that none of them
is reused on the same epoch. The balance between complexity and accuracy
achieved with the latter makes it one of the most popular in the machine learn-
ing scene, although it is being replaced by new approaches based on the same
principle [21].
The variety of new optimization methods is rather lengthy, however among the
most utilized approaches Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) has gained signif-
icant momentum in recent years. Based on mini-batch gradient descent, Adam
is highly efficient from a computational perspective, thanks to its low memory re-
quirement and a remarkable behaviour in the presence of noise. It is based on the
application of moving average filters to both the first order gradient (the slope of
the loss function) and the second order gradient (the uncentered variance of the
gradient). It also features and internal per-parameter learning rate decay in order
to adapt to the conditions of the local gradient dynamically. Apart from the learn-
ing rate, the only hyperparameters to be set by the designer are β1 and β2 that
handle the decay rate of the aforementioned sliding-window filters for the first and
second order gradient respectively [25]. The proved effectiveness of Adam in the
machine learning literature makes it an ideal candidate as GD-based optimizer in
the context of the proposed solution.
2.3.2
Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation
(SPSA)
One of the subfamilies within the gradient-free optimizers are those based on finite
difference approximations, as they maintain the number of function evaluations
relatively low while mimicking the behaviour of gradient-based approaches. SPSA
is based on Finite Difference Stochastic Approximation (FDSA), which estimates
the gradient of the loss function for each independent variable and establishes a
descent direction based on the classic weight update formula in Equation 2.16.
The main issue with such approach is the number of function evaluations it entails:
as the number of independent variables N is increased, the number of evaluations
(and therefore the complexity of the training) grows linearly with it [4]. Although
a linear growth may seem affordable from the computational cost standpoint, as
models become more complex this drawback can make an enormous difference
in amount of resources needed.
Contrary to its sibling algorithm, SPSA randomizes the direction of the function
evaluation for each dimension of the parameter vector (which coincides with the
behaviour of FDSA for N = 1, but becomes a non-trivial for multivariate problems)
so regardless of the value of N the method performs 2 evaluations per iteration.
This is done for the model to ultimately converge towards the optimal solution as
the number of iterations increase, at the cost of a noisier tracking of the gradient.
They key to choose between FDSA and SPSA resides in the complexity of the
evaluation of the model itself and the number of input variables considered: the
loss in accuracy may penalize SPSA excessively for systems where the number
of variables is relatively low and the elapsed time per epoch is also lesser. On
the other hand, models with a large amount of parameters to be trained (like most
18
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:29==
neural networks used in practice) will usually make FDSA’s exhaustive approach
less efficient. In both cases, the asymptotic performance of the training will be
of k1/3, inferior to the gradient-based approaches’ k1/2 [26], but in practice these
assumptions do not necessarily hold, so no assessment of superiority can be
made for either of them. Once the SPSA algorithm has been properly analyzed
from a performance point of view, it is possible to define it in 5 simple steps:
1. Initialization and coefficient selection: The various hyperparameters govern-
ing the behaviour of the algorithm (step size, perturbation size, decay rate
of step and perturbation) are fixed. The choice of these parameters will de-
termine the ”tracking speed” of the gradient as well as the precision in the
aforementioned tracking. The decay rates will determine the evolution of the
former features as iterations progress.
2. Generation of the perturbation: The direction of the function evaluated are
randomized at each iteration based on a zero-mean Bernoulli distribution.
This entails that each variable will be assigned a stochastic ”forward” and
”backward” sign with equal probability. The random combination of signs for
each independent variable establishes a perturbation direction, that will very
likely not be the optimal one.
3. Evaluations of the loss function: The cost function at iteration k is evaluated
in the previously set directions in only 2 distinct points at an equal Euclidean
distance from the current parameter vector θ(k)
N . This distance is selected by
the user-set perturbation size ck, which decays at every additional iteration.
This allows the algorithm to estimate the local gradient by resembling the
definition of the derivative in Equation 2.14, but where the perturbation is
not infinitesimal
d(y(t)) = lim
h→0
y(t + h) −y(t)
h
(2.14)
4. Approximation of the gradient: Once the 2 necessary measurements have
been taken, the gradient ˆgki(ˆθk, χ) can be approximated as a finite difference,
where the displacement for each variable can be tweaked according to the
requirements of the model:
ˆgki(ˆθk, χ) = y(ˆθk + ck∆k) −y(ˆθk −ck∆k)
2ck


∆−1
k1
∆−1
k2
...
∆−1
kN


(2.15)
5. Update of the parameter vector: Based on the chosen step size and the es-
timated gradient, the parameter vector for iteration k+1 is updated following
the traditional stochastic approximation formula as:
ˆθk+1 = ˆθk −akˆgk(ˆθk)
(2.16)
This methodology has been followed for all the gradient-less training performed in
the scope of this project, where the individual variable displacements where uni-
formly set for all parameters in the model. As a small proof of concept, a quadratic
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
19
==PAGE:30==
function was approximated with a 2-layer neural network optimized by SPSA, sim-
ply to test the different hyperparameters involved and their effect on an affordable
scale problem. The equidistant input points (in the range [−3, 3]) where fed to the
network sequentially and its output was compared to the true distribution using
Mean Square Error (MSE). All network parameters were initially randomized and
convergence was always achieved in under 50 iterations. The results are shown
in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Performance of SPSA for estimation of a quadratic function
The figure shows how the algorithm is able to find a solution close to the original
quadratic function within a relatively low amount of iterations, however the model
seems unable to reach null loss for the selected model regardless of the hyper-
parameters introduced. This suggests that the functions used within the model
play a crucial role on its performance and a careful study of the selected network
structure must be performed for any application regardless of its simplicity.
2.4
Hyperparameter optimization
Once all the factors that play a role on the training of a neural network (or in
this case, an autoencoder) have been reviewed, it is of vital importance to assert
their impact on practical learning problems and how to establish a comprehensive
strategy to modify them until the best possible results are obtained.
2.4.1
Learning rate tuning
One of the main hyperparameters to be set in any NN-based system is the learn-
ing rate (LR). The LR is the multiplicative factor that dictates the displacement of
the parameter vector w in the direction of the gradient, whether this has been es-
timated or derived analytically. As it often happens in the field of machine learn-
ing, the setting of the learning rate is a compromise: the designer must find a
balance between convergence speed, training stability and minimization perfor-
mance. Unfortunately, no general rules can be applied to real models were the
true distribution is unknown: it very much depends on the nature of the gradient
20
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:31==
where minimization will be performed on. A better explanation of this phenomenon
is provided in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Effect of learning rate on the gradient tracking of the optimizer
Given that each loss function evaluation has an associated computational cost (it
entails a full training + testing iteration), it is of great interest for the system de-
signer to minimize them in order to keep the total training elapsed time low. In
the other hand, the use of stochastic approaches like the aforementioned SGD or
SPSA makes the gradient estimation noisy, given that only a fraction of the train-
ing samples are used every time. Additionally, complex models will usually fea-
ture an intricate loss hyperplane, making optimizer divergence even more likely.
These 2 factors make higher values of the learning rate risky, as noise spikes and
high slopes in the loss function may drive the gradient in the opposite direction of
the steepest descent, invalidating the results yielded by the optimization. Unlike
Figure 2.9, loss shapes in real ML scenarios are usually greatly affected by the
characteristics of the true data distribution and the chosen hyperparameters of
the optimizer, so it can prove difficult to assess whether the model is learning too
fast or too slow. In general, and as long as the model converges to a stable level
(otherwise, the LR is either too high to track the gradient or to low to be resilient to
noise) we can distinguish 2 general cases: one where the loss function does not
descend monotonically, but has short lapses of increase, and one where the loss
of the model only decreases as new iterations take place, in a similar fashion to
the k−1/2 that asymptotic theory states. Figure 2.10 shows two practical examples
of how the loss decay of an overly fast-trained model might look in compared to
the usual asymptotic behaviour of classical gradient descent models.
The figure clearly shows how models with a high learning rate tend to have more
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
21
==PAGE:32==
(a) Model trained using a potentially too
high LR
(b) Classical decay rate of gradient
descent optimizers
Figure 2.10: Comparison between SPSA loss plots for different models and
learning rates
irregular tendencies in the descent, and if no learning rate decay algorithm is im-
plemented it can easily converge around suboptimal ground losses, i.e. the large
steps hinder them from reaching the absolute minimum of the loss function. In
the other hand, 2.10b has a steady steep descent despite the noise present in
the model. It must be pointed and stressed that even if the figures are drawn
from the learning of actual SPSA-based models, all the potential hints mentioned
are highly dependant on the characteristics of the learning problem and do not
necessarily hold in every case. This variability is so high than even when the
learning rate is higher in the right case, its descent is ”better behaved” than its
counterpart on the left, as every model requires individualized analysis and the
same hyperparameters may yield completely different outcomes.
2.4.2
Perturbation size tuning
In finite-difference-based optimizers like SPSA, the precision of the gradient esti-
mation, directly related to the perturbation size (PS), is a vital hyperparameter to
obtain a good training performance, as it is the direct substitute of the analytical
chain-rule partial derivatives that govern gradient-based approaches. The main
issue while tuning PS is that there is no general guideline that the designer can
use, other than trying how a specific model performs on an initial guess and try to
progress towards an optimal value from there.
The ideal perturbation depends directly on 2 factors: the noise present in the
gradient approximation and the steepness of the minima within the loss function.
Figure 2.11 shows the impact of the perturbation size in a number of common
situations during model training.
Although the number of scenarios within training is virtually limitless in multivari-
ate optimization, the use of single-dimensional models can better illustrate the
impact of PS and allow to understand its limitations and how to face them, virtu-
ally regardless of the number of independent variables implicated. Thus, within
the single-variable gradient-less learning problem we can distinguish 3 different
22
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:33==
(a) A low perturbation can impact the
resilience of the optimizer towards noise
(b) High PSs can yield good results when
the model is still far from convergence
(c) High perturbations struggle in the final
stages of the training
(d) When the optimizer approaches a
minimum, low PSs can yield better
approximations
Figure 2.11: Effect of the perturbation size in various training scenarios
cases:
• In models with a noisy and steep gradient, the system designer must find a
balance between noise resilience and gradient estimation precision. If the
perturbation is too low, many iterations will probably yield a poor gradient
direction (Figure 2.11a), thus prolonging the total training time, as the opti-
mizer will move erratically in opposing directions until finding a convergence
point (a minima). At the same time, if the distance between gradient esti-
mation points is too large the model will likely not reach an optimal point, as
the perturbation points may fall on opposite sides with respect to the sought
minimum. This case is probably the most troublesome one, as the final gra-
dient estimation will likely be inconsistent or stay stable around the minimum
without reaching it.
• For high noise but rather flat gradient models, higher PSs will be preferable,
as the lack of accuracy in advanced stages of the model will likely have a
low impact on the final bias with respect to the optimal point.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
23
==PAGE:34==
• Regardless of the shape of the loss hyperplane (steep or flat gradients) if
the overall noise of the function is low (the gradient direction stays consis-
tent regardless of the characteristics of the batch) a low perturbation size
will most likely be the optimal choice, as once the noise challenge has been
neutralized a localized approximation will always yield better results. How-
ever, this is rarely the case and in most cases the designer will be forced to
find a compromise.
2.4.3
Decay rates
A careful look at Figures 2.11c and 2.11d reveals another interesting phenomenon:
as the training of the model progresses, the real gradients tend to flatten around
the minimum due to their continuity. Some gradient-based algorithms, like RM-
SProp and Adam tackle this problem by automatically including decay filters in
their algorithms [27]. These approaches rely on a similar principle than moving
average filters, taking into account every new value of the gradient to estimate the
rate of decay of the loss function as they approach its minimum. The lack of ana-
lytical information available to gradient-less optimizers forces them to find alterna-
tive approaches, the simplest one being scaling the learning rate and perturbation
size (if necessary) by a coefficient that diminishes as more training iterations take
place. As in the previous cases, there is no universal rule to set these parameters
so the designer must adapt them to the problem in hand.
24
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:35==
3
Optical communication systems
3.1
Information Theory
Information theory can be defined as the study of the different concepts and laws
that govern the transmission of data through any communication medium [28].
This field is mainly concerned with the quantification of information within a cer-
tain data encoding and it allows to establish certain formal limits and universal
laws to the amount of information per unit of time that a certain communication
channel can tolerate. Thus, some of its fundamentals will be introduced in the
present section, as they will be utilized to benchmark the obtained results of the
proposed machine learning model from a more specialized perspective. Although
the theory presented in the scope of this section can be applied to a variety of
scenarios, including continuous time signals, the present project will focus on dig-
ital communication systems, like the one summarized in Figure 3.1 for the linear
additive noise case, where the symbols (distinct units of information within the
system) take place in discrete time.
Figure 3.1: Example of a generic linear, real digital communication system
3.1.1
Channel capacity and performance scoring
Given a linear digital communications channel characterized by Additive White
Gaussian Noise (AWGN), the maximum achievable capacity (maximum data rate
that the link can support) over a medium is given by the Shannon limit, depicted
in Equation 3.1:
C = 1
2log2(1 + SNR)
(3.1)
where SNR or Signal-to-Noise-Ratio is defined as the relation between the aver-
age signal power P and single-sided noise spectral density N0, directly related to
the noise variance σ2
N:
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
25
==PAGE:36==
SNR = P
N0
=
P
2σ2
N
(3.2)
Given that Equation 3.3 provides only an upper limit for the maximum channel ca-
pacity, in order to make a comparison in diverse scenarios it is necessary to find
an estimation procedure that yields the effect of a certain communication chan-
nel over the integrity of the transmitted data. This is achieved by comparing the
probability distributions of the original and received symbols, giving a higher score
to distributions with a high degree of similarity.Thus, the optimum achievable ca-
pacity C of an information transmission setup can be estimated through the maxi-
mization of the mutual information (MI) between input and output symbols I(x; y),
defined in Equation 3.3:
C = max
Px
I(x; y) = max
Px (H(x) −H(x|y))
(3.3)
where H(x) and H(x|y) are the entropy of x and x given the output symbol vector
y, defined in Equation 3.4
H(x) = −
∑
i
pi(x) · log2(pi(x))
(3.4)
The entropy of a probability distribution is intended to be a measure of its intrinsic
amount of ”surprise”, given that events that happen rarely have more ”meaning”
or ”information” that others that happen very often [29]. In other words, there is no
point in indefinitely sending the same signal (or symbol) constantly over a commu-
nication channel, as the lack of other events to contrast it will yield no information
to the receiver. If the system designer wants a certain message to be received,
they will have to establish a variety of events with an attached probability distri-
bution, so each event can be associated with a unit of information. Looking into
Equation 3.3 more closely and assuming equiprobable transmitted symbols, we
can elucidate what it will yield in different scenarios. If H(x) and H(x|y) have sim-
ilar values, this entails that y provides very little information about x (the symbol
probabilities of x barely change with the knowledge of y) therefore the correla-
tion between both vectors has been greatly lost when pass through the channel,
and the capacity of the link is low. In the opposite case, the entropy of x when
y is known is very low, meaning that the knowledge of y leaves very little uncer-
tainty over what symbols were initially transmitted. In other words, the channel
has barely modified the original codeword and therefore its capacity is high. Con-
veniently, the expression of H(x|y)) coincides with the cross-entropy of x and y
(see Equation 2.8). This yields an extremely useful tool for the implementation of
ML models in the scope of communication systems, as the usage of cross-entropy
as loss function in a hypothetical inference model can relate directly to the estima-
tion of the mutual information of the symbols transmitted. The only factor missing
in the equation, H(x), can be easily inferred from the probabilities of the chosen
26
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:37==
alphabet (collection of all possible transmitted symbols) and Equation 3.4. Fig-
ure 3.2 shows the maximum mutual information of some common equiprobable
real modulation schemes for various SNRs.
Figure 3.2: Mutual information of various 1D constellations
Another widely used metric for tracking the performance of a communication sys-
tem is Bit Error Rate (BER), or, failing that, Symbol Error Rate (SER). Intuitively,
both metrics refer to the mismatch between the information to be transmitted at
each ends of the communication system, i.e. the proportion of bits or symbols
that the system distorts between transmitter and receiver. The reason behind the
usage of symbols instead of bits is mainly its convenience in complex modulation
scenarios, where each symbol represents more than a single bit at a time. De-
pending of the encoding of the symbols, this can result in certain distortions being
penalized more than others, thus introducing SER as a preferred metric.
Additionally to mutual information (or cross-entropy, which is interchangeable due
to Equation 3.3 for a known equiprobable modulation scheme), Symbol Error Rate
will be used as benchmark of the performance of the proposed solution. This will
allow to assess not only the potential of the model in terms of symbol integrity,
but also to test the effectiveness of the RX detection of symbols and how well it
adapts to the changes in the arrangement of the symbols in the I/Q plane. Fig-
ure 3.3 shows the theoretical SER limit for various single-dimensional modulation
schemes, ranging from 2 symbols (BPSK) to the 16-element constellation of 16-
PAM.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.3: SER limits for equiprobable 1D constellations
3.1.2
Pulse shaping
The setup in Figure 3.1 aims to enable the reliable transmission of symbols while
minimizing the bandwidth occupied by their transmission, in order to optimize the
spectral efficiency of the setup (the relation between data rate and occupied fre-
quency spectrum). Denominating the finite length time domain pulses at trans-
mitter and receiver gT and gR and their transformed equivalents in the frequency
domain GT and GR, the choice of the former will determine the final spectrum of
the communication link, that in frequency domain will come determined by Equa-
tion 3.5:
H(f) = GT(f)C(f)GR(f) ⇒h(t) = gT(t) ∗c(t) ∗gR(t)
(3.5)
where C(f) represents the transfer function of the channel, which is usually out of
the reach of the system designer. The choice of the filter coefficients for gT and gR
will also determine the amount of distortion between consecutive symbols, given
that overlapping is in the very nature of digital filtering when the maximum data
rate needs to be achieved. If at the sampling points mT (being T the sampling
frequency of the system) several pulses are non-zero, the obtained sample will be
a mixture of them, in other words intersymbol interference (ISI) will be introduced.
Analytically, we define xm as the symbol sequence to be transmitted and ym the
discrete symbols after the RX filter and establish the relation between them:
28
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:39==
ym = h(0)xm +
∑
n̸=m
h(mT −nT)xn + υ(mT)
(3.6)
where υ(mT) is the Gaussian noise signal evaluated at time mT. If the only symbol
to influence ym must be x(m), i.e. if the interference of any symbols outside time
m must be avoided, the value of h(mT −nT) must be zero. Thus, the Nyquist
ISI criterion dictates that as long as the system complies with the properties of
linearity and time invariance established as prerequisites, the sufficient condition
to avoid intersymbol interference can be summarized as in Equation 3.7:
h(nT) =
{
1, n = 0
0, n ̸= 0
(3.7)
In the case of frequency-multiplexed channels where several bands are utilized
simultaneously, the definition of the Discrete Time Fourier Transform (DTFT) can
be applied to the train of pulses:
h(nT) =
∫1/2T
−1/2T
∞
∑
m=−∞
H(f + m
T ) ej2πfnT dt
(3.8)
As a notational simplification, we can write ∑∞
m=−∞H(f + m
T ) as Z(f) and apply
the inverse DTFT. The Nyquist ISI criterion for the time-domain expression of the
train z(t) the becomes:
z(n) =
{
T,
0, n ̸= 0
(3.9)
which in the frequency domain is equivalent to Z(f) = T. This leads to an interest-
ing conclusion: the ideal spectrum for avoiding ISI is a flat function defined in the
whole range. This can be achieved in 2 different ways: using square frequency
pulses with infinite slope so no overlapping takes place between them or having
overlapping pulses with vestigial symmetry, i.e. odd symmetry around T/2. The
first case is equivalent to having overlapping finite spectra, which in time domain
is equivalent to a sum of infinite-length pulses. This solution is intractable in real
settings, as infinite time series require infinite memory to be stored. The second
kind of pulses are the so called Nyquist or ISI-avoiding pulses, from which the
raised cosine (RC) pulses play an specially remarkable role on the field of signal
processing. As their name suggest, raised cosine pulses derive from a decaying
cosine function, as displayed in Equation 3.10:
Xrc(f) =





T,
0 ≤|f| ≤(1 −α)/2T
T/2[1 + cos( πT
α )(|f| −1−α
2T ))],
1−α
2T ≤|f| ≤1+α
2T
0,
|f| > 1+α
2T
(3.10)
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
29
==PAGE:40==
where α is the roll-off factor of the pulse between [0, 1] that defines the amount of
extra bandwidth taken compared to a square pulse of infinite roll-off, being α = 1
equivalent to double the original square bandwidth (Wα=1 = 2Wα=0). Figure 3.4
shows a raised cosine pulse for a roll-off α = 0.5.
Figure 3.4: Spectrum of a raised cosine pulse
Apart from the aforementioned ISI-avoiding features, raised cosine pulses have
the advantage of being competent low-pass filters, thus preserving baseband in-
formation after demodulation while virtually eliminating distortion at higher fre-
quencies [30].
3.2
Optical system design
Guided lightwave communication systems, also called fiber-optic or, in the present
context, simply optical communication systems are the main technology used in
terrestrial high-performance communication solutions in the present day. Their
high bandwidth (allowing carrier frequencies in the upper terahertz region) and
relatively low attenuation (that can get to the region of 0.2 dB/km) make them
an ideal candidate for long distance infrastructure. However, they are certainly
not free of challenges. Using light as physical medium entails that the electrical
signals modern computers are based on must be converted to pulses of light, with
the potential inconveniences that introduces in terms of thermal noise and non-
linear transduction and amplification of waves. Additionally, even when the data
has been encoded into optical pulses, the transmission through the optical fiber
makes them widen in time, thus pushing their energy outside the time slot they
30
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.5: Generic components of an optical communication system
were originally assigned. This is especially noticeable in multi-mode fiber systems
where various reflection angles are employed at the same time, thus introducing
different dispersion rates due to the divergence in the speeds of the waves [5].
In broad terms, guided lightwave communication systems can be defined by 3
main blocks: transmitter (TX), optical channel and receiver (RX). The transmit-
ter’s main function is to perform the conversion between the electrical information
signals, besides creating the optical carrier that will serve as base for the modu-
lation. The optical channel drives the light pulses to the receiver in the other end,
possibly with a series of repeaters to preserve signal quality. Once in the receiver,
the signal is demodulated and transformed back into electrical signals through the
use of a photodetector, as depicted in Figure 3.5.
Within the transmitter module, certain nuances must be pointed out. Firstly, some
systems do not require a separate modulator, as the input electrical current signal
can be directly utilized to modulate the semiconductor-based optical source. This
reduces the overall cost of the module, as the overall electrical design of the so-
lution becomes simpler. Secondly, the launched power of the transmitter, i.e. the
power of the signal that it feeds into the optical subsystem is limited by a series
of non-linear effects, which are usually defined by the laser technology of the em-
ployed source. As a result, the spacing between symbols cannot overcome the
saturation point of the modulator, making it more prone to distortion through the
optical channel.
3.3
Mach-Zehnder and EAM modulators
As explained in previous sections, the main function of a modulator is to actuate
on a certain optical source to generate the necessary variation in amplitude or
phase in order to transform data into lightwave symbols. Depending on the laser
technology (continuous or pulsed wave) and the architecture of the electronics
around the modulator (interference-based, semiconductor-based), a number of
approaches are available to the designer, each of them with their own performance
and cost characteristics.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.6: Representation of the internal structure of a Mach-Zehnder interfer-
ometer
3.3.1
Mach-Zehnder Modulators
An example of popular continuous wave modulator is the Mach-Zehnder modu-
lator (MZM). MZMs are based on the interference of two light paths, obtained by
splitting the original optical source using a coupler. Ideally, both channels will
drive the exact same optical field through them, making them virtually identical at
the output of the splitter. Once divided, the delay of each optical path is regulated
through a voltage-controlled waveguide, that modifies the length of the optical
path in order to introduce a certain delay. The overall idea behind Mach-Zehnder
interferometers is shown in Figure 3.6. The phase delay ϕj introduced in each
path j allows to reach virtually any constellation value within the operative range
of the system on the optical output, as long as the control of the system has been
performed correctly. The expression of the output electromagnetic field is defined
in Equation 3.11.
Ao = 1
2Ai(eiϕ1 + eiϕ2)
(3.11)
Expressing the transfer function of the interferometer as quotient of output and
input fields, the relation becomes:
tm = Ao
Ai
= cos[1
2(ϕ1 −ϕ2)]ei(ϕ1+ϕ2)/2
(3.12)
If the MZM is meant to be used as a pure amplitude modulator, the voltages for the
waveguides on each optical path V1, V2 can be set so that V2(t) = V1(t)+Vb, where
Vb is a constant bias voltage. For this particular case, which will be extensively
used throughout the project as the employed modulation schemes are single-
dimensional, the power transfer function of the MZM becomes:
32
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:43==
Tm(t) = |tm|2 = cos2( π
2Vπ
[2V1(t) −Vb]) = 1
2[1 + cos( π
Vπ
[2V1(t) −Vb])]
(3.13)
A first glance at Equation 3.12 reveals that the response of Mach-Zehnder filters
has a sinusoidal behaviour: they are bounded by the peak-to-peak voltage of the
sine that defines them, based on the input voltage and the half wave voltage of
the interferometer [5]. This introduces the need for a metric that gives insight of
the range boundaries within the MZM for delivering high and low optical power,
i.e. to achieve a high constructive interference when needed while being able to
deliver close-to-zero minimum power. Given a generic expression for amplitude
modulation schemes:
P(t) = P0[1 + mx(t)]
(3.14)
where P(t) is the time-dependant output power and P0 is the average input power,
assuming that the input signal x(t) has no DC component and m ∈R (0, 1]. We
can then define Extinction Rate (ER):
ER = Pmax
Pmin
= 1 + m
1 −m
(3.15)
The ideal ER is therefore ∞, as this would entail that m is maximum and the inter-
ferometer is able to produce total interference between both branches if needed.
Biasing the modulator at the quadrature point and applying a variable voltage with
peak-to-peak voltage Vpp, we can rewrite Equation 3.13:
Tm = Pout
Pin
= 1
2[1 + cos( π
Vπ
[V (t)])] ⇒
Pout = Pin
2 [1 + cos( π
Vπ
[Vπ
2 + Vpp
2 x(t)])] ⇒
Pout = Pin
2 [1 −sin(π
2
Vpp
Vπ
x(t))] ⇒
x(t) →0 ⇒
Pout = Pin
2 [1 −π
2
Vpp
Vπ
x(t)] ⇒
m = π
2
Vpp
Vπ
(3.16)
Thus, we can establish a direct relation between ER and the peak-to-peak voltage
of the input signal [31]. This relation is of great importance in real systems, where
the ER of a given modulator can very much define the resilience of the system to
channel distortion, given its effect over symbol spacing.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.7: Internal layer doping of electroabsorption modulators
3.3.2
Electroabsorption Modulators
Moving to semiconductor-based devices, electroabsorption modulators (EAMs)
have a significant role in continuous-wave modulation due to their small form fac-
tor and driving voltage. As shown in Figure 3.7, its structure is based on the
superposition of n-type and p-type doped layers with an active semiconductor re-
gion, like a multi-quantum well (MQW), in the middle that acts as a waveguide
for the external optical signal [5]. Bulk-based EAMs (that use semiconductor sub-
strates instead of MQWs) are based on the ability of photons to excite electrons
in the valence band to the conduction band, even if their energy is below the band
gap. This is the so called Franz–Keldysh effect. MQW-based semiconductors, on
the contrary, are based on the Quantum-Confined Stark Effect, or change in the
absorption bands of MQW when submitted to a perpendicular electric field [32].
From a signal processing perspective, this entails that applying a reverse voltage
on the EAM will increase its absorption coefficient to certain wavelengths of inter-
est, and therefore less light will be able to cross the device. This phenomenon
allows to control the optical output power of the carrier wave through the tuning of
the bias voltage of the modulator, effectively modulating its amplitude.
As convenient this scheme might seem for the system designer, it is not free
of challenges. Parallel to the case of MZMs, modulating the continuous wave
through the use of an EAM introduces an obvious non-linearity between bias volt-
age and optical transmittance, thus potentially breaking the assumptions that the
theory on AWGN systems is based on. This inconvenience arises the need for
techniques that allow the compensation or partial mitigation of such non-linearity
relations, thus allowing the overall system performance to approach ideal values.
The whole motive of the present project is driven by tackling this issue in an inno-
vative manner.
34
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.8: Measurement-based EAM estimated response of a real modulator
3.4
Non-linearity relations
The input-output relation of optical modulators is an intrinsic problem of every
fiber-based communication system, and as such it has been widely analyzed since
this technology became a standard. The present section will dive into the effect
of such non-linearity for the specific case of Mach-Zehnder modulators and some
pre-distortion techniques that have allowed to mitigate this issues.
3.4.1
Constellation compression in MZMs
Independently from the ER of the utilized modulator, MZMs introduce a signifi-
cant non-linearity in the constellation shaping through saturation, that is, the lim-
itation of the maximum and minimum value achievable by the transmitter. This
effectively bounds the distance between symbols, making them more prone to in-
tersymbol interference as they are sent over the fiber-optic channel. Given that
in real systems the SNR is determined by the power of the symbols, as the dis-
tortion introduced by the channel is usually not under the designer’s control, this
entails that the operating range of the communication is bounded for systems with
static constellation shaping, as trying to overcome a certain threshold in the out-
put amplitude of the MZM (±1 for the ideal case where ER →∞), would have
counterproductive returns.
This can be clearly observed in terms of mutual information (that approximates
channel capacity, as discussed in previous sections) and SER in Figure 3.9, where
both magnitudes are plotted against SNR for both 4PAM and 8PAM constellations.
It is important to note here that, as it would happen in real scenario, only the in-
put power of the symbols is varied here, as the power of noise is kept constant
across the whole experiment. In order to obtain the displayed figures, the MZM
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
35
==PAGE:46==
response was approximated by a Taylor approximation of order 7, and compared
with the standard AWGN performance for each modulation scheme and the pre-
distorted arcsine approach, described later in this chapter. The MI and SER per-
formance clearly shows how beyond 12 dB of SNR both metrics worsen instead
of improving, given that the linear region of the sine comes to an end and reaches
its maximum to decrease again. It must also be noted that in the region [−pi, pi]
the O(7) polynomial is practically identical to an ideal sine, so the extinction rate
in this case can be considered ∞. In a real setting, this would entail that the op-
tical infrastructure is not being exploited to its full potential, as the behaviour of
the MZM hinders the use of 1D constellations above 4PAM (MI values over 2 are
not achievable). Even if the saturation issue of MZMs comes from their physical
structure and cannot really be overcame without change in its structure, a dynamic
tuning of the constellation values can have a significant impact on the maximum
achievable performance of such devices.
(a) Effect of MZMs non-linearity on the
capacity of the channel, 4PAM
(b) Effect of MZMs non-linearity on the
capacity of the channel, 4PAM
(c) Effect of MZMs non-linearity on the
capacity of the channel, 8PAM
(d) Effect of MZMs non-linearity on the error
rate of the channel, 8PAM
Figure 3.9: Impact of MZMs in system performance
The impact of the transfer function of the MZM can better be seen directly on the
comparison of the desired constellation with the actual output of the modulator.
36
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.10: Projection of the maximum range of 4PAM constellation on the MZM
transfer function
Figure 3.10 tries to depict this for two equispaced 4PAM constellations with dif-
ferent signal power, thus making them fall in distinct regions of the MZM transfer
function. Looking at the projections of the side symbols on the sinusoidal function,
it is clear how for the low SNR constellation the input and output symbols have
almost the same amplitude: the MZM is operating in its linear region. On the other
hand, when looking at the high SNR constellation it becomes apparent how the
side symbols are greatly compressed, as they fall on the quadratic region of the
sine, i.e. the linearity is completely lost. The compression of the MZM makes the
amplitude of these side symbols decrease as the input power increases, effec-
tively worsening the final performance of the system at the receiver. The reason
why static approaches are therefore not suitable to tackle this problem effectively
is that the optimal solution is largely dependant on the ER of the specific MZM
studied and on the desired constellation power at TX, thus calling for solutions
that take this parameters into account.
3.4.2
Arcsine predistortion
Predistortion can be defined as the group of techniques that allow the compen-
sation of a known or estimated nonlinearity within a system before it takes place,
that is, preemptively modifying the input so the combined effects with the actual
system results in a linear response. Although originally applied to nonlinear ampli-
fiers in the context of RF communication, predistortion has evolved to other areas
of signal processing, including its application to optical systems [33].
A particular case of optical predistortion is arcsine predistortion: given that MZMs
are mostly equivalent to sine function, it seems intuitive to use its inverse func-
tion to compensate them. Analytically, we define the inverse function f −1(x) of a
certain function f(x) [34] as:
f −1(x) : Rn →Rm s.t. f −1(f(x)) = x
(3.17)
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.11: Main branch of the arcsine function
In the case of trigonometric functions, there is a special consideration to take, as
they are not injective (sin(x) = sin(x + 2πn)). This entails that the inverse of
trigonometric function has several branches in order to be continuous. This leads
to the inverse of the sine, the arcsine, being defined in the range [−1, 1] and taking
values only between [−π
2, π
2], as shown Figure 3.11.
The main drawback of the nature of the arcsine as predistortion function is that
its limited range bounds the space of possible input constellation values, as any
amplitude beyond ±1 will not be mapped to any value. This makes arcsine predis-
tortion useful in the non-linear region within its defined range, but unusable in any
value beyond [35]. The characteristics of the method make it ideal for low noise
scenarios where the limited energy is not an issue for the performance of the sys-
tem, although potentially inferior to more resilient solutions that allow a broader
spectrum of working conditions.
38
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:49==
4
Simulations and numerical
results
After introducing all the necessary theory to understand the potential challenges
in machine learning and optical systems, the present chapter aims to specify the
steps taken towards finding an autoencoder-based model that tackles the previ-
ously mentioned modulation distortion issue. The AI model will first be defined
in terms of structure and internal functioning, to then be put into the context of a
communication channel. To test its capabilities to their full extent, diverse channel
schemes will be proposed, and the solution will be analyzed within each of them
based on the metrics discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.
4.1
System and simulation structure
4.1.1
Autoencoder model
The proposed autoencoder model is based on a shallow neural network structure,
where the encoder is a nPAM × 1 linear activation network without bias (being
nPAM the number of symbols in the selected modulation), due to the conclusions
drawn in [24], and the decoder is a 1 × 2nPAM × nPAM biased network with Leaky
Rectified Linear Units (Leaky ReLUs) as activation of the hidden layer and softmax
as activation of the output layer. The overall AE structure is depicted in Figure 4.1.
(a) Encoder side
(b) Decoder side
Figure 4.1: Internal structure of the proposed autoencoder model for 4PAM
constellations
The network is designed to receive one-hot encoded symbols (where only one
of the input elements, corresponding to the symbol that needs to be sent, is ”1”
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
39
==PAGE:50==
and the rest are ”0”), therefore the weights of the input correspond directly with
the N-PAM amplitude levels that the model assigns. The input zeros in the rest
of elements make the non-utilized weights irrelevant, so only 1 weight is trained
per iteration. On the decoder side, each real amplitude value received is soft-
classified in one of the nPAM categories, that correspond directly to an inferred
symbol. The probabilities are used only for the calculation of the system loss, as
the mutual information is calculated directly from the output symbols before deci-
sion, and a hard decision is taken on the highest probability symbol to calculate
SER between true and predicted symbols. The procedure for the calculation of
testing metrics is depicted in further detail in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Block diagram of the MI and SER calculation for testing
The loss function is based on the cross-entropy between transmitted and received
symbols, as a quasi-equivalent of mutual information (the symbols are equiprob-
able, so their entropy at the transmitter does not change over the course of iter-
ations). The model was trained using 2 different optimizers: Adam and SPSA,
although the added difficulty of tuning the hyperparameters of SPSA discarded it
for most of the development of the solution, from which the results shown later in
the chapter are drawn from.
The model is trained on 215 shuffled equiprobable symbols, and tested on 219
equiprobable symbols for testing. The symbol rate is 1 Gbaud/s, with an oversam-
pling rate of 8. When linear channels are tested, the simulations are performed on
both per-sample and Nyquist pulse-shaped setups, while on non-linear channels
the pulse shaping is discarded due to the great impact that non-linear distortion
has on continuous pulses.
4.1.2
Simulation procedure
In terms of modulation scheme and channel linearity, 4 models are proposed: lin-
ear 4PAM, linear 8PAM, non-linear 4PAM and non-linear 8PAM. The linear cases
are included as a benchmark of the implementation of the autoencoder as map-
ping device for the whole system, given that they are easier to compare to well-
established theoretical values.
40
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:51==
Within the non-linear models, a Taylor-polynomial approximation of a sinusoidal
transfer function is added between mapper and channel, to simulate the response
of a MZM with ER →∞. Power normalization is implemented on the TX con-
stellation right before the MZM in order to adjust the power of the signal to the
desired SNR. The degree of the MZM-approximating polynomial is progressively
increased from 1 to 7 in order to increase the inference difficulty and facilitate
debugging on the model structure. At O(7) the polynomial approximates almost
perfectly a sine in the range [−π, π], so even at 30dB SNR the output of the MZM
should perfectly resemble an ideal modulator. Figure 4.3 shows the different poly-
nomial tested, compared to an ideal sine function. It must be noted that for the
O(3) case the output range of the modulator reaches beyond the classic [−1, 1]
range, thus giving a clear advantage to the model in comparison to other itera-
tions. For that reason, the results will not include O(3) results when higher order
polynomials have shown the desired performance.
Figure 4.3: Progressive approximation of the MZM’s sinusoidal response
For every MZM polynomial degree, multiple SNRs with a resolution of 1dB are
analyzed, thus establishing a direct comparison to the theoretical mutual informa-
tion and SER curves. Even if the definition of the SNR is rather irrelevant for the
linear channel cases, where no limitation in constellation amplitude applies, the
way it is implemented in the non-linear case is of great importance, given that a
very small signal analysis might yield outstanding results but be rather irrelevant
in physical systems. In the other hand, aiming for very high amplitudes is a hard
constraint on the system, as regardless of the compensation technique used the
output power limitations of the MZM cannot be overcome. In order to find com-
mon ground between the two extreme cases, the definition of SNR in Equation 3.2
varying the average constellation power P and keeping the noise variance σN con-
stant at 0.01 W. This effectively down-scales the signal power for a certain SNR
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
41
==PAGE:52==
when compared to the usual 1-watt σN, allowing the constellation to fall into the
pure linear region of the MZM at low SNR and progressively enter the quadratic
region as the signal power increases. The effect of this design decision can be
observed in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Input power after scaling for various SNRs
As shown in the plot, scaling the signal and noise power by 0.01 makes P reach
P = 1 at around 20 dB, establishing the upper limit of the supported power of the
MZM (at least in an efficient way). Alternatively, a much shorter range of SNRs
could have been chosen to avoid scaling, but as the yellow line shows that would
entail using many decimals in the SNR values, thus hindering the interpretation of
the data.
4.2
Simulation results
The results obtained in each of the 4 aforementioned testing iterations were sum-
marized in a series of graphs and plots. This section will be dedicated to showing
and analyzing the obtained results, commenting on any outliers or curious situa-
tions.
4.2.1
Linear 4PAM
The first testing setup aims to reduce all external sources of complexity to the
minimum, to assess whether the model is able to find the ideal mapping for a
AWGN model using 4PAM (compared to what the signal processing theory states,
equispaced symbols with maximum likelihood detection at the receiver). As a
starting point, only the per-sample model is considered, where no pulse shaping
is included. The overall system structure is summarized in Figure 4.5.
42
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.5: Block diagram for linear per-sample 4PAM setup
The system performance was tested in terms of mutual information and symbol
error rate between -5dB and 25dB with a resolution of 2dB. The yielded results
can be observed in Figure 4.6.
(a) Mutual information
(b) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.6: Obtained results for linear per-sample 4PAM case
Looking at both figures it becomes clear how the autoencoder model is able to
match the theoretical performance in both metrics. The only discrepancy can
be found in the SER graph, where for high SNRs the measured curve seems to
saturate over 10−6. This is due to the resolution limit when evaluating the individual
differences between symbols, if 219 = 524, 288 symbols are evaluated for testing,
SER measurements under 2 · 10−6 will not be reliable enough, so a SER floor
must be established. Thus, any value below 2 · 10−6 has been saturated. With an
increase in memory, it would be feasible to reach higher resolution and it is not
risky to assume that the measured curve would follow the theoretical one, from
what the plot yields at lower SNRs. It must also be noted that the ”Equispaced
4PAM” curve correspond to simulated values, while the theoretical one is drawn
directly from the formula associated with the symbol error rate of the modulation.
The next step in complexity comes by adding matched filtering on the setup, that
is, by adding 2 FIR filters tuned to shape the input symbols to a Nyquist pulse.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
43
==PAGE:54==
This is done to adequate the spectral properties of the transmitted data to the
frequency-constrained systems that are usually found in practice. This effectively
limits the operating band of the data through the channel and eliminates the pres-
ence of additive noise outside the data frequencies. One of the largest challenges
of such setups is that the filters are designed to converge to a very specific pulse
when convoluted to each other. This convoluted result is designed so no intersym-
bol interference is introduced in the transmission, as pulses do not overlap at the
correct sampling points. If any non-linear effect actuated on the pulses, their con-
volution would also be distorted, therefore (potentially) affecting their ISI-avoiding
property. The block diagram of the filtered scheme can be seen in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Block diagram for the linear, filtered 4PAM setup
In filtered setups, it is usually a requirement to include an oversampling factor into
the system, as it allows higher time resolution on the selected pulse without af-
fecting data integrity. Due to this, an upsampling-downsampling block pair was in-
cluded on both ends of the channel, right before the Nyquist filtering is performed.
In real systems, a symbol synchronizer would handle the election of the optimal
starting symbol from which the original sequence would be recovered, however
the simulation allows to avoid this step, as the correct symbols are known a-priori
thanks to the indexing of the tensors.
The results of the filtered case, shown in Figure 4.8, yield similar but not com-
pletely identical results. Looking at the mutual information curve, no difference
can be appreciated with respect to the simulation, so it could be argued that per-
fect symbol recovery was achieved. The SER however shows otherwise. For
higher SNRs, clear bias can be observed between theory and measured results.
This is due to the lack of spectral smoothness of the selected pulse, that leads
to slight imperfections in the shaping of the symbols, leading to amplitude noise
in time domain. This can be somehow mitigated by increasing the roll-off factor
of the shaping Nyquist pulse, thus reducing the resolution requirements at the
expense of increasing the bandwidth of the data. This added distortion is rather
small compared to the overall channel noise, but at higher SNRs, where chan-
nel distortion minimizes, they logarithmic scale makes it more noticeable. The
aforementioned low amplitude of the noise makes the penalization in the decision
probabilities negligible over all the evaluated symbols, therefore no anomaly is
44
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:55==
(a) Mutual information
(b) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.8: Obtained results for linear filtered 4PAM case
visible on the mutual information curve in linear scale. Keeping such effect aside,
the results comply with the theory and the static constellation simulations, so the
proposed structure seems to perform the geometrical constellation shaping task
successfully.
4.2.2
Linear 8PAM
Once the 4PAM experiment has been proven viable, it is interesting to see the
performance of the system on a higher order (therefore more challenging from the
interference perspective) constellation keeping the rest of the conditions (AWGN
channel, loss function, optimizer) unchanged. The structure of the network is
similar to the 4PAM case, but adapted to an 8PAM system, thus featuring a 8 × 1
encoder for TX and a 1 × 16 × 8 decoder on the receiver side. The block diagram
for this second iteration in its per-sample modality can be seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.9: Block diagram for the linear, per-sample 8PAM setup
Apart from the obvious modulation change and the aforementioned nuances, the
model does not present any real difference with respect to its 4PAM equivalent.
However, looking at Figure 4.10, the yielded results seem to diverse ever so
slightly.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) Mutual information
(b) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.10: Obtained results for linear per-sample 8PAM case
Similarly to the 4PAM case with Nyquist filtering enabled, there is a clear differ-
ence of results between the mutual information curve and its SER counterpart.
While the measured MI is almost exactly coincident with the theoretical results,
the SER curve seems to differ from them at high SNRs. Although the reasons
behind this are similar to the previous case, there is a deeper cause that must be
addressed. Indeed, the low amplitude distortion and its stochastic nature has lit-
tle impact on the mutual information calculation (on average), thus the difference
between both plots. It must however be pointed that, in the context of the present
setup, SER is simply a testing metric, while the training is performed on cross-
entropy (which is virtually equivalent to training on MI, because of the relations
explained in Chapter 3). This entails that there is no incentive for the autoencoder
to polish slight misalignments on the constellation for high SNRs during training,
given that its cost function will not be affected by it.
This phenomenon can be considered a pitfall of the model: as the mutual infor-
mation between transmitted and received symbols is optimized, the ”reward” of
the model to reduce SER will progressively decrease. A potential solution for this
could be using a custom loss function that takes both MI and SER into account,
with the potential issues that might entail in terms of acceleration of the optimiza-
tion and discontinuity in the loss. Nevertheless, considering the range of SNRs
where the bias takes place, the most straightforward solution seems to have an
automated look-up table where the modulation scheme is changed when the max-
imum MI is about to be reached by the currently trained constellation. This solution
would ensure the stability and robustness of the network during training while tak-
ing as much advantage as possible of the capabilities of the utilized channel, as
the system would always operate on the most ideal number of symbols depending
on the channel conditions. Such improvement has not been implemented in the
scope of the present project, as it would entail randomizing the channel conditions
during training, with the added difficulty in optimization that might bring. The pos-
sible low-level structure of this dynamic modulation tuning will be discussed later
in the report.
46
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:57==
Following the approach in the previous experiment, the same setup was tried
using matched filtering based on Nyquist pulses, as shown in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Block diagram for the linear, filtered 8PAM setup
As expected, the results on the per-sample case reflect also when filtering comes
to the scene, as shown in the mutual information and SER curves:
(a) Mutual information
(b) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.12: Obtained results for linear filtered 8PAM case
Both curves resemble Figure 4.10 almost perfectly, except from the very high SNR
range of Figure 4.12b. For the point on the very right, there is a slight change in
the slope of the curve: there seems to be a slight tendency change. It must be
highlighted that this is simply due to the reduction in testing symbols in order to
shorten the total memory requirements and training time, given that for an 8PAM
constellation with upsampling and convolutions for matched filtering this is these
increment dramatically. Apart from the previously mentioned bias at high SNRs
nothing suggests that the obtained measurements do not follow the theoretical
performance of the system, so this outlier was ignored during development. Addi-
tional computational resources could shed some light on this particular issue and
will also be included as part of the future work.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
47
==PAGE:58==
4.2.3
MZM 4PAM
The good results of the autoencoder setup on AWGN channels makes the logical
next step to add a non-linearity at the transmitter, thus resembling the conditions
of a fiber channel where an optical modulator is needed. Following the approach
of previous iterations, the model was evaluated for a series of different SNRs,
and only the signal power is varied, maintaining the noise variance identical in
every case. The aforementioned power scaling is applied too, giving insight on
the performance of the solution on both the linear and non-linear regions of the
sinusoidal response of the MZM. The degree of the polynomial approximation of
the MZM was truncated to O(1), O(3), O(5), O(7), but only the two highest orders
are included in the analysis. This is due to O(1) being an identical setup to the
previous sections and O(3) having an amplitude higher than ±1 in the input range
of interest. Figure 4.13 shows the overall setup for this testing iteration.
Figure 4.13: Block diagram for the nonlinear, 4PAM setup
The obtained results for the MZM simulation have been compared with the perfor-
mance of both the uncompensated equispaced 4PAM and the arcsine-predistorted
approaches, in order to have a well-known benchmark to compare to. Over cer-
tain SNRs the channel capacity and SER of both of these methods is no longer
monotonic, so only a few values where included for better visualization. The in-
troduced non-linearity distorts also the output constellation power right after the
MZM, so the displayed SNR corresponds to this output power instead of the usual
power after mapping. AN additional issue is that arcsine predistortion does not
allow input values to overcome ±1, so such values where simply ignored when
plotting the curves. Figure 4.14 shows the obtained curves in terms of MI and
SER.
48
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:59==
(a) Mutual information
(b) High SNR mutual information
(c) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.14: Obtained results for nonlinear O(5) approximation, 4PAM case
It must be noted that Figure 4.14b is a simple closer look into Figure 4.14a, given
that the differences between curves can be difficult to appreciate when looking at
the full SNR range. A general look at both the MI and SER reveal a clear tendency:
the model is able to outperform both the uncompensated and arcsine-predistorted
models at high SNRs, when the constellation shaping becomes more challenging.
However, there are a series of interesting points to highlight:
• At low and medium SNRs, when the channel has an almost linear response,
the proposed model is able to match the performance of an equispaced
4PAM constellation on a fully linear modulator, what constitutes a good foun-
dation in terms of performance and verisimilitude with the theory explained
so far. It also confirms what the 2 previous cases aimed to demonstrate, i.e.
the autoencoder does serve as a mapper-demapper solution for standard
AWGN conditions.
• At high SNRs, when the uncompensated and predistorted constellations be-
gin to suffer compression due to the intrinsic amplitude limitation of the MZM,
the proposed model is resilient to the introduced non-linearity, and through
the tuning of the input amplitudes it aims to match the performance of the
simulated 4PAM. This is an extremely relevant achievement, as it certifies
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
49
==PAGE:60==
the superiority of the autoencoder approach over traditional techniques in
this scenario. This tendency is observable in SER and MI almost identically.
• As the compression of the MZM hinders reaching higher output power de-
spite increasing the input signal amplitudes (at about 14dB in this case),
the model achieves theoretical performance at the maximum SNR that the
non-linearity allows. This can be seen on the overlapping points at the afore-
mentioned 14dB mark, where the plotting of results over 17dB input SNRs
have been omitted to facilitate the visualization.
To prove this last point, it might be interesting to look at the actual constellation
mappings performed by the model, as compared to the equispaced 4PAM and
the uncompensated 4PAM (the distortion that the MZM introduces on a standard
equispaced constellation). Figure 4.15 shows the I/O constellations at 5 and 18dB
for an O(5) sine approximation, where only the actual levels have been included
(the noisy samples are not included for visualization purposes).
(a) Input constellation to MZM, order 5
polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(b) Output constellation from MZM, order 5
polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(c) Input constellation to MZM, order 5
polynomial, 18dB input constellation
(d) Output constellation from MZM, order 5
polynomial, 18dB input constellation
Figure 4.15: Geometric constellation shaping for 4PAM MZM, order 5 polynomial
In the context of the constellation figures ”MZM” and ”EAM” are used indistinctly,
as the modulator transfer function should virtually not affect the overall structure
of the model. The constellation plots yield a rather predictable outcome based on
the metrics shown, but with some curiosities that may be worth looking into. In
the 5dB case, it becomes apparent how the MZM behaves as practically a linear
activation, as the uncompensated symbols on the output coincide almost perfectly
50
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:61==
with a standard equispaced distribution in energy. The proposed model obtains
an almost equispaced constellation, however the middle symbols seem to have
a bias towards 0. This is very likely due to the lack of penalization for ”small”
amplitude biases at low SNRs, given that the noise is so high that such small
deviations have a very small impact on the average mutual information over all
the training symbols. As argued for the linear case, this could be tackled by adding
SER to the loss function, but at such low SNRs the best approach is probably to
use a simpler modulation, like BPSK. At 18dB, the distortion introduced by the
MZM becomes much more noticeable, and compresses the high energy symbols
of the uncompensated constellation, leading to errors in the classification of the
symbols. The proposed model uses the maximum available power for its side
symbols, but keeps the spacing on the output constellation uniform, maximizing
the performance for the given energy range. This explains the MI and SER results
obtained: the autoencoder adapts to whatever channel conditions are given, and
aims for the maximum achievable performance regardless of the MZM region it
operates on.
Looking at the same setup of Figure 4.13 but with the highest order O(7) sine
approximation tested, the results are rather similar:
(a) Mutual information
(b) High SNR mutual information
(c) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.16: Obtained results for nonlinear O(7) approximation, 4PAM case
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
51
==PAGE:62==
As in the previous case, Figure 4.16 shows a substantial improvement in perfor-
mance on both of the utilized metrics. Even if the 3 analyzed approaches show an
almost identical behaviour in the linear region, as the small wave approximations
cease to be valid the uncompensated constellation begins to struggle, while the
proposed approach stays resilient. The arcsine predistortion falls in the middle of
the former both in terms of MI and SER, but its lack of defined input range makes it
a suboptimal solution. The analysis of the constellation amplitudes in Figure 4.17
yields similar conclusions:
(a) Input constellation to MZM, order 7
polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(b) Output constellation from MZM, order 7
polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(c) Input constellation to MZM, order 7
polynomial, 18dB input constellation
(d) Output constellation from MZM, order 7
polynomial, 18dB input constellation
Figure 4.17: Geometric constellation shaping for 4PAM MZM, order 7 polynomial
Parallel to the O(5) case, the O(7) approximation shaping shows the advantage
of ML methods compared to static approaches. Regardless of the signal power,
the AE-based model is able to find the combination of input values that achieves
(almost) uniform spacing between the symbols. The arcsine predistortion data is
not included here, as for 18dB of signal power the input constellation overcomes
the domain of the arcsine function.
4.2.4
MZM 8PAM
The challenge of mapping symbols to avoid the nonlinear effects of an optical
modulator becomes increasingly difficult as the number of symbols to be mapped
in parallel is augmented. Thus, it is interesting to see how a geometric constella-
tion shaping model behaves when submitted to higher order modulations, as the
decrease in available symbol spacing can lead to undesired effects. An 8PAM
52
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:63==
modulation scheme was tested on the proposed solution, following the network
structure introduced earlier in this chapter. Keeping symbol tensor sizes aside,
the rest of the system remains unchanged, as shown in the block diagram in Fig-
ure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Block diagram for the nonlinear, 8PAM setup
Following the analytical sequence of the nonlinear 4PAM case, we will first evalu-
ate the MI and SER curves for the O(5) MZM approximation, to then continue to
the O(7) case. The power scaling was kept the same as in previous testing iter-
ations, so it is expectable that symbol compression becomes apparent at lower
SNRs than with 4PAM. This is due to the own nature of higher order modulations:
having more elements in the constellation allows for symbols with very low energy,
so for the same average SNR the higher energy symbols will have a wider ampli-
tude, thus reaching the nonlinear MZM zone sooner. Another potential challenge
is the training of the new network structure, as given that the number of trainable
parameters increases there can be slight modifications to make on the hyperpa-
rameters of the network. After tuning all these factors accordingly, the outcome
was significantly different than in previous iterations. The results are shown in
Figure 4.19.
It is evident how, even though they follow a similar tendency to the 4PAM case, the
MI and SER curves of the proposed model present clear discrepancies. Apart from
the obvious change in magnitude of both metrics due to the change in modulation
scheme, there is a major difference in the decay point of the constellation when
compared to the theoretical results. The uncompensated 8PAM starts to show
symptoms of distortion at 12dB, while the compensated schemes decrease their
performance starting at 13dB. This is a clear indicator of the increased difficulty
of having high order modulations in MZMs: there is too little range for such mod-
ulations to show their potential in terms of channel capacity. Another significant
detail is that the proposed model is not able to maintain theoretical performance
at the maximum ouput SNR it is able to achieve: it is visible how the MI and SER
become rather flat instead of overlapping around the 8PAM simulation curve. It
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
53
==PAGE:64==
(a) Mutual information
(b) High SNR mutual information
(c) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.19: Obtained results for nonlinear O(5) approximation, 8PAM case
is difficult to diagnose the system without a closer look at the real mappings per-
formed before and after the modulator, but after seeing the performance of the
model while handling less symbols there seems to be an issue with their spac-
ing on the narrower domain. A closer look at the representation of the noiseless
symbols, shown in Figure 4.20, can explain the results on a more visual way.
Contrary to what would be expectable on a first thought, the obtained constellation
from the proposed model at different SNRs looks significantly more chaotic than
a simple equispaced layout. Regardless of the SNR, the output symbols do not
follow an equispaced layout and yet there seem to be different tendencies within
the SNR range. For low signal power the network seems to lean towards having
a lower count of symbols: although the middle side symbols are approximately
within the ideal values for an equispaced 8PAM, the middle ones are placed very
close to each other, sometimes even coinciding. This seems to suggest that the
model needs to ”switch” to a lower symbol count, as the noise hinders the correct
detection of so many points. In the middle range, the constellation looks the clos-
est to symmetrical uniform spacing, but with slight deviations from the ideal con-
stellation in the middle symbols, which might suggest an excessive noise power
in relation to the available range. Finally, the high range shows probably the most
54
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:65==
(a) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
5 polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(b) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 5 polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(c) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
5 polynomial, 11dB input constellation
(d) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 5 polynomial, 11dB input constellation
(e) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
5 polynomial, 18dB input constellation
(f) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 5 polynomial, 18dB input constellation
Figure 4.20: Geometric constellation shaping for 8PAM MZM, order 5 polynomial
surprising outcome: although it is difficult to appreciate in the figure, the symbol
count has reduced from 8 to 7, and the symbols on the right are very close to each
other. It is as if the compression had the same effect as the abundance of noise
power, the model considers that the range is so small that it sacrifices some points
to have a better accuracy on the rest. Further analysis needs to be made on this
specific case, but the overlapping of symbols to (somehow) lower the order of the
constellation is probably related to the use of cross-entropy as loss function of
the model: a lower symbol count can lead to lower cross-entropy, thus driving the
gradient toward simpler modulation schemes. The performance curves show no
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
55
==PAGE:66==
visible performance penalty for this apparently chaotic distribution, so there is no
reason to think that the model is necessarily malfunctioning: it is simply optimizing
for the metric it has been given.
The analysis of the results on the O(7) can lead to a deeper insight on the way
the autoencoder interprets the higher modulation order: if the shaping diverges
on similar SNRs there might be a pattern that is been overlooked in the analysis.
For the selected range, the difference between the O(5) and O(7) approximations
is rather negligible, so there should be no radical differences. Figure 4.21 shows
the performance curves for the higher order MZM approximation:
(a) Mutual information
(b) High SNR mutual information
(c) Symbol error rate
Figure 4.21: Obtained results for nonlinear O(7) approximation, 8PAM case
Apart from a slight change in the highest energy case of the ML model (which is
rather unexciting, as due to the output SNR approximation the position of these
points on the graph always varies to some degree) the overall tendency of the
curves seems to hold stable. The autoencoder still outperforms the other 2 ap-
proaches analyzed, but it stays unable to overcome the MZM constraints at higher
SNRs and its performance differs from the equispaced case. Although this con-
sistency is rather good news for the viability of the model, the mutual information
and SER plots are rather inconclusive by themselves, and further insight needs to
56
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:67==
be obtained. The constellation plots in Figure 4.22 seem to have more potential
for the analysis:
(a) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
7 polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(b) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 7 polynomial, 5dB input constellation
(c) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
7 polynomial, 11dB input constellation
(d) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 7 polynomial, 11dB input constellation
(e) Input constellation to 8PAM MZM, order
7 polynomial, 18dB input constellation
(f) Output constellation from 8PAM MZM,
order 7 polynomial, 18dB input constellation
Figure 4.22: Geometric constellation shaping for 8PAM MZM, order 7 polynomial
Despite the general distribution of the symbols gives a disorderly impression, a
careful comparison with the previous testing iteration shows very similar results in
terms of constellation shaping at each SNR. On the low range, the proposed model
tends to group the middle symbols, more difficult to distinguish in the presence of
noise, and prioritize the central and side ones. At mid-range signal power the
symbols follow a quasi-uniform distribution on space, but with slight bias towards
0. The MZM distortion seems to force the higher-end power constellation on the
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
57
==PAGE:68==
direction of effectively lowering the total symbol count, instead of minimizing the
space between all the 8 points. The symbol spacing in this case is surprisingly
uniform otherwise. As a general summary of the 8PAM shaping, the model is
consistent in its decisions and achieves superiority over traditional approaches,
but further research needs to take place for understanding what drives it towards
such decisions and whether these are actually optimal in this scenario.
58
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:69==
5
Conclusion
The present project aimed to address the limitations that optical modulators intro-
duce in communication systems based on geometric constellation shaping with
machine learning techniques, more specifically through the use of autoencoders.
A series of different approaches in terms of network layout and activation, loss
function and optimization algorithm were implemented during the different train-
ing stages, and every methodology used was properly introduced and analyzed.
The results of all the experiments that allowed so were analyzed on a progressive
manner, building up from minimal working setups to more complex ones. The
models were mainly assessed based on 2 metrics: mutual information between
transmitted and received symbols, as an approximation of channel capacity, and
symbol error rate, a classic indicator in the context of communication systems.
The final results established a comparison between linear (classic AWGN) chan-
nels and optical channels based on Mach-Zehnder modulation, trying 2 different
1D constellation schemes: 4PAM and 8PAM. Each model was trained individually
on a series of SNR values, so the system could develop its maximum performance
for each signal power selected. This also allowed the display of performance
metrics in a graphical way, making direct comparison easier. The constellation
shaping for AWGN channels was tested on a per-sample and a Nyquist-filtered
variations, in order to introduce an additional source of complexity to the system
and observing the resilience of the model towards different potential sources of
distortion. This also introduces a slightly more realistic challenge, as many optical
links make use of some kind of pulse shaping in its pipeline. In the case of MZM-
based channels, the proposed solution was compared to uncompensated and
predistortion-based approaches, thus allowing a certain benchmark to give con-
text to the numerical results. When the MI and SER curves did not yield enough
insight on the internal processes of the model, the input-output constellations (be-
fore and after the modulator) were plotted, thus facilitating an overall interpretation
of the decisions taken by the algorithm and whether those decisions were desir-
able to reach the pursued goal.
The testing of the aforementioned setups yielded a number of interesting conclu-
sions. Firstly, the proposed autoencoder layout was able to converge to optimal
constellation shaping throughout the SNR range evaluated for linear channels, in-
dependently of the weight initialization used. This can be clearly seen in the curves
of the selected metrics against signal-to-noise ratio, where the model was able to
match the theoretical performance of uniform constellations in almost every case.
Some slight bias from the ideal values could be seen for extreme SNR cases,
however the relevance of such cases in the studied problem was discussed. Sec-
ondly, the present solution was able to at least match and, in viable scenarios, out-
perform the uncompensated and predistorted channel models for both 4PAM and
8PAM modulations. For the former, the ML solution was able to equate theoreti-
cal performance and maximize the output constellation power within the intrinsic
boundaries of the modulator. In the 8PAM case, the scarce range seemed to force
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
59
==PAGE:70==
the solution towards less traditional symbol layouts, that despite improving clas-
sic techniques in terms of performance must be further investigated to determine
their suitability.
5.1
Future Work
The inexperience in certain parts of the research topics, the lack of time resources
and the expectable implementation difficulties found along the way hindered the
completion of some of the initial ideas of project. Therefore, some interesting ap-
proaches and methodologies had to be left aside for future work, either because
the present model had higher chances of ”success” or simply because their im-
plementation would elongate the total development time, which was tight on itself.
This section aims to summarize them and give some additional context on how
they could be shaped:
• The original project idea was to tackle the geometrical constellation shaping
problem from the perspective of gradient-less optimization systems. The
introduction of SPSA as possible optimization approach in the report has
therefore a clear motive: to understand its underlying mechanism in order
to implement it in a real setup. The algorithm was indeed developed for the
selected framework (PyTorch) but its lack of parallel optimization made it sig-
nificantly slower than the traidional gradient-based approaches, and hyper-
parameter tuning is significantly more time-consuming that for the latter. As
mentioned in the introduction, many of these algorithms have shown great
potential in other communication-related tasks and will probably have a sig-
nificant role in the research of the upcoming years in this field. The potential
shown by the present network layout could be exploited with gradient-less
algorithms like SPSA, therefore allowing its implementation in more modest
devices like DSPs and greatly simplifying its application to real systems.
• Although most of the experimentation was focused on Mach-Zehnder mod-
ulators, the project initially aimed for compensation of EAM modulators, like
the one developed in [6]. The structure of EAMs, based on semiconductors,
usually gives them a broader range of output signal powers compared to
MZMs, which translates directly into a better BER/SER performance [36].
Nevertheless, EAMs also suffer a number of transient effects that vary de-
pending on the doping and materials utilized for its construction, thus hin-
dering the reach of their full potential. The adaptive nature of machine learn-
ing techniques is extremely promising in such scenarios and in combination
of with photonic technology it can help to break the boundaries of what is
achievable today in terms of channel capacity. Even if changing the trans-
fer function of the MZM modulator and replacing it by the EAM’s should not
affect the learning performance of the model, the saturation of the symbol
amplitudes can lead to flat gradients that freeze their inference, blocking
the search for the optimal constellation. The viability of the proposed solu-
tion must be tested in realistic EAM-based simulations to ensure the correct
compensation of the time-varying effects of such systems while complying
with the implicit limitations of real communication links.
60
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:71==
• The internal structure of the autoencoder was not tested in depth, and was
rather based on previous references that had proven the success of such
layouts on similar tasks. A comprehensive validation of the optimal layer
topology must be designed and executed, so no assumptions are taken
while developing the model.
• Despite some initial efforts using MSE as loss function, all network training
has taken place using cross-validation as cost measure, due to its relation
to mutual information and channel capacity. This is undoubtedly a sensible
choice from the signal processing perspective, nevertheless it does have a
series of pitfalls, like the difficulty for weight fine tuning in very low or very
high noise conditions. Different experiment sessions should be performed
on a variety of loss functions in order to determine the optimal loss for the
task through different SNR ranges and channel variations.
• A reinforcement learning approach could have great synergy with the geo-
metrical shaping task, as the reward function would sequentially be evalu-
ated for each received symbol based on some metric like Euclidean distance
to the true symbol or mutual information. This would be specially effective
for channels with relatively slow transient effects, as the network would ac-
tuate and adapt to the link conditions at the same time. Such route must
be explored in the future with its respective redesign of the whole inference
setup for optimal results.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
61
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
Daniel S Weile and Eric Michielssen. Genetic Algorithm Optimization Ap-
plied to Electromagnetics: A Review. Tech. rep. 3. 1997, p. 343.
[2]
Yuhui Shi and Russell C. Eberhart. “Empirical study of particle swarm opti-
mization”. In: Proceedings of the 1999 Congress on Evolutionary Computa-
tion, CEC 1999. Vol. 3. IEEE Computer Society, 1999, pp. 1945–1950. DOI:
10.1109/CEC.1999.785511.
[3]
Ognjen Jovanovic et al. “Gradient-Free Training of Autoencoders for Non-
Differentiable Communication Channels”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technol-
ogy 39.20 (Oct. 2021), pp. 6381–6391. ISSN: 15582213. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.
2021.3103339.
[4]
James C Spall. “An Overview of the Simultaneous Perturbation Method”.
In: Johns Hopkins Apl Technical Digest 19.4 (1998), pp. 482–492. ISSN:
02705214.
[5]
P Agrawal. “FIBER-OPTIC COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS Fourth Edition”.
In: ().
[6]
J. Camilo Velásquez, Jeison Tabares, and Josep Prat. “Differential 8-APSK
monolithically integrated dual-EML transmitter for flexible coherent PONs”.
In: Optics Letters 44.11 (June 2019), p. 2760. ISSN: 0146-9592. DOI: 10.
1364/ol.44.002760.
[7]
Chia Chien Wei, Hsuan Lin Cheng, and Wei Xiang Huang. “On Adiabatic
Chirp and Compensation for Nonlinear Distortion in DML-Based OFDM Trans-
mission”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 36.16 (Aug. 2018), pp. 3502–
3513. ISSN: 07338724. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2018.2844859.
[8]
J ; Thrane et al. “Machine Learning Techniques for Optical Performance
Monitoring from Directly Detected PDM-QAM Signals”. In: Journal of Light-
wave Technology 35.4 (2017), p. 868. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2016.2590989.
[9]
Jakob Krzyston, Rajib Bhattacharjea, and Andrew Stark. “Complex-valued
convolutions for modulation recognition using deep learning”. In: 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Communications Workshops, ICC Workshops
2020 - Proceedings. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
June 2020. ISBN: 9781728174402. DOI: 10.1109/ICCWorkshops49005.2020.
9145469.
[10]
Tim O’shea and Jakob Hoydis. “An Introduction to Deep Learning for the
Physical Layer”. In: ().
[11]
Ronen Dar et al. “Properties of nonlinear noise in long, dispersion-uncompensated
fiber links References and links”. In: (2013).
[12]
R T Jones et al. “Deep Learning of Geometric Constellation Shaping includ-
ing Fiber Nonlinearities”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.1109/ECOC.2018.8535453. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ECOC.2018.8535453.
[13]
Wei Hsiang Huang et al. “Nonlinear Equalization Based on Artificial Neu-
ral Network in DML-Based OFDM Transmission Systems”. In: Journal of
Lightwave Technology 39.1 (Jan. 2021), pp. 73–82. ISSN: 15582213. DOI:
10.1109/JLT.2020.3025163.
62
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:73==
[14]
A. Omidi et al. “Geometric Constellation Shaping Using Initialized Autoen-
coders”. In: 2021 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communica-
tions and Networking, BlackSeaCom 2021. 2021. ISBN: 9781665403085.
DOI: 10.1109/BlackSeaCom52164.2021.9527735.
[15]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine
Learning and Data Mining. Tech. rep.
[16]
Karl Freiberger. “Measurement Methods for Estimating the Error Vector Mag-
nitude in OFDM Transceivers”. PhD thesis. June 2017.
[17]
Kevin P Murphy. “Machine Learning A Probabilistic Perspective”. In: ().
[18]
Jiahui Yu et al. “CoCa: Contrastive Captioners are Image-Text Foundation
Models”. In: ().
[19]
Chenhong Zhou et al. “One-pass Multi-task Networks with Cross-task Guided
Attention for Brain Tumor Segmentation”. In: (). URL: https://github.com/
chenhong-zhou/OM-Net..
[20]
Sergios Theodoridis. “Chapter 18 - Neural Networks and Deep Learning”.
In: Machine Learning (Second Edition). Ed. by Sergios Theodoridis. Second
Edition. Academic Press, 2020, pp. 901–1038. ISBN: 978-0-12-818803-3.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818803-3.00030-1. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128188033000301.
[21]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016.
[22]
Pierre Baldi and Kurt Hornik. “Neural networks and principal component
analysis: Learning from examples without local minima”. In: Neural Net-
works 2.1 (Jan. 1989), pp. 53–58. ISSN: 0893-6080. DOI: 10.1016/0893-
6080(89)90014-2.
[23]
Lei Zhou et al. “Variational Autoencoder for Low Bit-rate Image Compres-
sion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. June 2018.
[24]
Kadir Gümüs et al. “End-to-End Learning of Geometrical Shaping Maxi-
mizing Generalized Mutual Information”. In: (). URL: https://github.com/
kadirgumus/Geometric-Constellation-Shaping.
[25]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization”. In: (Dec. 2014). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[26]
Liyi Dai. “Convergence Rates of Finite Difference Stochastic Approximation
Algorithms 1”. In: (2015).
[27]
Sebastian Ruder. “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms
*”. In: (). URL: http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/tutorial/solver.html.
[28]
C E Shannon. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”. In: The Bell Sys-
tem Technical Journal 27 (), pp. 623–656.
[29]
John G. Proakis and Masoud. Salehi. Communication systems engineering.
Prentice Hall, 2002, p. 801. ISBN: 0130617938.
[30]
William A. Teso. Communication systems engineering. Vol. 293. 2. 1972,
p. 149. ISBN: 0130617938. DOI: 10.1016/0016-0032(72)90155-x.
[31]
Christophe Peucheret. Intensity modulation index and Mach-Zehnder mod-
ulator. Tech. rep. 2016.
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
63
==PAGE:74==
[32]
M. P. Fok and P. R. Prucnal. “Switching based on optical nonlinear effects”.
In: Optical Switches: Materials and Design (Jan. 2010), pp. 181–205. DOI:
10.1533/9780857090416.181.
[33]
D.R. Morgan et al. “A generalized memory polynomial model for digital pre-
distortion of RF power amplifiers”. In: IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing 54.10 (2006), pp. 3852–3860. DOI: 10.1109/TSP.2006.879264.
[34]
S Axler, F W Gehring, and K A Ribet. “Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics”.
In: ().
[35]
Antonio Napoli et al. “Digital Predistortion Techniques for Finite Extinction
Ratio IQ Mach-Zehnder Modulators”. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology
35.19 (Oct. 2017), pp. 4289–4296. ISSN: 07338724. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.
2017.2729603.
[36]
Pawandeep Kaur and Sanjeev Dewra. “Symmetric Mach-Zehnder Demul-
tiplexing Technique for Optical Time-Division Multiplexing: Comparison of
EAM, MZM and AM”. In: Journal of Optical Communications 38.1 (Mar.
2017), pp. 7–12. ISSN: 01734911. DOI: 10 . 1515 / JOC - 2016 - 0021 / PDF.
URL: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/joc-2016-0021/html.
64
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
==PAGE:75==
Machine learning techniques for communication over complex channels
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
