==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stand-alone energy system with solar and wind energy, rSOC for 
hydrogen energy production and storage for a 2500 people 
community in a one year case study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author 
 
Olmo Brito 
 
 
 
 
 
June 24, 2022 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
To Amparo & Manolo 
My beloved, tireless support 
I wish you could last forever 
 
 
To Hua and Ming, for allowing me to form part of their team and this project plus all the 
help and positive feedback received. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The present work comes from the world actual need of excess energy storage. Both solar 
photovoltaic and thermal energy in addition to wind power are used to the purpose of the 
project energetic model. A reversible solid oxide electrolyser-fuel cell is the responsible 
of the hydrogen and electricity production for the energy storage and production. 
The idea behind these scheme is to demonstrate the possibility of stablishing an up-
scalable stand-alone system for a community of people living in a close-by region. The 
target is being able to feed all the yearly energy and heating needs either with on-time 
renewable energy or with the supply of the electricity by the fuel cell which uses hydrogen 
previously produced and stored, by the electrolyser. 
To test the system, several softwares have been used for modelling different technologies 
such as Matlab for modelling the solar photovoltaic, wind, electrolyzer and fuel cell 
system, Polysun, for the solar thermal technology or Aspen, for all the thermal and 
chemical flows.  
Results do show that this is a feasible solution for the current need of change in the actual 
energy model to meet humanity energy profile demand. Additionally, further 
improvements and alternatives that could enhance, optimize or making more adaptable 
the system are presented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Content 
 
Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 
Abstracts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 
 
1. Introduction   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  5 
1.1 Presentation and main objectives of this work   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7 
1.2 Global energy use and environmental issues   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  8 
1.3 Current energy storage systems   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 11 
1.4 Thesis outline   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 13 
 
 
2. Solar energy   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 14 
2.1 Solar radiation   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    14 
2.2 Solar photovoltaic technology   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16 
2.2.1 Introduction   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16 
2.2.2 Current state   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  18 
2.2.3 Project model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    19 
2.3 Solar thermal technology   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25 
2.3.1 Introduction   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25 
2.3.2 Current state   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26 
2.3.3 Polysun and project model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    27 
 
3. Wind energy   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    32 
3.1 Wind resource   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    32 
3.2 Wind energy technology   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    34 
3.3 Project model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     36 
 
4. Reversible solid oxide cell   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   40 
4.1 Introduction to electrolysers and fuel cells   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    40 
4.2 Thermodynamics   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42 
4.3 Reversible Solid Oxide Cells (RSOCs)   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     44 
4.4 Project model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     46 
 
5. System model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  52 
5.1 Aspen model   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  52 
5.2 Community consumption profile   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   58 
5.3 System model and balancing, hydrogen storage   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   62 
5.4 Further energy uses   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    66 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
6. Economical analysis   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   67 
6.1 Solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, wind and rSOC systems and   .   .   .   .  67 
system LCOE 
 
 
7. Conclusions   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   73 
 
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74-79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
1. Introduction 
Since the first observation of the photovoltaic effect by Edmond Becquerel back in 1839 
[1], the discovery of the photoelectric effect in 1887 by Rudolf Hertz [2] or the first 
practical silicon solar cell by bell labs in 1954 [3], both solar photovoltaic and thermal 
energy have overcome a major development through the last 50 years both 
technologically and economically wise. Windmills have had a longer history since 
originally, they were for varies duties such as cereal grinding, water pumping or even 
powering low power machinery hundreds of years ago. The first known wind turbine used 
to produce electricity was built in Scotland by James Blyth in 1887. 
Hydropower is the still the highest contributor to the world renewable energy installed 
capacity. However, solar and wind power are up to date the technologies with a higher 
growth and planned capacity to be installed in the near future according to the report of 
IRENA “Renewable capacity highlights 2022”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electricity produced by renewable energies is consequently rapidly increasing year by 
year with a total global share of electricity generation by renewables of 23.2% by the end 
of 2019 [5]. This evolution can be observed along time by the tool provided in “Our World 
in Data” which analyzes the share of electricity production from renewables from 1985 
up to 2021. 
 
Figure 1 : World installed renewable capacity growth from, IRENA 2019-2021 
Figure 2 : World share of electricity production from 
renewables in 1985  
Figure 3 : World share of electricity production from 
renewables in 2021  
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
A steady increase in the renewable share is achieved by most of the world countries where 
some outstand like Norway, Iceland, Costa Rica, Paraguay, Central African Republic, 
Democratic Republic of Congo or Ethiopia with a share that overcomes 99%.  
Nevertheless, the major contribution of the renewable energy is for electricity generation 
but human needs range from transportation, to heating and electricity to state the most 
important. This is how, when analyzing the parameter of final energy consumption and 
according to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) of the United Nations report of 
2021 this renewables provide just a 9.2% to world heating sector and 3.4% to 
transportation sector in comparison to the 25.4% to the electricity sector [6]. 
 
IEA organization bears out this problem and demonstrates how the renewable share in 
final energy consumption, despite having increased continuously and doubled in the last 
20 years, still represents a low 11.5% of the world total. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For this reason, energy storage is the next link on the chain of renewable energy. Storage 
wipes out the intermittency of renewables and its direct dependance on real time 
generation. The final purpose of combining renewables and storage is nothing more than 
having an equivalent clean fossil fuel to power all our needs.  
Energy storage technologies are diverse : mechanical storage as flying wheels, chemical 
storage as Li-ion, NaS, acid-Pb or Ni-air batteries, thermal storage as water pits, pumped 
hydropower or the current popular hydrogen or hydrogen carriers as ammonia, methanol 
or the pair benzene-cyclohexane. 
The most economical solution in unitary terms is hydropower but it requires a specific 
geography added to an incredible construction costs (if not built already). Water pits have 
been demonstrated to be an excellent solution for heat water storage purposes and 
batteries have a high efficiency but still high costs and are built with some materials which 
particularly pollute when being extracted from ore. 
Hence hydrogen represents a promising solution which could cover this gap of the 
renewables being produced in excess out of the consuming time periods. 
 
Figure 4 : World renewable share in final energy consumption from 1990 to 2019,  
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
1.1 Presentation and main objectives of this work 
 
The overall aim off the work presented in this thesis is to investigate the possibility of 
creating an off-grid community of 2500 people which can rely solely in a renewable 
energy system for its every-day life energetic consumption for a trial period of one year. 
The system that is developed is a base case model in which future studies and upgrades 
can be done since the complexity of such a complete system is overwhelmingly high for 
a thesis alone project. Hereby it has been carried out an accurate model of every single 
part of the plant, which could be further upgraded to detail improvements or different 
equations that could more faithfully represent the reality of energy production or 
consumption according to better technology available or human consumption profiles 
including a heating system. 
It is a must to mention that, according to the location chosen, Telde, a city in the island 
of Gran Canaria (Spain), no heating needs have been taken into account since the average 
yearly temperature for the proposed city is 21 degrees with lowest peak temperatures of 
14 degrees which do not actually represent a need of heating installation in this city 
households. 
During the work, focus has been posed on the net zero energy balance in terms of the 
produced electricity for all needs and purposes via renewables or via hydrogen stored and 
energy needs taking into account all the side energy-consuming process such as pumps, 
heaters and losses. 
Despite the plant could be operated in a way where excess energy is directly poured to 
the grid, special interest is on storing this energy for two reasons. The first one is being 
able to react ahead failures occurring at any time or in any part of the diverse technologies 
or during maintenance periods. The second one is because this model is a small-scale 
simulation of what one day will come in near future. At some point renewable energy 
generation will commonly surpass local energy consumption for a given period so as the 
only way to not waste that produced energy will be any kind of storage. 
Further research is carried on to provide an adaptable solution to the different cases on 
which excess energy amounts to relevant high values in which continuing storing it will 
not anymore improve the system availability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
 
1.2 Global energy use and environmental issues 
Up to date, coal, natural gas and oil still represent the 81% of the total energy supply 
worldwide according to the last IEA energy outlook [7]. Solar and wind, however, only 
represent a 2.2% of this share very close to the 2.5% of the total  hydro power.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A similar scheme is seen in the world electricity generation where coal, natural gas and 
oil have a share of 63% whereas solar and wind a 8.3% (16% for hydro power). However 
it can be observed how the share of renewables in this sector increases significantly in 
comparison to the total energy supply one. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition, no matter what is the source is consulted, they all agree in the same evidence. 
CO2 levels have steadily increased since industrial revolution and do not seem to have a 
short-term tendency change. As it can be observed in figure (7) CO2 levels were very 
fluctuating and variable during the Eocene, Miocene and Pliocene but reached an 
equilibrium on Earth around 12000 years ago, the beginning of Holocene.  
 
 
Figure 5 : Total energy demand by source, IEA 
Figure 6 : Electricity generation by source, IEA 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is not until the 20th century when this equilibrium starts slowly getting imbalanced with 
a following rise of the levels up to date, being more drastic from the third industrial 
revolution in 1950’s – 1960’s as it can be seen in figure (8). Renowned institutions, 
committees and experts such as the IPCC do agree on this evolution and have further 
stablished a series of scenarios so called RCP (Representative Concentration Pathways). 
This studies represent possible future scenarios of the Earth evolution in several matters 
such as CO2 concentration in which every different level is a possible path the humanity 
will direct to if certain requisites are accomplished. This is shown in figure (9) where the 
worst case scenario shown RCP8.5 (brown line) reveals that if that path is followed during 
the coming years, CO2 levels of around 800-900ppm will be reached by 2080. On 
contrary, one of the most optimistic scenarios, the RCP2.6 (green line) stablishes these 
greenhouse gas at a level of 400-440ppm by 2080 which are in the range of nowadays 
value (420 ppm) [8]. 
 
 
 
IEA (International Energy Agency) global energy review from 2021 also researches about 
CO2 emissions and energy environmental impact for different sectors. Figure (10) 
displays the annual change in CO2 emissions from energy combustion and industrial 
processes, hence it can be concluded that apart from the year 2020 and due to covid 
impact, in the last 39 years CO2 emissions (again from energy combustion and industrial 
processes) have been increasing every single year but 2009 with an all-time high in 2021. 
Figure 7 : CO2 levels over the past 500 million years 
Figure 8 : CO2 concentration levels 1959-2021, Statista 
Figure 9 : Representative Concentration Pathways for CO2 
concentration, IPCC report 2021 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
 
 
If a deeper look is taken into the different CO2 producer sectors in figure (11), annual 
change of CO2 emissions (blue bars) is positive in 2021 for every sector. However, the 
net change in the interval 2019-2021 (orange dots) does show how a clear improvement 
has been done in the transport sector, leading the “degasification” of the sector in contrary 
to the electricity and heat production which has still the highest emission value. 
Even though there are pollutants with a higher GWP (Global Warming Potential)[9] than 
CO2 such as methane or nitrous oxide, this specific pollutant is the reference for the 
studies since it comprehends the highest in concentration in the atmosphere as well as a 
byproduct of human activities, hence the most relevant to tackle towards a cleaner future. 
All previously mentioned demonstrates how important is the need of a well integrated 
renewable energy system that can supply the most energy demands possible, ranging from 
electricity to transportation and heat.  
The designed system for this project aims to become a reference of a 100% renewable 
system in which all energy sources are supplied by clean sources of energy in which 
energy storage in form of hydrogen plays a major role in the achievement of  this 
milestone and without which this objective will never be possible to reach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 : Annual change in CO2 emissions from energy 
combustion and industrial processes, IEA 1900-2021 
Figure 11 : Annual change in CO2 emissions by sector, IEA 
Global Energy Review 2021 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
1.3 Current energy storage systems 
Pumped hydroelectric storage consists on a water mass in an upper reservoir, pumped 
from 
another 
reservoir 
at 
a 
lower 
altitude. 
During 
periods 
of 
high 
electricity demand, power is generated by releasing the stored water which falls 
conducted by pipes to a reversible pump-turbine/motor generator that acts as a turbine 
when energy is needed and as a pump when water is moved to the upper reservoir. This 
system is big in dimensions and relays not only in the principle of using gravitational 
power for producing electricity through very efficient turbines but also in the economical 
aspect of pumping water upwards when the electricity is the cheapest, hence low demand, 
e.g at night and producing it when demand is high, also selling prices. 
In the mechanical storage two technologies have to be mentioned : flywheels are rotating 
mechanical devices used to store electricity as rotational/kinetic energy that can be called 
up instantaneously.  
At the most basic level flywheels are a spinning mass driven by a motor in a container in 
which inside vacuum has been made. When energy is needed the spinning force drives a 
device similar to a turbine to produce electricity and when there is an excess of energy 
for any reason the spinning if this flywheel is increased as a rotational force. 
The key quality of this technology is the immediate response time to energy requirements 
and it is very adequate for grid power balancing. 
Compressed air energy storage (CAES) is based around the gas turbine cycle. Surplus 
power is used to compress air using a rotary compressor to then store it, often in an 
underground chamber. When the power is required, it is released from the chamber and 
passed through an air turbine that generates electricity from the flow of high pressure air 
[10]. Output from the plant can be boosted by burning natural gas in the high pressure air 
before it enters the air turbine as it would happen in a conventional gas turbine. However 
this has the penalty of producing carbon dioxide emissions, which the plain storage plant 
does not. [11] Small scale applications as mine locomotives do benefit of a lower need of 
heat dissipation associated to the need of conservation of thermal energy for compressed 
air in large-scale applications. 
    
On its most elementary level, a battery is a device consisting of one or more 
electrochemical cells that store electrical energy in the form oof chemical energy and 
convert at any time this chemical energy back to electrical one. Each cell contains a 
positive terminal, or cathode, and a negative one, the anode. The electrolyte is the 
intermediate layer which allows ions to move between the electrodes but not the electrons 
which will go through the current collectors in the outer circuit. This allows the battery 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
to perform the work in which ions move across the electrolyte producing a difference in 
concentration which makes the electrons jump to close the circuit. There are many 
different type of battery technologies nowadays, to name some : Li-ion, Ni-Cd, Na-S, 
Metal-Air, Redox Flow Batteries, Lead batteries or Electrochemical Capacitors or 
Supercapacitors. 
Thermal energy storage can be in the form of pumped heat, liquid air or simply heated 
water as it will be seen in the following chapter 2.3 . Solar thermal technology aims to 
make use of solar radiation to heat a fluid, either commonly water, oil or  molten salts to 
further store them as a thermal storage. Many technologies apply for this type of storage 
such as parabolic solar collector, vacuum tubes, flat plate solar collectors or Concentrated 
Solar Power. This systems are dependent both on beam radiation (parabolic ones) or beam 
and diffuse (as the flat plate ones). Uses can vary from hot water domestic demand with 
temperatures of 45-80ºC to industrial applications in the case of the CSP with 
temperatures of 600ºC in the case of molten salts. 
 
A simplified explanation of how hydrogen storage work is : electricity can be converted 
into hydrogen by electrolysis (water molecule splitting into oxygen and hydrogen). The 
hydrogen can be then compressed and stored and eventually re-electrified (with the use 
of a fuel cell). This process will be explained in detail in chapter (4). 
The most widely used techniques to produce hydrogen are, however, natural gas refining 
and ammonia conversion [12]. Despite this fact, due to the nature of this project and its 
stationary, small-scale characteristics water electrolysis through a solid oxide electrolyser 
is chosen to be the operating since it is adaptable, easily sized for a changing number of 
resident people and the most efficient among Alcaline, PEM (Polymer Exchange 
Membrane) and SO (Solid oxide) electrolysers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
1.4 Thesis outline 
 
The structure followed in this work is a bottom-up approach where chapter 1 provides 
with a general view of the main idea followed on the project and the current state of 
energy, environment and storage systems worldwide. 
Following, the different technologies used for the overall system, their current state and 
the model implemented are presented starting from the solar energy (Chapter 2), wind 
energy (Chapter 3) and the reversible Solid Oxide Cell (Chapter 4). 
The aim of this first six chapters is to provide the reader with the necessary theoretical 
background and specific devices that facilitate to understand the operation of the 
following plant model. 
Chapter 5 is indeed, the grouping of all previously mentioned energy technologies into 
one model and how this model and different energy profiles have been developed for the 
model work. Additionally, system performance and further uses or improvements are 
studied. This chapter shows how the results of the simulation come out and compares 
them to relevant literature to evaluate how optimal is the model and the system itself as 
an energy model solution. 
Chapter 6 is dedicated to calculate the cost of the different energy technologies, 
comparing them to existing project model numbers to then obtain the overall levelized 
cost of energy (LCOE) of the plant energy concluding with the determination of its 
feasibility in the current market compared to similar projects and actual energy prices. 
Last chapter, (Chapter 7) arises to the main conclusion obtained after this project 
evaluation which is reinforced by future prospects and alternatives to improve the existing 
model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
2. Solar energy 
 
2.1 Solar radiation 
 
Solar radiation makes reference to the electromagnetic waves emitted by the sun 
that approach and ingress into the Earth’s atmosphere. It is precisely this Earth’s 
atmosphere which modifies the solar spectrum according to time and location for 
a given moment. Standards are defined to classify this different spectrums along 
the Earth’s atmosphere [13], being the AM0 (Air mass zero) the reference 
extraterrestrial solar radiation, as a black body emitter at 5800K, with an 
integrated power value of 1366 W/m2 used in satellite applications. 
As the sunlight travels through the atmosphere, light interacts with air chemical 
components as water vapor, CO2, O3, O2 or N2 producing the absorption at certain 
wavelengths as figure (12) shows.  
 
The AM number differs from summer to winter and from day to evening being 
lower in summer time and mid-day time than in winter or evening time since it 
can de be defined as : 
 
                                                  AM ≈ 
1
cos (z) 
 
 
 
 
 
Being “z” the zenith angle or the angle between the sun an the perpendicular line 
to the Earth’s surface. 
For this reason the AM1.5 standard is used which represents the overall yearly 
average for mid-latitudes at a zenith angle of 48.2º. 
Thus AM1.5 integrated power is 1000 W/m2, a more precise classification is 
developed into two different types of surface air mass indexes : AM1.5G (Global) 
spectrum is designed for flat plate modules with the same power as the AM1.5 
and the AM1.5D spectrum (Direct) is instead defined for solar concentrator work 
with a power of 900W/m2 as shown in figure (13). 
 
 
 
Figure 12 : Spectrum of solar radiation in Earth 
Figure 13 : Standard Solar Spectra for space and terrestrial 
use, AM0, AM1.5G, AM1.5D 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
 
Solar irradiance is classified into three different components: beam irradiance (or 
direct irradiance), diffuse irradiance and global irradiance. 
DNI (Direct Normal Irradiance) which is the amount of energy per unit of area 
received by a surface in a perpendicular path. 
DHI (Diffuse Horizontal Irradiance) which is the amount of energy per unit of 
area received by a surface through a scattering process, meaning in a way that has 
not been a perpendicular path from the sun ray. 
GHI (Global Horizontal Irradiance) which is the total amount of shortwave 
radiation received from above by a surface horizontal to the ground of special 
interest for photovoltaic applications, it is expressed as : 
 
 
GHI = DNI ∙ cos(θ) + DHI                                               
 
GHI is characteristic of every location in the Earth and it is measure as a capacity of a 
specific location to have a certain amount of available energy from the sun in a period of 
time, usually measured on daily or yearly basis in kWh/m2. The map presented in figure 
(14) shows how the highest GHI values are in between latitudes 30º North and 30º South 
being specially high in between 15-30º N and 15-30º S representing this way the most 
attractive and feasible locations for photovoltaic applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The chosen location for this project is Gran Canaria in Spain regarding it’s both good 
solar and wind potential all around the year. Solargis provides with multiple energy 
solutions as heat maps, weather maps and solar resource maps as the presented in figure 
(15). This map, similarly to the previous map in figure (14) which displayed the GHI, 
provides with a specific information of photovoltaic power potential in the region of 
Spain, showing how Canary Islands have the best location for this type of technology 
reaching peak yearly values of 2000 kWh/kWp installed. 
 
 
Figure 14 : Global Horizontal Irradiance potential in the world, Global Solar Atlas 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 
Solar photovoltaic technology  
 
2.2.1 Introduction 
 
Photovoltaic technology relies on the p-n junction of semiconductor materials. Materials 
such as Silicon (Si) or Boron (B) are n-type and p-type materials respectively. P-type 
called acceptor impurities because they take free electrons in a semiconductor, N-type are 
called donor impurities because they give free electrons to a semiconductor. 
Semiconductors are often made from silicon. Silicon is an element with four electrons in 
its 
outer 
shell. 
To 
make 
a 
p-type 
semiconductor 
extra 
materials 
like boron or aluminum are added to the silicon. These materials have only three 
electrons in their outer shell. When the extra material replaces some of the silicon it leaves 
a 'hole' where the fourth electron would have been if the semiconductor was pure silicon. 
This allows a diffusion inside the junction due to the holes and electrons of each material 
type which leads to the electric field, figure (16). 
Figure 15 : Photovoltaic power potential in Spain, Solargis 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The application of band theory to n-type and p-type semiconductors shows that extra 
levels have been added by the impurities. In n-type material there are electron energy 
levels near the top of the material band gap so that they can be easily excited into the 
conduction band [14]. In p-type material, extra holes in the band gap allow excitation of 
valence band electrons, leaving mobile holes in the valence band, this is seen in figure 
(17). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In summary, a sun ray contains particles called photons with a certain energy which 
follows the Planck’s law : 
  E =
h∙c
f                                                                 
Each material has a specific bandgap energy defined as the minimum energy  needed to 
excite one electron from the valence band to a higher energy state, the conduction band. 
Photons interact with the semiconductor material of the solar cell producing a variation 
in the amount of electron-hole pairs created. If the energy of the photon (Eph) is greater 
than the bandgap of the material (Eg) the electron is effectively excited from the valence 
band to the conduction band, hence participating in conduction, in the creation of a 
current. This is how solar cells produce electrical energy from the sun. 
 
 
 
Figure 16 : P-N junction physical behavior layout 
Figure 17 : Materials band theory explanation, [14] 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
 
2.2.2 Current state 
Three main solar photovoltaic technologies are predominant in the current market : 
monocrystalline silicon, polycrystalline silicon and thin-film cells. 
Monocrystalline panels are manufactured using the Czochralski method which aims to 
have a single a single crystal of silicon with the highest purity possible hence the less 
imperfections. This panels are very robust and can achieve the highest commercial 
efficiencies ranging from 17% to 22%. Despite having experienced an approach to his 
analogue polycrystalline in terms of cost they are still the most expensive option 
nowadays explained by this manufacturing process. 
Polycrystalline panels are manufactured in a different way where the purity is not as 
crucial as in the monocrystalline ones, indeed scraps from monocrystalline ingots are also 
used for this type of panels which final cell has more crystals formed (impurities) that 
explains a lower efficiency of them 14%-18% but at a lower manufacturing cost avoiding 
the Czochralski method. 
Thin films solar panels are made by depositing a thin layer of a photovoltaic substance 
onto a solid surface, like glass. Some of this substances include amorphous silicon (a-Si), 
Copper Gallium Indium Selenide (CIGS), Copper Zinc Tin Sulfide (CZTS) or Cadmium 
Teluride (CdTe). This type of panels are the less mature ones hence the ones with a lower 
efficiency 9% to 13% but do offer a promising improvement window since a lot of 
research is going on this direction for its flexible properties and many applications such 
as building integrated photovoltaics or colored films [15]. 
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) publishes every year the “Best 
Research Cell Efficiency” in which they release the updated since 1976 best cell 
efficiencies at a laboratory scale and under Standard Test Conditions (STC) meaning at 
25ºC, AM1.5 and 1000 W/m2 seen in figure (18). 
 
 
Figure 18 : NREL best research cell efficiency chart 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
 
This chart takes into account other types of cells such as multi-junction cells that are out 
of the scope of this project and are very specific solar photovoltaic technology. 
Additionally, record efficiencies up to 2021 of 23.4% for thin film technology has been 
achieved and 27.6% for monocrystalline cells. This data reveals the already mature 
monocrystalline technology that has reached a flat curve in terms of efficiency 
improvement. On the contrary thin films have still plenty of room for improvement and 
are expected to overcome in the near future crystalline efficiencies as multi-junction cells 
already did but are yet too costly for commercial purposes.  
All in all, monocrystalline technology still represents approximately the 84% of the 
market solar photovoltaic share worldwide [16]. 
 
 
2.2.3 Project solar photovoltaic model 
 
Climatic data for the model operation comes from a trustworthy source which is PVGIS 
Tool [14] from the Photovoltaic Geographical information System, in the European 
Commission webpage. They are real values of the year 2020. Additionally the values are 
double checked for consistency with another relevant site, Global Solar Atlas [17] and do 
have a discrepancy of around 14% when it comes to irradiance values. This could be 
explained since the PVGIS Tool has a time resolution up to minute values of irradiance 
obtaining more information of the weather. In addition, for energy output estimation, 
Global Solar Atlas does also display a value a 14% lower which is presumably a 
consequence of an estimation according to standard parameters such as module efficiency 
or availability of the plant which is not the case as it will be explained in the following 
paragraphs. 
The solar photovoltaic model aims to give an overview of how the system behaves along 
the year given the climatic conditions of the chosen location and the technology used. An 
hourly time resolution is applied for the model since it is the most accurate available data 
both for irradiance and wind speed (see Chapter 3). Hence changes in the solar production 
along the days and months are obtained in an hourly basis, this will enable a deeper 
analysis of the system availability and production during the whole year for further study 
of the implementation success. 
 
The solar photovoltaic plant represents a 55% of the total installed capacity for electricity 
generation with a total installed peak power of 1.108 MWp. The plant panels are designed 
to be at an optimal tilt angle of 26º according to the latitude of the location, 27.99º ,                       
-015.44º to maximize yearly energy production. 
The chosen solar panel for the plant is the Longi LR4-72HPH 440M for its reliability, 
endurance and well-known prestigious brand. It is a monocrystalline, half-cut, Low-LID 
(Light Induced Degradation), PERC (Passivated Emitter Rear Cell) panel which increases 
the short-term and long term efficiency of the panel among conventional ones [18].  In 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
summary, this technologies will enable the panel to maintain a higher efficiency within 
the years thanks to Low-LID, to avoid high losses of shading thanks to the half-cut and 
to increase the efficiency with reflecting thanks to the PERC. 
The power of this panels range from 425W to 455W, 440W is the one used for the model, 
with a total capacity of 1108MWp makes a total number of 2520 panels. 
  
Main characteristics of the panel are presented in the table below :  
 
Max Power 
(W) 
Open 
Circuit 
Voltage (V) 
Short 
Circuit 
Current 
(A) 
Voltage at 
maximum 
power (V) 
Current at 
maximum 
power (A) 
Efficiency 
(%) 
440 
48.9 
11.46 
41.1 
10.71 
20.2 
Table 1 : Solar photovoltaic panel Longi LR4-72HPH 440M  main characteristics 
 
A solar photovoltaic panel produces a DC output but every appliance in use in our houses 
nowadays uses AC, this is the purpose of the inverter, converting this electrical energy 
from DC to AC in the most efficient manner. 
In principle, any inverter could fit this system in the adequate configuration, however a 
specific one has been used since there is a feedback from a real solar PV plant in operation 
which both uses this panels and inverters and has been in operation for 6 months very 
efficiently. The inverters are the SUN2000-105KTL-H1 [19] from the very well-known 
Huawei brand. To size the number of inverters needed to use in a solar system, datasheets 
must be consulted. In the case of this inverter, power output in AC is 105kWac then 
someone could think about sizing the system as : 
1108𝑘𝑊𝑝−𝐷𝐶
105𝑘𝑊𝑝−𝐴𝐶  ≈10.55 which will require 
an installation of 11 inverters. However, there is a parameter so called AC-DC ratio which 
accounts for the power rating, the relation of how much the installation would be able to 
produce in optimal conditions and how much the inverter can output in AC. This ratio 
takes values of around 1.1-1.3, 1.2 for the actual model. This ratio allows for a greater 
energy harvest when production is below the inverter’s rating, which it is typically most 
of the day [20]. 
The number of inverters is then :  
 
ninv =
1108kWp−DC
105kWp−AC
 ∙1kWac
1.2kWdc = 8.79 
 
This shows how important this parameter is, not only for accounting for a more optimal 
energy harvesting but also in terms of components savings, for a roughly 1MWp 
installation 9 inverters are installed instead of 11 that were to be installed if this had not 
been taken into account that is a CAPEX save of around 12.000€ . 
 
One additional consideration is how to connect modules between themselves and to the 
inverter. Again, datasheets will guide the limits of panels and panels to inverter 
connections. Each inverter has 12 different inputs, meaning 12 available strings can be 
connected to a single inverter if power limits are matching. A string is an grouping of 
modules in series. The voltage of the string must be equal or lower to the maximum 
voltage of the inverter (1500 V) and ideally around the rated input voltage (1080 V). 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
Each string then must contain at least, for ideal operating conditions : 
nppsoptimal = 1080V
41.1V  = 26.28 ≈27 
 
Hence the ideal number of panels per string should be equal or higher than 27. With the 
available number of panels and inverters plus the constraints mentioned before the system 
is set as follows :  
Inverter 
number 
Number 
of 
strings 
per 
inverter 
Number 
of 
panels per string 
Rated voltage 
of the string 
(V) 
Rated current 
of the string 
(A) 
Inverter 1 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 2 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 3 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 4 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 5 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 6 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 7 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 8 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Inverter 9 
10 strings 
28 panels 
1150.8 
10.71 
Table 2 : Solar photovoltaic modules and inverters system configuration 
 
The datasheet constraints of input voltage between 650-1500V and a maximum input 
current of 25A per MPPT (Maximum Power Point Tracking) are met with maximum 
design voltage of 1150.8 V and 21.42 A since each MPPT gathers two strings in parallel. 
Once configuration is clear, the equations that will determine the system energy output 
are as follows :  
Ein = ∑GII
366
1
 ∙ ATOT = 2290
kWh
year
m2  ∙2520 panels ∙ 2.1736 m2
panel
 = 12.54 GWh/year 
Raw energy from the sun into the panels surface before taking into consideration any type 
of losses. GII (Global Inclined Irradiance) is considered since all the irradiance data 
available is for an inclination of the panels of 26º as mentioned previously and is the 
effective irradiance reaching at each single hour the panel surface. 
According to the module datasheet [16], the module efficiency is a very good 20.2% this 
means that : 
ɳ = POUT
PIN
 = 
POUT
GII ∙ATOT
 →POUT = PIN ∙ ɳ 
Efficiency plays an important role in how much energy the module can convert from the 
sunlight into electrical energy. In this case a module like this with a rough 20% of 
efficiency will convert a coming energy from the sun of 6 
kWh
m2  into 
1.2kWh
m2
 ∙2.1736 m2 =
2.6 kWh. 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
Eout = Ein ∙ ɳ = 12.54GWhin
year
∙0.202 = 2.53GWhout
year
 
However, not all the losses are reduced to module efficiency, when designing a solar 
photovoltaic plant many other losses are taken into account that can and will arise in every 
day plant operation and could be higher or lower depending not only on the quality of the 
materials in the modules, inverters, cables and systems but also on the preventive and 
corrective maintenance. 
A fair approximation of this losses is presented now, this losses have been checked and 
compared from different sources such as the sosftwares SAM (System Advisor Model) 
or PVSYST , DTU applied solar photovoltaic course (34553) and other literature as 
“Energía Solar Fotovoltaica, Cálculo de una instalación aislada, Marcombo”. 
Loss cause 
Loss quantity (%) 
Nameplate capacity 
1.14 
Inverter efficiency 
98.8 → 1.2 
Soiling 
3 
Shading 
1.5 
LID 
1 
Mismatch 
1.5 
Availability 
3 
Wiring 
1.5 
Temperature dependance 
0 
Total 
13.84 
Table 3 : Different type of losses of the solar module 
 
Nameplate capacity accounts for the difference in the stated power of the module from a 
datasheet compared with how it actually performs at STC (Standard Test Conditions) 
meaning 25ºC, 1000W/m2 and AM1.5 . 
Inverter efficiency is the European efficiency given by the manufacturer, 98.8% in this 
case. 
Soiling accounts for particle deposition over the panels that reduce light absorption, the 
Canary Islands do suffer from desert sand storms, this explains this value. 
Shading of modules can always occur if the space to install the park is limited even if 
they are minimized, specially when the sun is lower in the horizon in winter or at very 
soon or late hours. 
Light Induced Degradation is a degradation that occurs in a solar cell during the first days 
after installation as a result of exposure to sunlight. It affects both monocrystalline and 
polycrystalline panels but is slightly less in the first ones. 
Mismatch losses are caused by modules which do not have identical properties, this slight 
differences in the electrical characteristics can become relevant since power output is 
determined by the solar cell with the lowest output value. 
Availability makes reference to periods where the plant or parts of it are out of service 
due to, usually, a broken or malfunctioning part such a string, combiner box or inverter.  
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
Wiring losses happen despite operating at a relatively high voltage (650-1500V) due to 
the intrinsic resistance of the own cable due to its thickness and length. Lengths are 
determined by the plant design and thickness by a tradeoff between reducing losses 
against increasing cost. 
Temperature dependance makes reference to a loss which occurs when the panel operates 
at a temperature different from the STC value, 25ºC, every ºC over this temperature will 
penalize the panel efficiency in the same way as it will benefit it under this temperature, 
a -0.35%/ºC of maximum power is applicable in the case of the chosen panel according 
to datasheet. In most climates, the efficiency will balance out over the long run, specially 
in this case since the yearly average temperature is 21ºC, only specific locations with very 
long times of coldness or heat would see a noticeable impact of this loss. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure (19) represents how the system setup looks like with the solar field of PV panels 
as the core of the system, followed by the cables, combiner box where strings are grouped, 
the respective inverter that gathers 280 panels (10 strings of 28 panels) each in this model 
design, a meter that in net-grid connected applications is the responsible of measuring 
real-time produced energy and a distribution box for household applications. It is 
important to mention that the presented system is an off-grid system but can nevertheless 
have a net energy meter, indeed it is highly recommended, in order to have a counting of 
how much energy is being produced in order to estimations, being able this way to 
evaluate the real performance of the plant. 
 
Theoretical total yearly energy output of the plant is then :  
                                           Eout−net = Eout ∙(1 −∑losses) ∙ ɳinverter = 
Eout ∙(1 −0.014 −0.03 −0.015 −0.01 −0.015 −0.03 −0.015) ∙0.988 = 2.188
GWh
year 
It is mandatory to mention that solar photovoltaic energy alone could not supply all the 
energy needs as a result of its dependance to the sun hours. For this reason in the following 
chapter wind energy will be presented as a wind turbine to cooperate with the solar PV 
plant. 
Figure 19 : General layout of grid connected PV system 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure (20) shows the result of the PV model simulation for the analyzed year data in 
2020. For the reason that solar energy is an intermittent power source, this analysis gives 
the opportunity to size accurately (together with wind energy) the system power output 
for every hour of the year towards a sizing of the households to feed and the hydrogen 
system both electrolyser/fuel cell and tanks. 
Some relevant information about the results is : 
- 
Lowest production hour is hour 6416 (24-aug) with an energy of 0.0018 MWh 
- 
Highest production hour is hour 1982 (22-mar) with an energy of 1.097 MWh 
- 
Average yearly energy of the production hours is 0.514 MWh 
- 
Availability of the plant is 45.1% 
- 
Capacity factor of the plant is 22.47% 
- 
Annual net energy output is 2.19 GWh 
 
Availability is understood as the percentage of the time that it is available to provide 
energy to the grid, given a certain threshold in which solar PV plant starts delivering 
energy since they can meet all the own-consumptions and operate normally. This 
threshold can vary regarding technology and auxiliaries of the plant between 30 and 100 
W/m2 of irradiance, model project uses 50W/m2 as a default value and obtains a total 
amount of 3962 hours out of 8784 of the year of theoretical operation (according to the 
hourly inclined irradiance). 
Capacity factor is another theoretical measure of how the plant performs. It is the relation 
between the actual energy output and the theoretical output energy if the plant operated 
at full capacity all the hours of the year : 
CF =
Eout−net
366d ∙24h ∙1108.8kW = 2.188 ∙106kWh
9.734 ∙106kWh = 22.47% 
 
 
Figure 20 : Yearly solar PV production of the plant in an hourly 
basis 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
 
2.3 
Solar thermal technology 
 
2.3.1 Introduction 
Solar thermal power generation systems collect sunlight to produce a temperature 
increase in a fluid to then produce heat or electricity. This energy systems have two main 
characteristic components : the mirrors or reflectors which are the responsible of re-
capturing the sunlight to direct it to the second component which is the receiver, usually 
tubes which contain the flow of the heated fluid which is used in the specific application. 
Solar thermal power systems can sometimes have tracking systems that keep sunlight 
focused onto the receiver throughout the day as the sun changes position in the sky 
increasing efficiency and power output in comparison to the non-tracked ones. 
When it comes to applications, solar thermal systems do also have two main uses : 
electricity production through the heating of a fluid in the receiver to a vapor phase at 
high temperatures (150-600ºC) depending on the technology used. This steam is 
converted into mechanical energy in a turbine which powers a generator to produce 
electricity. Another application, which is the specific one for the current model, is to store 
the heated fluid to cover a population with hot water needs, this can be either done in 
individual tanks, a common high storage tank or even in water pits for large-scale and 
long-term purposes. 
This systems can be hybrid or stand-alone. Hybrid systems do also contain an extra energy 
source as a back-up, generally a boiler of natural gas, pellets or oil, to ensure the feed of 
energy/hot water needs without interruption. Stand alone systems are designed in a way 
that solar fraction of the solar thermal system power is able to cover the 100% of the 
specific purpose demand. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21 : Four main types of solar thermal energy systems in 
use nowadays 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
 
As presented in figure (21), there are esentially four types of technologies for solar 
thermal power : parabolic through collectors (A), parabolic dish solar collectors (B), 
linear Fresnel solar collectors (C) and concentrating solar power (CSP). 
All this technologies, heading to industrial applications or large-scale energy production, 
aim to have high concentration ratios, defined as the ratio between the collector area and 
the receiver area, and operating temperatures ranging from 50ºC to the 600ºC of CSP. 
They all work with fluids as water or oil but CSP usually stores thermal energy in the 
form of molten salts. 
 
 
 
 
2.3.2 Current state 
From the point of view of household applications, flat plate collectors are the most used 
solution for its versatility, reduced space and competitive price. In fact, the world share 
of global solar market share is lead by evacuated tube collectors with a 71% of total share, 
followed by flat plate solar collectors with another 24% of share and lastly a 5% share of 
unglazed solar collectors [21]. Evacuated tubes solar collectors occupy the lead in the 
world market share, however, as the demand for solar thermal energy is soaring in Europe, 
one of the leading regions, the market share of flat plate solar collectors is doing so, partly 
due to their maximum utilization and their improvements on efficiency.  
However, the expansion of CSP technology for industrial applications will be limited by 
the availability of the resource since it requires a minimum yearly irradiance of about 
2,000 kWh/m2 to be competitive, which according to figure (14) is limited to some zones 
in the Earth in between latitudes of 37.5º both North and South. 
 
Geographically, Asia Pacific is projected to be the dominating region in the coming years 
for solar thermal market growth attributed to the increase in population and urbanization 
plus the green energy targets being looked upon by countries such as China. This last 
country. Is the market leader, both regionally and globally and this trend is set to continue 
with rising investment for solar power. 
In Europe the major driving forces for the market development are the green energy 
targets set by the European Union which lead to increased R&D focusing on the increase 
of efficiency of the existing technologies. 
 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
The annual newly installed area was in 2004 about 13 million m2, of which 10 million in 
China alone. The total installed capacity is thus approaching 100GWTH more than the 
global wind power electric capacity. China is by far the world lead market, with an 
installed capacity one third of the world total, almost exclusively evacuated tubular 
collectors. Their total surface now exceeds 22 millions of square meters. In the US, 
Canada and Australia, swimming pool heating is dominant with an installed capacity of 
18 GWTH of unglazed plastic collectors – and the market is said mostly dormant despite 
the immense resources. Europe and Japan provide about 10 and 9 GWTH  respectively 
with flat-plate and evacuated tube collectors. Almost all use water as heat transfer fluid – 
air collectors represent only 1% of the market [22]. 
 
Up to date, top 5 countries in the world with higher solar thermal power capacity installed 
are China, US, Japan, Germany and India with 205, 76, 63.2, 49.2 and 38 GW respectively 
[23]. Top three leaders among solar thermal industry are the companies: Abengoa Solar, 
Brightsource Energy and Siemens. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3.3 Polysun and project model 
 
Polysun is a software developed by the German Velas Solaris aiming to offer a simulation 
tool to plan and optimize energy systems. It provides is a compact and user-friendly 
solution for solar thermal models that range from small applications as a single house 
heating system to larger scales systems such as parabolic through collectors. This 
software has an extend catalog of the different components available to use from different 
type of solar panels: flat plate, evacuated tubes or parabolic through, plenty types of 
pumps models different in size and flow rates, tanks materials and sizes, heat exchangers 
by fuel type and size plus all the different control components for the system 
configuration. Most used commercially available technology is available in the software 
which is often updated with new devices. 
An additional feature of the software is its capability of creating energy flux diagrams, 
economical studies and many other useful graphs and data display like solar fraction or 
energy consumed by the auxiliary equipment. 
This solution has been chosen against creating a Matlab model as previously done for the 
solar photovoltaic model for its simplicity and since the project is already very high in 
load and detail. As a first approach, the initial model consisted solely on electricity 
production and consumption with renewables and hydrogen storage. However a real 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
system does include hot water systems in every household including heating but in this 
case as discussed in section 1.1, heating is generally not used in the Canary Islands. 
This is the reason why it has been included into the model design, to make it more realistic 
and give the final model a more holistic approach. What is more, an alternative use of this 
solar heating systems could also be the use of parabolic-through collectors as pre-heaters 
for the electrolyser feeding needs. Unfortunately, this is something that cannot be done 
in an accurate way in the software due to lack of models, hence it could be studied in a 
different way more detail in future research or model improvements. 
 
It is important to mention that the software has some limitations such as the amount of 
households that it is able to simulate on a yearly basis. Meaning the amount of water to 
heat for the consumption needs. This is of special relevance since the model has been 
developed for an hypothetical case where the consumption is for half of the real 
households, 1250 houses, since the model could operate this quantity but not the 2500 
houses at once. A simple extrapolation has been applied to estimate the values that will 
be obtained for the real result doubling the values of the panels needed to use, flow rate, 
pumps and tank volume essentially. This approach is even more conservative since the 
proportional losses for a bigger system are always lower but this way the model, since it 
is an approach, can be considered more trustworthy. 
The chosen solar thermal panel is of the type flat plate collector, the Gluatmugl HT 16.7 
m2. Main characteristics are explained in the table below :  
Type of collector 
Flat plate 
Absorber area (m2) 
15.23 
Gross area (m2) 
16.95 
ɳ0 (-) 
0.811 
a1 (-) 
2.439 - 2.71 
a2 (-) 
0.01 
Volume (l) 
30.46 
Tested flow rate (l/h) 
60 
Maximum flow rate (l/h) 
300 
Maximum flow temperature (ºC) 
200 
Table 4 : Main characteristics of the Gluatmugl HT 16.7m2 solar thermal collector 
 
Eta subzero, “a1” and “a2” are characteristic coefficients of each single panel that 
determine their efficiency according to the formula :  
 
ɳ = ɳ0 −a1 ∙Tm −Tamb
GI
−a2 ∙(Tm −Tamb)2
GI
 
 
The heat transmission coefficient “a1” describes the thermal losses. The higher this value, 
the more losses the collector has. The coefficient “a2” is used to calculate the coefficient 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
of heat transmission dependent on temperature. The “ɳ0” coefficient represents the optical 
efficiency of the collector when ambient temperature equals to collector temperature. 
“GI” makes reference to Global Irradiation. The average typical monthly solar thermal 
efficiency can vary between 30 – 45 % depending on location and type of panel [24]. 
For the purpose of this model, a hot water demand of 28l/person day has been applied 
since it corresponds to the value stipulated in Spain for residential applications that is 
additionally used for the houses energy certificates [25][26]. This amounts a total volume 
of 46116 m3 a year or 126 m3 a day. 
 
The model used for the hot water system is presented above. It is a simulation of half the 
real model, hence the final numbers to take into account are : 100 flat plate panels of the 
type Gluatmugl HT 16.7m2 will be used, a storage tank of 75000l which has the capacity 
to store and feed the entire community daily hot water needs, a tapping water temperature 
design of 60ºC according to Spanish regulation [26]. The model itself takes into 
consideration the location, ambient temperature, irradiation and wind speed to simulate 
the steady state and operation of the system along the year together with hot water storage, 
pumps consumption, medium consumption profile (5.845 MWh/day) which is by far 
more than enough since the energy to heat daily demand is : 
Qhot−water/day = m ∙Cp ∙∆T = 70 ∙103kg ∙4186.3
J
kg ∙K ∙(333K −288K) = 
                                              1.32 ∙1010J = 3.67MWh/day 
 
A big enough heat exchanger to be able to supply the energy between the two fluids, three 
way valves and temperature and flow controllers to supply the hot water accordingly to 
the need requirements. 
Figure 22 : Polysun hot water solar system model layout 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
This system is due to operate all year around supplying a daily amount of water of 28l per 
person in the community of 2500 people, hence the 70m3 mentioned previously. However 
the water consumption profile is not an instant demand of the water but spare on the hours 
of the day. This is another reason why the system has been sized to a total of 100 panels 
and not more covering a total area of 847.5m2. Since their nominal flow rate is 60l/h (up 
to 300l/h in case of need) then this panels can supply under good weather conditions a 
total flow of 6000-30000 l/h which can fill the tank in a range of 2.5h to 1 day depending 
on irradiation and operating flow. System is sized to supply an 80% of the daily hot water 
demand meaning 22.4l/person per hour giving a total of 56m3 of water, a 75% of the 75m3 
installed tank. Even if there was no supply from the solar field side, the water stored in 
the tank could feed the entire needs of the households for one day. Despite being an 
unlikely event this could happen and is beforehand designed, however under normal 
circumstances operation the system can supply 6-30m3/h which can cover the demand 
within 2-4 hours of full load operation leaving the rest of the day time to refill the tank 
with hot water if needed. 
The program itself evaluates all the constraints, parameters and real time flows to evaluate 
whether it is a consistent model or some components should be modified or upgraded. 
The results are presented below : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The solar system gives a total amount of thermal energy to the system equivalent to 
868.37 MWh around the year (2 times what it is described in the picture because it is the 
model for half a community) and the consumption of hot water demand amounts to 859.02 
MWh plus a 0.572MWh of pumps consumption and 9.95MWh of heat losses to the 
ambient. 
Looking at this diagram it could be thought that all the needs are fulfilled with a solar 
fraction of 100% but if further analysis is made it can be seen that not every day of the 
year energy needs are met 100%. This is the analysis made presented in the figure (24). 
One more time, this figure contains values for 1250 inhabitants that have to be 
extrapolated to the real 2500 inhabitants community one. 
Figure 23 : Thermal energy fluxes diagram of the system 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Represented in blue, the monthly energy needs of the hot water consumption for the 1250 
people community, grey defines the total amount of energy that the solar system is 
providing to the fluid but this does not take into account any other loss but the solar 
thermal panel one, meaning there are still piping, pumps and other thermal losses that will 
drop this value. Energy deficit is represented in orange bars which is a key parameter to 
take into account because it represents the real difference between the energy required by 
the people to obtain their effective tapping temperature and the supplied energy. This 
means that some hours or days of the year some extra energy will be required to meet the 
demand of hot water tapping, hence, the lower this value the better. The total sum of the 
yearly energy deficits amounts to 4.65MWh which extrapolated to real model could be 
estimated to be roughly 10MWh. This is a very reasonable value that could be covered 
by excess solar or wind energy as it will be seen in chapter 5, additionally this  value is 
spread along the year months being relevant in the months of January, March, May and 
October to December as it can be seen in figure (25). 
 
 
 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Ene Feb Mar Abr May Jun
Jul
Ago Sep Oct Nov
Dic
Energy  (kWh)
1250 inhabitants solar heating system model
Energy needs
Solar Energy to fluid
Energy deficit
Figure 24 : Comparison of energy needs, solar energy given and energy deficit of the model 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Wind energy 
 
3.1 Wind resource 
Wind is the movement of air, caused by the uneven heating of Earth by the sun and by 
the own Earth’s rotation. The difference in atmospheric pressure across the globe 
stablishes and generates the wind flows which usually tend to move from high pressure 
to low pressure areas.  
Prevailing winds are winds that blow from a single direction over a specific area of the  
Earth. Areas where prevailing winds meet are called convergence zones. Generally, 
prevailing winds blow east-west rather than north-south. This happens because Earth’s 
rotation generates the so called Corioli’s effect which makes wind systems twist counter 
clockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in the southern hemisphere [27]. 
The Earth contains five major wind zones : polar easterlies, westerlies, horse latitudes, 
trade winds and the doldrums [27]. 
Polar easterlies are dry, cold prevailing winds that blow from the east [27]. 
Westerlies are prevailing winds that blow from the west at midlatitudes. They are fed 
by polar easterlies and winds from the high-pressure horse latitudes [27]. 
The horse latitudes are a narrow zone of warm, dry climates between westerlies and 
the trade winds at about 30 and 35 degrees north and south [27]. 
Trade winds are the powerful prevailing winds that blow from the east across the tropics 
[27]. 
The place where trade winds of the two hemispheres meet is called the intertropical 
convergence zone (ITCZ). The area around the ITCZ is called the doldrums [27]. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Ene Feb Mar Abr May Jun
Jul
Ago Sep Oct Nov Dic
Energy  (kWh)
Energy deficit
Figure 25 : Monthly energy deficit of the solar thermal system 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
 
The wind components that are analyzed to estimate an optimal wind location are mean 
wind speed and mean power density. Global Wind Atlas [28] is a powerful tool that 
provides with this information worldwide.  
Figure (26) shows the wind mean power in Spain where it can be clearly observed how 
Canary Islands, north-west and north east coasts of the peninsula are the best Spanish 
locations with highest mean wind power densities, a measure of a good wind resource. 
According to Global Wind Atlas, the values of the chosen location in Gran Canaria are 
8.54m/s of mean wind speed and a mean power density that varies a lot in the area aimed 
for the model between 400 and 900 W/m2, both ways a very good wind resource. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total installed wind power capacity adds up to a total of 825GW (figure 27) with a little 
6.75% (55GW) of offshore wind capacity [29] that is however increasing significantly 
since the last 4 years, probably because it is becoming a more available and mature 
technology able to compete even surpass onshore one. 
Figure 26 : Mea nwind  power density heat map for Spain 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to IRENA's latest data, the production of wind electricity in 2016 accounted 
for a 6% of the electricity generated by renewables. Many parts of the world have strong 
wind speeds, but the best locations for generating wind power are sometimes remote ones. 
Offshore wind power offers tremendous potential [29]. 
 
 
 
3.2 
Wind energy technology 
Wind energy relies on the kinetic energy present on the wind masses. Wind mill are 
specifically designed to harness this energy from the wind at its maximum and in the most 
efficient way. When talking about wind energy, it is mandatory to talk about the Betz 
limit, the theory behind is explained by the limit of the windmill to extract energy from 
the wind since it will never be able to extract all of it because that will mean the air will 
stop after the windmill.  
The demonstration of this theory can be seen under the resource [30] but it is out of the 
scope of this thesis. However it is relevant to mention that this maximum power that can 
be extracted from air has a value of 59.3%. 
As said, wind turbines harness the kinetic energy from the wind and convert it to 
rotational energy thanks to the blades of the turbine that can transform this wind into a 
lifting and drag force based on aerodynamics. 
Figure 27 : Global total installed wind onshore and 
offshore capacity 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thanks to the airfoil profile (that are commonly NACA profiles), aerodynamics provoke 
the appearance of two different forces on the turbine blade : the lift force and the drag 
force. Lift force is created because the air inflow goes faster on the upper layer of the 
blade than in the lower one, creating a pressure difference that pulls the blade upwards 
the same as it does in an airplane wing. This force creates the spinning movement of the 
wind turbine. Drag appears as a direct reaction to the air flow motion. The air particles 
hit the front of an object, causing it to slow down, it depends on the shape of the airfoil 
and it does not contribute in a net increase of the rotational speed. 
Inside the nacelle of the turbine there is allocated all the necessary components to 
transform this rotational speed to electrical energy which are basically three : a rotor shaft 
to transmit all the turbine torque to the gearbox, the heart of the turbine which converts 
the slow rotational speed of about 5-20 rpm to a rotational speed compatible to triphasic 
electricity generation at approximately 1500 rpm that is then transformed thanks to the 
generator into net electricity ready to feed into the grid. The inner distribution of the 
different parts of the wind turbine is shown in the following figure (29). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28 : Airfoil forces in a wind turbine 
Figure 29 : Layout of the inner components of a wind turbine 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
Rotational speeds are that small because typical sizes of wind turbine blades are from 50 
to 100 meters, so this can lead to very high tip speeds if the rotation is not controlled. 
For a rotational speed of 15 rpm and a blade radius of 60m :  
vtip = ω ∙R = π
2
rad
s ∙60m = 94 m
s  
So very high speeds can be reached for large blade and relatively low rotational speeds 
if it is not controlled and sound speed limit is on 340 m/s which cannot by any main be 
achieved otherwise the turbine will break. 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Wind project model 
Wind turbines power extraction is calculated through the following equation : 
P = 1
2 ∙ρ ∙cp ∙A ∙v3 
Where “ρ” represents air density, “cp” is the power coefficient at a given speed, “A” is 
the sweep area of the blades and “v” is the wind speed. 
Energy and power are directly related by the time, the amount of time that a certain power 
is produced gives the energy : 
E = P ∙t 
For the current project, a wind turbine of a similar power of the solar field has been used 
in order to be able to compare how different technologies effectively operate in the field. 
The turbine object of study is the AN BONUS 1000/54 [31] with the following 
characteristics : 
Model 
AN BONUS 1000/54 
Rated power (kW) 
1000 
Cut-in wind speed (m/s) 
3 
Rated wind speed (m/s) 
15 
Cut-off wind speed (m/s) 
25 
Rotor diameter (m) 
54.2 
Max rotor speed (rpm) 
22 
Power density (W/m2) 
434.8 
Hub height (m) 
60 
Generator speed (rpm) 
1500 
Generator voltage (V) 
690 
Table 5 : Model wind turbine main characteristics 
 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
Wind speed data is obtained from the same resource as the solar irradiation, PVGIS Tool 
[17] from the European Commission webpage. Data resolution can be in different 
time intervals, the one used in this model is an hourly time resolution to have the 
best possible energy production calculation accuracy. Nonetheless the obtained 
hourly wind speed is at a height of 10 m, but the average wind speed that the 
turbine uses is that at the hub height, 60m. Then, to transform this data into the 
actual data that the model will use a parameters called roughness.  
Roughness is the condition of the landscape where the turbine is going to operate, this 
means, how filled it is with bunches, trees, farms or buildings that can make the 
wind resource to be higher or lower accordingly to the more objects present. Sea 
surface is the reference as a roughness of class 0. According to Global Wind Atlas 
[32] the roughness of the terrain where the model is set is of 0.05 which implies 
as an example that a wind of 5m/s at 10m height becomes a wind of 6.72 m/s at 
60m height. This wind speed conversion is done for every hour of the year to 
implement it in the wind turbine model thanks to the Danish Wind Industry 
Association tool [33]. 
Air density is a pressure and temperature dependent function, hence varying with altitude 
in the atmosphere. However it is assumed to be constant and equal to the sea level pressure 
since the difference is negligible. The value used for air density at 1atm and 20ºC is 1.204 
kg/m3 [34].  
The sweep area of the blades is calculated as a circumference area : 
Asweep = π ∙D
4
2
= π ∙54.22
4
= 2307.2m2 
The power coefficient of a turbine tells how effectively can a turbine convert the energy 
in the wind into electricity. Its expression is the relation between this two powers, the 
electrical power obtained divided the actual power contained in the wind. Usually 
manufacturers provide the power curve and cp curve datasheets for many of the turbines 
which makes it more simple to determine electricity production at each wind speeds. As 
seen in figure (30) the power curve in yellow of the used turbine increases with wind 
speed from the cut-in speed of 3 m/s to the rated power of 1000kW at a speed of 15 m/s. 
Cp instead does not follow a similar trend but increases its value up to the speed of 8-9 
m/s and then decreases constantly. This is a deliberate choice by the design engineers of 
the turbine in which optimal cp is reached at the forecasted mean operating speed point. 
This point indeed matches very close with the Weibull mean speed of the site that is 
explained in the following section (a mean yearly wind speed of 7.5 m/s) 
 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
 
 
Power is hence calculated for every hour of the year according to the wind speed, taking 
its respective power coefficient and applying the power formula. Energy is then obtained 
directly in kWh for every hour of the year assuming a constant wind speed for the hours 
time interval. 
 
For optimal wind turbine operation and generation costs minimization wind speed 
distribution and variation is a key factor. Usually, in locations with good wind resource, 
moderate wind speeds are the most common all around the year with a lower, moderate 
influence of strong and low winds. This wind variation is described using the so-called 
Weibull distribution shown in figure (31). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 31 : Weibull distribution of the wind turbine site, k=3, lambda =7 
Figure 10 : Power-cp curve of the used wind turbine for the model 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
The distribution shows the weighted average of wind speed across a specific time and 
location, 1 year and Telde in the model’s case. It can be seen how the most common wind 
speed along the year is the one in the range 8 m/s (violet vertical bar). However, the mean 
wind speed  is defined by the Weibull function which in this case is 7.5m/s. This value 
will be further used for the Annual Energy Output (AEP) of the wind turbine as an 
approximation of the total yearly energy produced at the mean windspeed of the 
distribution  since wind speeds change every second and can vary from 25m/s to 0m/s as 
an example. 
Electrical conversion, mechanical losses, converter and availability losses are accounted 
for a total of 10% for the model net energy output . 
Once everything is set, the model runs as it did for the solar photovoltaic field, the hourly 
energy production for the whole year 2020 of which data has been implemented. 
The result is shown in figure (32) : 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some relevant information about the results is : 
- 
Lowest production hour is hour 1385 (24-aug) with an energy of 0.634 MWh 
- 
Highest production hour is hour 336 (22-mar) with an energy of 0.011 MWh 
- 
Average yearly energy of the production hours is 0.265 MWh 
- 
Availability of the plant is 87.2% 
- 
Capacity factor of the plant is 26.06% 
- 
Energy cap is at around 0.63 MWh since it is the maximum power extraction 
point for the highest windspeeds at around 12-14 m/s. 
- 
Annual energy output is 2.29 GWh. 
Figure 32 : Hourly energy production from the wind turbine 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
 
4. Reversible solid oxide cell 
 
4.1 Introduction to electrolysers and fuel cells 
Electrolysers  consists of a conductive electrode stack separated by a membrane to which 
a high voltage and current is applied. This devices are the responsible of producing 
electrolysis, the dissociation process of the water molecule into the diatomic molecules 
of H2 and O2.  
In its most basic form, an electrolyzer contains a cathode (the negative charge), an anode 
(the positive charge) and a membrane (the electrolyte). The system also contains other 
secondary components as pumps, vents, storage tanks, a power supply and a separator.  
Water electrolysis is an electrochemical reaction which takes place within the cell stacks. 
Electricity is applied from an external source to the anode and cathode across, for this 
specific example, the proton exchange membrane (PEM) and causes the water (H2O) to 
split into its component molecules, hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2). Figure (33) shows 
the basic working principle of a PEM (Polymer Exchange Memabrane) electrolyser. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The half cell reactions occurring at each side are : 
In the anode side :                          H2O →2H+ +
1
2 O2 + 2e− 
In the cathode side :                               2H+ + 2e−→H2 
The overall reaction :                            H2O → H2 +
1
2 O2 
 
The electrolysis of one mole of water produces a mole of hydrogen gas and a half-mole 
of oxygen gas in their normal diatomic forms.  
Figure 33 : Working principle of PEM electrolyser 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
 
The water is fed to the anode side of the cell where water is reduced to oxygen, positively 
charged hydrogen atoms (protons) and electrons as seen in anode half cell reaction. This 
is possible thanks to the anode built chemically active materials such as Zinc, Magnesium 
or Aluminium alloys (Iridium in the case of PEM electrolyser) that enhance the oxidation 
process. The oxygen produced during this half-cell reaction can be removed with the 
unconsumed water if not compressed and stored for another purpose.  
 
The hydrogen protons move through the electrolyte [35] membrane (usually made of 
nafion, excellent proton conductor but electrical insulator) towards the cathode where 
they combine with the electrons from the DC (Direct Current)  power source and form 
the hydrogen gas as defines the cathode half cell reaction. 
 
The water feed to the cathode side is optional as it is only there to facilitate the efficient 
removal of the hydrogen. These reactions take place at the catalyst layer coated on each 
electrode. The diffusion layer on each side helps in efficient current distribution and also 
connects the Membrane Electrode Assembly (MEA) to the distribution plates. 
Distribution (bipolar) plates aid toward structural integrity of the cell. It also separates 
one cell from the other when cells are assembled together in the form of a stack to deliver 
the required hydrogen flow rate [35]. 
 
A fuel cell cand be stated to operate under the same chemical principles as the electrolyser 
but in the opposite direction. The anode of the fuel cell is now the side where hydrogen 
interacts and the cathode is the side where oxygen gets reduced, exactly the opposite as 
in the electrolyser. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As figure (34) explains, hydrogen is fed to the anode, while oxygen (usually air being 
nitrogen a non-reactive element) is fed to the cathode. The fuel, in this case hydrogen, is 
oxidized at the anode to produce positively charged protons (H+) and electrons. The 
protons pass through the PEM electrolyte to the cathode as hydronium ions, while the 
electrons travel along an external circuit, also to the cathode producing the current flow. 
Figure 34 : Working principle of PEM fuel cell 
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
This way, electro-neutrality (charge balance) is maintained. The protons and oxygen 
molecules are combined with the electrons at the cathode. Oxygen is reduced by the 
electrons and combined with the protons to produce pure water and heat. Again, the 
process can be simplified into separation (anode) and recombination (cathode) of charges, 
and the associated increase (energy source) or decrease (energy sink) in the system’s 
electrical energy [36]. 
 
 
 
4.2 
Thermodynamics 
The enthalpy of a reaction is defined by the equation : 
   
 
 
 
 
 ∆H = ∆G + T ∙∆S 
Which defines the total energy needed for an electrochemical splitting of water. ‘∆G’ is 
the free Gibbs energy, of the reaction, ‘T’ is the temperature and ∆S is the entropy 
variation of the system. At standard conditions of 1 bar and 298K the Gibbs free energy 
is ∆Go = 237
kJ
mol . For an electrochemical cell : 
Erev
o
= |
−∆Go
n∙F | = 1.23V 
This represents the minimum work needed to split the water molecule at the 
corresponding cell potential where ‘n’ is the number of electrons transferred (2 for water 
splitting) and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C/mol). 
Thermoneutral voltage instead, is defined as the voltage at which water splitting can be 
conducted without production or consumption of heat. 
 Etn
o = |
−∆Ho
n∙F | = 1.48V 
Where ∆Ho = 286
kJ
mol is the reaction enthalpy at standard conditions. 
The reversible cell voltage ‘Erev’ is a function of temperature and activity of the species 
involved in the reaction that can be calculated for the overall water splitting reaction 
equation as : 
Erev = Erev
o
+ R ∙T
2 ∙F ∙ln (aH2 ∙ (aO2)
1
2
aH2O
) 
However, measure cell potential (Ecell) is compromised by a series of system losses, 
mainly of three different nature : ohmic losses, activation overpotential losses and 
concentration overpotential losses. 
Ohmic losses in an electrolyser occur due to the electrical resistance contribution within 
the cell (Rohm) and the losses due to the proton transport resistance of the membrane 
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
(Rmemb) being the total resistance R = Rohm + Rememb. Rmemb depends on the membrane 
thickness and Rohm on the current density, both depend on the temperature. Plot of the 
membrane losses for a given temperature wills show a linear increasing behavior for an 
increasing membrane thickness as seen in figures (35) and (36). 
Activation overpotential losses are the result of irreversible processes within an 
electrochemical reaction usually described by the Butler-Volmer equation :  
 
i = i0 ∙[e(αA∙n∙F
R∙T ) −e(−αC∙n∙F
R∙T ∙η)] 
 
Where ‘i’ is the current of a half-cell reaction and η is the overpotential, which has a 
positive sign for an anodic and a negative sign for a cathodic reaction. ‘i0’ is the exchange 
current density, a kinetic reaction rate constant, which depends on the specific 
electrocatalyst. ‘αA’ and ‘αC’ are the transfer coefficients of the anodic and the cathodic 
reaction, describing the symmetry of the energy barrier and the number of exchanged 
electrons. Furthermore, ‘F’ is the Faraday constant, ‘T’ is the temperature and ‘R’ is the 
gas constant [37]. 
This losses are a measure of the activity of the electrodes. They represent the overpotential 
required for the electrochemical reaction to happen. This explains how for low current 
densities activation losses are high but tend to stabilize when achieving higher values of 
this parameter since low current densities mean slow electrochemical transfer kinetics. 
 
Concentration overpotential losses are caused by the resistance to the transport of reactant 
species approaching the reaction site and the transport of product species leaving the 
reaction site. In the case of the electrolyser, this means a resistant of the species going 
through the anodic site to the cathodic site which is reinforced at high current densities 
insomuch as the capability of the mass transfer of the electrochemical device reaches a 
saturation point meaning more ions are produced and transferred than the practically 
tolerable by the cell . 
 
All this type of losses both for electrolysers and fuel cells are graphically described [38] 
in the following figures (35) and (36) respectively. It is relevant to mention the different 
operation of both systems being electrolyser devices that use energy hence have a 
negative current density and can theoretically operate at any cell voltage. In contrary, fuel 
cells do produce electricity, hence have a positive current density and are caped by the 
thermoneutral voltage. 
 
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3 
Reversible solid oxide cells (RSOCs) 
Reversible solid oxide cells (ReSOCs) are an electrochemical energy conversion 
technology that can produce both hydrogen from electricity (when working in electrolyser 
mode) and electricity from hydrogen (when working in fuel cell mode). 
 
SOEC (Solid Oxide Electrolyser) are devices that replace part of the electric energy 
required to divide water with thermal energy. A SOEC is structurally similar to a SOFC 
(Solid Oxide Fuel Cell). working in reverse (as explained in the previous section).  
 
The same working principle of the PEM electrolyser applies for the Solid Oxide ones. 
The cathode is fed in these cells with steam (water or hydrogen-water mixture) that is 
reduced, generating H2 and O2− in the cathode–electrolyte interphase. Oxide ions then 
migrate through the electrolyte (ceramic membranes in the case of the solid oxide to stand 
high operation temperatures) to the anode, where they oxidize to produce O2. 
 
The use of higher temperatures (500°C–1000°C) increases the efficiency of the solid 
oxide electrolyzer compared to other technologies by reducing the overpotentials of the 
process. To be able to deal with this high working temperatures, specific materials must 
be used for SOEC which are usually ceramic materials. One drawback of this technology 
is the need of having high temperature steam feed-in and a thermal source to carry out 
and maintain the process; this may sometimes limit the applications of this technology. 
 
All in all The RSOC is still a very promising technology for “Power to X” purposes but 
it has to reach a more mature state (lower cost, longer lifetime, improved reliability) 
before it is ready for the general power and fuel market [39]. 
 
Figure 36 : Voltage losses in fuel cell operation, [35]. 
Figure 35 : Voltage losses in electrolyser operation, [34]. 
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
4.4 
Project model 
 
This section discusses the system layout and the modeling methods and equations 
employed to simulate the operation of both SOEC and SOFC. 
The electrochemical models of both parts of the RSOC are implemented in Matlab in 
order to get the J-V characteristic of the cells, following some literature as a guide to the 
equations needed to replicate the behavior and real operation of this type of cells. In 
parallel, an experiment is carried out to obtain the characteristic curves of the RSOC in 
both modes. The ultimate aim is to fit the model implemented to the real data results in 
order to simulate the system.  
Last step is to implement all the models together (solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, wind 
and RSOC) to run the system and evaluate the results, making some adjustments if 
necessary. 
Main reference papers followed for this study are the ones found most relevant and 
accurate (according to model results) under the references [39][40][41]. 
The fundamental mechanisms of the SOEC are illustrated in figure (37).  
For these experiments, the electrolyte, cathode, and anode were made of yttria stabilized 
zirconia (YSZ), nickel–YSZ (Ni–YSZ). A mixture of YSZ and strontium and cobalt co-
doped lanthanum ferrite lanthanum and gadolinium doped ceria (LSCF–CGO), is used 
for the electrode supported solid oxide cell, the same one as in the experiment [42]. 
 
The overall electrochemical reaction in a SOEC is : 
H2O → H2 + 1
2 O2 
With the correspondent reduction and oxidation processes :  
H2O + 2e−→H2 + O2− 
O2−→1
2 O2 + 2e− 
 
This half cell reactions, then, the hydrogen production process can be understood through 
the following figure (37). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The required applied voltage of the electrolyser can be expressed as :  
V = E + ηconc,a + ηconc,c + ηact,a + ηact,c + ηohm 
Where ‘E’ is the equilibrium voltage, ‘ɳconc,a’ and ‘ɳconc,c’ are concentration overpotentials 
at anode and cathode respectively. ‘ɳact,a’ and ‘ɳact,a’ are anodic and cathodic activation 
overpotentials and ‘ɳohm’ is ohmic overpotential. 
Equilibrium voltage, following the Nernst equation can be expressed as equation ().  
Standard potential (E0) can be written as a temperature dependent function [43] : 
E0 = 1.253 −2.4516 ∙10−4T 
The equations used for concentration overpotentials are [41] : 
ηact,a = J ∙R0,ox ∙e
(Ea,ox
R∙T )aO2
−0.25 
ηact,c = J ∙R0,red ∙e
(Ea,red
R∙T )aH2
0.1 ∙aH2O
−0.33 
 
In the SOEC porous electrodes mass transport Ni is mainly by means of diffusion [44]. 
The diffusion process, which is driven by concentration gradient or partial pressure 
gradient, can be determined by Fick’s model [45]: 
 
 
 
Figure 37 : Scheme of  a SOEC operation 
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
 
  
At the cathode–electrolyte interface (x = dc, the thickness of cathode), the diffusing rate 
of H2O to the interface, equal to H2O consumption rate in a steady state, is governed by 
the electrical current density J. Thus, the mass transfer rate can  be expressed as : 
NH2O =
J
2 ∙F 
At the anode–electrolyte interface (x = da, the thickness of anode), the rate of O2 diffused 
away from the interface, equal to O2 generation rate in a steady state, is also governed by 
the electrical current density as follows : 
NO2 = −
J
4 ∙F 
 
Since molar contribution of Hydrogen and water have a relation of 1:1 in the overall cell 
reaction, also do their mass transfer rates :  
NH2 =
J
2 ∙F 
 
The concentration overpotential expressions are : 
ηconc,c = R ∙T
2 ∙F ∙ln
(
 
 
1 +
J ∙R ∙T ∙dc
2 ∙F ∙DH2O
eff ∙pH2
0
1 −
J ∙R ∙T ∙dc
2 ∙F ∙DH2O
eff ∙pH2O
0
)
 
  
ηconc,a = R ∙T
2 ∙F ∙ln [(1 +
R ∙T
DO2
eff ∙pO2
0 ∙
J
4 ∙F ∙da)
1
2
] 
 
Where ‘J’ is the current density, ‘dc’ is the cathode thickness, ‘da’ anode thickness, ‘Deff’ 
are the effective diffusion coefficients of the respective elements/compounds (H2O, H2 
and O2) and ‘p0’ are pressure at the cathode or anode boundaries respectively for hydrogen 
and oxygen. 
The electrical connecting plates and electrodes generally have much higher electrical 
conductivity than the electrolyte. Therefore, their effect on the overall ohmic 
overpotential can be neglected [46]. According to Ohm’s law, the ohmic overpotential of  
SOEC can be expressed in terms of the properties of the electrolyte by the expression : 
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
 
ηohm = 2.99 ∙10−5 ∙J ∙L ∙e(10300
T
) 
 
Where ‘L’ is the thickness of the electrolyte in μm. 
 
With this equations and the constant values presented in the table below settled, the 
model J-V fitting of the SOEC and SOFC is presented in the figures (38) and (39). 
 
Polarization reduction resistance factor 
R0,red (ꭥ/cm2) 
1.9E-10 
Polarization oxidation resistance factor 
R0,ox (ꭥ/cm2) 
1.9E-10 
Cell area 
Acell (m2) 
1.6E-3 
Charge transfer coefficient 
α (-) 
0.5 
Fuel electrode porosity 
εfuel (-) 
0.3 
Oxygen electrode porosity 
εox (-) 
0.2 
Nickel tortuosity 
τNi (-) 
5.55 
YSZ tortuosity 
τYSZ (-) 
2.23 
Anode thickness 
da (m) 
3E-5 
Cathode thickness 
dc (m) 
1E-5 
Electrolyte thickness 
L (m) 
1.5E-5 
 
 
 
Table 6 : Pre-defined values used for the modelling of the SOEC and SOFC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 38 : Model fitting of the SOEC 
Figure 39 : Model fitting of the SOFC 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
As it can be extracted from the figures above, red curves represent the real experimental 
data J-V curves and blue curves represent the model. Ohmic losses are represented in 
violet, activation losses in orange and concentration losses in yellow. 
For the SOEC the fitting is almost perfectly aligned to all the curve but for a slight 
deviation at high current densities that could be explained by saturation of the mass 
transport through the cell or simply by a concentration overpotential expression that could 
be refined. Either way the operating point of the SOEC is set to be at -1A/cm2 and 1.08V 
where both curves do fit perfectly.  
SOFC instead could not be fully tight-fitted for reasons that escape to understanding, 
probably due to starvation effects but again this happens just at high current densities and 
the chosen operating point for the SOFC is set at 1A/cm2 and 0.81V. 
Once the system is modeled, next step is to size it since it will operate a real situation 
where energy needs are fluctuating hourly depending on each specific situation. 
For this purpose an analysis of the total excess energy is done. It is understood as excess 
energy that energy surplus that comes from the equation : 
Eexcess = Esolar + Ewind – Ehouses – EHW – Eaux 
This energy is represented in the time resolution of the model, in an hourly basis and it is 
the total renewables production minus the households consumption, the hot water deficit 
explained in chapter (2.3) and all the auxiliary systems, if used, at that specific hour such 
as pumps or heaters. 
The hour of the year with a maximum excess energy has 1.25 MWh.  
The average excess hourly energy during the year is 0.41MWh. 
Despite sizing the SOEC to 0.75MWh will take into consideration the 87.7% of the yearly 
excess hours of production if a further study is carried on it can be seen how low energy 
hours as well as energy lost due to the cap of the sizing of the system play a crucial role 
when it comes to determining what is the optimal solution that minimizes the losses. 
The system technical characteristics are : stacks of 30 cells and modules of 30 stacks, 
accounting for a total of 900 cells per module. This configuration allows the existing 
system to feed the energy needs at the SOEC operating point of 1A/cm2 and 1.08V. 
 
Hence, each module will have a rated power of : 
PSOEC−module = 30 cells
stack ∙30 stacks
module ∙1 A
cm2 cell ∙16 cm2
cell ∙1.08V = 15.55kW 
 
To optimize the  number of modules to use to minimize losses three parameters have been 
taken into account : the number of modules used according to the hourly excess 
production, the number of modules in standby mode which represent the design modules 
minus the ones that are operating at that specific hour that do consume some energy and 
the number of modules that could have been used that the design number is capping it, 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
for instance one hour with an excess energy of 1MWh could feed 64 of this modules but 
the design study goes from 20 to 45 modules as presented in the following figure (40). 
The results show the relation between the net number of SOEC modules used in an hourly 
time resolution along the year minus the correspondent standby modules and non-used 
modules because of a lower power design (cap sized modules) for different amount of 
model configurations : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Optimization gives an optimal value of 31 modules and 15934 net module use in order to 
minimize the amount of not produced energy along the year. This number gives a total 
amount of 27900 cells and a design capacity of 0.482MWh contrary to the first approach 
of 0.75MWh which corresponds to a number of 48 modules with a total of -9913 net 
module use meaning that along the year the energy on standby mode and oversizing of 
the system will overcome the own production capacity.  
 
A similar approach is done for the SOFC, maximum hourly energy deficit of the year is -
0.51MWh and average hourly deficit is 0.2MWh. Since the overall aim of the project is 
to feed the energy needs during all of the hours of the year, the system is sized to the 
highest deficit hour at a power of 0.51 MW. Then : 
  
Pcell = Jcell ∙Acell ∙Vcell = 1 A
cm2 ∙16cm2 ∙0.81V = 12.96W 
 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Net modules-hour use
Total number of modeules
Number of SOEC modules optimization
Figure 40 : Number of SOEC modules use optimization for a given module power 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
Ncells−SOFC =
Pdesign
Pcell
= 510000W
12.96W = 39351.8 ≈39600 
If the SOFC is grouped as the SOEC configuration, in modules of 30 stacks of 30 cells, 
a total amount of 44 modules are then needed. 
 
The total SOFC system reacting flow rate for the 39600 cells is : 
 
nTOT_react = nreact ∙39600 =
I
2 ∙F ∙39600 = A ∙J
2 ∙F ∙39400 =
1 A
cm2 ∙16cm2
2 ∙96485 C
mol
∙39600 = 
3.28 mol
s
= 23.5 kg
h  
 
However, the inlet flow rate factor relies on the conversion ratio of hydrogen, 
characteristic of the own fuel cell.  It has a value around 80-90% [47]. 
 
nTOT_in_H2 = nTOT_react
CR
= 3.28
0.8 = 4.1 mol
s
= 29.52 kg
h  
 
The corresponding power on the Power-nreact graph to the flow of 3.27 mol/s is 0.55MWh 
in an hour, hence 0.55MW, then the harvestable energy per kilogram of reacting hydrogen 
is : 
Ekg−H2 = 550kWh
29.52kgH2
= 18.63 kWh
kgH2
 
 
Figure 41 : SOFC system power versus total hydrogen reacting 
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
According to [48][49] typical value of fuel to electricity efficiency of SOFC’s is 60% 
meaning that in the energy content of 1 kg of hydrogen of 120 MJ/kg [50] or 33.33 
kWh/kg the typical usable quantity is a 60% of it hence 20kWh/kg which resembles very 
much with the results obtained. 
 
The discrepancy on the number of modules to use for the SOEC operating mode (31) and 
SOFC mode (44) can be tackled by two different approaches. Either there are installed 31 
rSOC’s and 13 SOFC’s alone or it its implemented an approach of following the initial 
purpose of the project by using only rSOC’s hence using 44 modules containing both 
SOEC and SOFC. 
This operating design is not the optimal from the point of view of the SOEC as explained 
in the previous page and seen in figure (40). However, the approach of only operating 31 
rSOC’s will produce a lack of energy demand meeting for 320 hours a year which will 
then remove the off-grid capability of this project. 
In addition, future developments and improvements of the model are given in the chapter 
7 of this document. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Project model 
 
5.1Aspen model 
Aspen Hysys is a software that simulates chemical processes. It is used for the purpose 
of the whole system modelling. The main aim of this model is to provide with an insight 
on whether the system flows are feasible to achieve with the current energy production 
data. Additional parameters such as auxiliary consumption of other devices than the main 
ones (e.g rSOC) are also taken into account for the calculations. Aspen is coupled with 
matlab codes so every change made in the solar PV, wind, SOEC or SOFC models are 
recognized by aspen changing the system parameters such as flow rates, temperatures, 
compositions or auxiliary energy consumption to find the new operating point. 
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
 
The following figure, represents the most basic sketch of the project model : 
 
 
 
The layout represents in orange squares the main key components of the system energy 
flow. Dashed lines represent heating flows and straight lines represent energy/materials 
flows.  
Orange lines represent the main priority level, meaning that electrical needs and heating 
needs of the households are the priority to feed all time. Blue and green lines are at the 
secondary level which depend on the excess of energy from the priority level to start 
producing hydrogen (SOEC) or energy (SOFC). The blue lines represent the SOEC 
operation and the green lines the SOFC one. 
The principle operation is as follows : all the time that solar PV, thermal and wind energy 
can cover the hourly demand they do so, recirculating all the excess energy if there is, to 
the SOEC system. All of this hours with excess energy the SOEC system produces 
hydrogen that is compressed to be stored in a tank. 
The hours that energy from the wind and solar parks cannot fully cover the electricity and 
hot water demand, SOFC starts operating with the previously stored hydrogen in the tank 
to top-up the rest of the energy needs. 
The connection between the solar PV and thermal fields is explained by the figure (24). 
Some of the hours of the year, the hot water demand temperature is not fully covered with 
a total discrepancy of around 4.7 MWh/year. This deficit is covered by the solar field, 
supplying this extra energy to heat water stored in the tank in the periods of excess solar 
PV energy in order to reduce this deficit to 0. 
 
 
Figure 42 : Basic layout of the project model 
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
Aspen provides a deeper look into the system model, with all the energy and material 
streams, modelled systems plus every device needed to carry out the whole system 
operation. Due to its length, it is divided in 4 different consecutive stages presented in the 
figures following :  
 
 
First stage of the system represents the electrolyser mode. A mix of Hydrogen and water 
mixture at ambient temperature and pressure in feed into the system. This mix contains a 
10% molar weight of hydrogen, this solution is commonly applied in Solid Oxide 
Electrolysers since it partly avoids the Nickel oxide (NiO) formation in the electrodes in 
the Nickel-based (YSZ) support and fuel electrode. Inlet flow of both streams are 3.86 
mol/s of H2O and 0.429 mol/s of H2 respectively that add up to 4.29 mol/s. This flow is 
obtained through the equations : 
 
nH2Oin =
nreact
SCR ∙Ncells =
I
2∙F
0.85 ∙Ncells =
1 A
cm2∙16cm2
2∙96485 C
mol
0.85
∙39600 = 3.86 
mol
s  H2O  
 
        nH2in = nH2Oin ∙
0.1
0.9 = 0.429 
mol
s  H2  
 
Where SCR represents the steam-conversion rate of the steam into Hydrogen. 
 
Figure 43 : First stage of Aspen system modelling 
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
The operating point of the SOEC is at a current density of 1A/cm2 and a voltage of 1.08V. 
At this conditions alone (no external heat supplied and air ratio of 1), the electrolyser 
outlet temperature is 264ºC which represents a high risk of cell cracking since the 
operating temperature of the electrolyser must be around 800ºC. For this reason the air 
inlet must be increased in order to provoke a higher O2 reaction in the electrolyser leading 
to higher temperatures. However if this air inlet flow is increased too much, the power 
needed to heat it becomes too large to make the system feasible. An optimal value 
between an inlet air flow of 3 mol/s and a hot plate under the rSOC supplying 0.179 
W/cell provides an outlet temperature of 764ºC which is within the 800 ± 100ºC 
maximum threshold for a safe SOEC operation. 
Outlet flows for the whole system, of Hydrogen and water are 3.71 and 0.58 mol/s 
respectively. 
Start-up of the system requires an initial amount of energy for the heaters to heat the mix 
up to the inlet value of the SOEC. After the start-up, SOEC outlet streams are recirculated 
to harvest their energy content in a heat exchanger so as to pre-heat the inlet mix reducing 
this way the amount of power needed in the inlet heater.  
In nominal operation, SOEC outlet mix of H2 and H2O is recirculated to a heat exchanger 
with the inlet flow, the inlet flow increases its temperature from 19ºC to 93ºC and the 
outlet SOEC flow reduces it from 764ºC to 52ºC. Oxygen outlet of the SOEC is used for 
the same purpose, pre-heating the inlet air flow from ambient temperature to 500ºC. 
After the recirculation of both streams through heat exchangers to recover outlet heat, the 
nominal value of the heater for the system are 29.43kW for the air inlet, 102.7kW for the 
SOEC inlet and 7.1kW for the hot plate heater. 
 
 
Stage 2 of the aspen system represents the SOEC outlet cooling, conversion to pure 
hydrogen and first step of the hydrogen compression. 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
56 
 
 
A cooler reduces the temperature of the mix flow from 52ºC to 30ºC to feed the separator. 
In this separator two streams are obtained, pure water in the bottom side and a mix of 
95.8% pure hydrogen in the upper side.  
For optimal fuel cell operation this mix is pass through another splitter which finishes to 
split the two streams providing with pure H2 outlet at 25ºC, 1 bar and 3.71 mol/s flow rate 
and more water. 
A compression of the hydrogen must be carried out in order to store it, otherwise storing 
it at ambient pressure will occupy a non economically viable tank volume. The main idea 
is to store it at 30 bars but after some year-around calculations the chosen value to store 
the hydrogen is set to 159 bars since type I hydrogen tanks can stand up to 200 bars 
storage [51]. 
This compression could be done either in a direct step or in several compression steps. 
The advantage of doing it in several steps is that the flow temperature increase is 
controlled whereas compressing hydrogen directly from 1 bar to 159 bar will require a 
huge amount of energy to compress and cool down. 
The first compression is done with a pressure ratio of 3, meaning the outlet hydrogen is 
at 3 bar and a temperature of 175ºC. The flow is cooled down every step before going to 
the next compression stage. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 44 : Layout of the second stage of the Aspen system model 
==PAGE:58==
57 
 
 
 
Several steps of compression-cooling of the hydrogen are done with pressure ratios of 3:1 
and a final one of 2:1 to keep the temperature increase controlled. The final result is a 
flow of 3.71 mol/s of H2 at 23ºC and 159 bar that go directly into the tanks to store. 
 
Final stage of the model represents  the SOFC operation from the Hydrogen tank to end 
user. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 45 : Layout of the third stage of the Aspen system model 
Figure 46 : Layout of the fourth stage of the Aspen system model 
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
Hydrogen is stored at 159 bars to optimize store volume but to operate the fuel cell it has 
to be highly reduced. A control valve is used for this purpose reducing the pressure of the 
stream to the desired value, 1 bar in the case of the simulation.  
The hour of the year with the highest energy demand is hour 3900 with 0.513MWh of 
energy deficit. According to what calculated on chapter 4, 1kg of reacting hydrogen for 
this system produces 18.63 kWh, this makes a total amount of 27.54kg of H2 to react to 
produce this energy. Hence, input hydrogen has to be 20% higher if a conversion rate of 
80% is assumed.  
Maximum hydrogen hourly flow rate at which the valve is to supply for the year is then 
34,43 kg/h or 4,78 mol/s. However the yearly average SOFC feed in flow rate is just 1.92 
mol/s. 
SOFC inlet temperature, as for the SOEC, has to be around 800ºC hence it is operated the 
same way as it. Once the system is running, the outlet hydrogen, which represents about 
a 20% of the inlet flow, is burnt in a conversion reactor with air reaching 2028ºC and 
recirculated to a heat exchanger where the inlet hydrogen is heated up to the operating 
temperature of 800ºC. 
Air ratio is set to 10 in order to have operative Oxygen outlet temperatures, with this air 
ratio the temperature is 904ºC under the SOFC cell operating conditions of 1A/cm2, 0.81V 
and air ratio of 1. Another heat exchanger is placed for the air inlet flow so it gets to 800ºC 
with the recirculated hot nitrogen outlet flow rate. 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2 
Community consumption profile 
 
A total amount of 2500 inhabitants is chosen for the community to model. Both energy 
and hot water needs are covered during every single hour of the year. This amount of 
people is a rough estimation for 2MW of installed renewable capacity and could be further 
increased or decreased to study the scalability of the system. 
 
Energy consumption profiles have a geographical nature, countries in higher latitudes 
tend to consume more heating energy during winter time than countries near the equator. 
Humanity energy consumption behavior is also a parameter that, despite having a 
common factor of a modern lifestyle, can vary from country to country as different 
cultures may lead to unalike energy consumption profiles.  
 
==PAGE:60==
59 
 
This model has taken into account Spanish solar radiation and wind speed, precisely from 
the island of Gran Canaria. The same data for energy consumption must be taken from a 
reliable local energy resource in order to model the inhabitants consumption profile. 
The national electrical grid operator is the most reliable source that can be consulted and 
has indeed, the energy demand and consumption data for the specific location of Gran 
Canaria [52]. The daily electrical energy demand for the whole system including 
industries, households and services is presented in the following figures : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 47 : Energy demand profile of Gran Canaria on the 15th of January 2022 
Figure 48 : Energy demand profile of Gran Canaria on the 15th of May 2022 
Figure 49 : Energy demand profile of Gran Canaria on the 15th of July 2022 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Four demand curve graphs have been analyzed in order to determine a more accurate 
model of the canarian demand energy consumption profile. Both for the 4 seasons, the 
days 15th of January, May, July and November are taken as representative days of the 
respective winter, spring, summer and autumn to tackle the seasonality effect on the 
demand side. It can be seen how these curves do have a shape where peak consumption 
occurs for every season at 9:00 a.m, 13:00 a.m and 9:00 p.m. 
Nonetheless, this curves do represent the total energy of all the sectors in the respective 
island. To determine the residential energy consumption profile, consumption has to be 
split into its respective components of residential, industrial and services. IDAE (Energy 
Saving and Diversification Institute) is the second reference resource in matter of energy 
in Spain- They provide all information related to the energy from real data to advices and 
public available information regarding the energy sector [53]. 
 
Looking into the publication of the IDAE [54] the following figure can be extracted : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This figure confirms the identical resemblance of the “duck shape” into the residential 
sector being also very similar for the services and having industry as a base load energy 
demanding. 
Figure 50 : Energy demand profile of Gran Canaria on the 15th of November 2022 
Figure 51 : Spanish energy consumption profile for residential, industrial and services 
==PAGE:62==
61 
 
Once the trend to fit is determined, real energy requirements are needed to make the 
calculations of energy consumption both for electricity and hot water demand for each 
person in the community. 
Yearly electrical consumption for the average family of 3 members in Spain is obtained 
trough the webpage of the national grid operator and amounts to roughly 3300 kWh/year 
meaning a person consumption is around 1100kWh/year. This could vary between 
different locations since it is an average but the value used for the model is 3500kWh/year 
for a 3 member family hence 1167kWh/year per person. 
The hourly distribution of the energy demand of each person of the community must then 
follow the fitted curve obtained from the grid operator. A simple approximation of the 
hourly energy demand per person is done taking into account the ambient temperature 
and a weighted percentage of energy contribution according to the hour of the day and 
the fitted curve of the residential energy demand profile. 
As an example one person consumes a minimum daily energy of 2.5kWh the 27th of 
August in the year and a maximum of 4.1kWh the day 23 of January. 
The total yearly electricity demand of the 2500 people community adds up to 2.946 GWh.  
It is essential to mention that this electricity demand does not take into account the hot 
water demand energy needs which represents according to IDAE an equivalent average 
47% of the total demand of a household electricity. This hot water demand is not covered 
by electricity but solar thermal power as explained in chapter 2.3 . 
The energy demand profile per person during the year is presented below : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Daily consumption per person (MWh)
Day of the year
Energy demand profile
Figure 52 : Energy demand profile of one person during the year in MWh 
==PAGE:63==
62 
 
5.3 System model and balancing, hydrogen storage 
 
Complete system consists on the solar photovoltaic plant together with the wind plant that 
produce electricity for the household needs. Excess energy goes directly to the SOEC to 
produce hydrogen that will be stored in the tank at 159 bar. Parallelly, hot water needs 
are fully covered by the solar thermal system and some deficit amount of energy, almost 
negligible, covered by the renewables to fulfill the 100% of the demand. When sun and 
wind power are not enough to cover hourly demand, SOFC starts operating with the 
hydrogen from the tank producing electricity to cover the needs. This system is ideally 
balanced working 24 hours a day 7 days a week for the whole year covering all the 
nowadays human basic energetic needs with no need of being connected to the grid. 
The ultimate step of this project is to demonstrate whether this is a plausible objective to 
achieve or further improvements should be carried before it can become a reality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some specific days are shown in detail in the figures below. This days correspond to the 
15th of January, April, July and October in order to have a reference of how much 
seasonality influences the energy production and consumption. 
 
 
Figure 52 : Whole community energy demand profile with solar, wind and net energy profiles 
altogether in a single plot 
==PAGE:64==
63 
 
 
 
 
Solar resource proves to be consistently good along the year meanwhile wind energy 
performs worse with some hours were mean windspeed is under 3m/s meaning under the 
cut-in speed hence not producing energy.  
 
This picture gathers all but the solar thermal model. Orange lines represent the hourly 
solar PV energy production, blue ones do so for the wind power, black lines plot the 
energy demand profile and the dashed violet lines represent the hourly net energy, 
meaning with net energy the difference between the sum of solar and wind production 
minus the energy demand at a specific hour. 
Every violet line under the “0” level represents a deficit of energy at that hour hence an 
hour where the SOFC will operate. On the other side, every violet point over the “0” level 
means an excess of energy at that specific hour in which SOEC will operate with that 
extra energy. 
Figure 52a : System behavior on the 15th January 
Figure 52b : System behavior on the 15th April 
Figure 52c : System behavior on the 15th July 
Figure 52d : System behavior on the 15th October 
==PAGE:65==
64 
 
The idea is simple but tackling, having a net zero energy balance around the year. This 
is, being able to fulfill the 100% of electricity demand at every single hour of the year 
with no exemption.  
To model the system, not only the excess energy and demand energy can be taken into 
account. Pumps, compressors, heaters, reactors, coolers to name some of the devices 
implied on rSOC operation do consume energy. Additionally, it is crucial to consider the 
system operation details at every hour regarding all the constraints, for instance, an hour 
with an excess energy of 1MWh and a following hour with a value of 0.4 MWh do not 
compromise the same to the system.  
The system is then analyzed every single hour to make the perfect balance between the 
“gross” excess energy directly coming from wind an solar parks that has to be filtered 
before it reaches the SOEC. 
As an example one hour with an excess energy of 0.5MWh is capable of directly produce 
enough energy to feed : 
Modules −fed =
500kW
15.55
kW
module
= 32.15 
32 fully fed modules of the SOEC and 2.33kW of extra energy. However this is not the 
energy that will receive the SOEC since many other components need energy to make the 
system work.  
The system energy balance is made taking into account : 
- 
Excess energy from solar and wind parks. 
- 
Energy needed to heat the inlet flows of air and H2-H2O or H2 for SOEC and 
SOFC respectively. 
- 
Energy needed for the hot plate of the SOEC heating. 
- 
Energy needed for the standby cells when the SOEC or the SOFC is not fully 
operating due to excess hourly energies lower than the peak design one. 
- 
Energy needed for the splitter in SOEC operation 
- 
Energy needed for the hydrogen compressors when operating in SOEC mode. 
- 
Energy needed for the cooling of compressed hydrogen with a cooling tower with 
a COP=6 [55] when operating is SOEC mode. 
 
The average reduction of the available net energy to feed the SOEC after all the system 
energy flows are considered is a 40%. This means that if a random hour with excess 
energy production with 0.5MWh could directly give 19.6 kg/h of hydrogen, after all the 
auxiliary consumptions this value is reduced to 11.9 kg/h of final real produced hydrogen. 
A code has been implemented to evaluate for every hour, what is the operating side of the 
rSOC, hence how many modules are operating, how many are on standby and what is the 
inlet flow hence the heaters and coolers load. For the SOFC operation the same applies. 
 It is relevant to mention that due to unfeasible high heating values in the standby mode, 
a modification of the flow to one tenth of the nominal flow for the SOEC and SOFC is 
==PAGE:66==
65 
 
applied. Calculation of the heating requirements is done with this standby flow which is 
this way an acceptable number that makes the system working without making it 
unfeasible to operate. 
 
After the model is run and due to the nature of the energy profile, the need of grid energy 
comes up which leads to a direct conclusion, there is a need of an initial reservoir of 
energy. This reservoir could be a battery, could be oversizing the parks or could be in the 
own hydrogen form. An optimization is carried out to have the minimum initial quantity 
of hydrogen reserves in order to achieve the zero hours a year with an energy deficit. 
The model gives a value of 9.68 tones of Hydrogen to initially have in tanks at the pressure 
of 159 bar to meet the targets of the project. The production and consumption of this 
hydrogen along the year respective to SOEC and SOFC operation is displayed in the 
following figure :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The conclusion extracted from this analysis is that it is required to have an initial quantity 
of 9.68 tons of hydrogen. After the year operation of the system, consuming in times of 
energy deficit and producing when there is energy surplus with all the auxiliaries into 
account the remaining hydrogen in the tanks is 10.6 tones which means that, theoretically 
after one year the system is able to continue running on its own and still have a margin of 
9.5% of extra hydrogen stored every year. 
This results just confirms the possibility of building such a system and making it work at 
least, under this project description conditions. 
The highest quantity Hydrogen to store during the year is 21.9 tones which represents a 
total volume at 159 bar of 1669 m3 which can be stored in 7 tanks of 250 m3 each [56]. 
 
 
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
1
401
801
1201
1601
2001
2401
2801
3201
3601
4001
4401
4801
5201
5601
6001
6401
6801
7201
7601
8001
8401
Tons of H2 in tank
Hour of the year
Figure 53 : Hourly Hydrogen storage along the year in the system in tons 
==PAGE:67==
66 
 
5.4 
Further energy uses and model improvements 
 
Since the excess hydrogen in the storage represents roughly 920kg and many issues can 
happen during the year in such a big and complex system, leaving it on the tanks is the 
best solution since using it for other applications will not have a big potential benefit. 
If the system is improved in any way and the hydrogen storage increases enough, another 
community could be started and fed with this excess hydrogen from the first community. 
This will create a symbiosis system in which every year each system gives the possibility 
to a new one to start supplying the needed initial hydrogen. 
Some other literature shows weather forecasting models [57]. That could improve the 
realistic analysis of the working system and anticipate to events not taken into account in 
a static analysis of the model with past yearly data. 
A better demand profile could be implemented with regards to more accurate equations 
that follow more precisely the energy consumption behavior. 
Further research and improvements on SOEC, SOFC and rSOC will represent for sure an 
upgrade in the overall system efficiency making it to produce more hydrogen and 
consume less auxiliary energy leading to a net improvement of the whole system. 
A solar thermal model could be implemented and compare it to the existing polysun one 
to contrast whether they are close enough and which one represents better the reality 
according to the model run results. 
Coupling this system to other energy sources as geothermal energy which provides both 
heat an electricity could be an ideal match for the rSOC. 
Other type of electrolysers and fuel cells such as the promising AEM (Anion Exchange 
Membrane) electrolyser could be implemented in the model to see if they perform better 
than the actual solid oxide one. 
Alternative ways of storing hydrogen could be studied as in organic compounds and 
evaluate whether they are more cost-effective than the actual pressurized tank storage 
for different storage volumes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
67 
 
6 Economical analysis 
 
All the following economical analysis are based on several references and have some 
simplifications and assumptions behind. The overall idea is to give a preliminary insight 
on whether this model could be economically feasible to implement under real operation 
circumstances and which could be the most costly part of it. This may reveal possible 
future pathways to follow as changing the type of energy storage technology or changing 
the location of some of the renewable energy plants. 
 
6.1 Solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, wind and rSOC systems 
A realistic economical analysis of the solar photovoltaic plant is made since I work for a 
company in charge of solar parks, some with the same type of inverters, panels and 
transformers as this installation. In addition, location of the plant is south of Italy with a 
very similar radiation to the one of the project solar PV model.  
The costs of the different parts of the plant as well as well as the soft costs as permits, 
grid connection, delivery times and so on are subject to every country specific 
characteristics so the presented values are a realistic estimation but not a 100% accurate 
value to assume as complete truth. 
 
 
Costs (€) 
Quantity (units) 
Total (€) 
Panels 
200 
2520 
504000 
Inverters 
5700 
9 
51300 
Combiner boxes 
100 
90 
9000 
Transformer 
8000 
1 
8000 
Wiring 
7 
20000 
140000 
Standing 
1000 
90 
90000 
Grid connection 
20000 
1 
20000 
Security system 
20000 
1 
20000 
Permitting 
15000 
1 
15000 
Construction 
1108800 
1 
1108800 
                       Table  7 : Costs of the solar PV plant different components and total costs 
 
The CAPEX of the plant amounts to a total of 1851300 € which represents a unitary cost 
of 1.67M€/MW installed. Since it is a very small installed capacity (1.1MW), unitary 
costs are higher than a big utility scale plant on the range of 100-300MW. According to 
Wood Mackenzie consultants typical values of residential PV are around 3€/W, dropping 
to 1.6€/W if done as commercial rooftop and 1€/W when the project is an utility scale of 
minimum 100MW [58]. 
OPEX costs are estimated to be a 1% of the CAPEX cost in a yearly basis. This costs 
cover from O&M to technician salaries, site inspection or modules cleaning. 
==PAGE:69==
68 
 
A life time of the different solar PV, thermal, wind and rSOC of 30 years has been 
estimated together with system degradation along the years meaning lower unitary 
production every year after the start of the plant operation. 
An average interest rate of 6% has been assumed as an acceptable value since this 
parameter will be influenced by current economic situation and different country and 
banks economic politics. This value ranges usually from 3% to 10% but could be at a 0% 
or even 18% value under specific circumstances [59][60][61]. 
An initial investment of a 30% is also assumed for every project and again can vary due 
to several conditions. This is a value taken from a real solar Italian PV park currently 
operating so it is extrapolated to the project model. 
 
For the wind project an estimated value of 1.3M€ CAPEX has been chosen for the 1MW 
turbine according to [62][63] and an O&M costs of 3% since the maintaining costs of the 
wind power exceed the solar PV in a rate of about 3 times [64]. Yearly production of the 
turbine is 2.88GWh. 
 
For the solar thermal project an estimated CAPEX of 1.5M€ and an OPEX of 2% are 
estimated since the system needs the water-glycol mixture as a “fuel cost” and has more 
parts such as pumps, tank, piping, expansion valve to name some, increasing operational 
costs compared to the photovoltaic technology. The cost of the energy is measured on the 
heat generated instead of the electricity since the system is providing hot water as an 
energetic outlet. The formula used for the LCOH (Levelized Cost Of Heat)[65] is : 
 
LCOH = 
I0 −S0 + ∑Ct ∙(1 −TR) −DEPt ∙TR
(1 + r)t
−
RV
(1 + r)t
t
1
∑
Et
(1 + r)t
t
1
 
 
I0 is the initial investment in €, S0 are subsidies and incentives assumed as 0, Ct are O&M 
costs in €, TR is corporate tax rate assumed to be 35% according to [66], DEPt is the asset 
depreciation in €/year, RV is the residual value assumed to be 0, Et is the final energy in 
kWh/year, r the discount rate and t the number of years of analysis. LCOH as the LCOE 
is also expressed in €/kWh. Obtained values are compared with [65][67] and look slightly 
underestimated regarding the IEA [65] and [67] values around 44-60€/MWh. 
 
For the rSOC system a deeper analysis is developed because of the availability of 
information about different costs of the plant parts. 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
69 
 
 
Quantity (units) 
Price per unit (€) 
Total price (€) 
rSOC cell 
39600 
800/m2 
50688 
H2 tank 
7 
50000 
350000 
Cooler 
5 
725 
3625 
Heater 
5 
140/m2 
18620 
Blower 
4 
10000 
40000 
Compressor 
5 
90000 
450000 
Heat exchanger 
5 
44800 
223943 
Splitter 
1 
280000 
280000 
Conversion reactor 
1 
100000 
100000 
Initial H2 
1 
19000 
1900 
Auxiliary devices 
1 
10% of CAPEX 
155446 
Table  8 : Costs of the rSOC plant different components and total costs 
 
 
Cell cost is obtained from [68] where current technology development has a cell cost of 
about 800€/m2. Hydrogen tank cost is estimated from retailers [69] and to be in the range 
of 50000€ for a 250m3 159 bar tank. Cooler costs are estimated through the formula in 
[70] : 
Ccooler = 22.582 ∙Qcool + 1924.6 
 
Where Ccooler is the cost of the cooler and Qcool the capacity of the cooler in kW. 
Similarly, heater costs are estimated through  as a value of 140€/kW. 
For the heat exchangers, total area is calculated from Aspen model and then costs are 
estimated according to this area through [71]. Overall heat transfer coefficient of 40W/m2 
is used from the tables of gas & liquid tubular heating. UA value from Aspen is divided 
by U to get the area that is then used to estimate the costs as : 
Chx = 30000 + 1000 ∗Ahx
0.81 
Being Chx the total heat exchangers cost and Ahx the total heat exchangers area. 
The costs of the initial hydrogen needed to be stored in the tank to fully operate with no 
interruption during the year is calculated base on [72] with natural gas reforming method 
to obtain the hydrogen. 
Splitter and compressor costs are calculated based on [73] as : 
IF ∙CO ∙(Sr
S0
)
sf
 
Where IF, C0, Sr, S0 and sf are Indirect cost factor, basic equipment cost, actual capacity, 
base capacity and cost scaling factor respectively. All the data is provided in the appendix 
of the paper and costs are calculated based on the capacity of the project splitter and 
compressor capacities. 
==PAGE:71==
70 
 
Four economical parameters are studied in order to verify the economic feasibility of each 
type of technology and of the project itself. The parameters are : NPV (Net Present 
Value), IRR (Internal Rate of Return), PP (Payback Period) and LCOE (Levelized cost 
of energy). 
Cash flows of the four technologies are calculated an presented under Appendix B. 
 
The formulas that describe this parameters are :  
 
NPV = ∑
CFt
(1 + r)t
t
1
 
 
 Being t the year, r the discount rate and CFt the net cash flow in the year “t”. It is used to 
determine the actual value of the future cashflow that the project will generate, a positive 
value means a project is attractive for investors, the higher the value the more profits the 
project is to get. 
 
IRR → NPV = 0 
 
The internal rate of return is a parameter obtained when the net present value is equal to 
zero. It represents an arithmetic average of the future expected returns on an investment 
together with the opportunity of re-investing. 
 
PP = I0
ACF 
 
I0 is the initial investment an ACF is the Annual Cash Flows. This parameter shows the 
time needed to recover the initial investment of a project. 
 
LCOE =
∑
It + OMt + Ft
(1 + r)t
30
1
∑
Et
(1 + r)t
30
1
 
 
Being It the yearly investment expenditures, OMt the operation and maintenance 
expenditures in a year and Ft fuel expenditures (if any) in a year. Et is electricity 
generation in a year, t is the number of years and r is the discount rate. LCOE itself is not 
==PAGE:72==
71 
 
a useful parameter but it is used to compare different types of technologies or even 
geographical locations. Then this parameter can tell which of the technologies is more 
economically-efficient producing electricity/heat or even which location has a better 
resource for specific types of technologies to produce more energy at a lower price. 
 
LCOE and NPV formulas could be confused to be very similar, indeed they are to some 
point, however their behavior against the economical parameter of interest rate is easily 
seen when plotting them in the same graph. LCOE increases with a higher interest rate 
which is something negative for the system and NPV does the opposite, it decreases with 
increasing interest rate which means less economic power that a project has. Hence 
interest rate will be a parameter to be kept as low as possible for any project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eventually, the results of the economical parameters of each part of the project is 
presented in the following table : 
 
 
Solar PV 
Solar thermal 
Wind 
rSOC 
NPV (M€) 
1.84 
0.69 
2.89 
0.56 
IRR (%) 
38 
29 
66 
23 
PP (years) 
2.5 
6.3 
1.5 
7.1 
LCOE (€/MWh) 
31.1 
34.0 
26.0 
59.1 
 
Results show a clear more economically-wise advantageous technology, wind energy, 
with the lowest PP and LCOE and highest IRR and NPV, followed by solar PV, solar 
thermal and lastly the rSOC system. This results agree to what was expected and are 
subject to variation according to the specific economical parameters, situation and 
calculations carried on in regards to one or another model or having different investment 
costs, CAPEX or OPEX costs due to any constraints. 
Figure 54 : Comparison between LCOE and NPV behavior against interest 
rate 
==PAGE:73==
72 
 
Nevertheless, from a general point of view this results resemble the reality in which solar 
PV is close by wind energy in terms of economically attractive technology to invest in 
and in terms of produced energy price. Solar thermal is subject to a more fractionated 
demand and has more technology implied in the construction, that could be the reason 
why it performs worse than the similar photovoltaic technology. rSOC is the less 
attractive system of all in terms of investing but still has very good electricity prices 
compared to the nowadays values. A key factor for the LCOE value of the rSOC system 
is its variability between SOEC/SOFC operation and the losses occurring in form of heat, 
and imperfect electrochemical processes that can however be further improved having a 
direct impact on the LCOE making the system more efficient in terms of energy produced 
per unit of energy input. 
 
 
Total LCOE of the plant is calculated as :  
 
                         LCOEtot =
∑
CAPEXtot+OPEXtot
(1+r)t
30
1
∑
Etot
(1+r)t
30
1
=
6471201€ + 3717330€
202156MWh
= 50.4
€
MWh  
 
An overall very reasonable and competitive value for such a small sized system that will 
improve if scaled up to the order of the hundreds of megawatts project. [74] 
Capacity factor of the rSOC is not stablished to 1 but treated differently in SOEC 
operation and SOFC operation mode, otherwise the LCOE turns a non-realistic value. An 
average capacify factor of 0.38 for the SOFC and 0.62 for the SOEC is obtained if looking 
at the hourly values on a year basis. However, the real CF of the rSOC system turns 0.24 
of its real capacity of energy production. 
 As an LCOE estimation,  the LCOE of the system is not the add of the different LCOE’s 
of the technologies since the total capacity considered is different for both the economical 
parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
73 
 
 
 
 
7 Conclusions 
 
The adoption of systems for energy storage is growing substantially and rSOC is a proven 
efficient alternative for the energy sector, helping to increase resiliency and reliability of 
the grids and avoiding energy losses. This project aimed to demonstrate, for a pre-
determined chosen location, the viability of an hybrid system with renewable energies 
and a rSOC system to provide a solid and reliable energy source for an experimental 
period of time.  
The key factor of the system results to be the smooth work among the different 
technologies in an armonized way and coupled with no interferences between each other. 
Results of simulations and models do show that this purpose is an achievable target with 
a promising future in the energy sector.  
Excess energy from any energy source can be transformed to another type of energy such 
as chemical energy in batteries or rSOC systems. The highest the efficiency and the lowest 
the cost the better. rSOC is improving steadily along the years and could provide in the 
near future with the ultimate solution for this type of energy applications. 
On the other side, the breakdown of the economical analysis shows how this technology 
is not yet competitive enough compared to the mature solar and wind power but with the 
feature of being capable to store the energy that at some point would otherwise be wasted. 
Capital costs of this type of installations account for more than a half of the LCOE cost, 
making it the most important component to research and develop to bring this 
technologies costs down. 
Future working ideas could include an IA to control the system in an automatized way 
and on real time, second by second. Optimizing for every time step the operation of every 
component of the plant focusing on the economic analysis of the system. When rSOC 
technology will be cheaper, an example of system optimization could be the optimal 
operation of the energy produced by renewables or by rSOC attending to market energy 
prices (if connected to the grid) or to improve the overall system efficiency by working 
on the optimal J-V point for the electrolyser. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
74 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
[1] 
“Edmond Becquerel: The Man Behind Solar Panels - Solenergy Systems Inc.,” 
Solenergy Systems Inc. Oct. 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://solenergy.com.ph/solar-panel-philippines-edmond-becquerel 
[2] 
“photoelectric effect  Definition, Examples, & Applications,” Encyclopedia 
Britannica. Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.britannica.com/science/photoelectric-effect 
[3] 
“This Month in Physics History.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.aps.org/publications/apsnews/200904/physicshistory.cfm 
[4] 
“Renewables - Fuels & Technologies - IEA,” IEA. May 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.iea.org/fuels-and-technologies/renewables 
[5] 
U. N. S. Division, “— SDG Indicators.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2021/goal-07 
[6] 
“Data & Statistics - IEA,” IEA. Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-
browser?country=WORLD&fuel=Energy%20supply&indicator=TESbySource 
[7] 
M. McGee, “Daily CO2.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.co2.earth/daily-co2 
[8] 
Oar, “Understanding Global Warming Potentials,” US EPA, May 2022, [Online]. 
Available: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/understanding-global-warming-
potentials 
[9] 
“Compressed Air Energy Storage - an overview  ScienceDirect Topics.” Jun. 2022. 
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-815292-8.00001-0. 
[10] 
“Compressed Air Energy Storage - an overview  ScienceDirect Topics.” Jun. 2022. 
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-815292-8.00001-0. 
[11] 
“The Future of Hydrogen  Analysis - IEA,” IEA. Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen 
[12] 
“Standard Solar Spectra  PVEducation.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.pveducation.org/pvcdrom/appendices/standard-solar-spectra 
[13] 
“Doped Semiconductors.” Nov. 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/Solids/dsem.html 
==PAGE:76==
75 
 
[14] 
C. Lane, “Types of solar panels: which one is the best choice?,” Solar Reviews, 
Dec. 2021, [Online]. Available: https://www.solarreviews.com/blog/pros-and-
cons-of-monocrystalline-vs-polycrystalline-solar-panels 
[15] 
F. Ise and P. Projects GmbH, “Photovoltaics Report.” [Online]. Available: 
www.ise.fraunhofer.de 
[16] 
Solargis, “Global Solar Atlas.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://globalsolaratlas.info/map 
[17] 
“Datasheet-Longi-Solar-Mono-Silver-Frame-LR4-72HPH-425-455M-Hi-Mo4”. 
[18] 
“SUN2000-105KTL-H1.” 
[19] 
K. Zipp, “Why array oversizing makes financial sense,” 2018. 
[20] 
“Solar Thermal Market Size, Share, Trends  Global Report, 2026.” Jun. 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-
reports/solar-thermal-market-101920 
[21] 
C. Philibert, “The present and future use of solar thermal energy as a primary 
source of energy,” ResearchGate, Jan. 2005, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/239585947_The_present_and_futur
e_use_of_solar_thermal_energy_as_a_primary_source_of_energy 
[22] 
“Top five countries with the largest installed solar power capacity.” Jun. 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.nsenergybusiness.com/features/solar-power-
countries-installed-capacity 
[23] 
“Collector Efficiency - an overview  ScienceDirect Topics.” Jun. 2022. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-08-099985-2.00007-X. 
[24] 
“Consumo diario de ACS en el certificado energeético con el nuevo DB HE.” Jun. 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.certificadosenergeticos.com/consumo-
diario-de-acs-certificado-energetico 
[25] 
“documentos_08_Guia_tecnica_agua_caliente_sanitaria_central_906c75b2”. 
[26] 
“Wind  National Geographic Society.” May 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/wind 
[27] 
“Global Wind Atlas.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://globalwindatlas.info 
[28] 
“Wind energy.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.irena.org/wind 
[29] 
“Proof of Betz’ Law.” May 2003. [Online]. Available: http://xn–drmstrre-
64ad.dk/wp-content/wind/miller/windpower%20web/en/stat/betzpro.htm 
[30] 
L. Bauer, “AN Bonus 1000/54 - 1,00 MW - Windkraftanlage.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/396-an-bonus-1000-
54 
[31] 
“Global Wind Atlas.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://globalwindatlas.info 
==PAGE:77==
76 
 
[32] 
“Wind Speed calculator.” May 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.xn–
drmstrre-64ad.dk/wp-
content/wind/miller/windpower%20web/en/tour/wres/calculat.htm 
[33] 
“Air - Density, Specific Weight and Thermal Expansion Coefficient vs. 
Temperature and Pressure.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/air-density-specific-weight-d_600.html 
[34] 
S. Sood et al., “Generic Dynamical Model of PEM Electrolyser under Intermittent 
Sources,” Energies (Basel), vol. 13, no. 24, p. 6556, Dec. 2020, doi: 
10.3390/en13246556. 
[35] 
“Electrochemistry Encyclopedia  PEM fuel cells.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://knowledge.electrochem.org/encycl/art-f04-fuel-cells-pem.htm 
[36] 
“Butler-Volmer Equation - an overview  ScienceDirect Topics.” Jun. 2022. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-323-52472-8.00005-8. 
[37] 
“Figure 9. Voltage Losses in Fuel Cells (EG & G Services 2004),” ResearchGate. 
Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Voltage-
Losses-in-Fuel-Cells-EG-G-Services-2004_fig7_267827667 
[38] 
M. B. Mogensen et al., “Reversible solid-oxide cells for clean and sustainable 
energy,” Clean Energy, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 175–201, Nov. 2019, doi: 
10.1093/ce/zkz023. 
[39] 
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, and D. Y. C. Leung, “Parametric study of solid oxide steam 
electrolyzer for hydrogen production,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, vol. 32, no. 13, 
pp. 2305–2313, Sep. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2007.03.001. 
[40] 
M. Navasa, C. Graves, C. Chatzichristodoulou, T. Løye Skafte, B. Sundeén, and H. 
Lund Frandsen, “A three dimensional multiphysics model of a solid oxide 
electrochemical cell: A tool for understanding degradation,” Int. J. Hydrogen 
Energy, vol. 43, no. 27, pp. 11913–11931, Jul. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.04.164. 
[41] 
X. Sun, P. v. Hendriksen, M. B. Mogensen, and M. Chen, “Degradation in Solid 
Oxide Electrolysis Cells During Long Term Testing,” Fuel Cells, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 
740–747, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1002/fuce.201900081. 
[42] 
“Fuel Cell Handbook (Seventh Edition),” 2004. 
[43] 
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, and D. Y. C. Leung, “An Electrochemical Model of a Solid 
Oxide Steam Electrolyzer for Hydrogen Production,” Chem. Eng. Technol., vol. 
29, no. 5, pp. 636–642, May 2006, doi: 10.1002/ceat.200500378. 
[44] 
“Chemical Engineering Science  Vol 52, Issue 6, Pages 861-1071 (March 
1997)  ScienceDirect.com by Elsevier.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/chemical-engineering-
science/vol/52/issue/6 
[45] 
J. R. Ferguson, J. M. Fiard, and R. Herbin, “Three-dimensional numerical 
simulation for various geometries of solid oxide fuel cells,” J. Power Sources, vol. 
58, no. 2, pp. 109–122, Feb. 1996, doi: 10.1016/0378-7753(95)02269-4. 
==PAGE:78==
77 
 
[46] 
J. R. Ferguson, J. M. Fiard, and R. Herbin, “Three-dimensional numerical 
simulation for various geometries of solid oxide fuel cells,” J. Power Sources, vol. 
58, no. 2, pp. 109–122, Feb. 1996, doi: 10.1016/0378-7753(95)02269-4. 
[47] 
F. Baldi, L. Wang, M. Peérez-Fortes, and F. Mareéchal, “A Cogeneration System 
Based on Solid Oxide and Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells With Hybrid 
Storage for Off-Grid Applications,” Front. Energy Res., vol. 0, 2019, doi: 
10.3389/fenrg.2018.00139. 
[48] 
“How SOFC can change the world - Elcogen,” Elcogen. Mar. 2021. [Online]. 
Available: https://elcogen.com/for-investors/how-sofc-can-change-the-world 
[49] 
Read “The Hydrogen Economy: Opportunities, Costs, Barriers, and R&D Needs” 
at NAP.edu. doi: 10.17226/10922. 
[50] 
“Compressed Hydrogen Storage - an overview  ScienceDirect Topics.” Jun. 2022. 
doi: 10.1533/9780857093899.1.94. 
[51] 
“Demanda de energ\’{\i}a eleéctrica en tiempo real, estructura de generacioón y 
emisiones de CO2.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://demanda.ree.es/visiona/canarias/canarias/total 
[52] 
“Inicio  Idae.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.idae.es/home 
[53] 
“Guía Práctica de la Energía,” 2011. [Online]. Available: www.idae.es 
[54] 
D. Eppelheimer and A. Engineering, “ADM-APN014-EN (01/05): Selecting Cooling 
Towers for Efficiency—Range or Approach?,” 2005. [Online]. Available: 
www.esmagazine.com/CDA/ArticleInformation/ 
[55] 
“Ståltanke og beholdere til alle slags væsker fra CGH Nordic A/S,” CGH Nordic. 
Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.cghnordic.com/?gclid=CjwKCAjwtcCVBhA0EiwAT1fY72-
7RsD4zfCXpZO1cEuypA26iNeoCNq90DWw5-
KtCXbhlTy2OYoU9BoChpUQAvD_BwE 
[56] 
F. Vitale, N. Rispoli, M. Sorrentino, M. A. Rosen, and C. Pianese, “On the use of 
dynamic programming for optimal energy management of grid-connected 
reversible solid oxide cell-based renewable microgrids,” Energy, vol. 225, Jun. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.120304. 
[57] 
M. Cox, “Key 2020 US Solar PV Cost Trends and a Look Ahead,” Greentech 
Media, Dec. 2020, [Online]. Available: 
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/key-2020-us-solar-pv-cost-
trends-and-a-look-ahead 
[58] 
“Solar Loans Guide (Rates, Borrowing Tips & More in 2022),” EcoWatch. May 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.ecowatch.com/solar/solar-loans 
[59] 
“Solar Loans & Financing Options in 2021  Solar.com,” Solar. Jun. 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.solar.com/learn/solar-loans 
==PAGE:79==
78 
 
[60] 
Z. Hyder, “Solar loans: Everything you need to know,” Solar Reviews, Jan. 2022, 
[Online]. Available: https://www.solarreviews.com/blog/how-to-find-the-best-
solar-loan 
[61] 
“Wind farm costs  Guide to an offshore wind farm.” Jun. 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://guidetoanoffshorewindfarm.com/wind-farm-costs 
[62] 
“How much do wind turbines cost?,” Windustry. Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.windustry.org/how_much_do_wind_turbines_cost 
[63] 
B. Steffen, M. Beuse, P. Tautorat, and T. S. Schmidt, “Experience Curves for 
Operations and Maintenance Costs of Renewable Energy Technologies,” Joule, 
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 359–375, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.joule.2019.11.012. 
[64] 
“Levelized cost of heating (LCOH) for consumers, for selected space and water 
heating technologies and countries  Charts  Data & Statistics - IEA,” IEA. Jun. 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/data-and-
statistics/charts/levelized-cost-of-heating-lcoh-for-consumers-for-selected-
space-and-water-heating-technologies-and-countries 
[65] 
“Corporate tax rates table - KPMG Denmark,” KPMG. Mar. 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://home.kpmg/dk/en/home/insights/2016/11/tax-rates-
online/corporate-tax-rates-table.html 
[66] 
J. Huang, J. Fan, S. Furbo, D. Chen, Y. Dai, and W. Kong, “Economic analysis and 
optimization of combined solar district heating technologies and systems,” 
Energy, vol. 186, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.115886. 
[67] 
J. Steinar Garðarsson, P. Vang, S. Højgaard, and R. Nielsen, “General rights 
Predicting the price of solid oxide electrolysers (SOECs).” 
[68] 
B. D. James, C. Houchins, J. M. Huya-Kouadio, and D. A. DeSantis, “Final Report: 
Hydrogen Storage System Cost Analysis.” Sep. 2016. doi: 10.2172/1343975. 
[69] 
M. Usman, M. Imran, Y. Yang, D. H. Lee, and B.-S. Park, “Thermo-economic 
comparison of air-cooled and cooling tower based Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) 
with R245fa and R1233zde as candidate working fluids for different geographical 
climate conditions,” Energy, vol. 123, Jan. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.energy.2017.01.134. 
[70] 
R. G. S. Y. Y. L. D. Li, “Optimal sizing of wind/ concentrated solar plant/ electric 
heater hybrid renewable energy system based on two-stage stochastic 
programming,” Energy, vol. 209, 202AD. 
[71] 
“Experts explain why green hydrogen costs have fallen and will keep falling.” 
Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-
headlines/experts-explain-why-green-hydrogen-costs-have-fallen-and-will-keep-
falling-63037203 
[72] 
C. He and F. You, “Toward more cost-effective and greener chemicals production 
from shale gas by integrating with bioethanol dehydration: Novel process design 
==PAGE:80==
79 
 
and simulation-based optimization,” AIChE J., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1209–1232, Apr. 
2015, doi: 10.1002/aic.14713. 
[73] 
A. Chadly, E. Azar, M. Maalouf, and A. Mayyas, “Techno-economic analysis of 
energy storage systems using reversible fuel cells and rechargeable batteries in 
green buildings,” Energy, vol. 247, p. 123466, May 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.energy.2022.123466. 
[74] 
E. T. EnergyWorld, “Global renewable energy capacity grew 7.4 per cent in 2019, 
solar takes biggest share,” ETEnergyworld.com, Apr. 2020, [Online]. Available: 
https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/renewable/global-
renewable-energy-capacity-grew-7-4-per-cent-in-2019-solar-takes-biggest-
share/74958583?redirect=1 
  
 
  
