==PAGE:1==
Naval search and retrieve mission using
autonomous drones
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
(empty)
ii
==PAGE:3==
Naval search and retrieve mission using autonomous drones
Report written by:
Alex Kolosowski Hansen (s163934)
Advisor(s):
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1 February­ 1 July 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M. Sc. Eng.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Alex Kolosowski Hansen, 2022
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Alex Kolosowski Hansen ­ s163934
Signature
Date
iii
01-07-2022
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This master thesis seeks to develop a drone able to locate and pick up an object without
using a GPS signal for positioning, solving part of the challenge set in the Mohamed Bin
Zayed International Robotics Challenge 2023.
The final solution developed solely relies on computer vision for navigation. After takeoff,
the drone locates an aruco marker on the takeoff platform for reference and begins scan­
ning the area in front of the takeoff zone. If the target object appears in this area, the drone
will approach the object and pick up the object using a gripper system developed for the
mission. The final solution ended up having a 40% success rate. Despite a slightly un­
derwhelming success rate, this thesis clearly identifies and reflects on the reason behind
the failed missions and presents solutions for how to deal with them.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Alex Kolosowski Hansen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Nils Axel Andersen, [Associate Professor], [Department of Electrical Engineering]
Nils Andersen has been a great supervisor who always shares good ideas and is good at
giving useful feedback when requested.
Søren Hansen, [Associate Professor], [Department of Electrical Engineering]
Big thanks to Søren Hansen for being an excellent mentor for the project. Søren was not
just helpful when it came to ordering hardware or general components for the drone but
was a crucial sparring partner and a key part in designing the final solution.
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal for the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Approaching the challenge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Drone Platform
3
2.1
Drone and hardware overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Gripper system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Camera server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Mission program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Results
33
3.1
Overall results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.2
Drone stopping before touching the box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.3
Drone bouncing off the box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.4
Drone dropping the box prematurely . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.5
Successful mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Conclusion
45
5
Future work
47
5.1
Add accurate low range height sensor getting rid of the zero­zone
. . . . . 47
5.2
Hardware malfunction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Remove static error on height measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.4
Reevaluation of image data to position conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.5
Threading the object tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.6
Add infrared sensor to indicate if an object was successfully picked up . . . 48
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
51
A.1 A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the progression in technology advancement and Moore’s law being pushed to its
absolute physical limit concerning transistor size, computational power has become more
accessible and cheaper than ever. This, amongst other factors, now allows engineers
to develop independent and autonomous systems that can take vast amounts of data,
analyze it and act accordingly without human interaction. The Mohamed Bin Zayed In­
ternational Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC) sets out a series of challenges that should be
solved autonomously, testing and pushing the boundary of how sophisticated these au­
tonomous systems have become.
This project, in collaboration with other projects in the DTU Automation and Robotics
department, seeks to solve the challenge presented in the MBZIRC 2023. The challenge
consists of locating a specific target boat in a 10 square kilometre area at sea using a
swarm of drones. When the drones locate the target boat, a raft sets out to the location
carrying a drone capable of scanning the boat for a specific object, fly to it and pick it up.
After the lifting drone successfully collects the object, it should return to the raft and drop
it off. No GPS signal will be available during any part of the mission to further increase
the complexity of the challenge. The lack of GPS signal means all navigation needs to be
based on computer vision and other local sensors mounted on the drone.
Since the complete mission is entirely out of scope for a single master thesis project, this
master thesis will build and develop the drone tasked with retrieving the object from the
target boat and returning the object to the raft.
1.1
Goal for the project
For the drone to complete the mission of retrieving an object, the project’s first step is to
develop a gripper system capable of picking up an arbitrary object. Secondly, to navigate
the drone without the use of GPS, we will use computer vision­based navigation instead.
By placing a marker on the takeoff platform, the drone can orient itself and navigate by
keeping the takeoff mark in sight. Not losing the reference marker, the drone will move
through a pre­determined search pattern, scanning for the target object. If the drone
successfully locates the object, it will use the newly found object as a reference instead.
After locking onto the object, the drone will move towards it before beginning its descent.
When the drone gets close enough, it will enter a precision mode specialized in keeping
the drone as steady as possible. After entering the precision mode, the drone moves
down and touches the object with the gripper mechanism, latching onto and picking up
the object. After picking up the object, the drone flies back to the take­off point.
1.2
Approaching the challenge
Historically, MBZIRC has been very reluctant to give all the challenge specifications.
Challenge specifications like the material and colour of the target object have in previ­
ous MBZIRC been subject to changes going up towards the challenge. Keeping this in
mind, we approached this project by ensuring the final solution is adaptable to changes
regarding the colour and even shape of the target object. The identification and tracking
algorithm were designed to be quickly reconfigurable to accommodate unknown features.
Similarly, the gripper system was also designed to pick up objects regardless of material
and shape. Despite the solution being designed and built as versatile as possible to ease
1
==PAGE:10==
and simplify the development, we have made certain assumptions about the target object
the drone needs to retrieve.
• The target is assumed to be a box.
• The target object is assumed to be coloured uniformly such that it distinguishes
itself from the blue/dark sea and the presumed grey ship. For this reason, the target
object is assumed to be red.
• The target object is assumed to weigh approximately 1 kilogram.
• The target object is assumed to be at most 30x30x80cm.
• The target object is assumed not to be magnetic.
• The target object is assumed not to have any hooks or handles that the drone can
use for easier pickup.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Drone Platform
Developing and building the final solution allowing the drone to solve the mission requires
many different parts and systems to work together. The final solution consists of three
distinct sub­systems; the gripper system, the camera server and the mission program. All
sub­systems need to be tested and work as intended before the sum of their parts, can
complete the mission. This chapter will go through each sub­system and present essential
features and tests of the sub­systems. We will also look at some critical observations and
limitations that became apparent during development testing and how they changed the
final solution. Only the tests that contributed to significant changes or revealed critical
issues are covered. We will omit the mentioning tests resulting in parameter tweaking or
minor design changes in the hardware setup and code base.
We used the DTU Autonomous Systems Test Arena (ASTA) to fly the drone and test
the drone’s capability to locate and track an object. The facility allows for a controlled
environment without the weather interfering with the tests. The arena is illuminated by
several light sources, which gives a very scattered light.
2.1
Drone and hardware overview
The project uses the DJI development platform; Matrice­100, which is a development
platform allowing external computers or micro­controllers to control and communicate with
the drone using the DJI Onboard Software Development Kit[OSDK]. The microcontroller
used in this project is a Raspberry Pi, and it will be running the camera server as well as
the mission program. The camera server is where the image analysis takes place, and
the main mission program keeps track of the mission state and controls the drone.
Documentation on how to interface with the drone using the OSDK can be found in the
documentation on DJI’s webpage, together with the source code and examples that run
on the droneDJI 2022.
The drone is further equipped with several additional components. Amongst these is a
Terraranger laser scanner for height measurements, a Raspberry Pi camera for computer
vision, a gimbal stabilizing the camera and the entire gripper system. A fritzing diagram of
the system setup can be seen in figure 2.1 to give an overview of how all the components
are connected.
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) Gripper design ­ image 1
(b) Gripper design ­ image 2
Figure 2.2: The two arm gripper design. The design was made in the CAD tool solidWorks
Figure 2.1: Fritzing diagram showcasing how the different electrical components and
equipment is connected
2.2
Gripper system
We designed the gripping system as general as possible, allowing the drone to pick up
arbitrary objects. In this case, an arbitrary object means that it is not required to be in a
particular shape or made of a specific material for the gripper to pick it up successfully.
There is a natural limitation regarding the object’s size since the gripper will not be able
to pick up arbitrarily large objects. Following the assumption on the target object found in
1.2 the design selected as a two­arm gripper and it can be seen in figure 2.2.
4
==PAGE:13==
2.2.1
Gripper design
The choice of a two­arm gripper allows the drone to pick up odd­shaped objects regardless
of shape and size as long as the objects fit in the gripper and do not exceed the 1­kilogram
limitation.
The chosen design relies on an initial wide grip and a strong servo, ensuring that once the
gripper starts clenching around the object, the amount of force and subsequent friction
the gripper can apply is large enough to keep the object in place. To increase the friction
as much as possible, each arm of the gripper has a rotatable head with a rubber patch
fastened. The rubber is the same rubber used on table tennis bats. The higher the friction
coefficient of the gripper heads means that the gripper arms can more easily keep objects
in place, increasing the gripper system lifting capability.
Another benefit of increasing the friction coefficient is that the 3d printed gripping mech­
anism can only handle a certain amount of torque before the gears start to skip or the
3d­printed plastic starts to break. By increasing the friction coefficient, the servo could
make due by applying less torque while still being able to lift the required objects, reduc­
ing the strain on the gripper. However, the servo used in this project is a position servo,
which means that if something stops the servo from reaching a specific position, it will
apply as much torque as possible. Without a way to measure if the servo is in contact
with an object, the servo will always clench as hard as possible.
Another design decision of the gripper system was the length of the gripper arms. In­
creasing the reach and size of the arms would make the gripper versatile and allow it to
pick up larger objects, but the compromise would be a reduction in the weight the drone is
capable of lifting. The way the arms hold an object is by applying a force on both sides of
the object. Where the gripper arms meet, the object is where the resistive force of friction
is applied. The resistive force of friction, also denoted Fr, is what keeps the object in
place and is found as
Fr = frN
(2.1)
fr is the friction coefficient, and N is the force applied to the object. The direction of the
resistive force of friction is opposite to the direction the object would move had it not been
there, which in our case means that the friction force points upwards since the target
object is pulled down by gravity. Looking at 2.1, we see that increasing either the friction
coefficient or the force the gripper is applying would increase the friction force, thereby
allowing the gripper system to lift heavier objects. The amount of force the gripper can
apply to the box is given by the torque equation:
τ = r × F
(2.2)
We consider the servo torque τ to be constant, which means that the amount of force
applied to the target is inverse proportional to the arm’s length. Hence the smaller the
arm r, the greater the force F being applied to the object.
The upper part of the gripper arms consists of two gears that interlock and move in con­
junction with each other. The servo is then connected to a smaller gear moving one of
the arms, which then, in turn, drives the second arm to move as well. The gearing can be
seen in figure 2.3.
Besides the gripper arms and the servo, the gripper system also needs to holster a small
microcontroller controlling the gripper, a power circuit to drive the servo, and a triggering
mechanism capable of detecting the target box within range of the gripper. If we look at
figure 2.2 and 2.3, we see that underneath the actual main frame, which is where the
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of how the gearing works in the gripper arms
6
==PAGE:15==
arms are fastened, there is an additional section attached. This additional piece has a
compartment for all the additional circuit components and microcontrollers.
Underneath the gripper system is a slot right in the middle, where the trigger button indi­
cates whether an object is within reach of the gripper.
2.2.2
Trigger mechanism
The trigger mechanism is a pull­down button centred straight under the gripper. The
instant an object triggers the button, the Arduino enters a ’locking’ state where it drives
the servo to a closed position. The Arduino stays in this state until a digital signal is sent
from the Raspberry Pi, indicating the gripper has to open. Buy only allowing the Raspberry
Pi to change the state of the Arduino and not the trigger button; it circumvents the issue
of the gripper opening if an object only touches the trigger briefly before moving just out
of the trigger range, which could easily happen.
2.2.3
Handheld gripper system test
Test setup
The first test would have the gripper system armed and ready before being lowered by
hand directly onto the target box triggering the mechanism and gripping the box.
Test results
Testing the gripper revealed two crucial observations that led to redesigning the gripper
system setup. In the initial design, the Arduino was powered directly by a servo power
circuit. The reason for powering the servo and the Arduino from the same buck­converter
was that they both needed a 5V power supply. According to the specifications of the
buck­converted, it was capable of providing enough power for both devices, even when
running the servo on maximum power. Another benefit of powering both from the same
power circuit was the small distance between the three components, which would mean
shorter cables and a more straightforward design. However, during testing, it came to
light that the Arduino would restart whenever the servo began moving.
Exploring this issue further revealed the restart caused by the servo drawing power from
the same buck­converter also powering the Arduino. Since both components shared their
power source, the sudden power surge going to the servo induced a brief voltage drop
over the Arduino, resulting in a restart. There are several reasons why this might be the
case. One probable cause could be that the rapidly changing power surges would cause
the voltage to drop momentarily over the Arduino.
While the optimal solution would be to precisely identify the exact cause of the voltage
drop, a significantly easier solution was to power the Arduino from a different power circuit,
namely the one also powering the drone gimbal.
Another problematic issue was damaging a GPIO pin on the Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry
Pi would signal the gripper system to release the box directly through a GPIO pin on
the Raspberry Pi connected to a digital pin on the Arduino Nano. The GPIO pin on the
Raspberry Pi would be configured as an output pin, while the digital pin on the Arduino
would be an input pin. Since the Arudino would consider any voltage above 3V on a
digital pin as a digital HIGH, the 3.3V HIGH signal the Raspberry Pi could issue from the
GPIO pin seemed like it could be connected to the Arduino without any additional circuit or
issue. Because the Raspberry Pi pin was configured as an output pin and the Arduino was
configured as an input pin, the fact that the Arduino was running on 5V and the Raspberry
Pi running on 3.3V led to the assumption that the difference in voltage level between the
two components would not be an issue. This assumption turned out to be wrong, and
after a few tests, the release signal from the Raspberry Pi stopped working. Investigating
7
==PAGE:16==
the extent of the issue revealed that the digital pin on the Raspberry Pi got damaged and
could no longer change state. The issue was likely caused by the higher voltage level on
the Arduino driving the pin on the Raspberry Pi high and, by doing so, damaging it.
The solution was to add a voltage level converter between the two boards, ensuring proper
voltage levels on pins both on both boards. We can see the added component in the
fritzing diagram found in figure 2.1.
After resolving both issues, we conducted a successful test with the drone picking up
the box and releasing it once the release signal was issued. The drone can be seen
successfully lifting the box in figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: Successful handheld gripper system test
2.2.4
Gripper system during manual flight
Test setup
Testing the gripper system during flight changes two significant premises from the hand­
held test. In the handheld test, the drone was lowered steadily and preciously enough
for the gripper system to perfectly contact the box, meaning that both gripper arms would
touch the box simultaneously, and the point of contact would align perfectly with the box’s
centre of mass. This extreme precision is unachievable during actual flight, leading to
complications. The lack of precision will often result in the drone angle being slightly off­
set from the angle of the box. The angle offset is carried on the gripper arms, resulting
in the gripper arms not grabbing the box using the entire gripper arm plate surface. Only
using part of the gripper arm plate surface reduces the friction and grip strength. Another
issue would be that the drone is not touching the box in the middle, which would skew the
weight distribution of the target object to one side. The extreme case would be to grab
the target object in one of the ends, causing the object to pivot around the point of contact
once the drone lifts off.
The last difference between the handheld test is the speed at which the drone takes off
after gripping the box. In the handheld test, we lifted the drone gently, but during flight,
the point of contact is where the highest probability of crashing occurs. Therefore it is
desirable to quickly move the drone away from this high­risk section of the mission as
8
==PAGE:17==
(a) Frame before smaller gear jumps over cog
(b) Frame after smaller gear jumps over cog
Figure 2.5: Testing the gripper system extensively revealed an issue with the gear cogs
not moving perfectly in conjunction with one another caused by cogs jumping over each
other
soon as the target object has been picked up. The fastest way to do so is by quickly
accelerating, which means the force the gripper system needs to exert on the target object
is significantly higher than in the handheld test.
Test results
As expected, the lack of precision did cause some issues when it came to the gripper
properly attaching to the target object, but the strength of the servo counteracted the
effect of this. As long as the gripper clenches the target object hard enough, then despite
the gripper arms not attaching perfectly, the box would not release itself from the gripper.
A more unexpected finding from running a few of these tests was the strain it put on the
3d­printed gripper system itself. Since the gripper is not made of hardened plastic, it can
be prone to wear and tear. After several successful and unsuccessful tests, the gripper
system would stop moving to the intended closing position. Upon closer inspection, we
discovered the smaller gear attached to the servo started to ’skip’ over cogs on the grip­
per arms. The cog­skipping was verified when taking a slow­motion video of the gripper
system attempting to pick up a box. Figure 2.5 shows the issue of the gear skipping by
comparing two back­to­back frames as the gears were moving. If we look at the numbers
on the cogs in figure 2.5a and 2.5b, we see that the smaller gear cogs do not intertwine
enough with the larger gear cogs which resulted in, the smaller gear skiting over one of
the cogs.
The solution to this issue was to ensure a better connection between the two gears. This
was done by 3d­printing the smaller gear slightly larger while also improving the compo­
nent’s quality, making it less prone to wear and tear. Another potential solution was to
attach the servo directly to the gripper arm, which would mean redesigning the gripper.
After solving the issue with the gears cogs skipping a successful test conducted from
which the images in figure 2.6 can be seen.
9
==PAGE:18==
(a) Gripper contact
(b) Gripper closed
(c) Take­off with box attached
Figure 2.6: Successful test of the gripper system with a box pick up in manual flight
2.3
Camera server
One key challenge the drone must solve is navigating accurately without relying on GPS
signals. Most previous missions heavily relied on GPS because it provided the drone
with a robust anchor point for navigation. However, in the MBZIRC 2023, the GPS signal
will be disabled, meaning that all navigation will rely solely on computer vision. For this
reason, the drone is equipped with a Raspberry camera that continuously captures the
video underneath the drone.
The camera server consists of two threads. One performs the image analysis and contin­
uously updates the current position, while the second threas manages clients accessing
the server transmitting the latest position.
The image analysis will use the OpenCV library to process the images and uses many
functions directly from there. Understanding the math behind these functions is important
to understanding how the camera server works. A detailed derivation explaining the math
behind the functions used can be found in appendix A.1. The filters and functions used
will only be explained on a high level.
The following sections will cover how the images coming from the camera are filtered and
analyzed to give an accurate position update for the mission program.
2.3.1
Calibration
Because the end goal of the mission is to pick up an arbitrary object, potentially even
with a colour that is different from what has been used for testing, then it is essential for
the drone to quickly be able to recalibrate itself to track this unknown colour. To calibrate
the camera server, we developed a calibration script where images taken directly from the
drone camera are displayed to the user. The user can then use the mouse to press on the
object of interest. Pressing the object of interest will return the new calibration values for
the drone to track. With this script, the drone can instantly start tracking an object of any
colour and light conditions by calibrating before running. Images of how the calibration
script works can be seen in figure 2.7
10
==PAGE:19==
(a) Calibration script prompt where the user
should click the target object for calibration
values
(b) The extracted pixels by using the calibra­
tion values after clicking the box
(c) The terminal printing the values calibration values selected
Figure 2.7: The mission where the drone dropped the box prematurely
2.3.2
Image analysis
Once the program reads the latest image from the Raspberry Pi camera, several image
analysis algorithms and filters are applied to locate the box.
2.3.3
Pre­filter
Before scanning and analyzing the video stream for the target object, the image goes
through a pre­filter to increase the robustness of the object tracking. The pre­filters used
in the application consist of zero­padding the frame with several zeros and applying a
Gaussian low­pass filter.
The image is zero­padded because later in the image analysis, when evaluating the iden­
tified contours, the contours are better defined when the target object goes out of the
frame, preventing the contour from being closed.
We apply the Gaussian low­pass kernel to smooth out the high­frequency noise elements
in the image. Under the assumption that the target objects are uniformly coloured and
the objects will appear larger than a few pixels in the image, applying the low­pass filter
will not decrease the program’s ability to identify the target objects. However, it will im­
prove the smoothness of the object’s edges since the edges will be a high­frequency area
because of the rapid colour change.
2.3.4
Colour extraction
After calibrating the program to the target object colours, we convert the image into an
HSV format. We are converting the image to the HSV domain because it is easier to
isolate the actual colour from the light conditions. During a flight mission, the light reflected
by the target object can vary significantly. Varying light conditions can be caused by
the camera catching the target box from a certain angle where the target object directly
reflects the light or the drone casting a shadow on the object. Clouds and light reflected
from water directly into the camera can also cause the colour of the target box to appear
different from the initial calibration. Here is where converting the image into HSV format is
important. Looking at the HSV colour­space in figure 2.8 we see that the actual colour can
11
==PAGE:20==
is expressed using only the Hue value in the cylinder. The saturation value is a measure
of how bright and saturated the colour is, which in our case would be very dependent on
the box being in the shade or direct light. Different light conditions will not affect the Hue
value significantly but only the saturation and value. Tarek Mamdouh 2020
Figure 2.8: Visual representation of the colour spectrum in the HSV domain ­ Image from
Wikipedia
Now that we have the image in the HSV colour domain and the target object’s colour
calibrated, we can extract the target object pixels from the image. We do this by using
the OpenCV function inRange(src,lowerb,upperb,dst) that only keeps the pixels within a
specific range. Because the hue value does not change much in changing light conditions
as the saturation and value do, the allowed threshold range for both the saturation and
the value is significantly larger than the hue range.
Implementation­wise, it is essential to note that the HSV colour domain is represented as
a half­cylinder where hue is the rotation of the colour. This means that hue values close to
0 or 180 degrees in the cylindrical colour space are very similar. When extracting colours
in a specific range, if the hue range goes past 0 or 180 degrees, the resulting image will
be a superset consisting of two individual extractions.
2.3.5
Morphology
After extracting the target object pixels, we would like to improve the quality of the ex­
tracted shape by applying morphological operations. Morphological operations are sim­
ple transformations that depending on the order in which they are applied, enhance or
change certain features of an image.
Erosion
Erosion is when all connected bodies or clusters of pixels get their outermost pixel re­
moved while all pixels without any neighbouring pixels are removed. The effect of doing
so is that high­frequency noisy pixels that typically appear without being connected to
larger bodies are discarded. In comparison, larger bodies would only shrink a little.
Dilation
Dilation is the opposite of erosion, meaning that every pixel gets padded with extra pixels
around itself. By doing so, any small holes or gaps in an object would be filled, and the
object itself would grow in size.
12
==PAGE:21==
Opening
When applying an erosion followed by a dilation, the procedure is called an opening of the
image. The purpose of doing so is to remove all smaller blobs and noisy pixels from the
image without changing the size of any objects. By eroding an image several times, all
small objects will eventually be gone, whereas big objects will only shrink in size. Dilating
the image afterwards causes the remaining objects to return to their original size, but the
discarded object will not reappear. The degree of opening is a measure of how many
erosions and dilutions are performed. A second­degree opening erodes the image twice,
followed by dilating it twice.
Closing
The opposite of opening an image is first dilating, followed by erosion. This is called clos­
ing an image. Here the purpose, as the name also suggests, is to close all the gaps and
small holes that might occur in a cohesive body. The small gaps will be absorbed by sur­
rounding or close­by pixels by first dilating the image. After gaps have been filled and are
part of larger bodies, when the erosion occurs, it will only remove the outermost pixels,
shrinking the body to its original size.
Since we would like to get rid of all the holes in the extracted objects as well as even out
the edges, we perform a second­degree opening followed by a second degree­closing of
the image. The effect of applying the morphing operations on the extracted pixels from
figure 2.7b can be seen in figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: The image 2.7b after applying opening and closing the image
2.3.6
Edge detection
Now that the colours of the target box have been extracted and the image has been
optimized using morphing operations, the edges of the box are extracted. To extract the
edges, the popular Canny Edge detection algorithm is applied. Canny 1986 The Canny
edge detection algorithm can be divided into five parts; noise reduction, gradient intensity,
non­maximum suppression and hysteresis thresholding. The detailed derivation on the
math behind these stages can be found in Appendix A.1 section A.1.5.
We can see the result of applying Canny edge detection to the morphed image in figure
2.10. One important note is that despite the edges looking well connected in figure 2.10 if
we would apply contour search directly after the Canny edge detection, the result would
13
==PAGE:22==
often consist of many small contours. Another closing operation is therefore applied to
the edges before proceeding.
Figure 2.10: Image 2.9 after applying Canny edge detection
2.3.7
Contour search
With all the edges stored in a binary image, it is now possible to piece the edges to­
gether into actual contours. Putting together the edges is done by comparing each pixel’s
connectedness to the surrounding pixels. If two neighbouring pixels are connected, they
are considered part of the same contour. The OpenCV implementation of the contour
search uses 8­connectivity when evaluating neighbouring pixels. 8­connectivity means
that horizontal, vertical and diagonal pixels are checked when determining neighbouring
pixel connectivity.
The final contours are stored as line segments with only their endpoints stored in memory
to optimize the memory usage and computational complexity.
2.3.8
Convex hull
To further increase the simplicity and reduce the number of pixels analyzed in further
computations, we find the convex hull of all the contours. Finding a convex hull of an object
means only keeping the fewest points possible such that a line can be drawn between
them, creating the tightest fit possible around the shape.
2.3.9
Object pruning
At this point, the program is left with well­defined contours defined as smooth convex
hulls; however, no check has been made to ensure that objects that randomly match the
colours specified in the colour extraction will not get to this stage. To prevent the drone
from tracking a random object matching the calibration colours, the program runs a check
that discards all contours that are smaller than a specific size. Discarding small objects
also helps when the target box is not uniformly illuminated. These colour deviations can
lead to the target object having parts of it appear as completely separate objects.
After pruning all the small objects, the centre of mass (CoM) of the remaining contours is
evaluated. If multiple centres of mass from distinct contours are sufficiently close, then
only one of them is kept, and the others discarded. The result is a set of distinct contours
larger than a certain size.
14
==PAGE:23==
2.3.10
Optimal target
Once only valid contours are left, the drone locks onto the CoM from the contours with
the largest area. We do this under the assumption that since the colour extraction is
done specifically to extract pixels from the object of interest, the pixels coming from this
object must also make up the largest contour in the image. By taking the object with the
highest area instead of the one that is closest to the drone at the time, the issue of a small
collection of pixels getting all the way through despite not being part of the target object is
mitigated. The assumption is that the pixels coming from the target object will be greater
than a collection of pixels getting through the image analysis.
2.3.11
Image to position
The final result of the camera server is to return a position for the drone, which it will use to
navigate. At this point, the contour of the target object is stored together with the object’s
centre of mass. The CoM is stored as pixel coordinates and needs to be translated into
an offset in meters for the drone to be able to use it.
The conversion we will use is taken from the existing code base and is part of the previous
work done on the drone. The conversion is based on the Raspberry Pi camera field of
view and the image resolution to calculate the position. The field of view coefficients for
the horizontal and vertical axis’s are found in the specifications of the Pi camera and are
found to be 2022CameraCameras
fowhorizontal = 62.2 degrees π
180 = 1.086
(2.3)
fowvertical = 48.8 degrees π
180 = 0.852
(2.4)
The position is then found as
xmeters =
image rows
2
−ypixels
image rows
fowvertical
(2.5)
ymeters =
image columns
2
−xpixels
image columns
fowhorizontal
(2.6)
Note how the program uses the y­pixel coordinate to calculate the drone position in the
x­direction. This is because the camera coordinate system is oriented differently than the
drone coordinate system. In the camera coordinate system, the columns are placed along
the camera’s x­axis, and the rows correspond to the y­axis, whereas the drone has the
x­axis pointing straight ahead with the y­axis going straight right. This is illustrated in 2.11
Figure 2.11: Orientation of the camera coordinate system and the drone coordinate sys­
tem
2.3.12
Real time re­calibration
By using the calibration script covered in section 2.3.1 we can configure the drone to
identify the target object in an entirely new setting. The intention of the calibration script
15
==PAGE:24==
is to do the initial colour calibration whenever a flight takes place in a completely different
light setting than the previous one. The calibration script does not continuously adjust the
extractions ranges mid­flight. Very often, during flight, the lighting conditions will change
quite a bit, resulting in objects changing their colour values. This could be solved if we
increased the extraction range to allow larger deviations from the calibrated values, but
there is a clear tradeoff between narrow and wider extraction ranges. The narrow ranges
are excellent in extracting pixels explicitly from the target object in certain lighting con­
ditions but fail to do so when the light conditions change. A broader extraction range
can extract the target object pixels in more light conditions but simultaneously captures
irrelevant pixels from the surroundings.
If we instead continuously recalibrate the extraction values, the program’s ability to contin­
uously locate the target object regardless of changing light conditions while still benefiting
from a narrow extraction range.
This is exactly what the recalibration function does. Once a target object is identified, it
is very likely that its average colour does not precisely match the calibration values but is
somewhere in the extraction range. If the average colour value of the target object de­
viates from the calibrated value, then the calibrated extraction values will change slightly
towards the object’s average. If we used all the pixels of the identified target object, we
would get the most accurate average for the recalibration, but this is also quite computa­
tionally heavy. To ensure the runtime of the recalibration script stays insignificantly low,
the number of pixels used to calculate the average is capped at 6000. If an identified
object consists of more pixels, then the sampling frequency when calculating the average
increases. By keeping the runtime of the continuous recalibration insignificant, the drone
can compensate for the subtle changes in lighting conditions that would accumulate over
time, adjusting the extraction values during flight. The importance of this is clearly illus­
trated when looking at how much the colour of the target box can change depending on
the camera’s angle seen in figure2.14.
2.3.13
Aruco tracking
Since the drone needs to fly without using a GPS signal, it needs another form of reference
not to drift off. After take­off, it is highly unlikely that the camera will immediately locate
the target object because that would mean that the object is right next to the drone in the
first place. The take­off platform will be equipped with an aruco marker printed on an A3
piece of paper and will function as a reference anchor. After take­off, the camera server
will continuously return the position relative to the aruco marker and regularly check the
frame for the target object. The camera server will send the position relative to the target
object when the target object is found. The aruco tracking is based solely on the very
optimized OpenCV aruco library.
2.3.14
Aruco filters
Unlike the target object, an aruco marker only consists of two colours, black and white.
The image goes through a few filters to increase performance when scanning the image
for aruco markers. Firstly we apply a gamma filter to increase the difference between
white and black pixels. Next, the image is converted into grayscale and binarized. By
doing so, all the unwanted colours are removed, and only the black and white colours are
left in the image.
Gamma­correction is used because it dampens low­value pixels much more than high­
value pixels increasing the relative distance between bright and dark pixels. This relative
increased distance allows for a more accurate threshold when the image is binarised. This
16
==PAGE:25==
makes it easier to identify the aruco marker and lock onto it even in images with many
colours.
After we have applied the filters, the image is passed to the OpenCV function
detectMarkers(image, dictionary, corners, ids)
which, given an image, will return the corner coordinates and the id of any aruco markers
found in the image. Depending on the configuration the camera server is in, it will either
search for the anchor aruco marker (id=0) or the return to home aruco marker (id=1). If
the found aruco marker matches the proper id, then the corners of the found aruco marker
are stored.
2.3.15
Aruco marker to position
Using the corners of the aruco marker, we can find the marker’s centre by taking the
average x and y coordinates of diagonally opposite corners. Then we can use equations
2.5 and 2.6 to convert the pixel coordinates to a position. The position is streamed for
the mission program to collect together with a flag indicating that the found object was, in
fact, an aruco marker.
An overview of the camera server code can be seen in 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Flowchart of how the camera server works. All the blue tiles are optional
filters than can be disabled but increase robustness
2.3.16
Run time
One essential aspect initially overlooked during the development of the image analysis
was the run time. Applying several filters would significantly improve the camera server’s
17
==PAGE:26==
accuracy and ability to locate the target object. Still, the tradeoff for increased robust­
ness and accuracy is a longer run time. Flying objects are very sensible systems where
accurate position estimations quickly become obsolete and misleading if calculated too
slow. When developing the image analysis, the camera server was tested while the drone
was grounded, making the effect of the image analysis run time unnoticeable. Similarly,
when simulating the mission and control system, the drone was again grounded with a
box placed underneath it. Moving the box around would cause the drone in the simulation
to follow the box, but it is impossible to detect if the control action performed by the drone
was too slow because of the camera server updating the position with a 5 Hz frequency
instead of a 10 Hz frequency.
Once the testing of actual drone flight commenced, where the drone would rely on the
position provided by the camera server, it became apparent that the camera server was
running too slow. Inspecting the packages the controller was getting from the camera
server revealed that the two consecutive readings would often not both be valid. Not
receiving a correct position update fast enough is particularly problematic if there is a
significant discrepancy between a position update and the reference. The high error and
subsequent large control signal would be continuously applied until a new position update
would be received, causing a big overshoot.
To ensure an acceptable image analysis run time, we evaluated all the filter image analysis
filters and algorithms to see if the increase in robustness and accuracy would justify the
added run time.
2.3.17
Run time analysis
The image analysis’s total run time depended on whether or not the mission code was
running and using up computational resources. When both the camera server and the
mission program were running, the image analysis would take around 160 ms to 200 ms.
Some of the functions are essential to getting the target object’s position. These include:
• Colour extraction
• Edge detection
• Contour search
• Finding the optimal target
• Converting target centre of mass to position
Anything besides these functions are only there to increase robustness and accuracy.
These are:
• Gamma­filter ­ 8 ms
• Gaussian low­pass filter ­ 8 ms
• Morphology dilating ­ 8 ms
• Morphology opening ­ 16 ms
• Morphology closing ­ 16 ms
• Convex hull ­ 5 ms
• Re­calibration ­ 5 ms
Looking at figure 2.12, we can see that the program performs the morphology operation
of closing twice and opening once. These three operations alone increase the processing
18
==PAGE:27==
time of the image analysis by around 50 ms, at which point the benefits of applying the
filters become questionable. The main goal of the filters is to ensure the extracted target
object pixels are connected and form a well­defined shape for the Canny edge detection.
Opening and closing the image would do that while also getting rid of noisy pixels without
altering the target object’s size. By only dilating the extracted pixels, any gaps would even­
tually be filled, creating well­defined objects for the Canny edge detection. Only dilating
and not eroding the image leaves the two major downfalls. Firstly any pixels matching the
colour extraction but not part of the target object will also get dilated and thereby signifi­
cantly increase in size. Secondly, the target object will grow in size, distorting the image
representation of the object.
We can mitigate the former issue by reducing the colour bandwidth allowed by the colour
extraction. By reducing the bandwidth, the chance of extracting pixels from an arbitrary
object or random noise diminishes since arbitrary objects most likely do not match the
colour of the target object perfectly. Furthermore, the camera server selects what object
to lock in if multiple are present by picking the largest contour of the bunch while also
pruning away all contours below a specific size. The pruning and selection process means
dilating rouge pixels, not part of the target object, is manageable.
The second issue is the distortion due to the target object growing in size. Because the
main objective of the camera server is to find the centre of mass and the target object is
symmetric, dilating it will not change the centre of mass. It is only the recalibration that
needs to adjust for the dilation of the target object. The recalibration uses an average
of pixels inside the selected contour to adjust the extraction. Adjusting which pixels to
examine based on the degree of dilating solved this issue.
The benefits of applying the Gaussian smoothing filter are evaluated against how big of
an improvement it yields when determining the CoM. Smoothing the image using a low­
pass filter improves how clean lines are coming from the target object, giving better edges
and contours. Having more straightforward contours is, generally speaking, a desirable
quality, but it does not change much when determining the CoM of an object.
Applying the Gamma­filter changes all the colours in the image, reducing the brightness
of low­brightness pixels more than bright pixels. When converting the image to the HSV
domain, a high gamma­correction would typically drive the saturation and value close to
the highest possible values, 255. Pushing these values close to the maximum simplified
the process of extracting the target object pixels. Before the capability to recalibrate which
colours to extract, this was a particularly useful feature. Once the recalibration was able
to readjust the saturation and value of the extraction, the benefit of applying was more or
less nullified.
The run time analysis resulted in a run time optimized version of the camera server. This
faster running image analysis got the running time down to about roughly 112 ms and can
be seen in figure 2.13. One thing to note is that the optimized object tracking still performs
one closing operation. It was found that without any effort to connect the edges found in
the Canny edge detection, the contours search could connect the edges wrong resulting
in several hundreds of contours.
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.13: Flowchart of how the optimized camera server works. All the blue tiles are
optional filters than can be disabled but increase robustness
2.3.18
Object tracking during flight
Test setup
To see if the drone was able to locate and approach the target object, a test was performed
where the drone was to find and lock onto the target object, fly towards it and hover above
it before approaching the object in a stable convincing manner. The drone would use a
GPS signal to fly into the area with the target object and switch over to navigate using the
target object once detected.
Test Results
During the test, it became strikingly apparent that identifying an object and continuously
tracking of said object had to compensate for the fact that during flight the colour of the
tracked object would change quite significantly based the light reflection. Figure 2.14
illustrates how a red box is perceived during a flight depending on the angle of the drone.
The colour values of the box seen in figure 2.14a is different on the side and the top of
the box. Only looking at the colour on top of the box the average HSV values from the
box are equal to
average HSVbox1 = [164, 154, 255]
(2.7)
while the average value of box two found in 2.14b is
average HSVbox2 = [13, 60, 252]
(2.8)
Both images are taken during the same flight. Comparing the two averages shows that
the saturation of the two boxes, in particular, is significantly different.
One reason why the appearance of the target object changed so dramatically could also
have to do with ASTA. ASTA can be described as a very big round tent stretched out by a
higher pressure level on the inside. The ceiling and roof of the arena are the same things
and consist of a plastic­like material. This material is very poor at blocking out the light,
20
==PAGE:29==
(a) Image from video stream in the begin­
ning of the flight with a sharp angle to target
box
(b)
Image
from
video
stream
halfway
through the flight directly over target box
Figure 2.14: Difference in target box appearance due to changing light conditions and
camera angle during a single flight
and on a sunny day, the area is brightly lit without any lights. The object tracking test was
conducted on a sunny but piecewise cloudy day with the sun lighting up the area. When
initializing the test, the sun was behind a cloud cover, and during flight, the clouds moved,
and the sun changed the light conditions in the arena. The changing light conditions, in
combination with the drone angle towards the box, caused this significant colour change.
This realisation led to the development and implementation of the real­time recalibration
script, which completely solved the issue.
2.4
Mission program
The mission program is where the current mission state is tracked and based on this
determines what mission stage the drone should move to next. The mission program
manages and control all the different sensors and the camera server and continuously
collects the data streamed from these. The mission program is also where the release
signal to the gripper system is set releasing the object.
Since the project uses some previous work, particularly for the position controllers of the
done and data collection we will first look at how and where some of the existing code
was used and also how is has been improved.
After that the next sections will cover how the different sensor work and how they are
managed by and connected to the main program. Lastly we will then look on how the final
mission is structured and how the missions stages work.
2.4.1
Existing code
The Matrice 100 is an established part of the DTU robotics and automation department,
and the essential part of developing a controller and observer has already been done. This
project will build on the existing controller and utilize the existing work as much as pos­
sible. Building upon the existing work allows more effort to be spent on mission­relevant
development and improvements to the existing code base. Throughout the process, a
few essential improvements and new features have been added to the drone’s controller
and general data handling. This next section will go through the previous work and how it
has been used for this project followed by a section highlighting significant improvements
to the existing code base.
21
==PAGE:30==
Controller and observer
An essential part of the whole solution is the already developed Kalman observer and
position controllers. The system is build such current position of the drone is either taken
from the GPS signal or the camera server. PID position controllers have been created for
the x­ and y­axis whereas, PD controllers have been developed controlling the height and
YAW of the drone. To move the fly the drone only the reference needs to be set and then
the controllers will do the rest.
Image to position
As mentioned in section 2.3.11 the conversion from a pixel coordinate in the frame to a
position used the existing functions 2.5 and 2.6 repeated here for convenience
xmeters =
image rows
2
−ypixels
image rows
fowvertical
ymeters =
image columns
2
−xpixels
image columns
fowhorizontal
If we look at equations 2.5 and 2.6 we can see that the position does not take into the
current height of the drone into account. This means that a CoM 25% offset from the
center would give the same position regardless of height. The drone would fly stably
when high up in the air but once the drone got sufficiently close to the object, any small
movements would result in quite significant change in position calculations. If we take the
horizontal field of view, [HFV] for the camera and the height of the drone, then we can
calculate the field width by using basic trigonometry. If we draw a triangle coming from
the camera with an angle equal to the horizontal field of view and the height of the triangle
being equal to the drone height then the field width can be found as the length of the side
opposite of the camera and can be found as
Field width(h) = h sin(HFV
2 )
sin(π
2
HFV
2 )
2
(2.9)
Using camera HFV of 62.2 degrees we can compare the field width at 1 meter and 7
meters. Raspberry Pi Documentation ­ Introducing the Raspberry Pi Cameras 2022
Field width(1) = 1 m sin(62.2◦
2
)
sin(π
2
62.2◦
2
) 2 = 0.9072m
(2.10)
Field width(7) = 7 m sin(62.2◦
2
)
sin(π
2
62.2◦
2
) 2 = 6.3507m
(2.11)
At the two heights a a 25% frame with pixel offset from the center of the image would
result in position offset of
Position offset 1 meter = Field width(1) 0.25 = 0.227m
(2.12)
Position offset 7 meter = Field width(7) 0.25 = 1.588m
(2.13)
If we instead are using the existing image to position conversion we get
Existing position offset 1 meter =
image columns
2
−image columns 0.25
image columns
HFV
(2.14)
Existing position offset 1 meter = 0.271
(2.15)
Existing position offset 7 meter = Existing position offset 1 meter
(2.16)
22
==PAGE:31==
Comparing the results of the actual position offset with the existing image to position
conversion we see that at 1 meter height both conversions give more or less the same
result but because the existing conversion does not account for the height, it gets the
same offset at 7 meters despite this being not being correct.
Because of the direct relation with the position received from the camera server and the
existing PID controller when it comes to keeping the drone stable, it dilemma of chang­
ing the existing image to position function to also account for the height arose. If the
existing PID controller was designed and tuned to properly control the drone using the
existing conversion then changing the conversion to be more accurate at higher height
at the expense of the PID controller not being able to keep the drone stable any longer
would require re­tuning and potentially re­designing of the controller. Because the exist­
ing conversion would give a smaller offset for distances greater than roughly 1.1 m then
even if the PID controller would not receive the correct position, it still be able to control
the drone.
A less disrupting solution to the issue with the drone applying to much control action
when getting closer to the object was to slightly adjust the Kp term of the controller to
compensate for the position offsets being smaller in reality. If we assume the controller
was designed using the existing conversion, where the conversion is accurate at around
1 meter then any relative position offsets coming from a height lower than this would be
to large causing too much control action and any relative position offsets coming from a
higher height would be to low causing to little control action.
By adjusting the Kp term, reducing it as the drone moves to close to an object applied
control action would compensate for the position not adjusting for the height.
It needs to be mentioned that in the existing code base there exists a function that adjusts
the position returned by the camera server using the current height of the drone and it
looks like this:
xnew = xcam
h −0.32
630
(2.17)
ynew = ycam
h −0.32
630
(2.18)
where h is the current height of the drone. The number 0.32 was initially assumed to be
the distance from the ground to the camera and the divisor was assumed to come from
either the camera pixel width or height. Seeing that neither of the numbers match the
value of the corresponding sources the are numbers 0.32 and 630 appear to be hand
tuned variables. Looking at the correction term
h −0.32
630
(2.19)
it can be seen that the divisor 630 will very aggressively get reduce anything coming from
the camera server to the point where any realistic position return by the camera server
would practically speaking be reduced to zero. Not surprisingly when added this additional
step when taking data from the camera server the drone would have the position locked
more or less at zero which is why we omitted adding this additional correction.
2.4.2
Improvements to existing code
Adjustable PID­controller
One aspect that will be touched upon later is how the drone becomes more sensitive to
small position fluctuations the closer it gets to an object. To compensate for the increase
23
==PAGE:32==
in sensitivity, the controller should reduce the amount of control action coming from the
proportional term. However, the existing PID­controller parameters were locked once
initialized, and it was only possible to change the control action limit. To solve the issue,
the PID controller was updated such that the proportional term could be reconfigured
during flight.
Reading data from camera server
Because the camera server and the main mission code are two separate programs run­
ning independently, the main mission code does not automatically have access to the
latest position update without requesting it first. Since the camera server works by serv­
ing requests sequentially as they are committed, if the number of requests gets too large,
the camera server risks not being able to keep up. During the initialization phase of the
main mission program, spawns the PID­controller thread. The PID controller continuously
queries the camera server for a position update to keep the drone stable and as close to
the given reference as possible. The main mission program also needs data from the cam­
era server to know if and when the program should move on to the next stage. In stages
where the data from the camera server is needed for the mission to continue, the main
mission program will also continuously query the camera server, requesting the same
data as the PID controller. Additionally, when enabling logging in the PID­controller, the
PID­controller itself would request data from the camera server twice, further increasing
traffic.
Instead of having multiple threads and sections, each querying the camera server for the
same data, the PID controller was appended with a data store that stores the latest update
from the camera server. All other parts of the program then read the data from this data
store instead of querying the camera server directly.
2.4.3
Gimbal controller
For the camera to capture as clear pictures as possible during flight, the drone is equipped
with a camera gimbal controller that stabilizes the camera and ensures a specific cam­
era position. The gimbal controller is the 8­bit SimpleBGC from BaseCam electronics.
However, the board is not an official board from BaseCam Electronics but rather a similar
one made by a third party. Because the board is not from the official vendor, much of the
official documentation and software is incompatible with the drone’s gimbal controller. In
an attempt to use some official software for the board we flashed official firmware onto the
board which causes the board to malfunction and stop responding completely. In the end
it turned out that it is not possible to interface with the board using any official software
built for it.
Controlling the gimbal
The gimbal has three small motors, each controlling one of the axes on the gimbal. Ac­
cording to the official documentation, multiple communication protocols can be used to
communicate with the gimbal controller. Still, without access to the software needed to
configure the controller board, the gimbal motors are controlled using a default PWM sig­
nal. Comparing the official pin­out diagram with the third­party board on the drone, the
PWM pins controller was identified but with the unfortunate realization that only one of the
motors could be controlled by the identified pins. Because only one of the gimbal axes
is controllable, the gimbal can set the camera in one of two configurations. Either the
camera is facing directly down or straight ahead of the drone.
According to the official documentation, the gimbal can be controlled using PWM signals
ranging from [1325;1675] with the neutral centre frequency in 1500.
24
==PAGE:33==
Using the gimbal
Only a few tests controlling the gimbal were conducted but the were successful. Applying
the different PWM signals would move the camera position from facing directly down to
straight ahead of the drone. Unfortunately during the testing phase of the gimbal the same
mistake that caused the digital pin on the Raspberry Pi to break when connected to the
Arduino covered in section 2.2.3 also damaged the PWM pin on the Raspberry Pi.
The gimbal controller was powered by a 5V poser supply and despite the Raspberry Pi
being connected to a read­only pin on the gimbal controller the pin on the Raspberry Pi
did break.
2.4.4
Laser scanner
The default height measurement used by the drone is an integrated barometer. The one
drawback of only using such a sensor for height measurements is the lack of accuracy,
particularly when the drone is close to objects, where the wind bouncing on the ground/the
object underneath can cause fluctuations in the air pressure measured by the barometer.
The drone is equipped with a laser scanner to ensure stable and accurate height mea­
surements. The laser scanner works by emitting a laser beam in a direction, and based
on the measured reflection, the distance in said direction is calculated.
The laser scanner is the TeraRanger One Type A (Spider), which according to its docu­
mentation, can measure a distance of up to 14 meters with a 0.5 cm accuracy. One of the
main benefits of using a laser when finding the drone’s height is that air pressure caused
by the drone’s propellers does not affect the height readings in any way. Only two things
can cause interference with the laser scanner corrupting the measurements. Air particles
that reflect the laser signal prematurely despite being passable by the drone or when the
laser is emitted onto materials that absorb all the light, thereby not reflecting anything for
the scanner to measure.
One thing to note is that the TeraRanger cannot measure heights lower than 50 cm. When
doing so, the sensor returns an ’invalid reading’ response and will be interpreted as zero
in the main program. The region where the Teraranger stop measuring will be refereed
to as the zero­zone going forward.
Implementation
The TerraRanger is connected to the Raspberry Pi using the I2C communication protocol
and transmits an 8­bit package containing the height reading in centimetres. The most
significant bit of the package determines if the reading is corrupt, with a 0 meaning that
the measurement is valid.
A specific class have been made to handle the initialization of the I2C bus, connecting to
the correct address, reading and decoding the packages from the TerraRanger.
2.4.5
Overview over main mission
The mission can be split into several stages.
• Initialization
• Take off
• Check for aruco anchor
• Initiate basic search pattern
• Approach object
• Pick up object
25
==PAGE:34==
• Return to start
• Drop box
• Land drone
For a better overview over the mission program a flowchart of the stages can be seen in
figure 2.15
Figure 2.15: Overview over the mission program
2.4.6
Initialization and take off
In the initialization phase all sensors and controllers are initialized and the Raspberry Pi
takes control over the drone for autonomous flight. If a detrimental sub­system fails to
initialize properly the mission is interrupted and the drone does not take off. Failing to
initialize less critical sub­systems will trigger a warning but will not stop the mission. An
example of this is if the laser scanner fails to initialize then the code will fall back on the
internal height measurement using the drone barometer, whereas if the camera server
fails to initialize the program terminates. Once all system are initialized the program halts
and waits for user input before continuing with the take off. The take off takes the drone to
a specified height and once the desired height is reached the drone switched from being
controlled by GPS signal to solely rely on the input from the camera server for reference.
2.4.7
Check for aruco anchor
The first stage in the flight mission is to ensure a proper reference is present the drone
can use for navigation. The drone will take off standing on a aruco marker and after take
off this aruco marker will function as the main anchor. If the drone fails to locate this initial
aruco anchor the program terminates and the drone terminates the mission and continues
to hover. Because the mission will take place at sea it is not ideal if the drone tries to land
automatically but it should rather wait for the pilot to take control and land the drone safely.
2.4.8
Initiate search pattern
Once the drone has taken off and is hovering above the initial aruco anchor it begins a
search pattern such that the aruco marker never leaves the frame.
To ensure the aruco marker does not leave the frame none of the aruco marker coor­
dinates can exceed the resolution of the image. The camera server returns the relative
26
==PAGE:35==
position of the aruco marker in meters and this position is corresponding for the center of
the aruco marker. The pixel height and width of the aruco marker and the position in the
image fram cannot directly be calculated from the relative position coming from the cam­
era server but it is also dependant on the height of the drone and camera specifications.
To calculate how close the aruco marker is to the edge a helper function is developed
taking the relative position of the aruco marker, height of the drone and camera specifi­
cations and return the number of pixels between the edge of the frame and the edge of
the aruco marker.
Search pattern
After the camera server has found the center of a target object it converts the coordinates
to a relative position by using equations 2.5 and 2.6, repeated here for convenience;
xmeters = IMGROWS/2 −ypixels)
IMGROWS
fowvertical
ymeters = (IMGCOLS/2 −xpixels)
IMGCOLS
fowhorizontal
To get the center coordinates of the aruco marker, equations 2.5 and 2.6 are rearranged
into:
ypixels = IMGROWS/2 −xmeters
IMGROWS
fowvertical
(2.20)
xpixels = IMGCOLS/2 −ymeters
IMGCOLS
fowhorizontal
(2.21)
After having the center of the aruco marker the pixel width of the marker needs to be found.
The width of the marker is highly dependant on the height of the drone. One commonly
used method to calculate the distance to an object in an image is by using the focal length
of the camera, the actual object size and the pixel width of the object in the image like so.
Realtime Distance Estimation Using OpenCV – Python 2022
focal length = pixel width in image · known distance
real width
(2.22)
Using the test setup seen in 2.16 the focal length of the camera was calculated to be
focal length = 566
(2.23)
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.16: Test setup to empirically determine the focal length of the camera
Having empirically determined the focal length of the camera it is now possible to rear­
range equation 2.22 to calculate the pixel width of the object instead
pixel width in image = focal length · real width
known distance
(2.24)
Now with the pixel width of the aruco marker and the CoM coordinates of the aruco marker
the exact position the mission code is now able to tell how far it can move in a certain
direction before increasing the height and repeat the seach pattern. Looking at 2.24 it
becomes clear that by increasing the drone height, i.e. know distance will reduce the
width of the aruco marker in the image and thereby increasing the potential offset before
the aruco markers disappears from the frame. If the aruco marker gets within 10 percent
of the image frame the drone will go to the next stage of the search pattern. A visual
representation of the search pattern can be seen in figure 2.17.
The search pattern terminates when the drone is unable to detect the aruco anchor or the
target object is found. In the case where the target object is not found the drone land back
onto the aruco anchor and terminate the mission. The search pattern is configurable to
move to all four sides of the aruco marker, but under the assumption that the drone takes
off with the target object located in­front of the drone, only the edges corresponding to that
are checked. If we use equation 2.9 with the Raspberry Pi camera vertical and horisontal
field of view we can determine the size of the search area at 8 meters to be
Field width(8)horizontal = 8 m sin(62.2◦
2
)
sin(π
2
62.2◦
2
) 2 = 9.65m
(2.25)
Field width(8)vertical = 8 m sin(48.8◦
2
)
sin(π
2
48.8◦
2
) 2 = 7.26m
(2.26)
This mean that the search pattern will be able to detect a target object in a rectangular
area in front of the reference marker of size 9.65 m times 7.26 meters.
28
==PAGE:37==
(a) Initial position in search
(b) Stage 1: Move aruco marker to
corner
(c) Stage 2: Move aruco marker to
opposite corner
(d) Stage 3: Increase height
(e) Stage 4: Go back to step 1
(f) The path the drone would take
by following the search pattern
Figure 2.17: Representation of the search pattern the drone follows once the initial aruco
search marker have been located. The process will repeat until a target object is found
or the aruco code is unidentifiable
29
==PAGE:38==
2.4.9
Lock target object
In the case where a target object is located the camera server will immediately begin
transmitting the drone position relative to where the object is together with a flag indicating
the new position is not coming from the aruco marker but the target object. Because the
new position update is relative to the target box it will cause a huge spike in control action
because the reference has been set relative to the aruco marker. To prevent this from
happening the PID controller itself checks if the position coming from the camera server
comes from the aruco marker or a target box. The very instant the source of the position
changes the PID controller will set a flag and will for as it is set stop all movement by
setting the reference to the current position state of the drone. Once the main program
detects the source of the camera position is the target object, it will take control over the
reference again and set the blocking PID flag low, allowing normal control action to take
place. The idea behind stopping the movement directly in the PID controller and not doing
it in the main program, is the delay it takes for the main program to detect a switch in type
of object tracking from the camera server. The PID controller is a running on a separate
thread and runs significantly faster than the main program. Because the PID controller
runs so much faster the delay before the main program would adjust the reference to
match the new position the controller would apply large control action, making the drone
fly somewhat unpredictably in the transition.
After the main program has control over the reference, it will then go towards zero while
gradually reducing the height of the drone. In this stage the main purpose is for the drone
to be placed directly above the target object and not approaching it quickly which is why
the height is only slowly reduced. The drone also does not check how close the box is
to the edge of the frame, and decreasing height to fast might push the object out of the
frame. When the drone is above the target object with the reference set to zero it will
hover briefly before initiating the box approach.
2.4.10
Box approach
When approaching the box it is very important to keep the drone as steady as possible.
This task becomes increasing difficult the closer the drone get to the target object, since
smaller and smaller deviations from the CoM of the target will result in larger and larger
position offsets. That is why the approach speed and the control action of the drone in
the final solution are dependant on the distance to the target object. After the drone get
sufficiently close to the target object the Kp term of the PID controller is reduced, making
the position control less aggressive as well as the approach speed gets reduced. Once
the drone is one meter above ground and initiates the zero­zone decent
2.4.11
Zero­zone decent
The zero­zone decent is where the drone goes down into the zero­zone of the laser scan­
ner and what this means in practice, is that we are controlling the drone height below this
threshold in open loop.
By letting the drone hover above the threshold for when the laser scanner stops measuring
the height and quickly letting the reference drop close to 0, the drone will build up velocity
before going into the zero­zone. The second the drone enters the zero­zone forcing the
height state to 0. With the current height state equal to zero and the reference still going
towards zero will cause the drone to decelerate. The small delay for the reference to
get to zero is enough time for the decelerating drone to stop 0.2 meters above ground,
coinciding with the box height. After the reference hits the lowest value and the drone
stops moving for 2 seconds giving time for the gripper to close, the height reference is set
high, causing the drone to rise again.
30
==PAGE:39==
The process of of getting the drone to right height was done by hand tuning the speed
the reference is dropping and when the zero­zone decent is initiated. By traversing the
last 80 cm as quickly as possible the possibility of the drone to missing the box also
diminishes. The instability caused by smaller and smaller position deviations causing
oscillatory movement get increasing worse the close the drone gets to the box and peaks
when just before touching the box.
After the drone is in contact with the target object the trigger mechanism will close and
the drone will quickly move back to the initial takeoff height and switch back to the GPS­
localizer. The reason for switching back to the GPS­localizer is because the current drone
design the camera and the gripper mechanism are to close to each other which results in
the box obscuring the camera view once picked up.
2.4.12
Fly back
With the GPS­localizer the drone navigates back to the take­off area and drops the box
before moving of to the side and ending the mission.
2.4.13
Testing the flight pattern
A demonstration of how the basic search pattern can be seen in figure 2.18. The position
on the drone path can be seen together with the height profile and the image coming
from the video feed at that time. We see how the drone is following the intended zig­zag
pattern keeping the aruco marker close to the edge. As expected the aruco marker moves
further into the fram when the drone increases in height, increase the range of the search.
After the drone detects the target object it also keeps the position before heading straight
towards the box. The image also shows the drone flying around in 5 meters longer than
at the other heights. This is because the height does not change on the way to the first
corner, but only after the second corner. It can also be seen that once the target object is
discovered the drone first gradually beginning the decent towards it and first after being
right above the object increases the decent speed.
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Drone at the first corner of the search pattern.
(b) Drone just after increasing height at the second corner
(c) Drone image when the box is detected
Figure 2.18: Images taken from the drone camera during one of the final missions. The
green markers on the right show where the drone is in the mission when the image is
taken.
32
==PAGE:41==
3
Results
In this section, a summary of the test results will be presented together with an analysis
of what caused the failed missions and how the successful missions differentiated from
those. Looking at the flight data, most flights are very similar. Because of this, we will not
go through every aspect of each flight. Instead, we will cover why the failed mission devi­
ated from the nominal case. Additionally, the successful missions are compared against
the failed ones to uncover which differentiating factors determined one outcome over the
other.
3.1
Overall results
Out of the final ten flights, four succeeded, and six failed. The six failures can be split
into four different failure categories and can be seen in figure 3.1. Despite the overall
success rate of the final tests being a bit underwhelming, the cause of the failed flights
has been narrowed down to a few key issues, and the successful flights prove that making
the mission work reliable is very close. The following sections will firstly go through the
different types of failed missions before looking at the successful ones.
• Missing the box
• Drone stopping before touching the box
• Drone bouncing off the box
• Drone dropping the box prematurely
• Successful missions
Figure 3.1: The overall test results
3.1.1
Missing the box
One of the causes for failing the mission was the drone not touching the box precisely
enough for the gripper to latch onto the target properly. Looking at the drone position
relative to the box in figure 3.2, we see how the drone touches the box too far from the
centre for the gripper to lock onto the box. The main reason the drone would be off the
33
==PAGE:42==
mark is an oscillatory trajectory initiated by increased sensitivity when getting closer to
the box. Figure 3.3 shows the relative position calculated by the camera server together
with the drone height for the mission seen in figure 3.2a.
The camera placement in front of the gripper system means the the x­reference needs to
increase as the drone moves closer. Looking at figure 3.3a, we see the slight delay from
when the reference changes and the drone following. Once the drone begins moving, it
speeds up and overshoots the reference. The slight overshoot on the x­axis is not critical
as long as the both gripper arm attaches to each side of the box. With gripper arms on
both sides of the box, the gripper will clinch the box hard enough for it to stay in place,
even when the box pivots around the gripper arm touch point.
On the other hand, it is quite detrimental to the mission’s success that the gripper touches
the box in the middle of the y­axis, ensuring both gripper arms attach to opposite sides of
the box. Suppose the gripper touches the box too far away from the y­axis centre, then
one of the arms risks going on top of the box instead of the side, which is what happened
during the mission seen in figure 3.2b. If the oscillatory behaviour gets too intense, the
drone will completely miss the target which almost happened in figure 3.4.
If we go back to the first case in figure 3.2a and take a closer look at the reference com­
pared to the current state of the drone in the y­direction, we can see the oscillations show
up. Figure 3.3b shows how the drone begins to oscillate along the y­axis when getting
below 1.8 meters. The oscillating position given by the camera servers is increasing both
in frequency and magnitude up until the point where the drone touches the box. At this
point, the drone is no longer right above the box, failing the mission. A similar pattern of
oscillating movement causing the drone to miss the box’s centre takes place during the
mission seen in figure 3.2b.
This oscillating behaviour is most likely caused by the program not adjusting the applied
level of control as much as it should due to the reason of increased sensitivity towards
small movements covered in 2.4.1. The final solution reduces the Kp of the PID controller
in the x, y­direction to 60% of the initial controller when entering the high precision mode.
By lowering the Kp, cases with oscillating movement dropped significantly. However, in
the cases where the oscillating movement began close to the object, the controller would
not be able to stabilize the drone.
Another noteworthy aspect is when the drone enters the zero­zone causing the height
to drop to zero in a instant. The hand­tuned zero­zone decent making the drone stop
at the right height would only work when the height profile followed the nominal case
before starting. The fact that the height sensor stops working at the exact moment where
the drone requires the most precision is regardless very problematic. A reason why the
zero­zone decent worked so successfully in the nominal case despite not having access
to height data is because the gripper gets the best grip in the scenario where the drone
is practically resting on the box. This means that even if the drone is projected to stop
slightly underneath the box, then, as long as it does not bounce off the box, it will just stop
moving when it touches the box, allowing the gripper to latch on.
Because the drone height is controlled in open loop after reaching the zero­zone, the
drone velocity at that point is directly proportional to where the drone stops. The biggest
downfall of controlling the height in open loop during the zero­zone decent is the lack of
reactionary capabilities when the drone would deviate from the nominal case. Too large
deviations from the nominal case when the drone initiates the zero­zone decent will cause
the drone to miss the intended stop point forcing one of two scenarios.
34
==PAGE:43==
Either the drone would enter the zero­zone with too much speed causing it to bounce off
the box, or it would stop and fly away before getting in contact with the box.
(a) Drone missing box ­ flight 1
(b) Drone missing box ­ flight 2
Figure 3.2: Point of contact between the drone and the box for the flight where the drone
missed the box
140
145
150
155
160
Time [s]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Camera X [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera x
Reference x
Height
(a) Relative X coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 1
140
145
150
155
160
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
Camera Y [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera y
Reference y
Height
(b) Relative Y coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 1
Figure 3.3: The position returned by the camera server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 1
35
==PAGE:44==
150
160
170
Time [s]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Camera X [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera x
Reference x
Height
Box contact
(a) Relative X coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 2
150
160
170
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
Camera Y [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera y
Reference y
Height
Box contact
(b) Relative Y coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 2
Figure 3.4: The position returned by the camera server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 2
3.2
Drone stopping before touching the box
One reason why the drone would stop just before touching the box is the laser scanner
clipping the box measuring the drone height relative to the top of the box instead of the
ground. Measuring the height from the box and not the ground only becomes an issue
when it happens moments before entering the laser scanner zero­zone descent. The
laser scanner did clip the box just before the zero­zone descent, during the flight seen in
figure 3.5b with the height profile of that mission in figure 3.6. At around 142 seconds into
the flight, only a few seconds before initiating the final box approach, the laser scanner
clipped the box, which caused the height readings to drop more than 20 cm instantly. The
sudden drop in height made the drone accelerate upwards. While attempting to get back
to the reference, the reference started dropping. Because the drone was too far below
the reference and moving upwards when the zero­zone descent began, it never built up
enough speed going into the laser scanner zero­zone, which caused the drone to stop
before touching the box.
The current hardware setup has the laser scanner mounted on a plastic frame and is
located 22 cm in front of the camera. A potential solution could be to move the laser
scanner to the opposite side of the drone, creating as much distance between the camera
and the laser scanner as possible. This would also give more room to move the camera
more to the front, ensuring that picking up an object would not block the camera’s view.
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.6: Snippet of the height profile during the failed mission where the drone stopped
before touching the box seen in 3.5b
(a) Drone stopping before touching the target
box ­ flight 1
(b) Drone stopping before touching the target
box ­ flight 2
Figure 3.5: Two of the missions failed because the drone stopped before reaching the
box.
Another very interesting flight during the final testing had was a seemingly consistent static
error on the height state ranging from minus 0.5 meters to 1 meter. The height profile of
the whole flight as well as the height profile just around before and under the zero­zone
decent can be seen in figure 3.7.
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Height profile of flight stopping before
touching the box ­ flight 1
(b) Height profile just around the zero­zone
decent of flight stopping before touching the
box ­ flight 1
Figure 3.7: The position returned by the camera server just before missing the box during:
drone missing box ­ flight 1
Under normal circumstances, a static error should cause the drone to end up further down
than intended, but in our case, the drone did the exact opposite. It stopped above the
intended target. Once again, the explanation goes back to the zero­zone, driving the
height state down to zero.
If we look at figure 3.7b, the drone is already moving in and out of the zero­zone long
before the zero­zone descent has begun. Whenever the drone enters the zero­zone, the
sudden error increase between the reference and the current state drives the drone back
out of it. When the drone then finally initiates the zero­zone descent, the drone is already
in the zero­zone and on its way out of it. Coincidentally, the drone leaves the zero­zone
and continues upwards right about the same time the reference hits zero, which would
once again drive the drone down into it, but before this happens, the reference goes back
up.
Because of the zero­zone caused by the hardware limitation of the laser scanner, a static
error actually causes the drone to stop above the intended target.
The exact reason this particular flight had such a big static error has not been determined.
Looking at figure 3.8 where the height profile of several more flights are presented, we
see a small static error in all of them, none of them in the same magnitude.
Suppose the large static error would recur often. In that case, we could solve it by intro­
ducing a feed­forward element to the height PD controller, but seeing that the static error
is significantly smaller in the nominal case, this might not be the best approach. Alterna­
tively, redesigning the height PD controller added an integrator would also get rid of the
static error, but neither has been tested due the how late this was discovered.
3.3
Drone bouncing off the box
One the other hand there is the case where the zero­zone decent causes the drone to
get to much speed. When this happened the drone hit the box with so much speed that it
bounced of the box just as the gripper was closing. The exact moment of contact as well
as the gripper closing can be seen in figure 3.9.
38
==PAGE:47==
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(a) Height profile ­ flight 37
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(b) Height profile flight 57
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(c) Height profile flight 58
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(d) Height profile flight 60
Figure 3.8: Height profile of several flights in comparison to the reference. Similar to all
of them is the very small static error
39
==PAGE:48==
(a) Drone in perfect contact with the box be­
fore bouncing off it
(b) Gripper mechanism triggering while drone
in the air after bouncing off the box
Figure 3.9: The contact between drone and the box triggering gripper but also causing
the drone to bounce back into the air missing the box
Figure 3.10 shows the drone path together with the height profile of the drone during the
mission. Looking at the figure 3.10b, it appears that everything is good since the drone
height follows the reference nicely with little static error that practically disappears after
the drone locates the box. However, if we look at the height profile just before touching
the box, the reason behind bouncing off the box is seen.
If we look at figure 3.10c, the drone begins to deviate from the reference around 149 sec­
onds into the flight. Despite the reference dropping at a constant pace, the drone suddenly
slowed down and began lagging behind the reference. Under normal circumstances, the
controller would have steered the height back to normal momentarily, but this happened
just before the drone began the zero­zone descent.
Because the drone was significantly higher than the nominal case before the zero­zone
descent began, the drone applied more control action than usual as the reference started
to drop and the higher starting point also meant the drone had more time to accelerate
before entering the zero­zone. These two factors caused the drone to have way too much
speed when entering the zero­zone, making it bounce off the box instead of just landing
on it.
The bounce was so high that the drone went back out of the zero­zone momentarily before
falling back since the reference was still almost zero.
40
==PAGE:49==
-4
-2
0
2
Y-cordinate [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
X-coordinate [m]
Box placement
Drone position
Target object located
(a) Flight path of the drone during the mission
that bounced off the box
0
50
100
150
200
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(b) Height profile of the drone during the mis­
sion that bounced off the box
146
148
150
152
154
156
158
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
(c) The height profile just around the bounce
Figure 3.10: Position and height profile of drone during mission that bounced off the box
3.4
Drone dropping the box prematurely
One of the final flights managed to find the box successfully, approach it and pick it up but
after holding the box for roughly 4 seconds the gripper system released the box. We can
see the box’s pickup and subsequent drop in figure 2.6. The flight’s position and height
profile can be seen in figure 3.11. Looking at figure 3.11a, we can see that the drone only
managed to move the box a meter away from the pickup point before dropping it.
The exact cause of why the gripper opened mid­flight has not been completely deter­
mined. However, in the current setup, only two things can cause the gripper to open
prematurely.
After the gripper button is triggered, the Arduino enters a closed gripper state and only
resets after receiving a digital high from the Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry Pi will only send
this release signal upon completion of the mission, which in this case is after the drone
moves the box to the starting position. When the drone dropped the box, the drone was
still in two mission states away from sending the release signal, opening the gripper. If
the signal came from the Raspberry Pi, it would have come from software running in the
background or faulty hardware. Both of which seem unlikely.
Another explanation for why the gripper suddenly opened is the Arduino restarting. When
powering the Arduino from the same source as the servo driving the gripper, the Arduino
would consistently restart whenever the gripper would draw power. After changing the
41
==PAGE:50==
Arduino power supply to the same source powering the gimbal, the issue disappeared.
The gimbal power supply is located on top of the drone and is far away from the Arduino.
That, combined with the fact that the wires going down to the Arduino consist of multiple
somewhat thin jumper wires, could result in the voltage level being stretched thin before
reaching the Arduino. The interference caused by the sudden power usage by the servo
could be what resulted in the Arduino shutting off momentarily, setting the gripper back to
the initial open state.
A solution to this issue could be adding a reasonable sized capacitor to the circuit powering
the Arduino ensuring a momentary drop in voltage does not result in a full restart of the
Arduino.
-4
-2
0
2
Y-cordinate [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
X-coordinate [m]
Box placement
Drone position
Target object located
Box dropped
(a) Drone position under mission with prema­
ture drop
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(b) Height profile
Figure 3.11: Difference in target box appearance due to changing light conditions and
camera angle during a single flight
(a) Gripper contact
(b) Take­off with box attached
(c) Gripper opening prema­
turely mid flight
Figure 3.12: The mission where the drone dropped the box prematurely
3.5
Successful mission
Four of the final ten missions did manage to complete the mission as intended. The data
collected during all the successful missions are very similar, with the main difference being
42
==PAGE:51==
the initial position of the target object. The drone position and height profile from one of
the successful missions can be seen in figure 3.13.
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Y-cordinate [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
X-coordinate [m]
Box placement
Drone position
Target object located
(a) Drone position during successful flight 1
0
50
100
150
200
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Height [m]
Drone height
Reference
Target object located
(b) Height profile during successful flight 1
Figure 3.13: The drone position and the height profile of the drone during a successful
flight mission
We find the most significant difference between successful and failed flights when com­
paring the relative camera position and height profile before initiating the zero­zone de­
scent and entering the laser scanner zero­zone. In particular, two key aspects are very
determining for the flight’s success, both of which can be seen in figure 3.14b.
The first aspect concerns touching the box close enough in the middle for the gripper to
attach properly and failing to do so, resulting in the cases presented in section 3.1.1. For
the mission to succeed, the oscillations around the y­axis must be subtle and with a low
enough frequency that the drone does not begin rocking back and forth. Comparing the
oscillations in the successful mission in figure 3.14b to the failed mission in figure 3.3b,
we see that in the successful case, the y­position oscillates around the reference once
during the 10 seconds from 135­145 seconds, just before initiating the final pickup. The
failed mission in 3.3b oscillates twice during the 10­second window before the zero­zone
descent
The slow and gradual change in the y­direction kept the drone stable and centred perfectly
over the box as the zero­zone decent began ensuring proper connection between the
gripper system and the box.
The second aspect concerns getting the right velocity when entering the zero­zone. As
previously mentioned, deviating too much from the intended speed can cause the drone
to stop before touching or bouncing off the box. Looking at the height profile seen in
figure 3.14 the drone’s height completely stabilizes before initiating the final pickup. In
this nominal case, the zero­zone decent will get the drone to the right velocity before
entering the zero­zone, settling on top of the box without bouncing off it.
43
==PAGE:52==
130
135
140
145
150
Time [s]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Camera X [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera x
Reference x
Height
(a) Relative X coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before successfully picking up
the box during: successful mission ­ flight 1
130
135
140
145
150
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
Camera Y [m]
0
1
2
3
Height [m]
Camera y
Reference y
Height
(b) Relative Y coordinate returned by the cam­
era server just before successfully picking up
the box during: successful mission ­ flight 1
Figure 3.14: The position returned by the camera server just before successfully picking
up the box during: successful mission ­ flight 1
After picking up the box the Raspberry Pi camera view gets partially blocked which we can
see in figure 3.15. Due to the lack of vision, the drone switches back to GPS to navigate
back to the starting point. The solution we developed allowed the Raspberry Pi to control
the gimbal, moving the camera from a downwards facing direction to straight ahead of
the drone. However, in a very late stage of the project, the PWM pin on the Raspberry Pi
took permanent damage, disabling this feature.
It is still not optimal that the object blocks such a big part of the camera view after suc­
cessfully picking up an object. Rearranging the camera could solve the issue with the
only change to account for being the offset between the camera and the gripper.
Figure 3.15: View from Raspberry Pi camera with a box attached
44
==PAGE:53==
4
Conclusion
The project sought to develop the drone tasked with picking up an object from a boat in
the MBZIRC 2023. The mission required the drone to do so without using a GPS signal
for navigation, and the requirements mention very little about the features of the object to
retrieve. The final solution should therefore rely on computer vision for navigation and be
equipped with a versatile gripping mechanism capable of picking up a multitude of objects
regardless of material, colour and shape.
A complete gripper system was designed and 3d­printed from scratch. The system con­
sists of two gripper arms driven by a strong servo motor that, upon activation, will clench
an object picking it up. The gripper system also includes an Arduino nano controlling the
servo, a trigger button for detecting when a box is within reach of the gripper and additional
power and voltage converting circuit components.
The final solution developed is capable of scanning an area of size 9.7x7.3 meters ahead
of the takeoff area navigating using an aruco marker placed on the takeoff platform. The
drone would scan the area for objects having a specific colour, and to ensure the solution
is as versatile as possible, a calibration script can be run to change which colour the target
object should scan for quickly. Once the drone detects the target object, it will lock onto the
target and continuously adjust itself to keep tracking the target, changing light conditions
or the drone casting shadows onto the object. With the target object locked, the drone
would proceed to move to the object and begin the fetching stage. Carefully lowering
itself, the drone would touch the box triggering the gripper mechanism and picking up the
box. With the box successfully retrieved, the drone turns on the GPS navigation and flies
back to the takeoff zone before releasing the box.
The final solution builds on some previously done work, particularly for the PID controller
part, where additional features have been added to solve some of the issues discovered
during the project.
The final solution suffered from hardware limitations, the most significant being the Ter­
raranger laser scanner used for measuring height. The laser scanner could not measure
any distances below 50 cm, which forced the control of the drone height to be done in
open loop during the pick­up stage of the mission. This limitation can be traced back to
half of the failed missions where the drone would either stop before reaching the target
object or touch it with such speed that it would bounce back into the air as the gripper
closed.
Under the final test of the mission, 40% of the flights completed the mission. Despite the
success rate being a bit underwhelming, the developed solution is definitely capable of
achieving the project goal of finding and retrieving an object.
45
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
5
Future work
With a success rate of 40%, some areas need to be improved to increase the robustness
of the solution. The following section will only look at the most essential changes that
could impact the mission’s overall success rate.
5.1
Add accurate low range height sensor getting rid of the
zero­zone
The most common cause for missions failing was the lack of height measurement when
getting below 50 cm. The current hardware limitation of the current laser scanner prevents
the final and most critical decent from being performed in closed­loop, which makes this
part of the mission susceptible to deviations from the nominal case. A much more ideal
solution would be to have the current mid­range laser scanner measure all heights above
2 meters but then also have an additional low­range laser scanner taking over in the range
2 meters and below.
If a low­range laser scanner got added, it would remove the open­loop control of the zero­
zone decent altogether.
5.2
Hardware malfunction
After picking up the target object, the drone should return to a specific location carrying
the object. When carrying an object, there is a high chance for the object to obscure
the camera’s field of view, thereby significantly reducing or even completely removing the
drone’s ability to rely on the camera server for navigation. We identified this as an issue
early in the process and developed an integration allowing the drone to move the camera
90 degrees to face straight ahead instead of downwards. The main mission program was
supposed to turn the camera after successfully picking up the target object and find its way
back to the starting point. During testing, the PWM pin on the raspberry PI got damaged
and stopped transmitting any signal. Without the PWM signal, the gimbal would always
be facing downwards, resulting in the current solution attempting to mitigate the issue by
offsetting where the target object attaches to the drone keeping the camera field of view
as un­obscured as possible.
The natural first step is to replace the Raspberry Pi, thereby getting access to the ability
to control the gimbal.
5.3
Remove static error on height measurement
Despite only seeing this during one of the final tests, identifying what caused the significant
static height error and solving it will increase the overall robustness of the solution.
5.4
Reevaluation of image data to position conversion
In the current solution, there is a discrepancy between the position the camera server
returns and the actual position of the drone. The current conversion corresponds to the
drone being roughly one meter above the ground, which means that the relative position
updates are too small when the drone is higher than this. Below this threshold, the relative
position updates are too large.
47
==PAGE:56==
In the final test, we saw how the controller would apply too much control action as the
drone moved too close to the object, which could be solved by incorporating the current
height when reading the relative position from the camera server.
5.5
Threading the object tracking
In the current solution, after the drone takes off and the camera server initiates a search
pattern using the aruco marker as a reference, it periodically checks the frame to see if
the target object is present. This also means that the camera serve has an inconsistent
running time. Only scanning for aruco markers takes approximately 40­60 ms, whereas
scanning for the target object takes approximately 80­100 ms. The current solution checks
the frame for a target object every 10’th iterations, which means that one out of ten position
updates takes approximately 120­160 ms instead of 40­60 ms. Once a target object is
locked, the camera server stops checking for aruco markers and only scans for the target
object, thereby keeping a consistent albeit slower run time.
A solution could be to set up a separate thread in the camera server that always scans the
image for a target object. The most straightforward way of implementing this would be to
set up a thread only scanning for the aruco marker and one only scanning for the target
object. Both threads should have access to a main registry telling if the target object has
been located. Once the target object thread finds the object, it should set a flag high in
the registry indicating that the aruco thread should stop updating the position. The server
should continuously transmit the latest position update.
An implementation like this will ensure a consistent run time when tracking the aruco
marker and only change the run time of the reference update after the target object is
found.
5.6
Add infrared sensor to indicate if an object was
successfully picked up
In the current setup, the drone has no way of telling if the box did get successfully picked
up or not. By adding a small infrared sensor just above the gripper system, it would be
possible to read if an object is, in fact, currently attached to the drone.
Adding such a sensor would make it possible for the drone to perform several attempts to
pick up the box should the first one fail. Since most of the flight time is spent locating the
object, it would make sense not to have to restart the mission if the drone deviated from
the nominal case seconds before initiating the pickup.
48
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
DJI (2022). DJI Onboard Software Development Kit.
Tarek Mamdouh (Apr. 2020). Color spaces (RGB vs HSV) ­ Which one you should use?
URL: https://discover.hubpages.com/technology/Color-spaces-RGB-vs-HSV-Which-one-
to-use.
Canny, John (Nov. 1986). “A Computational Approach to Edge Detection”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI­8.6, pp. 679–698. ISSN:
0162­8828. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851.
Raspberry Pi Documentation ­ Introducing the Raspberry Pi Cameras (June 2022). URL:
https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/accessories/camera.html.
Realtime Distance Estimation Using OpenCV – Python (May 2022).
Irwin Sobel (2014). “An Isotropic 3x3 Image Gradient Operator”. In: URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/239398674_An_Isotropic_3x3_Image_Gradient_Operator.
49
==PAGE:58==
50
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
A.1
A
A.1.1
Image representation
Digital images are typically represented as large 2d arrays. Each position in the array
corresponds to a pixel. Depending on the image format, each position is either a binary
value, a single value ranging from 0­254 for greyscaled images or a vector if the image is
in colours. For an RGB representation, each position has three values, each representing
the saturation level of red, green and blue. If the image is formatted as an HSV image,
which stands for hue, saturation and value, then the colour spectrum is represented as a
cylinder and can be seen in figure A.1. Each pixel is represented by three values corre­
sponding to the different HSV channels.
Figure A.1: Visual representation of the colour spectrum in the HSV domain
A.1.2
Gamma­correction
Gamma­correction works by going through each pixel and then multiplying the pixel value
with a fixed coefficient with the next pixel value being equal to
O =
( I
255
)γ255
(A.1)
Looking at A.1, it can be seen that with γ > 1, the value of bright pixels will increase
more than the value of low­value pixels. The effect on the pixel value is illustrated nicely
51
==PAGE:60==
in figure A.2 where the output values of high and low­valued pixels are compared for
different values of γ.
Figure A.2: Output mapping for different γ values when applying gamma­correction
A.1.3
Filter kernels
Most filters are applied to the images in the discrete domain by performing convolution
in the spatial domain. Convolution is the process of taking a filter kernel and running
said kernel over the image, multiplying the pixel value of the image with the overlapping
kernel value and summing all the resulting values to the centre pixel. Once a pixel value
has been calculated, the kernel moves one position in the source image and repeats the
process. A visual interpretation of how the new pixel values are calculated can be seen
in figure A.3.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.3: Convolution of images in the spatial domain
To ensure the image’s brightness does not change, the sum of kernel values should add
up to 1. If the sum is larger or smaller than 1, the image’s brightness will either increase
or decrease.
There exist many different filter kernels that will enhance or reduce specific properties in
the image. The one used in the pre­filter is the low­pass Gaussian kernel.
A.1.4
Gaussian kernel
The Gaussian kernel is a smoothing kernel. What smoothing kernels have in common is
that they take a variation of the average of all neighbouring pixels and use that as the new
value. One of the most commonly used low­pass filters is the Gaussian kernel, where
pixel averaging follows a Gaussian curve. The shape of the Gaussian curve means that
the value in the middle of the kernel is slightly more significant than the values further
away from the middle pixel. The values of the Gaussian kernel are found by using (A.2)
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 e−x2+y2
2πσ2
(A.2)
When comparing the resulting image after applying a Gaussian kernel and a regular av­
eraging kernel, the images can be close to indistinguishable from a human perspective.
But since both kernels are smoothing, this is to be expected. The math behind using the
Gaussian kernel is demonstrated nicely in figure A.4.
53
==PAGE:62==
x
=
13
16
19
2
4
6
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Zero padded image
4
6
5
3
5
4
0
1
1
Resulting image
0.0585
0.0965
0.0585
0.0965
0.1591
0.0965
0.0585
0.0965
0.0585
1. order
Gausian kernel
Figure A.4: Convolution using a Gaussian kernel
A.1.5
Edge detection
Canny edge detection ­ Noise reduction
Standard implementations of the horizontal Canny edge detection will start by smoothing
the image using a low pass filter. The OpenCV implementation does this by convoluting
the image with a 5x5 Gaussian kernel, following the procedure covered in 2.3.3.
54
==PAGE:63==
Canny edge detection ­ Gradient intensity
After the image has been smoothed, a gradient kernel is applied. A gradient kernel am­
plifies regions in a certain direction where the intensity of the image changes rapidly. The
default gradient kernel used by the Canny edge detection is the ’Sobel kernel’Irwin Sobel
2014. The kernel is applied horizontally and vertically to detect rapid changes in both
directions. Both kernels can be seen in figure A.5.
Gx = Horisontal_Sobel ∗A
(A.3)
Gy = A ∗V ertical_Sobel
(A.4)
(A.5)
Note that the ’*’ represents the symbol for 2d convolution. By looking at the kernels, it can
be seen that if applied to a large section with uniform pixel values, the kernel’s symmetry
causes the kernel’s positive and negative sides to cancel each other out. If, for example,
the horizontal Sobel kernel is applied to an area where pixel values are transitioning fast
horizontally, then the difference between the positive and the negative side of the kernel
will cause the effecting pixel to spike in value. Or, put in different words, the resulting
image will have high values in areas where the gradient changes rapidly, i.e. edges. One
important feature to note is that depending on the kernels going from a ’high­value region’
to a ’low­value region’, the resulting pixel value when applying the kernel will either be
positive or negative; both, however, represent a rapid transition. Since an image can’t
have negative pixels value and both transitions from high­low as well as low­high should
show up in the resulting image, the magnitude of the two kernels found by the following
equation
G =
√
G2x + G2y
(A.6)
To find the angle of the gradient the following equation is used
Ω= atan2(Gy, Gx)
(A.7)
Figure A.5: Figure of first order Sobel Kernels. On the left we see the horizontal Sobel
kernel and on the right the vertical Sobel kernel
An example of how the an horizontal and vertical are calculated can be seen in figure
A.6. Using equations A.6 and A.7 on the Gx and Gy from figure A.6 the G and Ωmatrices
found in figure A.7.
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Convolution of the image A with a horizontal Sobel kernel
(b) Convolution of the image A with a vertical Sobel kernel
Figure A.6: Example of convolving image with horizontal and vertical Sobel kernels
Figure A.7: The result of using equation A.6 and A.7 on Gx and Gy from figure A.6
Canny edge detection ­ Non­maximum Suppression
Ensuring the edges returned are as thin and well defined as possible, the Canny Edge
detection algorithm performs a Non­maximum suppression of all the pixels. Looking at
the resulting image G in figure A.7, it can be seen that the edges of the object A are not
that well defined after applying the Sobel kernels. While the edge of the object does have
a higher magnitude when compared to the neighbouring pixels, it does pose an issue that
the edge pixels are not the only pixels present in the image. The Non­maximum sup­
pression compares the gradient angle and the magnitude of every pixel with both of the
neighbouring pixels in the gradient direction. If the magnitude of one of these neighbouring
pixels is greater than the pixel examined, then the examined pixel is suppressed. Since
the pixels are represented in a matrix grid, and the gradient angle determines which neigh­
56
==PAGE:65==
bouring pixels to check when comparing the magnitude, all gradient angels are rounded
to the nearest multiple of 45 degrees. This can be seen in figure A.8
Applying Non­maximum suppression using the angle of gradient from A.8 the non­maximum
suppressed image can be seen in figure A.9
Figure A.8: The Ωmatrice rounded to the nearest multiple of 45 degrees together with
the direction of the gradient at each pixel
Figure A.9: The image G matrice after being non­maximum suppressed
Canny edge detection ­ Hysteresis Thresholding
Finally, to prune the final image for edges and small connected elements that are not
edges but rather a small collection of pixels from a background that also show up in the
image, the OpenCV Canny edge detection algorithm performs the final step: hysteresis
thresholding. Here the connectivity and the pixel value determine if pixels are, in fact,
part of an edge. If the pixel value falls below the lower bound, then the pixel is discarded
immediately. If the pixel value is greater than the upper bound, then the pixel is considered
guaranteed to be part of an edge. If a pixel value falls between the two thresholds, it is
only considered part of an edge if it is connected to an edge with pixels above the upper
bound.
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.elektro.dtu.dk/
