==PAGE:1==
Thermomechanical modelling
of metal additive manufacturing
with focus on residual stresses and deformations
Master Thesis
Alberto Santi
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Thermomechanical modelling of metal additive manufacturing
with focus on residual stresses and deformations
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Alberto Santi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
BeAM Machines ­ www.beam-machines.com
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Produktionstorvet,
Building 427, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Manufacturing,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU (Denmark), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Mechan­
ical Engineering, MSc Eng at DTU and for the Master’s degree in Materials En­
gineering at Universitá degli Studi di Padova (Italy).
This project concludes the
two Master’s degrees as prescribed by the T.I.M.E. (Top International Managers
in Engineering) double degree programme. Further information can be found at
https://timeassociation.org/.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in heat transfer, solid mechanics,
FE­modelling, and physical metallurgy.
Alberto Santi ­ s202888
Signature
24 ­ 06 ­ 2022
Date
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the last decade, metal additive manufacturing (MAM) has been experiencing huge
growth thanks to the increase in production performances and knowledge of it. Pre­
diction of temperatures and stresses during production is still challenging due to the
complexity of the process, requiring several experimental tests or numerical simula­
tions to achieve the desired components.
This project involves the development of a computationally­efficient part­scale ther­
momechanical model to reliably predict temperatures, residual stresses, and defor­
mations generated during directed energy deposition (DED) of stainless steel 316L.
Furthermore, ex­situ and in­situ analysis results are reported from the production of
samples with different process parameters to detect and better understand these
influences in the final components.
A single­track deposition thermal model is firstly validated through a high­fidelity
meso­scale CFD model. The model is produced in the commercial CAE software
ABAQUS through an in­house developed Python script that partitions the geome­
try as desired and defines loads, boundaries, and initial conditions according to the
Flash Heating (FH) method. Subsequently, a thermal and thermomechanical model
for a multi­layer multi­track deposition is obtained and validated through compar­
isons with IR­camera and photosensor recordings executed during production. It is
shown that the built thermal model can simulate a deposition of 14 layers made of
three tracks in around 200 hrs of computational time (if also the scanning pattern is
included in the simulation), which increases to 3400 hrs when moving from a thermal
to a thermomechanical analysis.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deep and sincere gratitude to Prof.
Mohamad Bayat for his persistent guidance, the positive spirit and knowledge trans­
mitted throughout this project. He has been an excellent mentor, motivating me week
after week. Without his supervision, most of what I achieved would not have been
impossible.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Prof. Jesper Hattel and Prof. Franco Bonollo,
for the exceptional collaboration on the project and between universities. It has been
a pleasure to work on this topic I have been assigned, and being supervised by two
experts in the field like you has made this experience even more enjoyable. Thank
you very much for the interesting talks we had together, the opportunity you gave
me, and the confidence that I could do a good job. I hope I will have the occasion in
the future to collaborate further with you.
I would like to thank Prof. Alberto Fabrizi for his massive contribution to the experi­
mental work in this project. I have been so lucky to have someone like him supporting
me in most of the microstructural analyses performed and providing insights on these
investigations.
I would like to thank Venkata Karthik Nadimpalli for the help in interpreting and ex­
plaining several of my experimental results.
Finally, I would like to thank the universities where I studied, Universitá Degli Studi
di Padova and the Technical University of Padova. These institutions allowed me
to gain a robust and complete engineering education while having fun and living the
best years of my life.
Going out of the academic field, I have several people to sincerely thank: I will try
not to write too much (the thesis is already long to read ).
I would like to thank all my friends here in Denmark. They have been my second
family in these two years. When time flies by, this usually happens because you
surround yourself with fantastic people. Well, the time has passed very, very fast.
Thank you for the amazing ride.
I would like to thank all my friends in Italy, especially those with whom I am still
regularly in contact. They are the proof that friendship defeats distance. I can’t wait
to see you again soon.
Last but definitely not least, I would like to thank my family, Andrea, Monica, and
Walter. I never find the right words to say how much I love them; for sure, these few
lines are not enough. Everyday when I wake up I really hope that I am the person
they wanted me to be. The most beautiful part of this? They make me feel like I am
that person. Grazie, di tutto.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Metal Additive Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Modelling of metal additive manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Numerical Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results
51
4.1
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Numerical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5
Conclusions and Future Work
101
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Metal additive manufacturing (MAM), also known as 3D printing of metals, is a pro­
duction technology capable of creating components with minimized material waste,
optimized material properties, and, above all, complex geometries unachievable with
conventional processes. On the contrary, MAM parts often have a high density of
stochastic defects within the final part, usually occurring from the complexity of the
manufacturing process.
For the above­mentioned reasons, MAM has been conventionally used only for pro­
totyping. Nevertheless, the last years have shown how several companies are in­
terested in improving their component’s designs via topology optimization. This has
led to an increase in their interest in exploiting MAM as a tool for production [1, 2].
To achieve this goal, reliability, reproducibility, and production quality are three key
factors that MAM must improve to reach the level of more mature manufacturing
processes. Optimization of the process parameters is challenging, and characteri­
zation and understanding of the production defects are currently under investigation
in research labs and early industrial adopters [3].
While ex­situ and in­situ monitoring of defects are reasonably cost and time consum­
ing, due to a “trial­and­error” approach in trying to minimize the defects by optimizing
the process parameters, the development of digital twins through numerical simula­
tions is instead cost­effective and related to the physical, thermal and microstructural
phenomena that are occurring during the process. In the current scenario, compu­
tational resources are not powerful enough to achieve high­fidelity simulations of
average­dimension components over a reasonable amount of time. To reach a sta­
tus in which companies can use such simulations for their purposes, a compromise
between computational time and reliability of results must be found.
This Master’s Thesis project aims to model, through the Finite Element Method
(FEM), the thermomechanical behavior of a specific MAM method, the Direct En­
ergy Deposition (DED), also called Laser Cladding (LC). This is done at a part­scale
level by taking advantage of the Flash Heating method, capable of strongly reduc­
ing the computational time of simulations. The numerical model will be validated
through a comparison with already validated CFD models, photosensor data and
thermal camera outputs. The project focuses exclusively on DED of stainless steel
316L.
The main outcome of this Master’s Thesis project is predicting residual stresses
and deformations of DED­printed components, allowing the users to compensate
for these deformations before printing the final components. This translates to a
considerable benefit for the end­user in terms of time and cost­saving. Furthermore,
the samples produced experimentally are also studied from a microstructural per­
spective, to obtain further insights into the defects and phases generated by the
manufacturing process. Thanks to this analysis, it will be possible to correlate differ­
ent process parameters to the microstructural characteristics found.
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Project plan
The beginning of the project was utilized to get familiar with all the concepts and
tools necessary to execute the Master’s Thesis project. In the beginning, all the
recorded classes of the DTU course 41748 ”Modelling in materials and manufac­
turing engineering ­ thermomechanics” were thoroughly revised and the exercises
supplied by the course were solved. This provided fundamental concepts related to
thermomechanical simulations that were missing from the previous master’s study
programme. Subsequently, another training was undertaken in the FEM commer­
cial software ABAQUS, used to perform thermal and thermomechanical simulations.
While doing so, further knowledge was sought in the literature related to the manu­
facturing process, modelling techniques, and defects during production.
After this initial phase, the following steps have been executed:
1. Thermal modelling of a single­track DED to calibrate the simulation parame­
ters. Validation with thermal data from CFD simulation.
2. Thermal modelling of a multi­track and multi­layer DED to predict the tempera­
ture field during material deposition. Semi­quantitative validation with thermal
data from IR­camera and photodiodes used during production.
3. Thermo­elasto­plastic modelling of a multi­track and multi­layer DED to pre­
dict the residual stresses and deformations obtained subsequently to material
deposition.
From an experimental perspective, several depositions of 316L produced by DED
with different process parameters were provided at the beginning of the project.
Samples have been prepared for material characterization, performed at Universitá
degli Studi di Padova (Italy). All this part of the project was performed alongside the
computational steps, performed at DTU through Python scripts for ABAQUS mod­
elling.
1.2
Project objectives
The following objectives are reached along with the project and extensively explained
in the following chapters:
1. Prediction of the temperature and stress fields for a single­track directed energy
deposition with part­scale simulations of low computational cost. Validation of
the thermal model through CFD simulation, parametric analysis of simulation
parameters related to the FH method, and mesh­independency study.
2. Prediction of temperature and stress fields for a multi­layer directed energy
deposition with macro­scale simulations of low computational cost. Validation
of the thermal model through the thermal camera and photodiode data from
experiments. Parametric analysis of simulation parameters related to the FH
method.
3. Correlation of microstructural features (grain size, presence of inclusions, etc.)
with process parameters and simulation outputs.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical background
In this chapter, the reader is provided with the theory on the relevant topics of the
thesis. Technical information related to the DED process and the state­of­the­art on
the modelling techniques are presented here.
2.1
Metal Additive Manufacturing
Additive manufacturing (AM) is a production technology commonly called 3D printing.
This simple definition is partially correct. 3D printing comprises the creation of parts
with geometries that would be unachievable with any other method, improving the
design freedom of mechanical engineers while developing new products. Additive
manufacturing, instead, also includes the technologies that provide the addition of
material for the sake of repairing, adding features or improving in any way already
built components. It is then reductive to define AM as 3D printing, and for this reason
a more technical definition and description are given below.
ASTM Standard F2792­12a [4] defines additive manufacturing as ”a process of join­
ing materials to make objects from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as op­
posed to subtractive manufacturing methodologies”. According to this standard, AM
is categorized into seven different techniques, based on the different working princi­
ples, heat sources, feedback state, material selection, etc.:
1. Binder jetting ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which a liquid bonding
agent is selectively deposited to join powder materials”.
2. Directed energy deposition ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which fo­
cused thermal energy is used to fuse materials by melting as they are being
deposited”­
3. Material extrusion ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which material is
selectively dispensed through a nozzle or orifice”.
4. Material jetting ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which droplets of build
material are selectively deposited”.
5. Powder bed fusion ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which thermal en­
ergy selectively fuses regions of a powder bed”.
6. Sheet lamination ­ ”an additive manufacturing process in which sheets of ma­
terial are bonded to form an object”.
7. Vat photopolymerization ­ ”additive manufacturing process in which liquid pho­
topolymer in a vat is selectively cured by light­activated polymerization”.
All these processes share a common workflow: the desired part to be printed is
designed through a CAD software, from which a printable file is extracted (STL file,
obtained through tessellation and made of triangulated surfaces), computationally
3
==PAGE:12==
sliced, and finally printed in a baseplate from which is finally detached through post­
processing cutting techniques.
Materials that can be used for these processes are of different classes (plastics, met­
als, ceramics) and process­dependent. Focusing on metallic materials (and hence
on metal AM), only four out of the seven above­mentioned techniques are eligible:
binder jetting, directed energy deposition, powder bed fusion, and sheet lamination.
The first three methods can use powder as feedstock, while the last one uses only
laminated sheets of materials. Furthermore, binder jetting uses liquid binders to
achieve the final components, leaving powder bed fusion and directed energy de­
position as the only techniques capable of melting and sintering the metallic powder
directly. This usually happens through a laser that provides thermal energy to the
material. These two techniques are the most diffused in metal AM, and a further
description is now provided.
2.1.1
Laser powder bed fusion
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is characterized by melting of the material within a
powder bed heated up by a laser that follows a predetermined scanning pattern. The
technique takes advantage of two moving platforms, one containing the powder bed
that is going to be melted by the laser, and one containing new powder feedstock.
Once a new layer is built, the first platform moves one increment down, allowing
space for introducing new powder supplied by the second platform through a move­
ment of an increment up, and thanks to a ”coating tool” (a roller or a blade) which
moves the powder on top of the just built layer [5]. A schematic representation of the
process can be found in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of a laser powder bed fusion process [6].
2.1.2
Powder­based directed energy deposition
Directed energy deposition (DED) is a process characterized by melting of the ma­
terial during its deposition, as the name suggests, meaning that no preliminary pow­
der bed is deposited in the baseplate. Also wire arc AM and cold metal transfer are
considered DED processes; however, in the rest of the thesis ”DED” refers only to
powder­based DED. As represented in Figure 2.2, there is a powder stream given by
appropriate nozzles, that gets heated up and melted by a laser coming from another
nozzle placed in the same robotic arc.
4
==PAGE:13==
Afterwards, the melt will collide with the baseplate where the layer gets built. All
the system of nozzles is usually surrounded by a flow of shielding gas (e.g. argon)
to prevent oxidation [7]. This robotic arm can move around the baseplate, which,
depending on the setup, might be able to translate or rotate (this last option is usually
considered for axial­symmetric samples).
Figure 2.2: Schematic representation of a directed energy deposition process [8]
2.1.3
Process Parameters
Several similarities can be found between LPBF and DED: laser power, laser diam­
eter, scanning speed, and particle size distribution are just some of the main factors
that influence both processes. These mainly affect how the heat gets transferred
inside the component getting built and in the baseplate. A quantitative comparison
of the main characteristics related to the two processes is reported in Table 2.1. The
two processes aim at different dimensions of produced parts, with LPBF usually con­
sidered for smaller components than the ones made via DED. It is also possible to
notice that the particle size distribution shows a tighter range for LPBF, to facilitate
the homogeneous spreading of the powder for the new layers [9]. Furthermore, DED
is applied at a slower scanning speed and higher laser power inputs. This is another
explanation for why more material is deposited for every layer but it also shows how
much more heat input is delivered for manufacturing the part. This increased thermal
energy plays a significant role in the final microstructure and in determining of the
final quality of the produced part, as it might cause defects like oxidation, waviness,
and bigger heat affected zone in the baseplate.
Table 2.1: Comparison between LPBF and DED [9, 10].
Process
LPBF
DED
Power [W]
50 ­ 1000
100 ­ 3000
Scanning speed [mm/s]
10 ­ 1000
5 ­ 20
Max. build size [mm3]
500 x 280 x 320
2000 x 1500 x 750
Layer thickness [mm]
0.05 ­ 0.2
0.5 ­ 2
Dimensional accuracy [mm]
0.04 ­ 0.2
0.5 ­ 1.0
Surface roughness [µm]
7 ­ 20
4 ­ 10
Particle size [µm]
15 ­ 45
45 ­ 150
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.4
Deposition pattern and geometry
Figure 2.3 shows an example of the DED deposition, with some other crucial param­
eters (and terminology) related to the laser scanning. Assuming that the deposition
pattern is linear, with several parallel lines of material deposited one close to the
other, then these lines are called tracks, and the distance between the center of
these is called hatch spacing. The shape and the dimension of the cross­sections
of the tracks are once again related to all the process parameters previously men­
tioned. To avoid pores inside the produced parts, the hatch spacing is usually smaller
than the laser diameter, causing overlap between neighbouring tracks. This overlap
affects the tracks’ cross­section once again.
When energy is provided to melt the deposited material, also the baseplate gets
severely affected. Part of the baseplate might reach the melting temperature, caus­
ing some penetration of the melt inside the baseplate (that is the case for high dilution
ratios [11]). Thermal cycles occurring at the depth of the baseplate while newer lay­
ers are being made, affect the microstructure of the baseplate material, and hence its
mechanical properties and appearance. Also, thermal stresses are generated that
affect the mechanical properties of the final products, and, in some cases, lead to
unwanted cracks or severe deformations. The zone that gets influenced in such a
way by the deposition is called heat affected zone (HAZ). This is also found in similar
processes such as welding.
Figure 2.3: Schematic representation of consecutive tracks deposited in one layer:
h is the depth of the heat affected zone (HAZ), d the depth of the melt pool, Lt shows
the layer thickness, and h the hatch spacing. [9]
Another issue that affects this process, still related to the thermal input provided into
the deposition, is the phenomena of residual stresses. These are tensile and com­
pressive stresses remaining inside the deposited material. Once the part is detached
from the baseplate, stresses are released, leading to subsequent deformation of the
part, and deviation from the nominal desired geometry. The thermal history (heating
and cooling) during such manufacturing processes plays a key role and thus deter­
mines the magnitude of these stresses. Usually it is possible to reduce temperature
gradients inside the part with a proper scanning pattern. Optimization of scanning
6
==PAGE:15==
patterns for LPBF can be achieved through digital twins [12] or machine learning [13,
14]. Instead, DED users minimize these stresses mainly through parameter adap­
tation (e.g. power­compensation) [15]: many DED systems have in­line process
monitoring setups that can perform a closed­loop feedback control of the parame­
ters. This possibility is not available for LPBF. Simulations are also an option for
DED [16, 17].
2.1.5
Defects
The reason behind the presence of defects in metal AM is still under investigation,
mainly because these might not be linearly related to the input process parameters
but combinations of these. Furthermore, these depend on the chosen alloy and part
geometry. The main defects found in LPBF and DED are listed below.
1. Porosities. When pores are found inside a component, these might deteri­
orate the component’s application, making it less reliable, especially from a
mechanical perspective. Origin of pores can be of several types: unmelted
powder (lack of fusion pores), gas pores given by absorbed gases during pro­
duction or gases present in the powder particles, improper process parameters,
too big hatch spacing, melt pool instability (keyhole porosities), shrinkage from
rapid solidification, etc. [18]. Depending on the dimension and shape of pores,
it is possible to distinguish their origin. Gas porosities are generally spherical
and very small, with diameters smaller than 200 µm. The other ones might be
less homogeneous in geometry with sharp edges that cause stress concentra­
tion if a mechanical load is applied. For the pores induced by lack of fusion, an
index LF is available to quantify their presence (LF = d/Lt, from the param­
eters of Figure 2.3). A high LF value corresponds to a decreased amount of
the lack of fusion pores and to a higher energy input in the deposition [19].
2. Residual stresses and deformations: as mentioned in the previous section,
heating and cooling lead to the material’s expansion and contraction, leaving
residual stresses after printing. When a new layer is deposited, the deposition
gets is heated up and hence wants to expand, exerting tensile stresses on the
material below and building up a compression state. When the new layer cools
down, it contracts, making it accumulate tensile stress. The magnitude of these
stresses is material­dependent: residual stresses tend to be higher for high
expansion coefficients, high Young’s modulus, and yield strength [20]. These
can finally distort the final component and give rise to cracks in the component
[21]. Apart from the already mentioned optimization of the scanning pattern,
other ways to mitigate this issue are:
• Compensate during the design phase of the component the expected
deformations caused by the residual stresses in such a way that, after
deformation, the desired geometry is achieved [22, 23]. This, however,
requires preliminary knowledge of the residual stress field inside the pro­
duced part.
• Heat treatments, that bring stress relief to the part before detaching it from
the baseplate. These are related to the type of deposited metal [24].
3. Inclusions. Oxide inclusions might be found inside the structures, caused
7
==PAGE:16==
by the initial composition and purity of the powder, shielding system from the
external environment, and thermal history.
4. Loss of alloying elements. In many metal alloys, several elements are present,
and some of them might be volatile, especially when the temperature is beyond
the melting zone. These elements are, for example, aluminum, magnesium,
manganese, zinc, and chromium, as they present high equilibrium vapor pres­
sure. The amount of lost alloying elements is related to the ratio between sur­
face and volume, leading that more surface availability brings enhanced loss,
and decreases mechanical performance and corrosion resistance.
2.1.6
Solidification and microstructural evolution
Solidification of the melt pool in DED and LPBF has a lot of similarities with welding
and casting. When the melt gets deposited, and the heat source moves away, this
region starts to cool down very quickly below liquidus temperature (above which all
the metal alloy is liquid). When this happens, solidification starts along with nucle­
ation and subsequent growth of grains. The way how the growth happens affects
the final size and shape of the microstructure. Five main growth mechanisms are
distinguished: planar, cellular, cellular dendritic, columnar dendritic, and equiaxed
dendritic. Figure 2.4 shows that the temperature gradient G and solidification rate R
are two critical parameters for the determination of the solidification mechanism and
the grains’ final dimension. It is possible to find all the above­mentioned mechanisms
in MAM, except for planar growth that involves too low cooling rates.
In the case of dendritic mechanisms, the distance between primary dendrites λ (den­
drite arm spacing, DAS) can be evaluated with G and R through the Kurz­Fisher
equation [25]:
λ = AG−mR−n
(2.1)
where A, n, and m are material­dependant parameters. The distance between sec­
ondary dendrites (SDAS) can be found with the same formula by using n = m. DAS
and SDAS can be related to the mechanical properties.
Figure 2.4: Effect of temperature gradient G and solidification rate R on grain size
and morphology [26].
8
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Modelling of metal additive manufacturing
Digital twins are virtual representations of real entities and systems. The develop­
ment of digital twins for manufacturing processes is a critical step, due to the com­
plexity of the built numerical models and the necessity of proofing their reliability
(through validation). A lot of physics are involved in the real­life processes, there­
fore, a lot of assumptions are typically made to develop numerical models for these
processes. But if the assumptions and computational times are acceptable, then
digital twins have incredible power, both in predicting production outcomes but also
for monitoring processes that are hard to monitor experimentally. The description
just provided is summed up very nicely by an aphorism from a British statistician,
George E. P. Box: ”All models are wrong but some are useful” [27].
Numerical models for MAM can be divided into three main categories, according to
Meier et al. [28], based on the different length­scales and the involved physics within
the simulations:
• Micro­scale models: focus on the microstructural evolution and dendritic growth
of the metallic material.
• Meso­scale models: focus on the melting of the powder and behavior of the
melt pool, generation of porosities, and similar defects that occur during depo­
sition (usually, these are CFD simulations).
• Macro­scale models: focus on the production of the full component, studying
the residual stresses and deformations that ate generated (usually FEM simu­
lations).
In this project, the built digital twin is a part­scale thermomechanical model of DED,
produced using FEM. This section gives a general introduction of how heat transfer
and solid mechanics problems are solved through FEM, how to couple these two, and
a final overview of how to apply this knowledge for simulations of MAM processes.
2.2.1
Finite Element Method
FEM is a numerical method to solve partial differential equations. It can be applied to
1D, 2D, and 3D problems. These problems are defined inside domains, discretized
in elements of which the end­points are called nodes. For solving the differential
equations, it is assumed that the solution of these is linear within each element and
continuous between them. Overall, the whole solution in the domain does not look
like a continuous function, but it is a piece­wise linear function that approximates
the real function. Solutions can be obtained if proper boundary conditions and initial
conditions are given to the domain.
The advantage of FEM with respect to other numerical methods for solving partial
differential equations, like Finite Difference Method (FDM), for example, is the easier
discretization of 2D and 3D domains, thanks to the possibility to introduce curvilin­
ear elements and reproduce complex geometries, and also the possibility of solv­
ing derivatives (through the element­wise linearity assumption above mentioned) in­
stead of using finite differences to do that. This last thing also allows evaluation of
functions and their derivatives always in the same positions (nodes) and not in the
9
==PAGE:18==
mid­points between them. Finally, elements can be of several different types and
geometries: it is also possible to have elements with an enhanced number of nodes,
allowing to allocate non­linear behaviors inside them (quadratic if one node is added
for each side of the element, cubic for two nodes added to each side, and so on).
Usually, linear and quadratic elements are the most used, depending on the problem
and domain under investigation.
To better elucidate the applications of FEM methods, the following two applications
to solid mechanics and heat transfer are discussed below.
2.2.2
FEM in Solid Mechanics problems
Within static solid mechanics problems, the final objective is to find out the displace­
ment field u(x, y, z) of a body under different types of loading. This is obtained by find­
ing the stresses acting on it through static equilibrium partial differential equations,
from which subsequently the strains are evaluated through materials law ε = f(σ).
Finally then displacements can be obtained from u(x, y, z) = f(ε).
Assuming a tridimensional body subjected to loading, static equilibrium is given by
σij,j = Pi
(2.2)
where σij is one of the stress components and Pi ois a volumetric force in the
i−direction. Repeated index j gives, according to Einstein’s summation convection
[29], a summation of the derivatives over the index range (from 1 to 3, considering
the 3D problem). The equation could be alternatively rewritten as
∂σxx
∂x + ∂σxy
∂y + ∂σxz
∂z
= Px
∂σxy
∂x + ∂σyy
∂y + ∂σyz
∂z
= Py
∂σxz
∂x + ∂σyz
∂y + ∂σzz
∂z
= Pz
(2.3)
Neglecting now plasticity, for an isotropic and homogeneous material stresses are
linearly related to strains (and hence finally to displacements) according to the gen­
eralized Hooke’s law (reported here in the matrix form):


ε11
ε22
ε33
2ε23
2ε13
2ε12


= 1
E


1
−ν
−ν
0
0
0
−ν
1
−ν
0
0
0
−ν
−ν
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 + 2ν
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 + 2ν
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 + 2ν




σ11
σ22
σ33
σ23
σ13
σ12


(2.4)
where E is the Young’s modulus and ν the Poisson’s ratio.
Showing how FEM works would work for solving the above­presented equations is
still complex. However, the simplified 1D case is way easier to explain and allows to
understand how the 3D case works as well. Considering then only the x−dimension,
10
==PAGE:19==
the following system made of the 1D static equilibrium (without volume forces con­
sidered) together with Hooke’s law must be solved:





dσ
dx = 0
σ = E ε = E du
dx
(2.5)
The problem in Figure 2.5 is now taken as an example (inspired from DTU course
of thermomechanics 41748). This is a 1D bar of length L and cross­sectional area
A fixed on one side and on the other with a prescribed load ¯σ applied. This bar is
discretized in a mesh of 5 elements, giving then, considering that every element has
a node as an end­point, 6 nodes in total. The objective is to obtain the values of
the displacement field u(x) at the nodal positions, getting a column vector of values
{u} = {u1; u2; u3; u4; u5; u6}. In other words, every node has only one degree of
freedom. Knowing the value of u(x) at the nodes will generate the above mentioned
piece­wise linear function: the more refined the mesh, the more nodal positions will
be available, and the better the estimation of the linear function. Within element 1,
the linear approximation of the displacement field will look like u(x) = a+b·x, where
a and b are evaluated and rearranged as follows:
u(x) = x2u1 −x1u2
x2 −x1
+ u2 −u1
x2 −x1
· x = x2 −x
x2 −x1
u1 + x −x1
x2 −x1
u2 = N1u1 + N2u2
(2.6)
where x1 and x2 are the coordinates of nodes 1 and 2, respectively. The rear­
rangement of the equation finally gives u(x) as function of the nodal displacements,
multiplied by the so­called shape functions N1 and N2, only dependent on the co­
ordinate x. These can be compacted in a vector {N} = {N1; N2}, giving hence
u(x) = {N}T{u}1, where {u}1 = {u1; u2} is the local displacement vector of element
1. To switch from the local displacement vector to the global one {u}, a 2x6 matrix
{L}1 is introduced, with all zeros except for the two nodal positions touched by ele­
ment 1 (one positions for each line, giving L11 = L2,2 = 1). It is possible to generalize
then the formula for a unspecified e−element:
u(x) = {N}T{u}e = {N}T [L]e {u}
(2.7)
This formula is now inserted in the 1D Hooke’s law from Equation 2.5, where u(x)
has to be derived. Only the shape function vector {N} depends on x, and its deriva­
tion gives out a new vector, defined as {B}. This is why, in Section 2.2.1, it was
5
ത𝜎
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
𝐿
𝑥
Figure 2.5: 1D beam constrained on one end and with a prescribed load ¯σ applied.
This is discretized in 5 elements (in blue), corresponding to 6 nodes (in orange).
11
==PAGE:20==
mentioned that FEM allows the calculation of derivatives without using finite differ­
ences.
At this point, the following equation is introduced:
∫L
0
dw
dx E du
dx dx = ¯σ · w(L)
(2.8)
This is the principle of virtual work for the 1D static equilibrium. The function w(x) =
{N}T{w}e represents virtual displacements. This equation is obtained by manipulat­
ing the equilibrium equation: more on how this is obtained and the meaning of virtual
displacements can be found in continuum solid mechanics books [30]. The expla­
nation behind this formula is that every system is in equilibrium if the internal virtual
work (left side of the equation) equals the external virtual work, for every virtual dis­
placement field w(x). This shows that the final result is independent from the virtual
displacement chosen in any case, and why extra time is spent on the characteristics
of this one.
What matter is that w(x) can be derived in the same way as the displacement field, as
it has the same dependency from x through the shape functions. It is then possible
to rewrite the left­side of the equation with what has been explained so far:
∫L
0
dw
dx E du
dx dx =
5
∑
e=1
∫xe
2
xe
1
dw
dx E du
dx dx =
5
∑
e=1
∫xe
2
xe
1
{w}T
e {B} E {B}T {u}e dx
(2.9)
{w}e and {u}e are independent from x, these can go outside the integral.
5
∑
e=1
{w}T
e
(∫xe
2
xe
1
{B} E {B}T dx
)
{u}e =
5
∑
e=1
{w}T
e [k]e{u}e =
=
5
∑
e=1
{w}[L]T
e [k]e[L]e{u} = {w}
(
5
∑
e=1
[L]T
e [k]e[L]e
)
{u} = {w}T[K]{u}
(2.10)
where [k]e is the 2x2 element stiffness matrix and [K] the 6x6 global stiffness matrix.
The number of columns and rows in the element stiffness matrix equals the number
of nodes for each element multiplied by the number of degrees of freedom for each
node. The number of columns and rows in the global stiffness matrix equals the total
number of nodes multiplied by the number of degrees of freedom for each node.
To avoid once again introducing further complexity in this explanation, the derivation
of the right­hand side of the principle of virtual work is not here shown, but works in
a very similar way as the one just explained. The final result is ¯σ ·w(L) = {w}T {Fe},
where the vector {Fe} contains the external forces applied to the nodal positions. In
the case of Figure 2.5, the only applied force corresponds to Fe,6 = ¯σ · A in the node
6, where A is the cross­sectional area of the bar. All the other components of that
vector are null.
Finally, the principle of virtual work can then be rewritten as
{w}T ([K]{u} −{Fe}) = 0 −→[K] · {u} = {Fe}
(2.11)
12
==PAGE:21==
and if this has to be satisfied for all possible values of {w}T, then the term inside the
parenthesis has to be null. This is the linear system of equations where {u} is the
only unknown. From these, stresses and strains can be easily derived afterwards.
To make the system of equations solvable, it is essential to remember to fix the
boundary and initial conditions within it. Prescribed stresses are introduced in {Fe}
as already explained. A prescribed displacement ¯u to a node i is obtained by forcing
all zeros in the i−th row of [K] and Fe(i) = ¯u. In this way, one obtains ui = ¯u.
While computing {Fe} is relatively straightforward (values introduced only where pre­
scribed stresses are present), the global stiffness matrix might be a bit more tricky.
To simplify its derivation, it is possible to compute all the local stiffness matrices [k]e
and assemble them into the global one by positioning the components accordingly
to the position of the respective nodal displacements. For both cases, the following
notation can be used:
[K] =
∑
e
[k]e
{Fe} =
∑
e
{fe}
(2.12)
This concludes the derivation of the system of equations through FEM. Again, the
case shown here is the simplest possible scenario. When expanding the domain to
2D and 3D, additional degrees of freedom are available for each node, corresponding
to the different coordinates. Furthermore, non­linear plasticity might play a role in
the structural analysis, and hence might be relevant for the stress­strain relation,
introducing new complexity.
2.2.3
FEM in Heat Transfer Problems
Heat transfer problems are ruled mainly by the heat conduction equation. When
steady­state is considered, modelling through FEM is performed in the same method
as for the structural problem just analyzed, considering that thermal equilibrium must
be reached. If one takes the steady­state heat conduction equation, this is rear­
ranged through FEM as follows:
∇2T = 0
−→
[Kth]{T} = {rQ}
(2.13)
where [Kth] is the global thermal conductivity matrix, {rQ} is the external thermal
load vector, and {T} is the nodal temperature vector. This linear system of equations
resembles strongly what is shown for solid mechanics in Equation 2.11, and hence
will not be further explained.
For heat transfer problems, however, it is relevant to dig into transient problems.
In several applications, such as the one of this project, it is interesting to know the
temperature development along time, and not only in the final steady­state. In MAM,
for example, a steady­state is reached only sometime after the end of the produc­
tion, when the component reaches the room temperature, and, in that moment, the
temperature value has no more big relevance. The 3D transient heat conduction
equation is expressed as
k
(∂2T
∂x2 + ∂2T
∂y2 + ∂2T
∂z2
)
+ ˙Q′′′ = ρcp
∂T
∂t
(2.14)
13
==PAGE:22==
where k is the conductivity, ˙Q′′′ is the heat body flux, ρ is the density, and cp is the
specific heat for constant pressure.
The heat conduction equation is shown here directly in 3D, as the derivation for FEM
is more accessible than the previous structural case. This is because the temper­
ature is the only nodal degree of freedom present in both 1D and 3D cases. In the
structural analysis, instead, a shift to more dimensions would have brought displace­
ment in the new coordinates, and increased degrees of freedom and dimensions of
the vectors and matrices.
FEM derivation of Equation 2.14 gives the following system:
[Cth]{ ˙T} + [Kth]{T} = {rQ}
(2.15)
where respect to the previous formulation, a new term is added, related to the tran­
sient nature of the system. [Cth] is the thermal capacity matrix, and { ˙T} is the rate
of temperature change (all the components are dTi/dt). This can only be evaluated
if the temperature is known for two subsequent time steps. Two different options are
available: an explicit method which uses the information of the temperatures from the
previous time step, or an implicit method which, instead, uses the temperature from
the new time step. Generally, commercial FEM software tend to prefer implicit meth­
ods, as these are usually unconditionally stable. The commercial software used for
this project, ABAQUS, takes advantage of an implicit method for solving this equa­
tion. The method used is the backward Euler formula:
Tt+∆t = Tt + ∆t · f(t + ∆t, Tt+∆t)
(2.16)
where Tt+∆t is guessed in the first iteration, inserted on the right­side to calculate the
new Tt+∆t. This is executed in a loop until the new temperature value converges for
all the nodes. The function f(t, T) is given by the system of equations 2.15 for each
node.
Heat transfer in FEM usually considers only conduction as a transfer method (ruled
by Fourier’s law). This is a good approximation when solid bodies are analyzed.
Other methods like convection can not be neglected when fluids are considered.
For these, however, the modelling method changes slightly, as usually computation
fluid dynamics (CFD) takes advantage of the Finite Volume Method (FVM), where
it is easier to implement these transfer methods. Even for solid bodies, however,
convection and radiation could be relevant phenomena at the surfaces, where most
likely the body is not adiabatic. For this reason, it is possible to introduce them
as boundary conditions: these work as in the solid mechanics problem, where the
system of equation is forced to have some values at the prescribed nodes based
on the convection and radiation parameters (film coefficient h, emissivity ϵ, ambient
temperature).
2.2.4
Weakly­coupled thermo­elastic model
While presenting how the FEM mechanical model works, the effect of the tempera­
ture on the analysis was neglected. In reality, this plays an important role for high­
temperature systems, as solid bodies get expanded and contracted depending on
the temperature value. The coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) α plays the role
14
==PAGE:23==
by coupling the thermal problem to a subsequent mechanical problem in a thermo­
mechanical problem. This parameter is defined as the relative change of dimension
with respect to a temperature gradient of 1◦C:
α = 1
L
dL
dT
(2.17)
How do these expansions and contractions affect the stress field of the component?
To answer this, a new strain component has to be introduced. So far, always as­
suming zero plasticity, the total amount of strain was considered to be elastic strain,
εtot = εel, and hence to Hooke’s law. With the introduction of the thermal expansion,
thermal strain εth = α · ∆T also has to be considered in the analysis, giving out
εtot = εel + εth.
When a thermomechanical FEM model calculates the displacement, this is related
to the total strain εtot. Only the elastic component will contribute to the generation of
stresses, which has to be then calculated by knowing the expansion of the elements
based on the materials’ CTE and change in temperature. This is done by εel =
εtot −εth = εtot −α∆T.
The way how a thermomechanical problem is solved then is accordingly to this flow:
1. Solve the thermal problem to find the new temperature field in the component’s
nodes.
2. Find the thermal strains from the temperature field.
3. Solve the mechanical problem to find the component’s displacement field (and
hence total strains).
4. Derive the elastic strains by subtracting the thermal from the total strains.
5. Find the stresses in the component given by the elastic strains through Hooke’s
law.
The FEM implementation of the thermal problem is the same as in Equation 2.15.
The implementation of the mechanical part is slightly rearranged to introduce the
new definition of the elastic strain. For a simple 1D linear elastic case, the problem
defined in Equation 2.5 is now







dσ
dx = 0
σ = E εel = E
(du
dx −α · ∆T
)
(2.18)
that brings to the following FEM formulation:
[K] · {u} = {Fe} + {Pth}
(2.19)
where {Pth} contains the information about the thermal strains.
As the connection between the thermal and mechanical problem is only given by one
variable (temperature), the newly built model is defined as weakly­coupled.
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2.5
Weakly­coupled thermo­elasto­plastic model
Finally, plasticity is briefly discussed here to reach the type of model used mainly
for metal additive manufacturing modelling. As most materials have temperature­
dependant material properties, these must be considered for high­temperature ap­
plications. Concerning the elastic limit (or yield stress, σy), this tends to decrease
with increasing temperature, up to 0 when the liquidus temperature of the metal
is reached. This is why, especially for high temperatures, stresses go beyond the
elastic limit, so it is essential to have a plastic model for the material under anal­
ysis. Several models are available: J2­flow theory, isotropic hardening, kinematic
hardening, etc.
In this project, the used one will be the power­law hardening model:
εmech = εel + εpl = σy
E
[1
n
( σ
σy
)n
−1
n + 1
]
(2.20)
where εpl is the irreversible plastic strain and n is the hardening coefficient, a mate­
rial property temperature­dependent. This is a non­linear model, bringing additional
complexity (this is why this has been presented only now). It is implemented in the
mechanical part of the model through an incremental theory that will not be shown
here in formulas to avoid introducing new definitions only to prove that the model
works. Conceptually, plastic strains are dependent on the loading history. Hence,
the status of the previous (explicit method) or subsequent (implicit method) time step
is required when advancing in the simulation. The implicit method is based on two
stages, one called elastic trial that checks whether the plastic flow is present or not
in the new increment, the second is called return mapping and introduces the plastic
behavior (if applicable), bringing to the proper behavior of the material.
2.2.6
Modelling techniques for MAM residual stresses
All of the part­scale thermomechanical simulations for modelling metal additive man­
ufacturing solve equations according to the thermo­elasto­plastic models briefly ex­
plained in the previous pages. These include the physics necessary to replicate the
generation of residual stresses and deformations within a component that is sub­
jected to thermal loading.
The following step is to figure out how to replicate all the steps happening during the
MAM production, like movement and speed of the laser, how the laser provides heat
to the part, generation of the component along time, etc. High­fidelity replication of
the process, where the complete realistic movement of the laser is replicated, takes
an excessive amount of CPU time. This is why CFD simulations, that involve a good
amount of physics of the process, are used only at a meso­scale level. The chal­
lenge is to create simulations that can give a reliable result within the shortest time.
Research within the field is still studying new methods and improving existing ones
to provide software for industries that want to predict the behavior of components
produced through MAM as soon as possible. Some of the main methods that are
investigated nowadays are here listed:
• Flash Heating (FH): based on the concept of lumping. Several layers are
lumped in blocks (meta­layers) that are activated along the simulation time ac­
cordingly to when these are deposited during production. When activated, a
16
==PAGE:25==
body or surface heat flux starts heating the lumped block. Heating happens in
a very concise time (between 1­10 ms, which is why the method is called ”flash”
heating), allowing the heat to be conducted within the piece and baseplate be­
fore the deposition of the subsequent lump. The time used for the heating and
the amount of heat flux given to the block are challenging to be calibrated. An
application of a part­scale model based on the flash heating method is pro­
posed in the following articles [31, 32]. The working principle of this method
is used throughout the modelling part of this project. A more comprehensive
explanation is provided in Section 3.2.1 related to the used methods.
• Sequential Flash Heating (SFH): flash heating is based on the lumping of
layers, meaning that the method is insensitive to the scanning pattern of each
layer. To overcome this issue, an extension of the FH method is proposed
through the sequential flash heating method. In this one, lumping is related
just to tracks of different layers, hence taking into account the effect given by
the scanning pattern. This, however, brings to a more significant computational
cost. Bayat et al. showed in [32] how the SFH method in LPBF considers the
anisotropic behavior of the printing process, more similar to the actual process
with respect to the FH method, which gives a homogeneous and isotropic print­
ing.
• Gradual Heating (GH): same working principle of FH, but with the difference
that the heat source is provided for a longer time, rather than in a very short
one. This brings way lower peak temperatures. Even if the temperature field
could be nicely predicted even with these models and a shorter simulation time,
melting might not be detected, meaning that thermomechanical simulations are
less likely to be reliable. One application for modelling LPBF is found in [33]. A
comparison between FH and GH will be proposed within this project for a DED
deposition of a single track.
• Inherent Strain (IS): this method was invented in the 1970s and was firstly
applied for welding. This is based on a meso­scale thermomechanical simu­
lation, where temperature, stresses, and strains are extracted from it. From
these, the plastic strains are calculated, and the results are mapped into a big­
ger part­scale model, where only a static mechanical analysis is performed at
the end. Liang et al. developed and compared IS simulations performed with
experiments for LPBF [34] and DED [35].
• Agglomerated Heat Source (AHS): based on the concept of agglomeration.
Instead of simulating the laser hatch­by­hatch, the laser of different layers is
merged, but the same scanning speed is kept. This brings to a bigger (imag­
inary) heat source with a simplified scanning path that needs less iterations
to converge. The method still results quite expensive from a computational
perspective. Hodge et al., for example, used the agglomerated heat source
method to model LPBF of stainless steel 316L and agglomerated the laser
source by providing heat power and beam size 20 times bigger than the real
ones [36].
An exhaustive review of the state­of­the­art modelling techniques for micro­, meso­
and macro­scale modelling of LPBF and DED is found in Bayat et al. [37].
17
==PAGE:26==
18
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
Two sections are here reported: one describing the experimental setup and the pro­
cess parameters used, with a description of the monitoring equipment used for col­
lecting data from the produced samples, and a second section related to the mod­
elling techniques used to create the numerical models in ABAQUS.
3.1
Experimental Setup
Samples of stainless steel 316L have been produced through DED at FORCE Tech­
nology in March 2020 (setup shown in Figure 3.1).
Certified composition of the
powder and particle size distribution are provided in Table 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.
Baseplates are made of the same material as the powder deposited (AISI 316L).
Table 3.1: Chemical analysis of 316L powder.
Element
C
Cr
Fe
Mn
Mo
N
Ni
O
P
S
Si
%
0.03
17.44
Bal.
1.49
2.48
0.1
13.9
0.027
0.04
<0.01
0.75
Table 3.2: Particle size distribution of 316L powder.
Particle size [µm]
>106
106­90
90­75
75­63
63­53
53­45
45­38
<38
%
0.0
4.1
27.2
39.5
21.0
7.1
1.0
0.0
Figure 3.1: Experimental setup at FORCE Technology. In (a), an example of depo­
sition is shown, with the nozzle printing the part on a small baseplate.
19
==PAGE:28==
Different process parameters are investigated to study their influence in the final
components. The parameters investigated are laser power P, scanning speed v,
and beam size . Three levels for each parameter are used. A review of all the ex­
periments with related process parameters is presented in Table 3.3 for ST­samples
and Table 3.4 for MT­samples. Here are the rules behind the nomenclature of the
experiments:
• First letter: value of the laser power. N stands for nominal power (2100 W), H
for high power (2700 W), and L for low power (1500 W).
• Second letter: value of the scanning speed. N stands for nominal speed (1000
mm/min), H for high speed (1500 mm/min), and L for low speed (500 mm/min).
• Third digit (optional): if the beam size is different than 3 mm, the value of the
beam diameter is reported (4­5 mm).
• Special nomenclature is given to the samples produced with nominal speed,
power, and beam size: N1, N2, N3.
• Special nomenclature is given to the samples produced with nominal parame­
ters and power compensation of the laser: PC1, PC2, PC3.
Firstly, a set of 9 single tracks were produced within the same plate. Afterwards,
depositions made of 14 layers, with 3 tracks for each layer, were printed (two samples
per baseplate). Tracks within the same layer are overlapped by 1 mm. The samples
produced with beam sizes of 4 mm and 5 mm are made with only 5 layers. The
scanning pattern and coordinate system are reported in Figure 3.2. Finally, some
samples were produced with continuous laser power adaptation: depending on the
incoming irradiation from the melt pool, a linear function decreases the power as the
melt pool irradiation surpasses a fixed experimentally­found threshold value. This
technique keeps the amount of energy that is given to the material more controlled.
Power compensated samples are only available in multi­layer­track experiments as
this effect is visible only when building up several layers.
Table 3.3: Single­track (ST) experiments.
Tag
P [W]
v [mm/min]
 [mm]
N1
2100
1000
3
N2
2100
1000
3
N3
2100
1000
3
LN
1500
1000
3
HN
2700
1000
3
LH
1500
1500
3
HL
2700
500
3
HL4
2700
500
4
HL5
2700
500
5
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Table 3.4: Multi­track (MT) experiments.
Tag
P [W]
v [mm/min]
 [mm]
N1
2100
1000
3
N2
2100
1000
3
N3
2100
1000
3
LN
1500
1000
3
HN
2700
1000
3
LH
1500
1500
3
HL
2700
500
3
HN4
2700
1000
4
HN5
2700
1000
5
PC1
2100
1000
3
PC2
2100
1000
3
PC3
2100
1000
3
20
==PAGE:29==
z
2 mm
9.27 mm
y
x
Figure 3.2: Scanning pattern and coordinate for multi­layer­track samples.
A complete view of the system of nozzles is presented in Figure 3.3. This presents
six powder nozzles, placed co­axially with respect to the laser source with a distance
radius of 6.665 mm. These have a diameter of 1.5 mm. Only three feedings of pow­
der are activated for each deposition. The powder supply is tilted for every feeder at
14°, so the powder coming from the different sources will collide at 18.5 mm of dis­
tance. This distance is then used from the nozzle to the baseplate of the deposition.
For multi­layer­track samples, the distance is kept constant by moving the nozzle
upwards for each new layer. The whole system of powder nozzles is surrounded
by 24 smaller nozzles that generate a shield of inert gas to reduce the interaction of
oxygen with the powder stream. These are, once again, coaxial with respect to the
laser beam.
14o
L = 18.5 mm
Figure 3.3: On the left, the whole system of nozzles is represented: powder nozzles
(light­blue for active nozzles, dark­blue for the non­activated ones), shielding gas
stream (green nozzles), laser beam (red). On the right, the direction of the powder
stream and calculation of the length for powder interaction.
21
==PAGE:30==
3.1.1
Process monitoring
Both in­situ monitoring and ex­situ experiments are used to collect information about
the outcomes of the depositions. In­situ techniques are methods to monitor the ex­
periment while the sample is being manufactured. For MAM, the biggest importance
is usually given to investigating temperature evolution during deposition. Ex­situ
techniques are executed after the production and aim to investigate porosities, grain
size and shapes, inclusions, and residual stresses. In both cases, these monitoring
techniques relate results to the implemented process parameters to find the best set
of parameters for the production.
The following in­situ techniques are installed during the experiments executed for
this project:
• Infrared thermal camera (Thermal imager OPTRIS Pi640). While a regular
camera records the images by collecting the visible light, infrared cameras col­
lect the non­visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum released by the dif­
ferent bodies, specifically the infrared (IR). This one is responsible for storing
the thermal energy that is released from the recorded bodies through radiation.
What happens inside the camera is that an IR sensor transforms the received
IR­signal into an electric one, processed to create the images that compose the
recorded video. How the temperature is calculated from the IR­signal depends
on the temperature range given to the tool for calculation and the assumed
value of emissivity. These cameras are very powerful as, through the corre­
sponding software, they allow to average the temperature of a specific zone
along with the whole video and only of a single pixel. At the same time, it is
possible to extract temperature­time data from these.
The infrared camera is used for all the multi­layer­track experiments. This one
was placed on the side where the first track of every layer was built; therefore,
the most valuable data is collected on the wall built on that side. The exact po­
sition of the camera is unknown. This is placed relatively far from the deposition
to avoid damages due to the spattering of the melt pool during deposition. The
camera was not perfectly normal to the xz­plane but tilted with respect to it. If
the tilting around the z­axis is assumed negligible, the one around the x­axis is
not. A rough calculation of the inclination is performed by measuring the dis­
tance from the bottom first track to the top layer first track of the sample in both
the video and in the actual geometry. Considering L = 0.97 cm as the distance
detected through the thermal camera, and H = 1.075 cm (see Figure 3.4), the
tilting angle θ is given by trigonometry:
θ = cos−1(H/L) ≈25◦
(3.1)
One of the main parameters that is possible to modify when analyzing the
recorded videos with the thermal camera is the value of emissivity ϵ, which
relates the amount of emitted radiations of a body to those ones emitted from
a perfect black body. A higher emissivity brings lower temperature output val­
ues from the thermal camera. The melt pool during the deposition always looks
darker (see Figure 3.4) because of its lower emissivity. This brings an under­
estimation of its temperature when the emissivity of the software is regulated
to detect the right temperature of the deposited material
22
==PAGE:31==
z
y
x
θ = ?
L
H
y
x
z
Figure 3.4: On the left, an image obtained from the thermal camera during
the deposition of the final layer. The grey arrow shows the melt pool (darker
due to its lower emissivity). On the right, a representation of the inclination of
the thermal camera with respect to the geometry. Calculation of θ reported in
Equation 3.1.
• In­axis camera. This is placed co­axially with respect to the laser beam. It
allows visualizing the melt pool deposited from the top, monitoring the dimen­
sion and shape of this one, as the light gets reflected from it and hence gives
a bigger contrast on the image output. The idea is to compare the melt pool
size between the different process parameters and detect potential phenom­
ena of lack of fusion and spattering. The first one corresponds to when some
unmelted powder is detected and usually corresponds to a low energy density
provided to the material. The second one instead corresponds to the ejection
of melt from the melt pool due to excessive energy density supplied to the melt
pool, which makes it unstable.
• Thermocouple, well­known equipment for monitoring temperature. These are
made of two electrical conductors of different materials that creates an electri­
cal junction. The working principle of thermocouples is based on the Seebeck
effect: if one of the two extremities of the junction is exposed to a change in
temperature with respect to the other side (that is kept at a known reference
temperature), a voltage that is dependent on the temperature difference gets
generated. This value is then converted to the desired temperature value.
For these experiments, K­type thermocouples are used to monitor the temper­
ature development during deposition of MT­samples N1, N2, and N3. Useful
data is extracted only from N1, as for the other two cases, the thermocouple
got detached (N2 sample) or burned (N3 sample).
• Photosensor (PDA50B2 Ge Switchable Gain Amplified Detector, 800 ­ 1800
nm, 510 kHz BW, 19.6 mm2, Universal 8­32 / M4 Taps). Detector of the spectral
region that goes from 800 to 1800 nm, including visible light and NIR (Near
Infrared) waves. When these are detected, a voltage value is released by
the sensor that then records these along the experiment time. These voltage
values can be again related to some temperature values. This conversion is
not as automatic as for the thermocouples and therefore is not addressed for
this project.
23
==PAGE:32==
The photosensor is placed on the same side of the infrared thermal camera,
hence on the side where the first track of each layer is deposited. The sensor
looks at the full deposition, not at a specific point. Information about the tilting
angle of the sensor is not available and potential influence given by that is
neglected.
For what concerns the ex­situ techniques, these are executed after production only
on four representative MT­samples. The analyzed samples are N3, HL, LH, and PC2.
The reason why these samples have been chosen can be found in the different laser
volumetric energy densities E that these samples have. This parameter defines the
amount of energy that goes into the deposited metal per unit volume. According to
[38], this can be calculated as
E [J/mm3] =
P
vHt ≈P
v · constant
(3.2)
where P is the laser power, v the scanning speed, H the hatch spacing, and t the
layer thickness. The hatch spacing is constant between all the experiments. The
layer thickness slightly changes with the process parameters, as the amount of de­
posited material depends on the scanning speed at a constant powder flow. It is,
however, assumed as negligible the variation of t for simplifying the analysis. What
then is concluded is that the energy density depends strongly on the P/v ratio. The
selected samples N3, HL, and LH represent the experiments with the intermediate,
maximum and minimum values of E, respectively. The sample PC2, instead, was
chosen to study the differences given by the power compensation, therefore, it is
interesting to compare results with N3 (same process parameters but without power
compensation).
Before the investigations, the samples were prepared according to the standard pro­
cedure for microstructure observations: the cross­sections were mounted in resin,
grinded with SiC abrasive papers, polished to mirror surface with silica colloidal sus­
pension, and then etched with a chemical solution (Glyceregia: 15 ml glycerol, 10
ml HCl, and 5 ml HNO3). Several conventional material characterization techniques
are used:
• Optical microscopy (OM, Leica© DM6). This equipment uses the reflected
light from the metallic surface, which appears different for colouration and in­
tensity after the localized corrosion operated by the etching agent. Pictures
are taken at different magnitudes, both with and without etching. This gives a
general overview of the cross­sections, allowing to visualize eventual cracks
and porosities before etching. After etching, geometrical characteristics of the
different tracks are visible, giving a first visualization of the microstructural mor­
phology.
• Field­Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE­SEM, FEI© Quanta 250).
This equipment is based on the generation, in the vacuum, of an electron beam
at high energy which is focused through a system of lenses to a region of the
sample. The interaction electrons­material generates different signals acquired
by appropriated detectors and then elaborated to provide an image on a scale
of grey. The output signals are from various sources and different depths of
24
==PAGE:33==
the samples; therefore, they deliver different information. Here, information
from secondary electrons and back­scattered electrons are collected. The first
ones come from a region closer to the surface (5­50 nm), while the second
ones arrive from a deeper region (0.1­1µm). Before etching, this is used to
evaluate the shape and dimension of some porosities and inclusions. After
etching, dendrite arm spacing can be investigated together with the morphol­
ogy of precipitation phases in interdendritic regions.
• Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS, EDAX© ­ mounted on FE­SEM). This
equipment, when mounted on SEM, can discriminate the different energies of
X­rays coming out from the interaction between the electron beam and the sam­
ple, through usually a solid state Si(Li) detector. The output is then a spectrum
where, on the x­axis, the different energies of the X­rays are reported, and,
on the y­axis, the intensity of these. Different energies of X­rays correspond to
different elements and allow to obtain information on the sample’s composition.
• X­Ray Diffraction (XRD). This technique allows determining the phases of which
the material is made through a study of their reticular structures. It is based
on the diffraction from the interaction between X­rays and the atoms compos­
ing the crystalline structure. This phenomenon occurs because X­rays’ wave­
length and interatomic distances in metallic structures are of the same order
of magnitude. If X­rays interacting with the crystalline structure are in phase
before and after diffraction, then they create a signal that is perceived through
a detector. X­rays are shot to the sample at different angles, and only some of
them will be detected. It is finally possible to relate the angles at which signal
is detected to reticular parameters (precisely, the lattice plane that generates
this diffraction). Several lattice planes will be oriented appropriately at differ­
ent angles to create diffraction, for poly­cristalline samples. For this reason, all
possible diffraction peaks should be observed before concluding on the ma­
terial under analysis. The output of an XRD analysis is a spectrum with the
different angles used for the analysis on the x­axis and the signal output on the
y­axis.
Another application of XRD is to provide an evaluation of residual stresses.
This is based on evaluating the shift of XRD peaks from the virgin material
(without residual stresses). These shifts in the angles make it possible to eval­
uate the different residual stresses up to produce a stress map of the whole
sample. Good examples of stress maps are seen in [39, 40]. At the begin­
ning of the project, XRD was planned to be executed to evaluate the residual
stresses on the nominal samples, which are also predicted numerically. This
was not possible: all of the samples showed cracks on the external surfaces
that also go inside the cross­sections (Figure 3.5). Cracking brings a release
of residual stresses; therefore, it is not suggested to start a long evaluation of
residual stresses on such samples. XRD is then only limited to the phase eval­
uation and performed for 6 hours on the N3 (this is because the main phase is
assumed to be austenitic for all samples).
• Microhardness tester (Future­Tech© FM­810). This equipment was used to
measure the samples’ Vickers hardness on the build direction of the cross­
25
==PAGE:34==
sections: a load of 200 g with a dwell time of 10 s was applied for all the
measurements (2 profiles for each sample). The information on the micro­
hardness can be related to the microstructural characteristics of the samples.
The phase formed after the deposition of 316L is known to be austenitic (as
it is an austenitic stainless steel). The main differences between the samples
will be mostly related to the structures originated with this phase. Generally,
a rougher grain size usually provides lower hardness, while a finer one gives
higher hardness. Grain size is then related to cooling rates.
2mm
Figure 3.5: Cracks seen from the external surface (left) and from the cross
section (right) of the N3 sample.
26
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Numerical Modelling
The final objective of this project is to produce a computationally­efficient part­scale
thermomechanical model capable of providing information on the temperature and
stress field development during the production process. To ensure such a result, and
also to prove the efficiency and reliability of this one, several intermediate models are
built. Four macro­steps are recognized:
1. Building and validation of a thermal model of a DED single­track to predict the
temperature field
2. Building and additional validation of a thermal model of a DED multi­layer­track
to predict the temperature field
3. Building of a thermomechanical model of a DED single­track to predict residual
stresses
4. Building of a thermomechanical model of a DED multi­layer­track to predict
residual stresses
For the first two steps, validation is also executed. By validation, it is meant the prove
that simulations do predict the experimental behaviour and also show to what extent
the model is accurate. Without this step, the model can not be defined as reliable.
As thermomechanical models strongly depend on the temperature field generated,
validation is only executed on the thermal simulations. The objective is to show that
the predicted temperature profiles coincide with the experimental ones. Initially, the
plan was also to experimentally validate the thermomechanical simulations through
XRD for residual stresses. However, this was not executed due to the cracking of
all of the nominal parts. Proper validation of the thermal models still provides strong
basis for the reliability of the thermomechanical ones.
All simulations are built in the FEM­based commercial software package ABAQUS
/ CAE 2018, through Python scripting and based on the flash heating method. Sim­
ulations are based on the experimental nominal process parameters (samples N1,
N2, and N3 in Table 3.3 and 3.4). The numerical model can be expanded to the
other process parameters, but due to the time limits of the project, focus is given
only to the nominal ones. The simulations are executed in the High Performance
Computing (HPC) cluster of DTU, with 20 cores used for each run.
3.2.1
Flash Heating implementation
As previously described in Section 2.2.6, flash heating (FH) is a method based on
lumping layers to reduce the computational time of the part­scale thermomechanical
model. While the number of layers is big for LPBF, requiring lumping several of them
to get computationally efficient simulations, for DED, instead, the layers are usually
ten times thicker (as seen in Table 2.1). This brings to a smaller number of layers (14
layers is the maximum number for the produced experiments), and it is not required
to proceed with lumping of these.
FH is applied to DED by activating the geometry in different ways, depending on the
degree of fidelity one wants to achieve. From the less to the more reliable model,
the considered activation are layer­by­layer, track­by­track, or patch­by­patch. A
27
==PAGE:36==
patch is defined as a part of the component generated from the partitioning of the
track into several equal pieces. A bigger number of patches brings higher fidelity
and, subsequently, increased computational time. When a layer/track/patch gets
activated, thermal energy is provided within a very short period, called contact time
∆tcont, in which the heat is conducted within the material.
When building a FH model, it is crucial to respect two requisites: time consistency
and energy consistency. The concept of time consistency is related to the timing
when patches are activated. All of the patches are deactivated at the beginning of
the simulation, giving the baseplate without any deposition. Patches should then
be added one after the other with a gradual activation that matches the experimental
deposition times. The second concept of energy consistency means that the amount
of heat provided to the patches in the simulations should agree with the amount of
energy supplied to the powder during the deposition to have a numerical model that
respects the physics behind the deposition. These two requisites are fundamen­
tal to ensure the reliability of the simulation, as they show the first match between
numerical model and experiment.
The heat input in the simulation and energy provided in the experiment through the
laser are connected as follows. In ABAQUS, the laser heating can be provided to
the patches through body heat flux ( ˙Q′′′), which heats homogeneously all the nodes
that compose the desired element, or surface heat flux ( ˙Q′′), that provides heat to
the component through a decided surface. It is decided to use body heat flux as
energy input since, in the real process, the powder gets melted relatively homoge­
neously while getting deposited and not afterwards from the top surface. Being a
flux, this is defined as the amount of heat provided per time, per unit volume. With
the heat body flux, the process is better replicated. ˙Q′′′ is then input directly into the
3D heat conduction equation (see Equation 2.14). This is going to be provided only
throughout the contact time, meaning that ˙Q′′′ can be rewritten as follows:
˙Q′′′
[ W
m3
]
=
Q′′′
∆tcont
(3.3)
where Q′′′ is defined as the volumetric heat, that is the amount of energy provided
per unit volume. Again, this can be rewritten:
Q′′′
[ J
m3
]
=
Q
Vpatch
(3.4)
where finally Q corresponds to the total amount of thermal energy provided to the
patch, and Vpatch is the volume of the deposited patch.
In the real production, the amount of energy provided for a certain lapse of time can
be easily derived through the process parameters:
Q [J] = η · P · ∆t
(3.5)
where η is the powder absorptivity, P the known laser power, and ∆t the deposition
time. The absorptivity is defined as the ratio between the absorbed and incident en­
ergy of the laser and works similarly to a performance parameter. For 316L, usually
28
==PAGE:37==
η =0.3÷0.6 [41, 42]. The deposition time ∆t can be easily found by knowing the
length ∆x of the considered deposition (patch, track, or layer) and the known scan­
ning speed v to travel that deposition path (∆t = ∆x/v). Once η is found, this value
can then be implemented in Equation 3.3 and 3.4: in such a way, an energy consis­
tent value of heat body flux that can be implemented in the simulations is obtained.
The main challenge is that η is unknown: a trial­and­error approach is used to find
the correct value.
The values of ˙Q′′′ and the corresponding ∆tcont that validate the thermal model are
model­independent values. This means that for the given material (316L), process
(DED), and set of process parameters, these values can be used to reliably build
a thermal model of such production, even if the geometry and discretization of it
change. This is the reason why a single­track thermal model is firstly built: ˙Q′′′ and
∆tcont can be found and validated for a model that is easy and quick to simulate.
Then, these values can be transposed to a bigger multi­layer­track model that takes
several days to run, being sure that the thermal result will be correct (as long as all
the rest of the simulation is programmed correctly).
Finally, to ensure the correctness of the FH method, ∆tcont should be way smaller with
respect to the deposition time ∆t of the considered patch. Heating should happen
only for a short time of the deposition to ensure that the melt phase is reached and
allow for the heat energy to conduct within the rest of the geometry. If ∆tcont −→∆t,
the maximum temperature of the deposited material will decrease up to the point
where no liquid melt pool is created. This method is called, as already mentioned,
gradual heating (GH). It is a big issue from a thermomechanical perspective, as a
reduced peak temperature will bring reduced stresses (especially if no melt pool is
generated). For this reason, an additional study is executed to ensure that ∆tcont
brings to FH and not GH.
3.2.2
Thermal model of a DED single­track
Thermal modelling of a deposition of a single track is executed to achieve the follow­
ing objectives:
• Building a single­track thermal model in ABAQUS to predict the temperature
field after metal deposition.
• Validate the thermal model by comparison with a high­fidelity meso­scale CFD
simulation of the material deposition.
• Study of the influence of simulation parameters in the model.
• Check for independence from the mesh size.
3.2.2.1
Python scripting for ABAQUS
The numerical model is built in ABAQUS through a Python code: the general struc­
ture of this one is given in Figure 3.6. Firstly, all the relevant simulations parameters
are given to the code: the most important ones are heat body flux ˙Q′′′, the contact
time ∆tcont, scanning speed v, and the number of patches per track for the given
geometry (this value is going to be called p). Secondly, the geometry is uploaded
in the Part ABAQUS environment. Geometry is provided through a .sat file, since
29
==PAGE:38==
it is the extension that ABAQUS most easily read. With the geometry, all the rel­
evant geometrical parameters are also given: length and height of the component
and thickness of the baseplate are the most important ones. From the length of the
deposition L, the length of the patches is given by ∆xp = L/p. Different geometries
of single track are simulated and later discussed.
Afterwards, several commands are executed from ABAQUS through the code. The
deposition is partitioned (defined as a different body) from the baseplate. Based on
the value of p specified, an amount of (p−1) Datum planes are then defined between
the beginning and the end of the track at equal distances. These are used to partition
the deposition in the different patches. If p = 1, no partitioning in patches is executed,
and the track is entirely deposited in one step.
To later assign loads, boundary conditions (BCs), and other details, it is a good norm
to give names to the different partitioned components and to the relevant surfaces.
Names are given to components through Sets and Surfaces options. These are
then defined for all the patches, their surfaces, the baseplate, and its top and bottom
surfaces.
Material properties are then given to the software. As MAM modelling requires heat­
ing beyond liquidus temperature, temperature­dependent material properties up to
these values are used. ABAQUS linearly interpolates the values within the given
temperature­dependent data­points to extract values at every temperature within
the given ones. To solve numerically Equation 2.14, thermal conductivity k, den­
sity ρ, and specific heat at a constant pressure cp are required. These temperature­
dependent properties for stainless steel 316L are found in literature [43] and reported
in Table 3.5. Also the latent heat ∆Hf, that is the additional amount of heat released
Definition of input parameters: 𝑄̇ ᇱᇱᇱ, ∆𝑡௖௢௡௧௔௖௧,
𝑣, number of patches per track (𝑃)
Upload of geometry and definition of 
geometrical parameters (patch length Δ𝑥௉)
Partitioning of geometry (patches and 
baseplate) using Datum planes
Definition of sets and surfaces
Definition of material properties
Definition of activation steps with negligible 
step time (Δ𝑡஺= 10ି଼𝑠)
Definition of deposition steps with time 
consistent step times (Δ𝑡஽= 𝑣/Δ𝑥௉− Δ𝑡஺)
Definition of loads (𝑄̇ ᇱᇱᇱ) and related
amplitude function
Definition of sets activation (all sets 
deactivated in Step 1 apart from the first patch)
Definition of initial condition
Definition of boundary condition
Definition of convection and radiation at 
surfaces
Figure 3.6: Structure of the Python code for ABAQUS implementation of the flash
heating method in DED.
30
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.5: Temperature­dependant thermal properties of 316L [43].
Temperature
[°C]
26.85
726.85
1426.85
1726.85
2726.85
k
[W/(m·°C)]
13.96
24.96
35.95
18.97
22.35
cp
[J/(kg·°C)]
434
498
965
531
600
ρ
[kg/m3]
7900
7710
7430
7140
6740
during solidus temperature and liquidus temperature, is implemented. This is given
in the same reference as equal to ∆Hf = 272 kJ/kg. The solidus and liquidus tem­
peratures are also provided: Tsol = 1419.85°C and Tliq = 1489.85°C.
The different steps that define the temporal development of the simulation are then
implemented. The sum of all the step times gives the total simulation time that, if
extra cooling time is not considered, should coincide with the experimental deposition
time. For every patch in the model (except for the first patch deposited), two steps
are defined:
• Activation step: the set containing the patch of interest gets activated (inserted
in the model’s geometry). No heating is applied in this step. This step has a
total time that is arbitrary and almost negligible (for this project, this is chosen
to be ∆tA = 1·10−8s).
• Deposition step: the set previously activated is now heated up according to
flash heating. Convection and radiation are also activated, as later described.
The step time depends on the patch length, the scanning speed and the pre­
viously decided activation step time: ∆tD = v/∆xp −∆tA.
It is eligible at this point to ask why the two steps are not merged in only one, where
activation, heating, and all the other actions are performed in one unique step. The
answer is here given after a long period of using such a technique: the initial ap­
proach to the simulations was to merge activation and heating in the same time
step, as there was no real reason to split the two. The simulations results, however,
showed always that an excessive amount of heat was necessary to replicate the ex­
perimental results. The first guess was that too many heat transfer methods were
neglected in the ABAQUS model, but this was not the correct answer. The real rea­
son why there must be a very short activation step before of the deposition step is
found in ABAQUS User’s Guide [44]. When a deactivated element gets reactivated
within a specific step, this gets activated linearly along the step time: all the proper­
ties are linearly increased from 0 to the given value, reached only when tStep = ∆tD.
Also, the load applied to these is linearly activated from 0 to ˙Q′′′ within the step time.
This is an unrealistic behavior with respect to the experimental DED and, therefore,
it was badly replicating the results (or, in some cases, replicating the results only
with weird input parameters). When the patch was heated up, all of it was reaching
very quickly high temperatures (as the specific heat was very low, a small amount
of energy was necessary to increase the temperature) and not conducting within the
baseplate (as the conductivity was also close to 0). The reason why ABAQUS deals
in this way with the element reactivation is not known and might be due to other kinds
of analysis that the FEM software performs.
31
==PAGE:40==
After discovering this ”bug”, the idea was to move this ”linear reactivation” to a very
short separated step that anticipates the step where the heat flux is activated. This
is how the idea of using an activation step got created, in which the patch gets com­
putationally activated, and no other phenomena have time to happen as the step
time is very small (10−8s). The activation step time used, ∆tA, is removed from the
deposition step time.
For the first patch deposited in every model, however, the activation step is not nec­
essary: the simulation starts without deactivating this one, which is then present from
the very first step. The flow of the different steps for a simulation with p patches is
schematically reported in Figure 3.7.
Deposition step
Patch 1
Activation step
Patch 2
Deposition step
Patch 2
…
Activation step
Patch i-1
Deposition step
Patch i-1
Activation step
Patch i
Deposition step
Patch P
Activation step
Patch P
Deposition step
Patch P-1
…
Figure 3.7: Flow of the steps composing the ABAQUS simulations.
The very first patch of the simulation does not respect the equation for ∆tD = v/∆xp−
∆tA previously defined for the other patches. If the laser diameter is also bigger or
equal to the patch length, the second patch time also does not respect that equation.
The reason is given by the difference between the length of the laser pattern and the
deposition length, which corresponds to the laser diameter. An example is proposed
here to furtherly explain this (Figure 3.8). It is assumed that a deposition of L = 18
mm is generated with a laser of  = 3 mm and scanning speed of v = 5 mm/s. Given
the diameter of 3 mm, the total laser pattern (from A to B) is equal to Llaser = L −
= 18−3 = 15 mm. The total time necessary for the laser to run this distance (A→B)
is t = Llaser/v = 3 s. Neglecting the activation time ∆tA, two cases are analyzed:
A
B
A: Δ𝑥௉> Ø
B: Δ𝑥௉≤ Ø
15 mm
18 mm
Figure 3.8: Example to understand deposition times for first and second patches.
Different partitionings are proposed: p=5 (case A) and p=9 (case B). The partitions
in orange represent the patches with altered deposition time.
32
==PAGE:41==
• Case A (∆xp > : p = 5 and ∆xp = L/p = 3.6 mm ). The deposition time for
each patch is given by ∆tp = ∆xp/v = 0.72s. If this time is multiplied by the
number of patches, the total time obtained is 3.6 s > 3 s. This is then a non­
consistent way to replicate the deposition. The solution is given by keeping the
∆tp just found for all the patches except for the first one, which is deposited in
a shorter time:
∆t1 = t −∆tp · (p −1)
(3.6)
For this specific case, ∆t1 = 0.12 s.
• Case B (/2 < ∆xp ≤: p = 9 and ∆xp = L/p = 2 mm ). In this case, ∆tp =
0.4 s. By multiplying this value for the number of patches, a total time of 3.6 s >
3 s is again obtained. If Equation 3.6 is applied, what is obtained is ∆t1 = −0.2
s, which is non­physical. The solution is to change the patch deposition time
also for both the first and second deposition times as follows:
∆t1 = ∆t2 = 0.5 · [t −∆tp · (p −2)]
(3.7)
For this specific example, ∆t1 = ∆t2 = 0.1 s.
More patches would be affected by this time reduction for ∆xp ≤/2, however this
is an excessive discretization of the geometry.
A shorter deposition time for the first patch(es) of the simulation corresponds to a
quicker deposition which in the experiment should bring fewer material deposited.
This is experienced in reality: when the DED process starts, the laser beam starts to
move immediately, meaning that there will be a smaller amount of material that gets
deposited.
To conclude the discussion about activation and deposition steps, some words are
now spent on the initial, minimum, and maximum value for the increments within
these. An increment is the amount of time between two subsequent simulation’s
successful iterations. Whenever the simulation can not manage to converge for one
value of increment, ABAQUS reduces the increment value by 1/4 and tries again
to solve the transient heat conduction equation. On the other hand, if convergence
happens smoothly, the subsequent step ABAQUS usually tries to increase the incre­
ment value to speed up the computational speed. For the activation steps, the initial
and maximum increments coincide with the step time. The minimum step can be
arbitrarily chosen, and it is, in this case, assigned to 10−15 s. If the simulation works
appropriately, the minimum increment is never reached. If it is reached, it means
that the model is not correctly working. For the deposition steps, the initial increment
is equal to 1/10 of the contact time, the maximum increment is equal to 1/2 of the
patch deposition time, and the minimum step is again fixed arbitrarily to 10−15 s.
Once all the steps are defined, what happens for each one of these is specified (al­
ways through the Python code). Heat body fluxes ˙Q′′′ are assigned to the deposition
steps for the patch that is getting deposited. These loads are active only within that
step and immediately deactivated afterwards. To respect FH, the heat body fluxes
must be active for a time of ∆tcont < ∆tD. To achieve this, an amplitude function is
defined. This one determines how much of the specified thermal load ˙Q′′′ should be
used from 0 (no load) to 1 (load = ˙Q′′′) as a function of the step time. The function
33
==PAGE:42==
is defined through data­points, and then ABAQUS linearly interpolates the function
within those. The amplitude function for a FH method is reported in Figure 3.9. The
area below the function corresponds to the amount of volumetric energy inserted in
the patch. If the same ˙Q′′′ is given as thermal load and the model is switched to GH,
the amplitude function changes by increasing the contact time (user input parame­
ter), and the new amplitude is scaled down in a way such that the area below the
curve stays the same (according to the inverse proportionality shown in Equation 3.3,
to ensure energy consistency).
0
Step Time
0
1
Amplitude
Amplitude Function - FH
0
Step Time
0
0.2
1
Amplitude
Amplitude Function - GH
tD
tD
tcont
5
tcont
Figure 3.9: Amplitude function applied to thermal loads. For GH, the time contact is
quintupled (as an example), and the amplitude is divided by 5.
Boundary and initial conditions are now defined. It is fixed that the bottom of the
baseplate has a constant temperature equal to the room one (25°C). For single­track
depositions, the baseplate is not warmed enough to have a change in temperatures
on the bottom. For this reason, it is kept as a boundary condition to give more sta­
bility to the simulation. This is maintained for all the steps of the simulation. Initial
conditions are related instead to when t = 0 s. For all of the geometry, the room
temperature is fixed as initial condition.
To conclude, convection and radiation are implemented on some surfaces. Convec­
tion is defined in the top surface of the baseplate and in the patch surfaces when
these are activated. This stays active for the whole simulation, starting when the
surface of interest gets activated. Radiation is defined only in the surfaces of the
patches as these are the ones releasing most of the radiations. Also, radiation is ac­
tivated only when deposition happens and stays active for the rest of the simulation.
As known from heat transfer laws, convection is characterized by the film coefficient
h [W/(m2K)] and by the temperature of the environment surrounding the geometry.
The chosen values are h =15 W/(m2K) and Tamb = 25°C. For radiation, emissivity ϵ
and ambient temperature are requested. The chosen values are ϵ = 0.4 and Tamb =
25°C.
The final step that is missing from the setting up of the simulation is the mesh­
ing, which is the transformation of the geometry in FEM elements. This is strongly
geometry­dependent and changed several times during the different testing of the
models. It is also more difficult to implement through a Python code. For this reason,
34
==PAGE:43==
it has been decided to leave the meshing as a manual operation to be performed di­
rectly in ABAQUS by the user. Through the code, it is only specified to the software
that heat transfer elements are desired for the analysis.
3.2.2.2
Geometry
The model is validated through comparison with a meso­scale CFD model obtained
through FLOW3D software. In this one powder deposition is also simulated, with
the geometry generated along with the simulation. The length of the single track
used for the validation step does not match the experiments in Table 3.3. A shorter
track is preferred to fasten the validation process by reducing computational times.
Therefore, a track length of 3.8 cm is tested, and produced with nominal process pa­
rameters for what concerns laser power, scanning speed, and beam size. Baseplate
dimensions are 6x2x1 cm (corresponding to length, width, and depth).
The geometry obtained from FLOW3D is extracted in a .stl file (Figure 3.10), which
was not possible to directly implement in ABAQUS due to its complexity and heav­
iness. In .stl files, the geometry is discretized in triangles, representing only the
external surface. If some small holes are detected in the geometry, it is not possible
to convert it into a solid body without repairing it. Both ABAQUS and SolidWorks
detected some gaps in the extracted .stl file and could not fix them. For this rea­
son, it was decided to reproduce a very similar geometry by opening the .stl as a
graphical body and manually replicating its shape. For the track deposited, it was
not possible to extrude a semicircular area for the whole track length, as the .stl
showed a very inhomogeneous surface, given by the unsteady states at the begin­
ning and end of the depositions when the process is starting and ending, and less
material is deposited. Therefore, a detailed high­fidelity geometry is produced and
reported in Figure 3.11.
This geometrical complexity is transposed in convergence issues. For this reason,
after validation, a second geometry is also produced (Figure 3.12). This presents
identical baseplate dimensions and track length, but a constant cross­section of the
track for its whole length. This ”simplified” model removed any convergence issue
allowing smooth testing of the simulation parameters influence.
All the volumes of the three models are reported in Table 3.6. The high­fidelity ge­
ometry presents a very close volume to the FLOW3D model (with a difference of
1.04%), while the simplified geometry overestimates it (difference of 20.15%). This
overestimation is due to the higher amount of material assumed to be present at the
beginning and end of the track, where steady­state is assumed for this last geometry.
For this reason, validation is only executed for the first geometry.
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.10: CFD geometry.
Figure 3.11: High­fidelity geometry.
Figure 3.12: Simplified geometry.
Table 3.6: Volume comparisons.
Model
Volume [mm3]
CFD
121.6
High­Fidelity
120.34
Simplified
146.1
3.2.2.3
Validation of the thermal model
The CFD model is shape­validated, meaning that the geometry of the deposition
matches the one of the experiments (Figure 3.13). The validation of the CFD model
was executed by the supervisors prior to the beginning of the Master’s Thesis project.
It is possible to use the results from this FLOW3D model to validate the one built in
ABAQUS. The idea is to extract some temperature­time curves for some specific
nodes, with given coordinates, in both the ABAQUS and FLOW3D model and com­
pare these for different values of ˙Q′′′ and ∆tcont until a sufficiently good match is
obtained. These are calibrated according to nominal process parameters and using
Equation 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5.
Figure 3.13: Shape validation of the meso­scale CFD model. The cross­section of
the deposition is overlapped to the one from the numerical model. Good agreement
between the two is detected.
36
==PAGE:45==
To evaluate the match between CFD and ABAQUS temperature­time curves, the
root­mean square error (RMSE). This measures the difference of y­values (temper­
ature) predicted by two different models at the same x­value (time):
RMSE [°C] =
√∑N
i=1 (Ti,CSM −Ti,CFD)2
N
(3.8)
where Ti,CSM is the temperature detected in the ABAQUS node (CSM stands for
Computational Solid Mechanics), Ti,CFD is the one detected in the FLOW3D one,
and N is the number of points in time collected. The two models do not have the
temperature evaluated in the same time instants, as time increments differ between
them for computational reasons. As per definition of the RMSE, it is essential to
have the temperature evaluated at the same values of t for both models, leading
that a preliminary interpolation between the given data­points is executed at desired
equidistant values of t.
Four points along the baseplate are investigated. The coordinates are reported in
Table 3.7, with a representation of the position and the origin in Figure 3.14. In this
last one, it is also possible to see how the partitioning of the track is executed, with 25
patches along its length. This has been decided to be a very high­fidelity model, with
the patch length corresponds approximately to the laser radius (∆xp = 1.52 mm).
Mesh is reported in Figure 3.15. This is composed of 192330 elements, seeded with
a coarse mesh of 3mm for the bottom part of the baseplate (0.6 cm of its height),
the top part of the baseplate is seeded with a finer mesh of 0.5 mm, and finally, the
track with a mesh of 0.2 mm. Hex­elements are used for the baseplate, with 8 nodes
for each element (for heat transfer, these are called DC3D8). Patches are meshed
with wedge elements with 6 nodes (DC3D6). The first and the last patches could
only be meshed with tet­elements, with 4 nodes. (DC3D4). To obtain nodes A, B,
C, and D at the same coordinates of the CFD model, these are manually dragged to
the desired coordinates through ABAQUS settings.
Figure 3.14: Position of the investigation nodes in xy­plane. In the z­axis, the origin
is placed at the bottom of the baseplate, the nodes at 0.9 cm from it.
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.15: Meshing for thermal valida­
tion.
Table 3.7: Coordinate of nodes under in­
vestigation.
Node
x [mm]
y [mm]
z [mm]
A
19.84
­5
9
B
9.84
­5
9
C
­0.16
­5
9
D
9.84
­4
9
3.2.2.4
Sensitivity analysis of simulation parameters
Once the model has been validated, the influence of simulation parameters to check
how much the model is affected by the change of these. This is called sensitivity
analysis. It is performed by playing with one parameter at a time with this one that
gets changed within a decided range, and the rest of the numerical model is kept
unchanged. The geometry used for the parametric analysis is the simplified geome­
try in Figure 3.12. For all the following points (apart from mesh refinement analysis),
hex­elements of size 1 mm are used for the baseplate, and wedge­elements of size
0.5 mm are used for the deposited track. A number of patches p = 25 is used for all
the tests, except for the patch refinement analysis. The following tests are executed:
• Patch refinement: the number of patches p is changed from 1 to 24 to detect
the influence on the temperature fields. What is expected is to obtain heating of
the nodes close to the end of the track earlier when p is reduced. By logic, when
p = 1 patch, all the nodes get heated at the beginning of the simulation, while
when p = 24 patch, the last part of the track gets deposited and heated later.
Temperature­time curves are investigated at a new point at the end of the track,
called E, with coordinates (37.1,­3.8,10) mm, located in the baseplate close to
the end of the track. Furthermore, the effect on computational time is also
investigated. Results are not compared with the high­fidelity geometry from
the validation as the geometry is different, with higher volume and therefore
higher thermal input, considering the same volumetric heat.
• Contact time influence: it was previously discussed how an increased contact
time would switch the model from FH to GH. It is valuable to find at which
value of ∆tcont this is achieved and when the value is small enough to have
a FH result independent of the value of contact time. ∆tcont is changed be­
tween 10−3 s and 1 s. The temperature­time curves are extracted from node D
with coordinates given in Table 3.7 and compared using RMSE. It is expected
to get similar curves within the FH range, with subsequent shifts in time with
increasing contact time while moving into GH.
• Mesh refinement: this is done to check what dimension the mesh size should
have to not have this affecting the numerical result too much . A refined mesh
always tends to give a more reliable result, but as a drawback brings strong
38
==PAGE:47==
increases in the computational times. A suitable trade­off should then be found
between these two. Four meshes are studied (see Table 3.8), with uniform
mesh size for the whole geometry, hex elements in the baseplate, and wedge
elements in the deposited track.
Table 3.8: Models for mesh refinement.
Model
Mesh size [mm]
Number of elements
M1
1
16580
M2
0.75
31142
M3
0.5
112255
M4
0.25
926690
• Convection­Radiation dependency: the addition of these two interactions to the
model is fundamental, however, it also affects the computational time. Three
models are then run, with gradual removal of convection, to check how much
the model gets affected from the removal of these. Model A removes both
radiation and convection from the track but keeps it in the baseplate. Model B
removes the baseplate convection as well. Temperature­time curves in D are
extracted and compared with model 0, having all the interactions activated.
3.2.2.5
Solidification rates study
Based on what is explained in Section 2.1.6, the solidification rate affects the final
microstructure. It is also known from literature [10] that the solidification rate changes
along with the distance from the baseplate. As the thermal model provides good
estimations of the temperature developments in time, this is all that is necessary to
evaluate these rates. One attempt is then made to show the different rates along
with the track height. It is, however, challenging to achieve the right number for the
solidification rate, as simulations do not provide the exact temperatures at liquidus
and solidus temperature. The evaluation is based then on the closest temperatures
within that range, assuming a linear behaviour of the cooling rate from Tliq to Tsol.
3.2.3
Thermal model of a DED multi­layer­track
After the single­track thermal model, the energy input is validated for getting reliable
temperatures and allows producing a multi­layer­track model. The following objec­
tives are reached:
• Building a multi­layer­track in ABAQUS thermal model based on N3 experiment
to predict the temperature field after metal deposition.
• Further validation of the thermal model by comparison with measurements from
thermal camera and photodiode.
• Study of the influence of simulation parameters in the model.
3.2.3.1
Python scripting for ABAQUS
A Python code is again used to build the thermal model in ABAQUS. The same
structure of Figure 3.6 is used, and the description of all the flow mostly corresponds
39
==PAGE:48==
to what was already described for the single­track. Some differences are existing,
but whatever is not going to be mentioned here means that it is kept as in the previous
sections.
A new geometry is implemented, corresponding to the N3 sample cross­section.
How this is obtained is going to be discussed in the next section. The geometry is
uploaded already partitioned between tracks. The height of every track is specified in
the code and obtained through previous evaluation in SolidWorks. This is necessary
to define later sets and surfaces for each patch for all the tracks.
Partitioning is once again executed through datum planes, where one plane partitions
all the tracks through a loop (as it is possible to perform a partition of one track at a
time).
Activation and deposition steps are also present in this case, with the same concept
as for the single­track model. The longer process is composed of different tracks
and layers, bringing new considerations from a time perspective to be made. These
are achieved after a detailed analysis of the thermal camera recordings. Figure 3.16
is used to help understand all the additional timings added:
• The amount of time used to deposit one track (A→B, C→D, and E→F) is 5.5
s. Considering the deposition speed of 1000 mm/min and the track length of
9.27 cm, the total time should equal 5.38 s. The extra gap of 0.12 s is given to
the first track of each layer, according to Equation 3.6. All the other patches of
the track follow the known equation ∆tp = ∆xp/v.
• The amount of time used to shift the nozzle from one track to the neighbour
one (B→C and D→E) is evaluated to be 0.3 s. This one is spread between the
last deposited patch of the old track (0.1 s to this one) and the first patch of the
new track (0.2 s).
• The amount of time used to shift the nozzle from the end of the last track of
a layer to the position where to begin the first track of the new layer (F→A)
is evaluated to be 1.3 s. This is completely given to the final patch of the old
layer.
2 mm
9.27 mm
y
x
z
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 3.16: Improved scanning pattern featuring lateral shifts of the nozzle position.
40
==PAGE:49==
In general, the patch activation sequence corresponds to the scanning pattern during
deposition. Neglecting any additional cooling after deposition brings to a total time
of 256 s, which corresponds to what thermal camera video show for the deposition
of N1, N2, and N3 samples.
No thermal boundary conditions are defined here: as the baseplate gets strongly
heated during the whole deposition, it would be a too strong assumption to fix the
room temperature at the bottom of the baseplate. Instead, a convection interaction
is implemented in such a surface, with h =1 W/(m2K) and Tamb = 22.5°C. The film
coefficient is small due to the underlying materials’ thermal impacts (thick layer as­
sumption).
For what concerns all the other convection and radiation effects, the ones on the top
surface of the baseplate are kept as in the previous section, while the ones on the
surface of the patches are slightly modified. When a patch gets deposited, convec­
tion and radiation are activated with parameters equal to the previous section (with a
room temperature of Tamb = 22.5°C as calculated by the thermal camera), but then
these are deactivated when a new patch gets deposited on top of it in the subsequent
layer. The interactions are deactivated only on the top surfaces of each patch, but
on the surfaces that are still facing the ambient, the interactions are kept throughout
the whole simulation.
3.2.3.2
Geometry
The implemented geometry replicates the profile from the experimental investiga­
tions in the best way possible. Given that two depositions were made per baseplate,
in the geometry for one deposition, only half of it is considered. The dimensions
of the simulated baseplate are 60x14x120 mm3. The cross­section of the tracks is
extracted manually from the macrography of the cross­section of the sample N3 (Fig­
ure 3.17). This is done by importing the figure in SolidWorks and drawing the visible
lines from the etched surfaces as track surfaces. Some approximations were made,
especially for the last layers, where the separation lines are not clearly defined due to
remelting effects, which are neglected. Changes of cross­sections at the beginning
and end of the component length are not considered.
It was challenging to import the geometry in ABAQUS as desired. Many problems
raised due to the partitioning of the tracks and, most importantly, badly­defined curve
lines with holes generated between the tracks. This is caused due to the software
that defines a curve twice if this is touching different bodies, with some holes that
might get generated due to the interpolation made by the CAD software to approxi­
mate the curves. To overcome these issues, only the sketch was produced in Auto­
CAD and subsequently exported in ABAQUS, where the geometry was extruded to
9.27 cm track by track. This also helped in partitioning the tracks immediately into
different geometrical components. Finally, to utilize the geometry in other .cae files,
the geometry is exported from ABAQUS as a .sat file. As the file comes directly
from ABAQUS, no further issues are generated when this is imported again in the
same software. The visual from the xy­ and xz­planes is reported in Figure 3.18 and
3.19 to properly locate also the origin of the coordinate system.
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.17: From macrograph picture to CAD replication: yz cross­section N3.
Figure 3.18: xy­view of multi­layer­track
geometry.
Figure 3.19: xz­view of multi­layer track
geometry.
3.2.3.3
Further validation of the thermal model
Even if the thermal model could be already considered validated, as per validation
through single­track deposition, it is desired to show the time and energy consistency
of this model via comparison with a thermal camera and photodiode data. This time,
the comparison is way more different: before, it was a comparison between two
numerical models, while now experimental data are used. These are more complex
to compare directly with the model, as it will be explained now.
All the experimental data are compared to a model made with 16 patches for each
track. This is the highest fidelity model produced during the thesis project. The
mesh is produced with hex elements of dimension 1.5 mm in the baseplate and
wedge elements of dimension 0.5 mm in the component deposited. This gives a
total amount of 287256 elements. Patching and meshing are shown in Figure 3.20.
For what concerns photodiode’s data, these are in voltage, while simulations provide
temperatures. Therefore, only a qualitative comparison will be executed, where the
shape of the two curves is compared. As the photosensor looks at the lateral sur­
face of the component (the one visualized in Figure 3.19), all the nodes composing
that surface are taken into account from the simulation. Temperature­time data is
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.20: Patching and meshing of the multi­layer­track model with p = 16.
extracted from each one of these (4053 nodes), and then an average between all
these points is executed.
This is where the first problem comes into play: when doing this average, the nodes
belonging to the last layers that are not active at the beginning of the simulation are
also averaged. The data that, however, these give to the average is the initial tem­
perature of 22.5°C. The most clever way to do the average is to consider the nodes
only when these are activated, but ABAQUS does not allow so, and when so many
nodes are considered, it is not an option to do this manually. As a backup option,
it was attempted to get the upper envelope given by the merging of all the curves.
Still, the output curve was made of a lot of peaks above the liquidus temperature,
and, when depositing the last layers, this technique neglects the colder temperature
of the bottom layers. For this reason, the average technique is still considered to
work better: one should be aware of this issue and use the data only for qualitative
purposes of shape comparison (as the being performed here).
The thermal camera information and the simulation results are analyzed together
in a separate analysis, as they all give temperature values. For the N3 sample,
the thermal camera output was ruined by the thermocouple that got detached and
burned during the deposition, covering partially the deposition recording through the
thermal camera. One position not affected by such an issue was taken, at x = 3.8
mm from the beginning of the deposition. On the y­axis, the pointer of the thermal
camera software was placed at the position that is looking at the first layers of the
deposition. This is executed to minimize the amount of data collected from the other
side of the deposition while getting deposited (due to the shadowing effect, as it will
be explained later), and having, for most of the time, data that comes from the lateral
surface of the component. Estimating a dimension of the pointer of 0.2x0.2 cm2 and
considering the previously calculated tilting of 25°, the area in the numerical model
corresponds to 0.22x0.2 cm2 (Figure 3.21). From this area, the temperature­time
data of the nodes is collected and averaged (with the same considerations about the
averaging as the ones presented above).
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.21: Positioning of the pointer in the thermal camera (left) with the corre­
sponding set on nodes (in red) from the numerical model (right).
3.2.3.4
Sensitivity analysis of simulation parameters
As for the single­track model, after validation, it is studied the influence of some
simulation parameters.
• Patch refinement: different partitioning of the geometry are studied. Patches
per track are varied from 1 to 16 to study the dependency of the result to this.
Also, a model with one patch equal to the whole layer (3 tracks) is produced
(this corresponds to a p = 1 patch / 3 tracks = 0.33). A line of nodes along
with the height of the deposition is extracted from the point at coordinate (15.7,
1.5, 2.29) mm up to the one that ends the deposition of the eight layer, at
(15.7, 1.5, 6.92) mm. Temperature­time of these is averaged for all the nodes,
and the obtained curves for all the nodes are compared through RMSE. The
computational times are compared as well.
• Convection­Radiation dependency: in the same way as before, the influence
of these interactions is checked both for the obtained temperature fields and
computational time. The model with p = 2 is used. Again, model A removes
radiation and convection only on the component, while model B removes it also
from the baseplate (and model 0 has everything activated). Same nodes as
for the patch refinement are extracted, averaged, and compared. Also, data
from one node on the baseplate is extracted (located immediately below the
deposition) to check how much the temperature in this changing also inside
this one.
3.2.3.5
Solidification rates study
If before the difference in the solidification rates was studied within a single track, it
is instead now studied between the different layers. From the model with p = 16, the
temperature­time data is extracted from three nodes in the middle of the second track
of the second, eighth, and fourteenth layer, respectively. One attempt to evaluate the
value of the solidification rates is again made with the linear assumption within Tliq
and Tsol.
44
==PAGE:53==
3.2.4
Thermomechanical model of a DED single­track
The numerical models are now switched from fully heat transfer to coupled temperature­
displacement analysis. Again, the first analyses focus on the deposition of the single­
track to ensure that everything is running with no problems, and then move to the
more complex multi­layer­track model. The following objectives are reached:
• Build a single­track thermomechanical model in ABAQUS to predict residual
stresses and deformations after deposition.
• Study of the influence of the simulation parameters in the model.
No tool for further validation was provided here.Since stress generation is strictly
directed to temperature development, this last one has been validated; therefore,
the model can still be regarded as valuable.
3.2.4.1
Python scripting for ABAQUS
The Python code used resembles the structure of Figure 3.6 again, with some extra
addition given by the thermomechanical nature of the code.
Geometry, partitioning, sets, and surfaces are kept in the same way as in Section
3.2.2. Only the simplified geometry (Figure 3.12) is used to avoid issues in conver­
gence.
For what concerns material properties, the thermal one are kept identical as in Sec­
tion 3.2.2 as well, but this time also the mechanical properties are required. Con­
sidering that the material presents an elasto­plastic behavior, the elastic part is pre­
dicted by Hooke’s law and the plastic one by the power hardening law (Equation 2.20).
For Hooke’s law, the necessary material properties are the Young’s modulus E and
Poisson’s ration ν; for the power hardening law also the yield stress σy and harden­
ing coefficient n are necessary. By solving these for different values of stresses, the
temperature­dependent stress­strain curves reported in Figure 3.22 are obtained.
The curves continue after the values of failure (tensile strengths) to avoid issues
within ABAQUS, which considers perfect plasticity after the last given stress­strain
data­point. To avoid such behavior, the curves are implemented up to 100% of total
strain.
In ABAQUS, mechanical properties are implemented in two sections of the material
properties, called Elastic and Plastic. In the first one, a table of the temperature­
dependent values of E and ν is required. In the second one, a series of stress
values σ followed by the related plastic strains εpl are needed for each temperature.
To find these, the properties to solve Equation 2.20 are used to find εmech, and then
the elastic strain is removed from this one to find εpl = εmech −εel.
Finally, the coefficient of thermal expansion is also implemented. This develops up
to the liquidus temperature, after which a value of α = 0 °C−1 is imposed, assuming
that the melt at the liquid state does not exert any stress to the part (Figure 3.23).
Activation and deposition steps are kept unchanged, except for the fact that these
are now switched from ”heat transfer” steps (only calculation of the temperature)
to ”coupled temperature­displacement” steps (calculation of both temperature and
displacement field). Another addition is related to the last deposition step: to study
45
==PAGE:54==
residual stresses, it is fundamental that the printed component goes back to room
temperature so that stresses are settled and constant. To achieve so, a very high
step time is given to the last deposition to emulate cooling up to the room temper­
ature. This is fixed to 1000 s. This will not affect so much the computational time
as the time increments to reach the end of this step are becoming very big quickly
thanks to the easy convergence when cooling.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Strain
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
Stress-strain curves - 316L
T = 1°C
T =50°C
T=100°C
T=150°C
T=200°C
T=250°C
T=300°C
T=350°C
T=400°C
T=500°C
T=600°C
1°C
400°C
800°C
1200°C
1600°C
2000°C
Tensile Strength
Figure 3.22: Stress­strain diagram for stainless steel 316L (up to 50% total strain).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Temperature [°C]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
CTE [1/°C]
10-5
CTE - 316L
Figure 3.23: Coefficient of thermal expansion temperature­dependent for 316L.
46
==PAGE:55==
An extra step is added at the end of the simulation to replicate the cutting process.
This step is defined as ”Static” (only calculation of the displacement field). In this
one, the baseplate is deactivated and removed from the model so the deposition
gets detached from it. This brings a release of the stress state. To avoid the sample
”flying” far away in the coordinate system, the line that connects the lateral surface of
the first patch to the baseplate is kept fixed through an encastre boundary condition
that forbids translation and rotation of the nodes in that line (see Figure 3.24).
Finally, the last additional feature is another boundary condition at the bottom surface
of the baseplate, that is pinned (no translation of the nodes composing the surface)
throughout all the coupled temperature­displacement steps (not in the ”Static” one,
where the baseplate is removed).
Meshing happens again manually with specification on the Python code only con­
cerning that coupled temperature­displacement elements should be used.
Figure 3.24: Boundary condition at the ”Static” step: translation and rotation of the
nodes in the blue line are constrained.
3.2.4.2
Convergence of the simulation
One challenge of thermomechanical modelling is to achieve convergence through
the whole computation, given the enhanced non­linearity of the models. If one tries
to run a code like the one built above, the simulation will most likely fail at some
point. Failure usually happens due to a lack of convergence, even for very small
time steps. For every time step, ABAQUS checks convergence through specific
parameters that are not here deeply discussed to avoid complexity. Only some of
them are discussed, with definitions taken from ABAQUS User’s guide [45]. When
simulations are not converging, it is possible to customize these parameters to allow
ABAQUS converging with less tight conditions. The following modifications have
been performed:
• Residual control (Rα
n): this parameter defines the converge criterion for the ratio
of the largest residual rα
max to the corresponding average flux norm ˜qα. This
last one corresponds to an overall time­averaged value of the typical flux for
the field during the analysis step, including the current increment. The symbol
47
==PAGE:56==
α stands for a general area (that can be of temperature, displacement, etc.) of
interest showing non­linearity. Convergence is satisfied when
∆rα
max
˜qα
≤Rα
n
(3.9)
This value, by default, is equal to 0.005 for all the variables. In this thermome­
chanical model, the parameter is increased to 0.05 for evaluating the displace­
ment field (translations and rotations).
• Solution correction control Cα
n: this is the convergence criterion for the ratio of
the largest solution correction (provided by the current Newton iteration) cα
max
to the largest corresponding incremental solution value ∆uα
max. Convergence
is satisfied when
cα
max
∆uα
max
≤Cα
n
(3.10)
This value, by default, is equal to 0.01 for all the field variables. The value is
increased to 0.1 for the displacement field.
• Discontinuous analysis: there are two parameters, I0 and IR, that define the
number of iterations for every increment after which a check is made for the
residual and rate of convergence, respectively. By default, these are equal to
4 and 8. Suppose the conditions given by the control parameters of the pre­
vious points are not satisfied after these amount of iterations. In that case,
the increment time is reduced to 1/4 (cutback) for the subsequent iteration.
ABAQUS also proposes an alternative analysis, called Discontinuous analy­
sis, that switches these values to 8 and 10, allowing more iterations to try and
minimize the residual and maximize the rate of convergence to satisfy the con­
vergence conditions above.
• Maximum number of cutbacks per increment (IA). By default, ABAQUS tries a
maximum of 5 cutbacks when convergence can not happen. Within these, the
increment time is reduced to 1/4, and if convergence does not occur even at
the fifth reduction, the simulation stops. More attempts are given to the model
in this thermomechanical analysis, with an increased value of IA = 15.
3.2.4.3
Sensitivity analysis of simulation parameters
For this analysis, different results are reported for a high­fidelity model with p = 24
and compared with other models within p = [1;24]. Stresses, deformations, and com­
putational times are evaluated.
Meshing is executed for all the models with only hex elements (C3D8T for cou­
pled temperate­displacement analysis). No wedge elements are here used as these
showed some convergence issues during simulation (and errors due to negative vol­
umes during thermal expansion), and, by trial­and­error approach, it was found out
that everything was running smoothly when only hex elements were used. Baseplate
seeding is made with a mesh size of 1.5 mm, while the deposited track presents a
mesh size of 0.5 mm.
One additional simulation was run according to the GH method, proving that such a
technique underestimates strongly the stress field produced within the deposition.
48
==PAGE:57==
3.2.5
Thermomechanical model of a DED multi­layer­track
This final modelling step wraps up most of the collected information from the previous
sections, finally building a thermomechanical model for a multi­layer­track deposition
and knowing how much stress is going into the component and its final deformation
after cutting. The main objective of this part is just the building of the model.
3.2.5.1
Python scripting from ABAQUS
This Python code is a fusion of the previous ones. Geometry, definition of partitions,
thermal material properties, loads, sets, surfaces, BCs, initial conditions, and inter­
actions are the same as the one presented in Section 3.2.3. Mechanical material
properties, steps, and solver control options are the same as in Section 3.2.4. The
”encastre” boundary condition for the final ”Static” step is defined as for the single­
track geometry, with the line that now involves all the three tracks of the first layer.
3.2.5.2
Sensitivity analysis of simulation parameters
Due to the significant increase in computational times given by the switch from a
thermal to a thermomechanical model and from a single­track to a multi­layer track,
only a model with p = 0.33 (layer deposition) could be simulated within acceptable
timings. Meshing used for these is hex elements of 2 mm of mesh size in the base­
plate and 0.5 mm for the component. To obtain more models to study, mesh size was
increased to 2.5mm (baseplate) and 0.75 mm (component): with such a meshing,
also models with p = 1 (track deposition) and p = 2 are simulated in an acceptable
timing.
49
==PAGE:58==
50
==PAGE:59==
4
Results
All the experimental results are initially reported: some of these are recalled when the
numerical ones are also shown, to highlight when identical behaviors are detected
from both the experimental and computational perspectives.
4.1
Experimental Results
Firstly, data collected from the in­situ monitoring are reported, followed by the post­
production ex­situ analyses.
4.1.1
Photosensor results (in­situ monitoring)
While thermal camera information is presented later with the thermal validation of the
numerical solution, photosensor outputs are shown here to compare results given by
different process parameters. In Figure 4.1, all the photosensor outputs from single
tracks are shown. The following conclusions are obtained (numbering based on the
red graph numbers shown in the top­right corner of each plot in Figure 4.1):
1. Nominal samples N2 and N3 showed the repeatability of the output. When
printing N1, the photosensor was not properly calibrated, so a smaller voltage
was recorded.
2. The energy density input affects the output voltage accordingly: HL (highest
energy density) shows the most significant output voltage, while LN and LH
show the smallest one (lowest energy density). To be consistent, the LH sam­
ple should present lower values of voltage with respect to LN, given the differ­
ent energy density. Still, the difference is so small (approximately 0.3 V) that
any other noise factor could have influenced the measurement. Differences in
length are related to the deposition speed, which defines the deposition time.
The lowest speed gives the highest time.
3. When the laser power is kept constant, and the beam size increases, the en­
ergy density decreases as the same energy is provided to a bigger surface
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Output Voltage [V]
N1
N2
N3
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Output Voltage [V]
N3
LN
LH
HL
0
5
10
15
Time [s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Output Voltage [V]
HL ø=3mm
HL ø=4mm
HL ø=5mm
2
1
3
Figure 4.1: Photodiode results from single track depositions.
51
==PAGE:60==
area. For this reason, the HL5 sample has the smallest energy density and
shows the lowest output voltage as expected.
Outputs from multi­layer­track samples are collected in Figure 4.3. Explanation of
how to understand the graphs is given in Figure 4.2. Generally, higher intensity is
obtained for the tracks closer to the detector (the first track of each layer). After
that, the light is blocked by the already built part, decreasing the output for every
layer’s second and third track. There is an average voltage increase as the parts
build up, correlated to the increasing temperature of the deposition. Following the
numbering of the plots Figure 4.3 (red numbers in the top­right corner of each plot),
the conclusion achieved are:
1. Repeatability of the output is achieved for the nominal samples N1, N2, and
N3 .
2. Power­compensated samples (PC­1, PC­2, and PC­3) show repeatability as
well for the three different productions.
3. Comparing samples with different laser power (N3, LN and HN), higher power
brings higher photo intensity, corresponding to higher temperatures.
4. Comparing samples with different energy densities (N3, LH, and HL), these
are again linearly related to the output voltages. Timings are different due to
different scanning speeds.
5. When comparing nominal samples with power­compensated ones, these have
the same type of increase in intensity in the initial layers, whereas the latter
ones keep a lower level of intensity in the future layers. Nominal samples put
too much energy into the material, bringing higher temperatures and therefore
causing reductions in hardness and coarsening of the microstructure (as mi­
crographs and microhardness tests will show).
6. When the beam size is changed, the smallest diameter brings higher photo
intensity for the first layers, given the biggest energy density. For the last layers,
however, it is detected an inversion in the trend.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14
Track 1
Track 2
Track 3
Layers
Figure 4.2: Multi­layer­track N3 photosensor output: layer and track recognition.
52
==PAGE:61==
0
100
200
300
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
Output Voltage [V]
N1
N2
N3
0
100
200
300
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output Voltage [V]
N3
LN
HN
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output Voltage [V]
N3
LH
HL
0
100
200
300
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
Output Voltage [V]
PC1
PC2
PC3
0
100
200
300
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
Output Voltage [V]
N1
PC1
0
20
40
60
80
Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
Output Voltage [V]
HN ø=3mm
HN ø=4mm
HN ø=5mm
2
1
3
4
5
6
Figure 4.3: Photodiode results from multi­layer­track depositions.
53
==PAGE:62==
4.1.2
In­Axis thermal camera results (In­situ monitoring)
Images from the recording of the in­axis camera are discussed here. Three main
phenomena are detected in these: spattering, development of the melt pool dimen­
sion, and improper melting of the powder. In Figure 4.5 an 4.6, the melt pool image
captured by the mentioned in­axis camera and for different process parameters are
shown and compared, both for a single track deposition (the first column of the tables)
and for multiple layers deposited (the second column shows the first track of the fifth
layer deposited). In the first image of Figure 4.5, a small guide on the interpretation
of the images is given:
• The white circle in the middle is given by the laser, and its dimension and in­
tensity are given by its power and diameter.
• The tail behind the laser is the melt pool. This changes in shape depending on
the position along the track (all images reported are in the steady­state condi­
tion; therefore, effects due to the beginning and end of the deposition are not
here discussed) as well as on the selected process parameters. Visualization
of this one is limited to the nozzle diameter where the camera is placed, rep­
resented by the external fixed circle in grey. The light captured through this
outer circle is just due to the reflection from the melt pool and therefore is not
as relevant as the other information.
• The small drops visualized around the deposition (in the blue circles) are due
to the spattering phenomena already discussed.
Furthermore, in Figure 4.4, the effect of power compensation is studied when several
layers are built. In this one, the melt pool is located below in the picture with respect
to the laser because the pictures are taken from the second track of each layer. This
is done to show the difference when the pattern changes. From all of these, the
following considerations are made:
• When comparing the radiation intensity between the different depositions, this
increases with the energy density given by the laser power and scanning speed.
Ignoring for this comparison the difference in laser diameter, the order from
the smallest to the highest radiation intensity output in the camera is: LH →LN
→N3 →HN →HL.
• When comparing the depositions of the single tracks with the depositions of
the first tracks of the fifth layers, the intensities look higher in the latter case.
The melt pool becomes longer and better­defined with the build height. This is
most likely due to the higher temperature of the component while building up:
the melt pool takes more time to cool below melt temperature, as conduction
is reduced due to the reduced temperature gradient with the already solidified
deposition.
• More spattering is noticed in the samples with higher energy density (HL ­ HN
­ N3). Furthermore, this seems to be located only when depositing the first
layers, as a comparison with the fifth layer shows a minor quantity of spattering
(if not completely absent).
• In the samples with lower energy density (LH ­ LH ­ HL5), the intensity within the
54
==PAGE:63==
laser diameter region looks not so homogeneous, especially in the deposition of
the first track. This is due to the low thermal energy given to the powder, which
does not get melted homogeneously, causing lack­of­fusion defects. This de­
fect is found only in the bottom layers as, for already discussed reasons, the
temperature tends to increase with the number of layers and, therefore, the
powder gets melted more easily when building up.
• When comparing the samples with different laser diameters, it is possible to see
that at the first track, the intensity is higher with a smaller beam size (as the
energy density is higher). Afterwards, as the part builds up, the bigger diameter
can melt more homogeneously a more extensive area, creating a larger melt
pool.
• When looking at images from HN5 and HL5, an increased intensity is seen at
the very front of the melt pool. Similar behavior is seen in previous works [46].
• From Figure 4.4, it is possible to see how much the intensity gets increased for
the different layers in the nominal sample (also confirming what is detected with
the photodiode in Figure 4.3­5. This phenomenon is avoided with the power
compensation option. The melt pool size looks controlled and very similar be­
tween the different layers, causing a more uniform geometry and microstruc­
ture along with the build height.
N3 – Layer 1
N3 – Layer 7
N3 – Layer 14
PC2 – Layer 1
PC2 – Layer 7
PC2 – Layer 14
Figure 4.4: In­axis camera outputs for different process parameters and layers.
Comparison with and without power compensation shows that the PC­samples melt
pool does not change much in size while the others experience a noticeable size
increase.
55
==PAGE:64==
Single Track
Multi Track (Layer 5, Track 1)
N3
Laser Diameter
Melt pool
Spattering
LN
HN
LH
Nozzle diameter
Figure 4.5: In­axis camera outputs for different process parameters and layers (Part
1)
56
==PAGE:65==
Single Track
Multi Track (Layer 5, Track 1)
HL
HL4 (ST) – HN4 (MT)
HL5 (ST) – HN5 (MT)
Figure 4.6: In­axis camera outputs for different process parameters and layers (Part
2)
57
==PAGE:66==
4.1.3
Ex­situ monitoring
All the ex­situ analyses are now reported. Figure 4.7 shows macrographs from sam­
ples LH, N3, HL, and PC2 before etching. The geometrical characteristics of the
tracks are here not visualized, but it is possible to see already that samples with
lower scanning speed present an overall decreased height. As the powder feed
rate is constant for the different productions, more material is deposited when the
scanning speed is lower. This brings in a higher component height, as expected.
Figure 4.8 shows further details from samples LH and N3. In the LH samples, several
irregular porosities are detected in the bottom layers (red arrows). These are due
to a lack of fusion, as the energy provided was not enough to fully sinter all the
melted powder. These are located mainly on two vertical lines, where tracks of the
same layers overlap. The overlapping region is usually where these porosities are
more prone to happen due to insufficient overlap between the melt pools. A way to
mitigate this effect is to increase the overlap or the energy density (this second one
has proven to work as no further lack of fusion porosities are detected in the other
samples).
In all samples, few spherical gas­induced pores of diameter greater than 20 µm are
found (blue arrows). As already explained in Section 2.1.5, these are due to ab­
sorbed gas during fusion from the environment or from the powder itself. Finally, the
N3 sample shows some cracking on the top layers, potentially related to the relief of
residual stresses.
Figure 4.9 shows some optical micrographs of the samples before etching. In all
samples, spherical oxide inclusions with diameters smaller than 10 µm are detected.
These are uniformly distributed all over the analyzed areas. By comparing the frac­
tion of inclusions between the samples, it looks like this one increases with increasing
2mm
HL
2mm
PC2
2mm
LH
2mm
N3
Figure 4.7: Optical macrographs of samples’ cross­sections before etching. Red
boxes are furtherly addressed in Figure 4.8.
58
==PAGE:67==
energy density. When comparing N3 and PC2, the inclusions seem to be more or
less similar, with apparently smaller inclusions when power compensation is used.
1mm
1mm
LH
N3
Baseplate
Figure 4.8: Details from macrographs of LH and N3 samples. Red arrows show
some LOF porosities. Blue arrows indicate spherical gas­induced pores. Yellow
arrows indicate cracks.
20μm
20μm
20μm
20μm
LH
HL
N3
PC2
Figure 4.9: Optical micrographs of samples’ cross­sections before etching.
59
==PAGE:68==
In Figure 4.10 the cross­sections after etching with glyceregia are reported. In these,
some geometrical characteristics of all the samples are visualized. For no­power
compensation samples, the height and width of cross­sections of the deposited tracks
vary with the laser power and scanning speed. According to Figueredo et al. [47], the
fusion zone expands by raising the laser power, and the deposition height increases
for lower scanning speeds. Furthermore, for higher energy density, the baseplate
gets melted close to the first layer deposition and the depth of melting increases with
increased energy. Also, in the upper layers of N3 and all layers of HL, remelting
of the already deposited layer happens when a new layer gets deposited. This is
noticed by the distortion of the geometrical characteristics of the tracks, where the
curvature of the top surface of the tracks is decreased or changes in shape. When
comparing N3 and PC2, especially the top layers, it is evident that the geometry is
way clearer in the PC2 sample compared to the N3. Also, the upper layers in N3
seem to include more material due to remelting, while the PC2 upper layers show
the same amount of material as the previous ones.
In Figure 4.11, optical micrographs of etched samples at different magnitudes are
reported. The distance from the baseplate where these are taken is approximately
the middle of the cross­section (between the fifth and tenth layer). Considering that
the distance from the baseplate affects the cooling rate, it would have been for sure
interesting to have several micrographs at different built heights. However, these
were not executed during the project, and there was no further possibility to produce
more of these when this consideration was made. From these, columnar and cellular
dendrites are detected. Also, LH samples seem to show way more fine microstruc­
tures than HL, given the different G·R ratio that, according to Figure 2.4, should give
that result. This is detected as dendrites are more randomly orientated in LH (smaller
grains) than in HL (larger grains).
2mm
HL
2mm
PC2
2mm
LH
2mm
N3
Figure 4.10: Optical macrographs of samples’ cross­sections after etching.
60
==PAGE:69==
200μm
200μm
200μm
200μm
50μm
50μm
50μm
50μm
LH
LH
N3
N3
HL
HL
PC2
PC2
Figure 4.11: Optical micrographs of samples’ cross­sections after etching with dif­
ferent magnitudes.
61
==PAGE:70==
Also, PC2 seems to have finer microstructure with respect to N3. For upper layers,
less energy is added, parts are heated up less, and consequently cooled faster.
In Figure 4.12, SEM analysis and images from the N3 sample before etching show
one gas­induced porosity and one oxide inclusion. It is possible to conclude that
the bigger spherical feature (evaluated with a diameter of 53.78 µm) is a porosity,
thanks to the picture on the right, as the back­scattered electrons provide information
on depth between 0.1­1 µm, confirming that the feature is a pore. The second feature
looks flat in both cases, and the given dimension of 5.10 µm allows concluding that
this is an oxide inclusion. These are found randomly and uniformly distributed in the
samples, with dimensions within 0.5­10 µm.
To address the nature of the oxide inclusions further, EDS analysis is run on two
different inclusions (shown in Figure 4.13) and on a region of the bulk phase, where
the overall spectrum is obtained by an average of that red zone. The three different
spectra show differences in the peaks, confirming different compositions from the
bulk phase. Every peak position can be related to some elements, and their mag­
nitude to the amount of them. Therefore, spectra are converted in qualitative %wt
results of composition, reported in Table 4.1. By comparing with the typical composi­
tion of AISI 316L (last row of the table), it is immediately clear that, from a quantitative
perspective, the composition is incorrect: it is not possible that Zone 1, on average,
presents such a big amount of carbon. This might also be due to the detection limit
of lower atomic numbers elements (like C and O), usually equal to 1%. It can be
concluded, however, that inclusions are rich in Si(Al) and Mn. This corresponds to
what is found in the literature for additively manufactured 316L samples [48, 49].
Also, the presence of aluminum is unexpected on a first sight, given its absence
from the initial powder composition (Table 3.1). According to [50], this can be due
to some impurities in the powder. OES could provide a more quantitative evaluation
of the compositions instead of EDS. However, due to time limits, this could not be
successfully executed.
Gas-induced
porosity
Oxide
inclusion
Figure 4.12: SEM investigation: output from secondary electrons (left) and back­
scattered electrons (right).
62
==PAGE:71==
Inclusion 1
Inclusion 2
Zone 1
Zone 1
Inclusion 1
Inclusion 2
Figure 4.13: EDS analysis for characterization of oxide inclusions.
Table 4.1: Qualitative estimation of compositions (in wt%) through EDS.
C
O
Al
Si
Cr
Mn
Ni
Mo
Fe
Incl. 1
0.69
21.98
9.12
8.95
11.05
13.83
5.43
0.86
Bal.
Incl. 2
0.65
29.82
0.38
14.09
10.61
18.65
2.45
0.00
Bal.
Zone 1
1.2±0.2
­
­
1.3±0.2
17.6±0.6
1.6±0.5
14.6±0.8
2.7±0.3
Bal.
316L
≤0.03
­
­
≤1.00
16.5­18.5
≤2.00
10.0­13.0
2.0­2.5
Bal.
A further analysis with EDS shows that the composition along a line is studied to
check segregation in the interdendritic regions. Even if the signal is not clearly de­
fined as a lot of noise is also detected, from Figure 4.14 a first indication is given.
Chromium, molybdenum, and silicon show some slight peaks in the intercellular re­
gions. These are ferrite stabilizing elements typically found in these regions in DED
samples of 316L, according to [50].
After etching, secondary phases could be distinguished through SEM (Figure 4.15).
Precipitation of a second phase is mainly detected in the interdendritic and inter­
cellular regions. This is found with two morphology: eutectic (Figure 4.15a) and
blocky­like (Figure 4.15b). The eutectic phase is most likely δ­ferrite, given the in­
creased concentration of ferrite stabilizing Cr, Mo, and Si. According to [51], how­
ever, some σ­phase can also be present as a secondary phase if the austenitic steel
is kept at high temperatures for a prolounged time, which could be the one found
in the blocky­like morphology. The σ­phase is present in austenitic steels due to
the high concentration of chromium and typically reduces toughness and corrosion
resistance.
To conclude on the nature of these secondary phases, further EDS analyses are run,
but these show very similar composition and no evident chemical variation with the
63
==PAGE:72==
morphology is found. All the additional analyses showed increased concentration of
Cr, Mo and W. Therefore, XRD is run for 6 hours (limit given by tight schedules of the
equipment in the laboratory) to distinguish the phases, but only austenite (γ) could be
recognized, based on the found peaks (Figure 4.16). Potentially, an extended analy­
sis could have given some peaks corresponding to the secondary phases, but, given
their low fraction into the material, a too long analysis would have been required. The
low amount of the secondary phase is also confirmed by the Schaeffler’s diagram
(Figure 4.17), which places the composition of 316L used in the border line between
0% ­ 5% ferrite (equivalent chromium is evaluated to be 21.045% and equivalent
nickel to 15.545%. Beware that for processes with very quick cooling, Schaeffler’s
diagram might give different results respect to the experimental ones.
Figure 4.14: EDS analysis for detection of segregations.
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.15: SEM investigation after etching: secondary phase identification. Eu­
tectic morphology in (a), blocky­like in (b).
64
==PAGE:73==
60
80
100
120
2 [°]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Intensity (cps)
XRD - 316L from DED
 (220)
 (111)
 (200)
Figure 4.16: XRD analysis of N3 sam­
ple.
Figure
4.17:
Schaeffler’s
diagram
based on Table 3.1 [52].
LH
N3
HL
PC2
Figure 4.18: SEM with ECCI mode for grain analysis. Bigger columnar grains are
detected in the HL sample. The morphology of LH looks instead more refined and
equiaxed.
65
==PAGE:74==
SEM with back­scattered electrons is again used to evaluate the grain shape, with
the electron channel contrasting imaging (ECCI) mode to distinguish grains with dif­
ferent orientations [53]. These are reported for the four samples in the middle of
the cross­section in Figure 4.18. The microstructure passes from a fine equiaxed
grain morphology to coarse columnar grains as the Laser Energy Density increases.
According to [54], low solidification rates (R in Figure 2.4) promote a transition from
equiaxed to columnar grains, whereas an increase in the cooling rate (G · R) results
in a microstructure refinement. When comparing N3 with PC2, a more refined and
less oriented microstructure is found. This is a synonym of higher solidification and
cooling rate during deposition of the layers at the middle of the cross­section.
Finally, microhardness tests’ results are reported in Figure 4.19. For each sample,
hardness decreases as the distance from the baseplate increases. This is once
again related to the cooling rates, and further proof will be given during the numerical
analysis results. The low energy density sample shows the highest, as the cooling
rate is the highest for this sample. When comparing N3 with PC2, the hardness is
similar for the first layers. Subsequently, it is decreased for the N3 sample, where
extra energy is input leading to lower cooling rates (decreasing with the layer number
[55]).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Distance from baseplate [mm]
100
150
200
250
300
Microhardness [HV]
HL
N3
LH
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Distance from baseplate [mm]
100
150
200
250
300
Microhardness [HV]
N3
PC2
Figure 4.19: Vickers microhardness along with the build height.
66
==PAGE:75==
4.2
Numerical Results
Different subsections are discussed here, depending on whether single­track or multi­
track geometry is used, if the analysis is only thermal or thermomechanical and on
the outcome desired for such study.
4.2.1
Validation of the single­track thermal model
The thermal model is successfully validated while using a body heat flux of ˙Q′′′ =
1.4·1013 W/m3 and a contact time of ∆tcont = 1 ms, corresponding to a volumetric
heat flux of 1.4·1010 J/m3. With these, the energy input in the single­track geometry
is 1648 J. According to the nominal values of scanning speed and laser power, this
energy input is obtained for such geometry when the absorptivity is equal to η =
0.39062, which is within the physical range of 0.3÷0.4.
Results from the thermal validation are given in Figure 4.20. Continuous lines are
from the ABAQUS model: these match nicely the dashed ones obtained from the
CFD model, both from a time and temperature perspective. Curve A shows the best
match (also according to the RMSE, reported in the legend). It has the lowest tem­
perature as it is located close to the beginning of the track, where a smaller amount
of material is deposited. Curves B and C present similar temperature development
but shifted in time, as the nodes have equal distance to the track, but B is located
before C along the track length. Curve B is activated at the same instant as curve
C, being at the same x­coordinate of the geometry, but the temperature values are
higher as the distance from the track is reduced. Comparisons of the contour plots
from ABAQUS (CSM) and FLOW3D (CFD) are reported in Figure 4.21 and 4.22 for
a simulation time of 0.91 s (when the thirteenth patch out of 25 in the CSM model
gets heated up). The temperature field between the two models looks very similar
from both cross­sections, as well as the melt pool size. This last one shows a length
bigger than the patch length: this is because the laser diameter is greater as well,
leading that the melt pool is always within two patches minimum.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
T [°C]
Thermal validation [ Dashed line: CFD - Continuous line: CSM ]
A - RMSE 7.55°C
B - RMSE 6.53°C
C - RMSE 1.60°C
D - RMSE 14.35°C
Figure 4.20: Temperature profiles for thermal validation.
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.21: Comparison of CSM and CFD contour plots: xy­plane view.
Figure 4.22: Comparison of CSM and CFD contour plots: xz­plane view.
68
==PAGE:77==
4.2.2
Patch Refinement of the single­track thermal model
Given the validated simulation parameters, the geometry is now switched to the sim­
plified one to study the influence of the patch refinement. In Figure 4.23 ­ left, tem­
perature profiles for models with a different number of patches (named PX, where
X is the number of patches used) are reported. The node where the temperature
is extracted is located at the end of the deposition, leading that this gets activated
earlier when a smaller number of patches is used. For model P1, the temperature in­
creases from the beginning, as the entire track gets activated at the beginning of the
simulation. For model P2, the temperature rises at half of the deposition time (2.1/2
= 1.0.5 s), as the whole second half of the track gets activated at that moment. The
temporal shift in the heating up of the node is therefore inversely proportional to the
number of patches used. Once p = 12, the time shift is negligible. However, a slight
increase in the temperatures for the subsequent refinements is detected. This might
be due to the higher temperature of the precedent patch deposited, given by the
presence of melt pool also in that one. When comparing CPU times (Figure 4.23 ­
right), these are increasing with the patch refinement. It seems, however, that up to
when the patch length becomes smaller than the beam size, the slope of CPU times
is decreased.
In Figure 4.24 and 4.25, a comparison of contour plots is reported when half track is
activated. The time when these are extracted increases with the patch refinement.
The melt pool size also changes with the patch refinement becoming more and more
realistic. When p > 12, the patch length becomes smaller than the laser diameter,
and the melt pool is spread between more than one patch.
0
1
2
3
4
Time[s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
T[°C]
Temperature-Time at node E
P24
P12
P4
P2
P1
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of Patch
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
CPU Time [hrs]
Patch Refinement - CPU Times
Figure 4.23: Patch refinement analysis results: nodal temperatures in E (left), CPU
times (right).
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.24: Patch refinement: xy­plane view
Figure 4.25: Patch refinement: xz­plane view
70
==PAGE:79==
4.2.3
Contact time refinement of the single­track thermal model
The contact time is increased and decreased accordingly to energy consistency. The
corresponding body heat fluxes used are reported in Table 4.2. RMSE values are
evaluated against the model with 0.1 ms for the temperature­time curve at node D.
Table 4.2: Simulation parameters for contact time refinement analysis. Evaluation
of models through RMSE of the temperature­time curve at node D.
Δtcont [s]
0.001
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
1
˙Q′′′ [W/m3]
1.4·1013
1.4·1012
2.8·1011
1.4·1011
5.6·1010
2.8·1010
1.4·1010
RMSE [°C]
0
3.33
5.74
6.48
14.07
15.74
27.94
From 0.001 s to 0.1 s, the behaviour of the model is approximately the same (Fig­
ure 4.26 ­ left). In this graph, the temperature is slightly increasing when decreasing
the contact time. It is also possible to notice that the curve with a contact time of 0.1
shows a lower initial slope of the curve, meaning the heating is happening slower.
When ∆tcont > 0.1 s, this slope reduction is more evident (Figure 4.26 ­ right).
From Figure 4.27, it is possible to see the melt pool changing in dimensions when
increasing ∆tcont: for ∆tcont ≤0.01 s, all the patch is fully melt, while for higher
values, the maximum melt zone is decreased. At ∆tcont = 0.5 s, no melt pool is
anymore generated: from this value, the simulation is ruled by a GH method. For
∆tcont ≤0.01 s instead, the simulation is driven by a FH method independently of
the value ∆tcont chosen below this condition. Furthermore, Figure 4.28 shows how
computational times are quite similar within the FH method range, to then decrease
in the transition zone between FH­GH and finally quite steady again when the GH
range is reached. The GH method requires a lower computational time as no latent
heat gets released, as well as the specific heat stays at lower values. This simplifies
the convergence of the simulation.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Time[s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
T[°C]
Temperature-Time in D (GH)
tcont=1 s
tcont=0.25s
tcont=0.5s
tcont=0.001s
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Time[s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
T[°C]
Temperature-Time in D (FH)
tcont=0.1 s
tcont=0.01s
tcont=0.001s
Figure 4.26: Contact time refinement analysis results: FH models (left), GH models
(right).
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.27: From flash heating (FH) to gradual heating (GH) by increasing the con­
tact time. yz­view at the middle of the track length, where the biggest melt pool size
is detected (with maximum temperature Tmax).
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Contact time [s]
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
CPU Time [hrs]
Contact time Refinement - CPU Times
Figure 4.28: CPU times for contact time refinement: from FH to GH, the computa­
tional time is reduced by 25%.
72
==PAGE:81==
4.2.4
Mesh refinement of the single­track thermal model
Four models with different mesh sizes show similar contour plots during the whole
deposition (Figure 4.30). Temperature­time curves at node D are reported in Fig­
ure 4.29 ­ left: these are almost coinciding, with the RMSE values confirming such
similarity. This means that, below 1 mm of mesh size, the model can be consid­
ered mesh independent as its behaviour is unchanged. Computational times in Fig­
ure 4.29 ­ right show a logarithmic increase with the number of elements.
104
105
106
Number of Elements
100
101
102
103
CPU Time [hrs]
Mesh Refinement - CPU Times
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Time[s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
T[°C]
Temperature-Time in D
M1 - RMSE = 2.5°C
M2 - RMSE = 3.4°C
M3 - RMSE = 2.7°C
M4 - Reference
Figure 4.29: Mesh refinement results: temperature­times curves (left) and computa­
tional times (right). M4 corresponds to the model with the most refined mesh (0.25
mm), while M1 with the coarsest one (1 mm).
Figure 4.30: Contour plots for the mesh refinement analysis: maximum temperature
during deposition of patch 18 of 24.
73
==PAGE:82==
4.2.5
Interaction dependency of the single­track thermal model
When removing convection and irradiation in the track (model A) and the convection
at the top of the baseplate (model B), the cooling of the model is slowed down as
it only happens through the boundary condition in the bottom. From Figure 4.32, it
is clear that the convection of the top surface of the baseplate does not play a big
role with respect to the interaction in the track. This is because the baseplate is not
heated up enough by a single­track deposition. The computational time is not that
affected: model 0 with all interactions activated took 8.6984 hrs, model A took 8.9566
hrs, and model B 8.7383 hrs. The gap in time of model A with other two is relatively
negligible.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time[s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
T[°C]
Temperature-Time in D
P250 - Reference
P25A - RMSE = 137.87°C
P25B - RMSE = 138.83°C
Figure 4.31: Interaction dependency: removing the interactions at the track brings a
non­negligible cooling rate reduction.
4.2.6
Cooling rate study of the single­track thermal model
Different cooling rates are detected when increasing the distance from the baseplate.
This behaviour is studied by taking different nodes on the track mesh along the z­
coordinate and checking their temperature­time curves, from which the cooling rates
can be evaluated. The nodes taken are documented in Figure 4.32 and 4.3, while
the curves are reported in Figure 4.33. Cooling rates are studied within the liquidus
and solidus temperature interval, showing a clear decrease in this value along with
the built height. This can be strictly related to what is explained in Section 2.1.6, as
a higher cooling rate will bring a refined mesh and decreased dendritic arm spacing
(according to Equation 2.1).
The grey arrow in Figure 4.33 indicates a particular behavior, where the nodes farther
away from the baseplate seem to have a reduction in the cooling rate before reaching
the liquidus temperature, where the released latent heat causes the decrease in the
cooling speed. This behaviour is most likely given by the release of latent heat from
the elements below: these affect the cooling of the top part of the track, causing such
behavior.
74
==PAGE:83==
Figure 4.32: Position of taken nodes for cooling rate
analysis in the yz­cross­section.
Table 4.3: Distance from
the
baseplate
of
the
nodes.
Node
d[mm]
z1
0.20
z2
0.56
z3
0.87
z4
1.06
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Time[s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
T[°C]
Temperature Profile in the track
z1 (CR = 1099°C/s)
z2 (CR = 663°C/s)
z3 (CR = 399°C/s)
z4 (CR = 353°C/s)
Tliq=1459.85°C
Tsol=1419.85°C
Figure 4.33: Temperature­time profiles for different track heights. Cooling rates, in­
dicated in the legend, are calculated between solidus and liquidus temperature. The
grey arrow indicates a premature decrease of the cooling rate in the upper nodes,
while being above the liquidus temperature.
75
==PAGE:84==
4.2.7
Thermal model of the multi­layer deposition
Figure 4.34 gives a first overview of the model built for predicting the temperature
field of the multi­layer geometry. The reported screenshots are chosen at different
build heights to show the increasing temperature of the baseplate while new layers
are built. Also, the first three pictures show the deposition of the first, second, and
third track for the specified layers, respectively. This is reported to show the correctly
implemented scanning pattern, with the deposition following one direction during the
depositions of the first and third track, and the opposite direction while depositing
the second track of each layer. At the end of the depositions, the baseplate shows
temperatures around 200°C.
Figure 4.34: Temperature contour plot of the multi­layer geometry at different depo­
sition times.
76
==PAGE:85==
4.2.8
Data extraction from the multi­layer thermal model
To illustrate the extraction of temperature­time profiles from different positions in the
geometry, a recap is here provided in Figure 4.35. Coloured rectangular areas and
lines correspond to temperature­time values extracted for all nodes and then av­
eraged. Coloured circles correspond to the temperature­time value from a node
extracted at that point (circles are represented bigger to make them clearer in the
figure). Considering that the deposition length is 9.27 cm and that the scanning direc­
tion starts from the red cross, the positions and dimensions of the selected regions
of nodes are:
• Solidification rate: 4.92 cm from the start point, in the middle of the second
track of the second, eighth and fourteenth layer.
• Thermal model study: three nodes at the top of the baseplate, respectively
distant from the deposition 0.45 mm, 3.22 mm, and 6.41 cm
• Thermal camera: area of 0.2 x 0.22 cm2 at 3.8cm of distance from the start
point.
• Patch refinement: line of height of 5.1cm that covers the first eight layers. This
is placed 2 mm from the end of the deposition length.
• Thermocouple: no nodal temperature­time curves are extracted here. This is
because the thermocouple got burned during the experiment, giving no valu­
able data to be tested.
Figure 4.35: Positions on the multi­layer model where temperature­time nodal curves
are extracted. Coloured areas and lines indicate surface regions where nodal values
are extracted and compared. Coloured circles show nodal positions where these are
extracted. The red star for the thermocouple position is related to the unavailability
of the data.
77
==PAGE:86==
4.2.9
Interpretations of results from multi­layer thermal model
In Figure 4.36, the temperature­time curves from the three nodes in the baseplate
are reported. These three curves present several fluctuations related to the cyclic
pattern of the manufacturing process, as will be now explained.
For each deposited layer, three fluctuations are present, one for each track. The
fluctuations are located in time depending on when each of the tracks (or one of the
patches that composes it) gets deposited, with the heat conducted to the baseplate.
These three fluctuations show different magnitudes due to the different distances of
the taken node from each track. Considering that the nodes are located on the side
where the first track of each layer is deposited, the first peak of every layer is the
biggest one, followed by the second and the third. While the deposition continues,
these peaks get smaller layer after layer, but with a shift of the valleys to higher
temperatures. The first effect is due to the increasing distance of the node from
the newly built layers. The second effect is due to the general warming up of the
baseplate during the deposition, as a considerable quantity of heat is transferred to
the sample by the laser. Finally, the slope at the end corresponds to the cooling of
the part.
Figure 4.36: Multi­layer temperature­time curves: layers and tracks recognition.
4.2.10
Validation with photosensor of the multi­layer thermal
model
In Figure 4.37, the comparison in shape between the curve given by the photodiode
and the thermal model is documented. This graph confirms the time consistency of
the model, as the placement of the different peaks coincides between the two curves.
Considering that the two are related to different units of measurement, no quantitative
analysis can be executed on a first analysis. However, as already explained, the
voltage can be related to the temperature through some specific procedure that is
not here executed.Therefore, the qualitative behavior of the two curves can still be
compared, and a good matching on the development of these is found.
78
==PAGE:87==
For the temperature­time curve reported in this plot, a very large of nodal values was
extracted and averaged: this is the reason why the fluctuations for each track are
very small. This is because the nodes not yet deposited contribute to the curve as if
they are at room temperature, strongly decreasing the average when the first layers
are built. One solution for this could be to remove them from the average before
they get deposited, but unluckily ABAQUS does not include such a feature. A script
could be written to obtain such a result, as it will be proposed for ”future work” in the
conclusions. Secondly, it is also noticed that the fluctuations are wider and do not
have only one peak point as seen in the previous section. This is due to the several
patches that every track presents that get heated up, providing a new increase in the
temperatures. By zooming in into one track deposition (Figure 4.38), it is possible
to recognize a package of 16 peaks, one for each patch of the track, whereas, in
reality, there would be no such fluctuation as the material is deposited smoothly and
continuously.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
T [°C]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Output Voltage [V]
Photodiode output vs. Thermal model
Thermal Model P16
Photodiode Output
Figure 4.37: Comparison between the output voltage of photosensor and thermal
model with p = 16.
Figure 4.38: Zoom on the fifth layer (temperature­time curve from the thermal mode
with p = 16).
79
==PAGE:88==
4.2.11
Validation with the thermal camera of the multi­layer
thermal model
Figure 4.39 compares temperature­time curves obtained from the thermal camera
and the numerical model. Several assumptions have to be considered here:
• The averaging of the nodal temperatures once again reduces the peaks of
temperature values.
• The thermal camera Pi640 is, during the thermal measurements, used with a
selected temperature range mode of 200­1500°C. That means the minimum
temperature is always assumed to be 200°C. This, of course, does not corre­
spond to reality, and, to make a use of the obtained data, the curves are shifted
on the y­axis of 177.5°C to have the same initial room temperature as in the
numerical model. This is done with the thermal camera data extracted with an
emissivity of ϵ = 1.
• Finally, another issue involved with this analysis is the so­called shadowing ef­
fect: considering that the thermal camera is aiming at the deposition being tilted
of 25°respect to the x­axis, the video is also capturing what is happening on
the other side of the deposition as long as this one is visible through the cam­
era objective. Figure 4.40 clarifies more in the detail what was just explained:
while the numerical model considers only the nodes on the surface (shown with
a blue line), the thermal camera also considers the surfaces identified by the
purple lines when these are visible (not covered yet from other material on top).
Again, this can cause discrepancies between the curves found experimentally
and numerically, especially in the second and third peaks of the first 2 layers
(where the thermal camera shows higher peaks).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
T [°C]
Thermal camera vs. Thermal model
Thermal model P16
Thermal Camera
Figure 4.39: Temperature­time curves obtained by the thermal model with p = 16
and thermal camera.
80
==PAGE:89==
θ = 25°
Data extracted
from ABAQUS 
Data extracted from Thermal Camera 
(when visible) 
Figure 4.40: Shadowing effect: while, from ABAQUS, only the nodes along the lateral
surface are taken (in blue), the thermal camera also sees the surfaces underlined in
purple before the blue one gets built. This brings to some differences in the detected
temperatures.
Overall, the curves look temporally similar, with the numerical one underestimating
the values for the layers between the eighth and twelfth, and then have a new rise in
the temperature values for the last layers (especially for the final track of the last layer
apparently). This different behavior can be explained by how the cross­sectional
geometry was produced. As described in Section 3.2.3.2, the geometry was pro­
duced manually, neglecting all the remelting effects. This assumption brings that, if
two subsequent layers are considered, the one on top has been overestimated as
the partitioning line between the layers detected through the macrography is moved
downward due to remelting. This brought that most of the layers in the middle of the
deposition have an underestimated volume, with the final one being overestimated
(as it is also clear to see in the last track of the fourteenth layer). A new geometry
could then be proposed, but again this was not doable within the project time limits
and, therefore, it is proposed as future work. Considering remelting, the layers in
the middle would have a higher volume, possibly bringing higher temperature values
and a better match with the thermal camera.
It is also noticed that the peaks corresponding to the first fluctuation of every layer are
bigger, especially for the first four layers, after which their intensity decays. This is
because the temperature­time data comes from nodes at the first four layers, mean­
ing that these reach temperatures above the melt one while getting activated, in­
creasing the average value for those peaks. For the subsequent layers, none of the
considered nodes reach such a temperature; therefore, the peaks’ magnitudes are
lower. Also, it is noticed in the thermal camera that the first four peaks are bigger
respect to the other ones of the upper layers, confirming the estimation made on the
region considered by one pixel of the thermal camera video coincides with the one
taken numerically.
Finally, the cooling at the end of the deposition is also studied. Looking at the two
81
==PAGE:90==
different slopes at the end, the experimental seems to cool down more quickly than
the numerical one. This can be due to the following reasons:
• The film coefficient used at the bottom of the baseplate is too low, making the
bottom surface semi­adiabatic and contributes too little to the cooling down of
the deposition. This value should be increased to enhance the cooling power
of the bottom surface.
• The geometry considered for the baseplate includes only half of the actual
baseplate. As previously explained, every baseplate from the experiment in­
cludes two multi­layer depositions, and what is done in ABAQUS is simply to
consider half of the baseplate (the one with the deposition of interest). The
surface that should be connected to the other side of the baseplate is consid­
ered adiabatic in the numerical model. Instead, in the actual process there is
conduction to the other side of the baseplate, which helps the heat transfer far
away from the deposition.
Again, fixing the model with a higher bottom film coefficient and bigger baseplate
would increase the cooling power and change the cooling after deposition. These
should be tried in future work.
All of these considerations show how it is very complex to use experimental data
to validate complex manufacturing processes such as DED. Validation, however, is
already proofed by the single­track model. Therefore, what has been here executed
was just a second check that the right amount of energy is input and, apart from
some gaps in values that could be due to one of the assumptions made, the trends
between experiments and numerical model show several similarities.
4.2.12
Patch Refinement of the multi­layer thermal model
In Figure 4.41 and 4.42, models with different number of patches are compared.
The nomenclature follows the following rules: L corresponds to a model with layer
deposition (p = 1 patch / 3 tracks = 0.33), T a model with track deposition (one patch
per track, p = 1), and then PX when more patches per track ware deposited, where X
corresponds to the number of patches per track p used. The following observations
are made:
• For model L only one temperature fluctuation per layer is noticed. This is be­
cause the model is insensitive to the number of tracks per layer. Therefore, it
can not output one peak for each track deposition.
• For model T, three fluctuations per layer are now found. This shows how the
model detects the three different tracks deposited per layer along its deposition
time. The model is still, however, insensitive to the scanning pattern: this can
be recognized as the peaks are equidistant one to the other, while they should
not be. The distance should vary as the nodes under analysis are close to the
end of the first track and the beginning of the second track; therefore, the first
two fluctuations should be closer with respect to the third one.
• For model PX, disregarding the X value, the model is now both sensitive to
the track deposition and the scanning pattern. Fluctuations are not equidistant
82
==PAGE:91==
anymore: the first two peaks are close one to the other for the reason explained
at the previous point.
• When increasing the number of patches in the PX models, the curves are
shifted to higher times, as seen in Figure 4.23 ­ left. The nodes at the end
of the first track are activated later when more patches are used.
• Finally, regarding the overall shape of the curves, higher peaks are seen for
the first 8 layers as the nodal temperatures averaged come from these layers.
Figure 4.41: Patch refinement analysis results (for multi­layer). On the left, a zoom­
in of the deposition of the fourth layer to show how model T is sensitive to the track
deposition and model P16 to the scanning pattern.
Figure 4.42: Patch refinement analysis results (for multi­layer). On the left, a zoom­
in of deposition of the first track ­ fourth layer, to show how different patching of the
PX models brings a temporal shift in the activation of the nodes at the end of the
track.
83
==PAGE:92==
The reason why the first peak of layer 5 and 8 are higher than the others is
due to mesh reasons along the surface: at the lateral surface, all the tracks
of the first layer present their lowest height, giving that meshing with 0.5mm
size elements brings only one element per layer. In layers 5 and 8, however,
meshing brought two elements per layer. Therefore, one extra node is present
for these layers during the melting, increasing the average value respect to the
other layers. See Figure 4.43 to visualize what was just explained.
When comparing the computational times (Figure 4.44), these also follow the ex­
pected linear trend where a higher number of patches brings longer computational
times, given the higher number of steps. Also, the RMSE are reported, considering
as reference the P16 model. The error increases linearly with a higher slope when
shifting to the model L (p = 0.33) due to the different amount of peaks.
Figure 4.43: Line of nodal points con­
sidered for the patch refinement anal­
ysis.
White dots show that layers 5
and 8 have one more node along the
line, bringing higher peaks in the corre­
sponding positions of the temperature­
time curves.
0
5
10
15
Number of Patches per Track
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
CPU Time [hrs]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
RMSE [°C]
CPU Times
Figure 4.44: Computational times and
RMSE for different number of patches
per track
4.2.13
Interaction dependency of the multi­layer thermal model
In Figure 4.45 and 4.46, the different temperature­time curves for model 0, model A
(no convection­radiation in the deposition), and model B (no convection in the top
surface of the baseplate as well) are reported.
In the first plot, the average temperature of the line of nodes of the previous section is
plotted for the different models. Models A and B behave similarly, with lower cooling
respect to model B, bringing higher temperatures at the end of the deposition. This
makes good sense, as models A and B have no heat transfer to the environment in
the 3D printed part.
In the second one, the temperature­time curve of the node at the top of the baseplate
is considered. The trend is similar, but with also an increased lower cooling for model
84
==PAGE:93==
B. Again, the result is reasonable as model B has no convection on the baseplate
surface, therefore, uses more time to cool down.
The three models have, however, not so different CPU times: model 0 shows one of
136.6 hrs, model A of 121.90 hrs, and finally model B of 123.83 hrs. It is concluded
that the discount in computational time is not worth removing the interactions, as
the cooling of the system is affected. The same results have also been found in the
literature [56].
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
800
T [°C]
Temperature-time curves in the deposition
P2 - Reference
P2A - RMSE = 11.93°C
P2B - RMSE = 15.08°C
Figure 4.45: Interaction dependency analysis: temperature­time curve of averaged
nodal temperatures from the deposition.
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
T [°C]
Temperature-time curves in the baseplate
P2 - Reference
P2A - RMSE = 6.71°C
P2B  - RMSE = 10.89°C
Figure 4.46: Interaction dependency analysis: temperature­time curve from a node
on the top surface of the baseplate.
4.2.14
Cooling rate study of the multi­layer thermal model
Figure 4.47 shows a comparison of the different cooling rates at the second, eighth
and fourteenth layers. The reported curves come from single nodes at the different
85
==PAGE:94==
layers, and only the peak that crosses the melt temperature is shown here. The
peaks are, of course, located in different positions in time, but to allow a comparison
between the three, these are shifted such that cooling starts at the same instant
for all of them, to compare the different cooling rates from the slopes. Taking the
values of temperature within solidus and liquidus temperature, the cooling rates are
reported in the legend of the plot. The outcome is that the cooling rate decreases
with increased build height.
This gives a very good agreement with what was found in the experiments. In the
N3 sample, it is found that the microhardness decreases with the built height. A de­
creased hardness is usually related to coarser grain size and to a lower cooling rate.
This trend is confirmed here, and Figure 4.48 shows in one plot the development of
the hardness and cooling rate with the build height that confirms what is mentioned
earlier in the text.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
T [°C]
Cooling rate at different heights from the build plate
Top (CR = 374°C/s)
Mid (CR = 704°C/s)
Bottom (CR = 1043°C/s)
Tliq=1459.85°C
Tsol=1419.85°C
Figure 4.47: Temperature­time profiles at different layers. ”Top” comes from the
14th layer, ”Mid” from the 8th layer, and ”Bottom” from the 2nd layer. The legend
also reports the cooling rates (CR).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Distance from baseplate [mm]
180
200
220
240
260
Microhardness [HV]
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Cooling rate [°C/s]
N3 Microhardness
Cooling rates
Figure 4.48: Microhardness and cooling rate development with the build height. The
decay looks similar in both cases.
86
==PAGE:95==
4.2.15
Stress analysis of the single­track thermomechanical
model
Stress development is analyzed with a thermomechanical model having p = 24 (Fig­
ure 4.49). Stresses along the deposition direction are the highest ones in magnitude
and, therefore, the most interesting to be analyzed. During the deposition of new
patches, the material in the track starts developing tensile stresses while cooling
down below melt temperature, as, above that temperature, the stress­strain curves
are almost horizontal (no stress development even for very high strains). Tensile
stresses are generated slowly up to 600 MPa when the deposition reaches room tem­
perature. These are developed as the track wants to contract due to the decrease
in temperature, while it is constrained by the baseplate where it is deposited. On the
other hand, the baseplate behaves differently depending on the region considered.
Close to the track, when heated up, initially compressive stresses are generated as
the expansion is constrained by the bottom part of the baseplate that is not heated
up yet. Subsequently, a tensile state is generated by the contraction of the track
while cooling down. The final residual tensile stress gradually decreases with the
distance from the track. Finally, the bottom part of the baseplate (far away from the
track) tends to develop only a compressive state. As it is pinned, it does not get that
much warmed up, and creates equilibrium by balancing the tensile state at the top.
The maximum magnitude of the compressive state reaches up to ­60 MPa.
Representations of the longitudinal stress fields along with the temperature one are
reported in Figure 4.50 at a simulation time of t = 0.866 s.
Another approach to representing the development of σx and T along the track width
is given in Figure 4.51: at T > Tliq, no stresses are present, and these start to build
up when cooling below that value. Within one single track, the final residual stress
is quite homogeneous, with higher values at the center part of this one.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time [s]
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Temperature [°C]
 and T development (Track)
xx
yy
zz
T
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time [s]
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Stress [MPa]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Temperature [C]
 and T development (Baseplate)
Figure 4.49: Stress and temperature development extracted at a node in the middle
of patch 12 (left) and at the closest node in the baseplate below that same patch
(right). Curves are made of fewer data­points for t > 2.5s due to the automatic time
stepping of ABAQUS that increased excessively the time steps.
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 4.50: Contour plots for the thermomechanical model with p = 24 during de­
position of patch 12 (t = 0.886 s). On the left, the stress field σx is reported, on the
right the temperature one.
Figure 4.51: Temperature and stress profile in the middle of patch 12 (of 24).
A comparison between models with different patch numbers is documented to present
the complete stress fields after deposition, when the sample is back at room temper­
ature. In Figure 4.52, cut­views of the xz­plane are shown, where the stress fields
σx are very similar between the different models. The main difference is given in the
tensile state of the track: an increased number of patches brings higher stress in the
track, specifically on the surfaces between two different patches. What is also re­
ported in the same figure is a stress field output from a model with p = 1 and obtained
through the GH method. This one still shows a stress field, meaning that plasticity
still happens even below the melt temperature. Still, its values around the track are
significantly underestimated (50% reduction with respect to the ones in p = 24 with
FH). The computational times for the different models are reported in Figure 4.53:
the model obtained with GH show a way lower computational time as the low temper­
ature reduces the non­linearity degree of the simulation. Also, compared to the CPU
times of the thermal simulations, the thermomechanical ones show longer times due
to the increased number of equations to be solved and their non­linear behavior.
88
==PAGE:97==
Figure 4.52: Patch refinement analysis: by changing the p from 1 to 24, the stress
field σx remains very similar with a reduction of it in the track. In the top­right corner,
one output given by a GH model is also reported (enhanced underestimation of the
stress at the track).
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of Patches
0
50
100
150
CPU Time [hrs]
CPU Times - ST Thermomechanical model
FH - Thermomech.
FH - Thermal
GH - Thermomech.
Figure 4.53: Computational times of the thermomechanical simulations respect to
the thermal ones (and GH for p = 1).
The cases with p = 1 and p = 24 represent the two limit scenarios, meaning that
the following representations will be shown only for these two. The xy­view of the
longitudinal stress is reported for these two in Figure 4.54. This shows how the
tensile regions are surrounding the track. In Figure 4.55 and 4.56, instead, the other
two components of stress σy and σz are reported:
• In the first case (Figure 4.55), tensile stress is generated around the track in
the baseplate, with some small compressive state at the end and beginning of
the deposited track. The rest of the geometry looks almost without any stress.
The model with p = 1 seems to overestimate the stress values.
• In the second case (Figure 4.56), only compression is found in the bottom of
the baseplate, with almost no stress for the rest of the geometry. The model
with p = 1 seems to underestimate the stress field.
89
==PAGE:98==
Finally, in Figure 4.57, the Von Mises stress field is reported. Once again, these look
very similar for the two different models, with higher values for the one with p = 24.
Figure 4.54: Longitudinal stresses σx from xy­plane for different numbers of patches.
Figure 4.55: Stress field σy from xy­ and xz­plane for different patches.
Figure 4.56: Stress field σz from xy­ and xz­plane for different patches.
Figure 4.57: Von Mises stress field σMises for different patches.
90
==PAGE:99==
4.2.16
Deformation analysis of the single­track
thermomechanical model
After cutting, the stress is released by the component as this is not constrained any­
more and is free to deform. All the deformations for this geometry are small (maxi­
mum 80µm), as this concerns only one deposited track of material. Higher deforma­
tions are expected for the multi­layer case. For all cases, higher displacements are
detected in the models with a higher number of patches. By analyzing the behaviour
in the three directions, it is seen that:
• In the x­ and y­direction, shrinkage towards the center of the track is noticed
(Figure 4.58 and 4.59), bringing a reduction in the track length and with of
2.2mm and 0.3mm, respectively (when p = 24).
• In the z­direction, bending is noticed, with an upward curvature (Figure 4.60).
This is due to the stress profile at the edge of the deposition along its height
that resembles the one generated by a bending force, therefore bringing to a
curvature when cutting is performed.
Figure 4.58:
Displacement in the x­
direction.
Figure 4.59:
Displacement in the y­
direction.
Figure 4.60: Displacement in the z­direction.
91
==PAGE:100==
4.2.17
Convergence and computational times of the multi­layer
thermomechanical model
Given the increased computational times detected for the single­track thermome­
chanical model (Figure 4.53), it has been declared impossible to run simulations for
the multi­layer geometry with the same patching as for the thermal models. Consid­
ering that simulations are run with 20 cores on HPC, after several tests, it has been
discovered that only the model with layer deposition (p = 0.33) can be concluded
within 10 days of simulation time. However, it is important to include also the models
that are sensitive to track deposition and scanning pattern. To achieve these, the
mesh is coarsened as explained in Section 3.2.5.2. The computational times ob­
tained are 781.81 hrs for model L (50 hrs in HPC), and 3873.46 hours for model T
(240 hrs in HPC).
One second consideration is made on convergence: several times, while testing the
models, these failed halfway through due to elements distorted in such a way that
the volume was becoming negative. Wedge elements have been initially accused
of being the ones causing this issue, making the mesh to be changed to fully hex
elements. This issue was again found when the hex elements had a too flat shape,
like the ones shown in Figure 4.61. Such elements reach too small volumes that give
errors in ABAQUS, stopping the simulations. This is what happened for the last layer
of the model with the original meshing with p =0.33 and for the model with a coarser
mesh and p =0.33. This happened in the last week before the thesis deadline. For
this reason, no results with the refined mesh and the scanning pattern influence
are here reported. These could be furtherly investigated as future work, to ensure
that the model is still mesh­independent with a coarser mesh (this should be true
considering the analysis made in Section 4.2.4) and to evaluate the influence of the
scanning pattern.
Finally, the static final step related to the cutting also gave some issues, with diver­
gence happened for all the cases with p > 0.33. However, the stress state detected
for the models with p = 1 before cutting resembles the one with layer deposition,
meaning that a similar displacement is assumed to happen also for the other model.
Figure 4.61: Distortion of elements with low aspect ratio. This might bring to error
due to the expansion of elements below.
92
==PAGE:101==
4.2.18
Stress analysis of the multi­layer thermomechanical
model
The final residual stresses after deposition found for the different models are reported
in Figure 4.64, 4.65, and 4.66. Model L corresponds to the one with layer deposition
(p = 0.33) and T to the one with track deposition (p = 1). Similar results are found in
articles [57, 58], providing an initial qualitative validation of the model.
At the interface between the deposition and the baseplate located at the beginning
and end of its length, the peak value of longitudinal stress is around 700 MPa (in­
dicated by red arrows in Figure 4.62). Considering the stress in the z­direction, the
value is even higher, with a peak value of σz of 780 MPa. Also, the stress in the y­
direction is amplified here, up to 660 MPa. These high stresses at this specific point
agree with what is also found in literature [57, 58]. These might induce cracking at
these interfaces between the part and the baseplate. A comparison of the results
from model T with the findings of [57] is proposed in Figure 4.62 and Figure 4.63.
This behavior is found only in the short edges of the geometry.
Within the part, instead, the larger stresses are overall found in the longitudinal di­
rection (σx). Maximum tensile stress of 600 MPa is found in the middle of the length.
Small compressive stresses are developed at the beginning and end of the length
in the top layers, with values of ­80 MPa. In Figure 4.62­left these compressive
stresses are not so visible in the article geometry due to its reduced length and width
(and therefore localized in a smaller region).
With respect to the single­track geometry, the compressive state (for σx) of the base­
plate is here absent below the deposition. That is because, as seen in the thermal
model, the baseplate gets heated up during the process, allowing then to expand
Figure 4.62: Longitudinal stress concentration (red arrow) at the edge of the depo­
sition from literature [57] (left) and cut­view from the project (right). The black arrow
shows the stress in the middle of the deposition, with bands corresponding to the
different layers. Similar behavior is found in Figure 4.64 for the multi­layer simulated
geometry.
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure 4.63: Stress in the build direction reaches the peak value at the edge between
deposition and baseplate: comparison of the cut­view with literature model [57] (on
the left).
Figure 4.64: Longitudinal stress σx for the multi­layer models: cut view of the mid­
plane. The tensile stress at the middle of the length also resembles what is seen in
Figure 4.62­left (black arrow).
94
==PAGE:103==
Figure 4.65: Stress σy field for the multi­layer models: cut­view of the mid­plane.
Beware that the legend differs from the plots of σx and σz to visualize better the
stress distribution.
Figure 4.66: Stress σz field for the multi­layer models: cut­view of the mid­plane.
Beware that the legend differs from the plots of σy.
95
==PAGE:104==
and produce tension that compensates for the compression generated by the depo­
sition. Therefore, when cooling down after deposition, this also presents some slight
tensile residual stress.
The longitudinal stress field shows a band structure along with the height, related
to the different layers built. Every layer shows longitudinal stress increasing within
its height that becomes discontinuous at the interface between two layers, where
the tensile stress is suddenly reduced at the beginning of the upward layer. Such a
pattern is also seen in Figure 4.62­left from [57]. Figure 4.67 shows more in detail
this behaviour, with the values taken in the elements along with the build height, at
the middle of the length and width of the component. This trend is clear for the first
layers, a bit less for the last ones (probably due to the coarse meshing).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Distance from the baseplate [mm]
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
x [MPa]
1
2
3
6
9
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
5
4
Layers
Figure 4.67: Development of the longitudinal stress along with the build height (from
the model T). This shows a general decrease, with internal fluctuations given by the
change of layers.
As the temperature shows some fluctuations over time, where every fluctuation cor­
responds to a deposition of a new layer, also the stress σx shows a number of fluc­
tuations equal to the number of deposited tracks. To explain this cyclical thermal
loading, Figure 4.68 shows the development of the longitudinal stress together with
the temperature along time (from model T, chosen as it presents equidistant peaks
due to the absence of the scanning pattern influence). The shown node is taken
from the middle of the second track of the second layer.
When this one gets deposited, the melt initially does not build up stresses until the
temperature goes below the melt one. When this happens, tensile stresses are gen­
erated, as explained in the single­track case.
When a new track is deposited, the tracks previously deposited are also heated up
to some extent. This heating would bring a material expansion that depends on
96
==PAGE:105==
the CTE. However, this expansion is counterbalanced by a relief of the tensile state
previously generated, causing the detected drop of the longitudinal stress. When
then the material is not anymore affected by a tensile state, but the temperature is
still increasing, expansion is constrained by the surrounding material and, therefore,
a compression state starts to get generated.
Finally, the material starts to cool down again before a new track is deposited. This
cooling brings to a contraction that is again counterbalanced by the compressive
state. When the compressive state is relieved, new tensile stress builds up as the
part would like to contract, but it is constrained.
It is very interesting to zoom only on the beginning of one fluctuation, to visualize
better one further detail (green box in Figure 4.68). As it is possible to see, at 66.8s
(when deposition of the third track of the fourth layer starts), the stresses experience
Figure 4.68: Stress and Temperature development during deposition for one node
located in the middle of the second track, second layer. The black box shows the
development within a layer deposition. The green box shows the behaviour at the
activation of a new track.
97
==PAGE:106==
a small bump before the temperature increases. This is because the deposition is
begun, but the heat is not arrived yet at the node under investigation. The material
that is heated up starts releasing stress and go into compression, and, by doing, so
they bring a slight increase in the stress at such position. After 0.05 s, however, this
effect disappears as the zone starts heating up and releasing stress.
All these fluctuations are damped by the build height and the distance from the new
layers deposited. Also, the tension relieved when a new layer gets deposited is not
entirely recovered while the subsequent cooling happens, but it is usually decreased
in magnitude. In the long term, this stress becomes so low that the contraction given
by the cooling is not enough to counterbalance the compressive state, leaving the
bottom layers residual stress that is only compressive. This happens because the
overall temperature of the deposition gets increased during the process, leading that
the part desires to contract less if it is kept at a higher temperature (and therefore, it
is less prone to produce residual tension).
When the deposition is over, the whole piece cools down one last time to room tem­
perature. This brings to a final big contraction of the part, which builds up a tensile
state in most of the geometry, as discussed in the first part of this section.
Another approach to visualizing what was just described is through contour plots:
Figure 4.70 and 4.71 show the temperature and longitudinal stress history along
with the deposition of the first track of the tenth layer.
Figure 4.69 shows the stress­time curves for all the stress components σx, σy, and
σz. This confirms again that the longitudinal stresses are bigger in the deposition,
followed by the ones in the z­direction and almost null ones in the y­direction.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Stress [MPa]
108
Stress and Temperature development (Model T)
x
y
z
Figure 4.69: Stress components σx, σy and σz development along time.
98
==PAGE:107==
Figure 4.70: Longitudinal stress development during deposition of the first track of
layer 10. At 1, the track is fully melted (not loaded), and the tensile stress is still
present in the rest of the geometry as heat is not conducted yet. From 2 to 4, switch
to compression given by the heating. In 5, the deposited track cooling down builds
up tensile stress. This is then increased up to the end of the deposition step (6), with
the largest tension close to the track just deposited. The compression zone close to
the baseplate moves up from 1 to 6.
Figure 4.71: Temperature development during deposition of the first track of layer 10.
These images should be paired to the ones in Figure 4.70 to see how temperature
increases bring a compression state and reductions of it to tensile stress.
99
==PAGE:108==
4.2.19
Deformation analysis of the multi­layer
thermomechanical model
The behavior after cutting is finally reported for model L. Checking the different resid­
ual stress fields, a similar deformation is expected for the other models, with just
higher displacement values given the larger values. In Figure 4.72, the results are
shown. These resemble the ones also seen for the single­track deposition, but this
time the displacements detected are bigger, meaning that more deformation is ex­
pected (beyond half a millimeter). Along the x­ and y­axis, shrinkage is detected
(bigger in the first direction), while, in the z­direction bending, is expected with an
upward curvature.
Figure 4.72: Displacements after cutting: from left to right, the displacements along
the x­, y­, and z­directions are reported.
100
==PAGE:109==
5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this Master’s Thesis project, experiments and simulations have been run related
to DED production. It has been concluded that the process parameters greatly in­
fluence the outcome of the 3D printed components, especially related to its final
geometry, microstructure, and warping after cutting. A Design of Experiment (DoE)
is recommended to obtain relevant insights on how to optimize the process param­
eters, improving the quality of the final parts. While an experimental DoE might
require extra costs for the company, a virtual one run through simulations reduces
the cost for the industries. Therefore, this project showed also that reliable simula­
tions can be produced to predict the temperature development during the deposition,
from which most of the final properties of the component are then derived. Residual
stresses can also be studied numerically, with refined thermomechanical simulations
that might require an extra computational time (depending on the number of cores
of the computing machine used, it is still possible to obtain results within one week
of simulation).
The following points are suggested for future work to obtain further insights on the
topic:
• As the SEM­EDS analysis brought qualitative results related to the samples’
compositions, a further investigation could be executed through OES (Optical
Emission Spectrometry) to conclude on the final composition of the part.
• The secondary phase found through SEM­EDS has been qualified as δ­ferrite,
but also some σ­phase has been hypothesized to be present. EBSD (Elec­
tron Backscattered Diffraction) could be executed to study the crystallographic
characteristics of that regions and finally define whether the σ­phase is also
present.
• It has been shown how the cooling rates are different depending on how many
layers have been deposited. The cooling rate affects the final grain size, and,
in the presented results, micrographs are shown only to compare samples with
different energy densities, not to compare different layers in the same one. It
is, therefore, recommended to execute new microstructural investigations to
conclude on the change in grain size (and morphology) with the built height.
• The thermal model of the multi­layer deposition has shown a cooling after de­
position that differs from the one detected by the thermal camera. Increasing
the film coefficient at the bottom of the baseplate would increase the cooling
of the numerical model, bringing to a better match. Also, replicating the entire
geometry of the baseplate (and not half of it, as done during the project) would
bring more material where the heat can be conducted away from the printed
part.
• The thermomechanical model produced with the FH method showed the in­
crease in computational times compared to the thermal model. It is then curious
at this point to test other modelling techniques, like the IS method, and check
101
==PAGE:110==
potential differences in the computational times and in the produced residual
stress fields.
• Also, given the coarsening of the mesh executed to run the thermomechanical
models within proper timings, a double­check of the independence of the final
residual stress and deformation fields from the coarsening is recommended.
• To reduce the dimensions of the output files from the thermomechanical simu­
lations, data every 5 increments is stored (only temperature, stresses, and dis­
placements are saved). For the multi­layer case, this brought to dimensions of
30GB, but as a drawback, the output curves look less refined (see Figure 4.69),
where the curve development is less smooth and made of straight lines during
the cooling phase especially). To achieve nicer plots, a rerun of the simula­
tions with more data saved is suggested, ensuring enough storage space is
available in the machine where simulations are run.
• So far, only one set of process parameters has been validated and simulated
(the nominal ones). To show the reliability of the FH method from the process
parameters, it would be nice to produce simulations from other energy densities
and show the consistency of the results.
• Finally, an experimental evaluation of residual stresses of newly built samples
would also give a final validation of the model, which is only proven through
the temperature development within the part.
102
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
Muhammad Usman Naseer et al. “A Review on Additive Manufacturing Pos­
sibilities for Electrical Machines”. In: Energies 14.7 (2021). ISSN: 1996­1073.
DOI: 10.3390/en14071940. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/7/1940.
[2]
Syed A.M. Tofail et al. “Additive manufacturing: scientific and technological
challenges, market uptake and opportunities”. In: Materials Today 21.1 (2018),
pp. 22–37. ISSN: 1369­7021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2017.07.
001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369702117301773.
[3]
M. C. Brennan, J. S. Keist, and T. A. Palmer. “Defects in Metal Additive Man­
ufacturing Processes”. In: Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance
30.7, SI (July 2021), pp. 4808–4818. ISSN: 1059­9495. DOI: 10.1007/s11665-
021-05919-6.
[4]
“Standard Terminology for Additive Manufacturing Technologies”. In: F2792
(2013).
[5]
John O Milewski. “Additive manufacturing of metals”. In: Applied Mechanics
and Materials (2017).
[6]
Anton Wiberg. Towards Design Automation for Additive Manufacturing : A Mul­
tidisciplinary Optimization approach. Oct. 2019. ISBN: 9789179299859. DOI:
10.3384/lic.diva-160888.
[7]
Dong­Gyu Ahn. “Directed Energy Deposition (DED) Process: State of the Art”.
In: International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing­Green
Technology 8 (Feb. 2021). DOI: 10.1007/s40684-020-00302-7.
[8]
Torsten Petrat et al. “Microstructure of Inconel 718 parts with constant mass
energy input manufactured with direct energy deposition”. In: Procedia Manu­
facturing 36 (Jan. 2019), pp. 256–266. DOI: 10.1016/j.promfg.2019.08.033.
[9]
Bhaskar Dutta, Sudarsanam Babu, and Bradley Jared. “Chapter 2 ­ Additive
manufacturing technology”. In: Science, Technology and Applications of Met­
als in Additive Manufacturing. Ed. by Bhaskar Dutta, Sudarsanam Babu, and
Bradley Jared. Additive Manufacturing Materials and Technologies. Elsevier,
2019, pp. 11–53. ISBN: 978­0­12­816634­5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-816634-5.00002-9.
[10]
T. DebRoy et al. “Additive manufacturing of metallic components – Process,
structure and properties”. In: Progress in Materials Science 92 (2018), pp. 112–
224. ISSN: 0079­6425. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2017.10.001.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079642517301172.
[11]
Sarah J. Wolff et al. “Experimentally validated predictions of thermal history
and microhardness in laser­deposited Inconel 718 on carbon steel”. In: Ad­
ditive Manufacturing 27 (2019), pp. 540–551. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.03.019. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860418308443.
[12]
Emil Duong et al. “Scan path resolved thermal modelling of LPBF”. In: Additive
Manufacturing Letters 3 (2022), p. 100047. ISSN: 2772­3690. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addlet.2022.100047. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2772369022000214.
103
==PAGE:112==
[13]
Keval S. Ramani and Chinedum E. Okwudire. “Intelligent Scan Sequence Opti­
mization for Uniform Temperature Distribution in Laser Powder Bed Fusion us­
ing a Control Theoretic Approach”. In: IFAC­PapersOnLine 54.20 (2021). Mod­
eling, Estimation and Control Conference MECC 2021, pp. 503–508. ISSN:
2405­8963. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2021.11.222. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405896321022667.
[14]
Bodi Yuan et al. “Machine￿Learning￿Based Monitoring of Laser Powder Bed
Fusion”. In: Advanced Materials Technologies 3 (Sept. 2018). DOI: 10.1002/
admt.201800136.
[15]
Hao Wang et al. “Review on adaptive control of laser­directed energy deposi­
tion”. In: Optical Engineering 59.7 (2020), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1117/1.OE.59.7.
070901. URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.OE.59.7.070901.
[16]
Ehsan Foroozmehr and Radovan Kovacevic. “Effect of path planning on the
laser powder deposition process: thermal and structural evaluation”. In: The In­
ternational Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 51.5 (Nov. 2010),
pp. 659–669. ISSN: 1433­3015. DOI: 10.1007/s00170-010-2659-6. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00170-010-2659-6.
[17]
K. Ren et al. “Thermo­mechanical analyses for optimized path planning in laser
aided additive manufacturing processes”. In: Materials Design 162 (2019),
pp. 80–93. ISSN: 0264­1275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2018.11.
014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264127518308207.
[18]
Amir Mostafaei et al. “Defects and anomalies in powder bed fusion metal addi­
tive manufacturing”. In: Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science
26.2 (2022), p. 100974. ISSN: 1359­0286. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cossms.2021.100974. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1359028621000772.
[19]
T. Mukherjee et al. “Printability of alloys for additive manufacturing”. In: Sci­
entific Reports 6.1 (Jan. 2016), p. 19717. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/
srep19717. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep19717.
[20]
P. Rangaswamy et al. “Residual stresses in LENS® components using neu­
tron diffraction and contour method”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: A
399.1 (2005). Measurement and Interpretation of Internal/Residual Stresses,
pp. 72–83. ISSN: 0921­5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2005.02.019.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092150930500167X.
[21]
Xiaoming Zhao et al. “The effect of hot isostatic pressing on crack healing,
microstructure, mechanical properties of Rene88DT superalloy prepared by
laser solid forming”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: A 504.1 (2009),
pp. 129–134. ISSN: 0921­5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2008.12.
024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921509308013920.
[22]
Shukri Afazov et al. “A methodology for precision additive manufacturing through
compensation”. In: Precision Engineering 50 (2017), pp. 269–274. ISSN: 0141­
6359. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2017.05.014. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0141635917301484.
[23]
Kai Xu et al. “A Reverse Compensation Framework for Shape Deformation
Control in Additive Manufacturing”. In: Journal of Computing and Information
Science in Engineering 17.2 (Feb. 2017). 021012. ISSN: 1530­9827. DOI: 10.
1115/1.4034874. eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/computingengineering/
104
==PAGE:113==
article-pdf/17/2/021012/5996370/jcise\_017\_02\_021012.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1115/1.4034874.
[24]
Alberta Aversa et al. “Effect of Heat Treatments on Residual Stress and Prop­
erties of AISI 316L Steel Processed by Directed Energy Deposition”. In: Jour­
nal of Materials Engineering and Performance 29 (Sept. 2020). DOI: 10.1007/
s11665-020-05061-9.
[25]
W. Kurz and D.J. Fisher. “Dendrite growth at the limit of stability: tip radius and
spacing”. In: Acta Metallurgica 29.1 (1981), pp. 11–20. ISSN: 0001­6160. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(81)90082-1. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0001616081900821.
[26]
Yousub Lee et al. “Effect of Fluid Convection on Dendrite Arm Spacing in Laser
Deposition”. In: Metallurgical and Materials Transactions B (Mar. 2014). DOI:
10.1007/s11663-014-0054-7.
[27]
G.E.P. Box. “Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building”. In: Ro­
bustness in Statistics. Ed. by ROBERT L. LAUNER and GRAHAM N. WILKIN­
SON. Academic Press, 1979, pp. 201–236. ISBN: 978­0­12­438150­6. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-438150-6.50018-2. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124381506500182.
[28]
Christoph Meier et al. “Thermophysical Phenomena in Metal Additive Manu­
facturing by Selective Laser Melting: Fundamentals, Modeling, Simulation and
Experimentation”. In: Annual Review of Heat Transfer 20 (Jan. 2018). DOI:
10.1615/AnnualRevHeatTransfer.2018019042.
[29]
Allan F. Bower. Applied Mechanics of Solids (A.F. bower) appendix C: Index
notation. 2008. URL: http://solidmechanics.org/text/AppendixC/AppendixC.htm.
[30]
Kelly, PA. Mechanics Lecture Notes: An introduction to Solid Mechanics. See
http://homepages.engineering.auckland.ac.nz/ pkel015/SolidMechanicsBooks/
index.html.
[31]
Luke Parry et al. “Investigation of Residual Stresses in Selective Laser Melt­
ing”. In: Key Engineering Materials 627 (Jan. 2015), pp. 129–132. DOI: 10.
4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.627.129.
[32]
Mohamad Bayat et al. “Part­scale thermo­mechanical modelling of distortions
in Laser Powder Bed Fusion – Analysis of the sequential flash heating method
with experimental validation”. In: Additive Manufacturing 36 (2020), p. 101508.
ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101508. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860420308800.
[33]
Michele Chiumenti et al. “Numerical modelling and experimental validation in
Selective Laser Melting”. In: Additive Manufacturing 18 (2017), pp. 171–185.
ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2017.09.002. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860417302087.
[34]
Xuan Liang et al. “Modified inherent strain method for efficient prediction of
residual deformation in direct metal laser sintered components”. In: Computa­
tional Mechanics 64 (Dec. 2019). DOI: 10.1007/s00466-019-01748-6.
[35]
Xuan Liang et al. “A modified method for estimating inherent strains from de­
tailed process simulation for fast residual distortion prediction of single­walled
structures fabricated by directed energy deposition”. In: Additive Manufactur­
ing 23 (2018), pp. 471–486. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
105
==PAGE:114==
j.addma.2018.08.029. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214860418304858.
[36]
N.E. Hodge, R.M. Ferencz, and R.M. Vignes. “Experimental comparison of
residual stresses for a thermomechanical model for the simulation of selective
laser melting”. In: Additive Manufacturing 12 (2016). Special Issue on Modeling
Simulation for Additive Manufacturing, pp. 159–168. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2016.05.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S221486041630094X.
[37]
Mohamad Bayat et al. “A review of multi­scale and multi­physics simulations
of metal additive manufacturing processes with focus on modeling strategies”.
In: Additive Manufacturing 47 (2021), p. 102278. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2021.102278. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2214860421004383.
[38]
Tomasz Kurzynowski et al. “Effect of Scanning and Support Strategies on Rel­
ative Density of SLM­ed H13 Steel in Relation to Specimen Size”. In: Materials
12 (Jan. 2019), p. 239. DOI: 10.3390/ma12020239.
[39]
M. Strantza et al. “Effect of the scanning strategy on the formation of resid­
ual stresses in additively manufactured Ti­6Al­4V”. In: Additive Manufacturing
45 (2021), p. 102003. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addma.2021.102003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214860421001688.
[40]
R.K. Ganeriwala et al. “Evaluation of a thermomechanical model for prediction
of residual stress during laser powder bed fusion of Ti­6Al­4V”. In: Additive
Manufacturing 27 (2019), pp. 489–502. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.03.034. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2214860418308741.
[41]
Indhu Ramdas et al. “Overview of Laser Absorptivity Measurement Techniques
for Material Processing”. In: Lasers in Manufacturing and Materials Processing
5 (Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.1007/s40516-018-0075-1.
[42]
Jujie Yan et al. “A Comprehensive Study of Steel Powders (316L, H13, P20
and 18Ni300) for Their Selective Laser Melting Additive Manufacturing”. In:
Metals 9 (Jan. 2019), p. 86. DOI: 10.3390/met9010086.
[43]
Mohamad Bayat et al. “A fundamental investigation of thermo­capillarity in
laser powder bed fusion of metals and alloys”. In: International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 166 (2021), p. 120766. ISSN: 0017­9310. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120766. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0017931020337029.
[44]
Dassault Systèmes. Abaqus Analysis User’s Guide (6.14) ­ Section 11.2.1.
July 2015. URL: http://130.149.89.49:2080/v6.14/books/usb/default.htm.
[45]
Dassault Systèmes. Abaqus Analysis User’s Guide (6.6­1) ­ Section 7.2.3.
Mar. 2006. URL: https://classes.engineering.wustl.edu/2009/spring/mase5513/
abaqus/docs/v6.6/books/usb/default.htm?startat=pt03ch07s02aus43.html.
[46]
Florian Wirth, Samuel Arpagaus, and Konrad Wegener. “Analysis of melt pool
dynamics in laser cladding and direct metal deposition by automated high­
speed camera image evaluation”. In: Additive Manufacturing 21 (2018), pp. 369–
382. ISSN: 2214­8604. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.03.025. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214860418300551.
106
==PAGE:115==
[47]
E. W. A. Figueredo et al. “Influence of Laser Beam Power and Scanning Speed
on the Macrostructural Characteristics of AISI 316L and AISI 431 Stainless
Steel Depositions Produced by Laser Cladding Process”. In: Journal of Mate­
rials Engineering and Performance 30.5 (May 2021), pp. 3298–3312. ISSN:
1544­1024. DOI: 10.1007/s11665-021-05676-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11665-021-05676-6.
[48]
Xiaoyuan Lou, Peter L. Andresen, and Raul B. Rebak. “Oxide inclusions in
laser additive manufactured stainless steel and their effects on impact tough­
ness and stress corrosion cracking behavior”. In: Journal of Nuclear Materials
499 (2018), pp. 182–190. ISSN: 0022­3115. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jnucmat.2017.11.036. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0022311517313922.
[49]
Abdollah Saboori et al. “An investigation on the effect of deposition pattern
on the microstructure, mechanical properties and residual stress of 316L pro­
duced by Directed Energy Deposition”. In: Materials Science and Engineering:
A 780 (2020), p. 139179. ISSN: 0921­5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
msea.2020.139179. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921509320302653.
[50]
Marius Aga Belsvik, Wakshum M. Tucho, and Vidar Hansen. “Microstructural
studies of direct­laser­deposited stainless steel 316L­Si on 316L base mate­
rial”. In: SN Applied Sciences 2.12 (Nov. 2020), p. 1967. ISSN: 2523­3971.
DOI: 10.1007/s42452-020-03530-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-
03530-3.
[51]
Tomasz Kurzynowski et al. “Correlation between process parameters, microstruc­
ture and properties of 316L stainless steel processed by selective laser melt­
ing”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: A 718 (2018), pp. 64–73. ISSN:
0921­5093. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2018.01.103. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921509318301473.
[52]
P. Barnard. “4 ­ Austenitic steel grades for boilers in ultra­supercritical power
plants”. In: Materials for Ultra­Supercritical and Advanced Ultra­Supercritical
Power Plants. Ed. by Augusto Di Gianfrancesco. Woodhead Publishing, 2017,
pp. 99–119. ISBN: 978­0­08­100552­1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
08-100552-1.00004-X. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B978008100552100004X.
[53]
Zi Wei Liu et al. “Analysis of Electron Channeling Contrast Imaging in Scan­
ning Electron Microscopes”. In: Properties and Testing Techniques of Inorganic
Materials III. Vol. 768. Key Engineering Materials. Trans Tech Publications Ltd,
June 2018, pp. 52–58. DOI: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.768.52.
[54]
Srikanth Bontha et al. “Thermal process maps for predicting solidification mi­
crostructure in laser fabrication of thin­wall structures”. In: Journal of Mate­
rials Processing Technology 178.1 (2006), pp. 135–142. ISSN: 0924­0136.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2006.03.155. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924013606002949.
[55]
V. D. Manvatkar et al. “Estimation of melt pool dimensions, thermal cycle, and
hardness distribution in the laser­engineered net shaping process of austenitic
stainless steel”. English. In: Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A: Phys­
107
==PAGE:116==
ical Metallurgy and Materials Science 42.13 (2011). Cited By :63, pp. 4080–
4087. URL: www.scopus.com.
[56]
Seifallah Fetni et al. “Thermal model for the directed energy deposition of com­
posite coatings of 316L stainless steel enriched with tungsten carbides”. In:
Materials Design 204 (2021), p. 109661. ISSN: 0264­1275. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matdes.2021.109661. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0264127521002148.
[57]
Xu Song et al. “Advances in additive manufacturing process simulation: Resid­
ual stresses and distortion predictions in complex metallic components”. In:
Materials Design 193 (2020), p. 108779. ISSN: 0264­1275. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matdes.2020.108779. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0264127520303130.
[58]
T. Mukherjee, W. Zhang, and T. DebRoy. “An improved prediction of residual
stresses and distortion in additive manufacturing”. In: Computational Materials
Science 126 (2017), pp. 360–372. ISSN: 0927­0256. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.commatsci.2016.10.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0927025616304980.
108
==PAGE:117==
109
==PAGE:118==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Building 427
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
