==PAGE:1==
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
Analysis of satellite based methods for maritime
arctic observation
Master’s Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institue
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
Analysis of satellite based methods for maritime arctic observation
Master’s Thesis
October 26, 2022
By
Toke Bue Bjørner
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institue, , Denmark
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over three months at DTU Space, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Toke Bue Bjørner ­ s144111
Signature
Date
ii
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
May 26, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The arctic region has witnessed a decline in ice coverage and an increase in
maritime traffic. For these reasons, maritime surveillance in the arctic region is
of increasing importance. This thesis evaluates the feasibility of various satellite
based methods for maritime surveillance in the arctic region. I assumed a max­
imum budget of 20 million dkk, a minimum mission lifetime of 2 years, a vessel
localisation with an error of less than 10 km, and a requirement of covering the
arctic circle every 24 hours.
Based on costs, the project was limited to the Cubesat design architecture. A
Cubesat is a specific subset of nanosatellites comprised of 10 x 10 x10 cm3 cubes,
which may be joined together to create Cubesats of varying sizes. Cubesats are
entirely manufactured using commercial off­the­shelf components, thereby reduc­
ing costs.
Various detection methods were considered for the project. The automatic identi­
fication system (AIS) is used by all passenger ships and by all other ships above
300 tonnage on international voyage. This system provides information on the
identity, type, size, course, speed, and navigational status of each ship fitted with
AIS. However, AIS was not deemed suited for satellite based detection, since it
runs the risks of signal confluence and of noncompliance.
The Global Navigation Satellite Systems Reflectometry (GNSS­R) is a passive
radar system that uses the reflection from terrestrial and space­borne illuminators
to position vessels. However, for polar areas the GNSS­R method is hampered
by low signal strength and resolution.
The synthetic aperture radar (SAR) uses the motion of the radar antenna over
a target region to optimize spatial resolution. SAR is attractive for surveillance
since it is an active radar system ­ not relying on emissions from the vessels.
However, the Cubesat design architecture poses severe restrictions on the size
of the antenna used with SAR. Orbit simulations found that SAR in the Cubesat
environment was not able to achieve sufficient coverage in a 24 hour window.
Optical imaging methods include a range of different optical imaging bands: panchro­
matic, multispectral, near­infrared, and infrared. While optical methods are ham­
pered by cloud coverage and light conditions, use of a multistage geolocalization
process may counter these problems. However, orbit simulations found that op­
tical imaging methods were not able to achieve sufficient coverage in a 24 hour
window.
Passive emitter tracking methods utilize the navigational radar systems used by
all maritime vessels operating in open sea. This thesis studied two methods for
localization based on passive emitter tracking: time difference of arrival (TDOA)
and angle of arrival (AOA). Orbit simulations found that both methods were able
to achieve sufficient coverage in a 24 hour window. Therefore, both methods
were selected for further analysis of localization accuracy. In the time domain
the TDOA method was implemented using a combination of linear estimation and
Taylor Series approximation.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
iii
==PAGE:6==
Both TDOA and AOA methods were able to localize a radar emitter with a better
accuracy than the 10 km given by the requirements. However, achieving such
precision with the TDOA required a constellation of at least 4 satellites.
Due to the difficulty comparing the efficiency of a satellite constellation to a single
satellite it is hard to directly compare the efficiencies of the two methods. However,
given the drawbacks of operating a constellation of satellites compared to a single
satellite the thesis concludes that the phase comparison based AOA method is
best suited for maritime observation of the arctic area using Cubesat satellites.
iv
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors for their support and help:
Peter Brauer, Professor, DTU Space
Sten Schmidl Søbjærg, Associate Professor, DTU Space
And i would like to thank my parents, without their help i would not have been able
to finish this project
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Mission Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Arctic Region
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Ship identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Cubesats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Maritime detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Satellite Maritime Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
8
2.1
Radar basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Maritime Detection Methods
11
3.1
Passive Detection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Passive RF Emitter Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Sat­AIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Synthetic Aperture Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Optical sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Mission Requirements
18
4.1
Mission Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Mission objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Requirement definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Mission top level requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
First Maritime Surveillance Method review
23
5.1
Imaging systems accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Optical Imaging Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Synthetic Aperture Radar Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Passive Bi­static Radar Detection Method Review
. . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Non­cooperative Radar Emitter Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.6
AIS Localization Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
First Maritime Surveillance Method review: summary . . . . . . . .
40
6
Second Maritime Surveillance Method Review
41
6.1
Satellite Orbit Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Passive radar signal strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Time Domain emitter localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Parameters for TDOA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.5
TDOA simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.6
TDoA method Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
vii
==PAGE:10==
6.7
Phase comparison Based Direction of Arrival determination . . . .
48
6.8
Angle of arrival Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.9
AoA Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.10 AoA method Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Conclusion
54
8
Future work
55
A Appendix
59
A.1 MUSIC AoA alogirthm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 TDOA algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 SNR noise temperature and Link Budget calculation . . . . . . . .
64
viii
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Computation area of the arctic circle. Modelled using the Systems
Tool Kit (STK) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of the different Cubesat configurations [7] . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Image of the basic Radar scenario, with a monostatic radar antenna
transmitting and receiving a signal [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
The Glistening point for the GNSS­R system [15] . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
The Geometric parameters of the synthetic aperture radar scenario
[5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1
characteristic structure of a ship wake [22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
The probability of ship detection as a function of the pixel size as
percentage of ship length [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Accumulated coverage for an optic sensor with swath width of 80
km, evaluated over a 24 hour period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
1 (Left) Figure of SAR design parameters. (right) Spatial resolution
as a function of Bandwidth and look angle, for the Capella X­sar
satellite [26] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Atmosheric attenuation as a fucntion of wavelength [27] . . . . . .
30
5.6
Accumulated coverage of a SAR sensor with a 30 KM swath over
a 24 hour period
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.7
Figure of the TDoA localization scenario where emitter position is
found from intersection of hyperboloids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.8
Geometric parameters of the satellite and target system[29] . . . .
36
5.9
Accumulated Sensor coverage over a 24 hour period of the passive
radar detector given the parameters of the marine navigation radar
37
6.1
The positions of the satellite receivers and signal emitter, in a straight
line satellite constellation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
The position estimate error for function with taylor approximation of
straight line constellation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Figure of propagating radar signals received at an antenna array[30]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Simulation of the accuracy performance of different DOA algorithms
in Matlab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
Simulation of RMSE angle error as a function of the number of
snapshots given for varying levels of SNR
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.6
Simulation of RMSE angle error as a function of the number of an­
tenna in the ULA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
3.1
Overview of Satellite maritime detection methods . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1
Mission top level requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Possible optical imagers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Marine navigation radar parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
List of ITU parameters for marine navigation radar in the x­band
frequencies [16]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
1
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Mission Objective
This thesis concerns the study of satellite based methods of detecting ships in
the arctic polar region. The key focus of the thesis is a feasibility study of various
detection methods, given the requirements set by a hypothetical client.
I pre­empt part of the market analysis and considerations of the initial design by
making the assumption that the potential client is interested in a cost­efficient and
lightweight solution. This assumption is the reason for basing the project on the
Cubesat model. The following introduction outlines the most salient points for the
mission objective and the key points of the base satellite architecture.
1.2
The Arctic Region
The arctic region is geographic region which surrounds the north pole. It can be
defined by a multitude of various descriptors, but for sake of clarity, this thesis
defines it as the area encircled by the arctic circle, a line drawn at Lattitude 66 °
33’N.
The arctic region encapsulates Greenland and other polar islands as well as parts
of Siberia, Alaska, Canada, Norway, Sweden, and Finland. In the last decades,
political interest in the arctic region has increased due to emerging economic po­
tential of accessible resources. Even more so, this interest is fueled by the possi­
bility of a significantly shortened northern naval shipping route.
As a result of global warming the arctic sea ice coverage has receeded drastically.
On the 16th of September 2021, the arctic sea ice reached an extent of 4.7 million
square kilometers, one of the lowest points in measured history [1]. On average,
the sea ice minimum coverage in September has been decreasing at a rate of
approximately 13% per decade between 1979­2017 [1]. Climate models based
on a high CO2 emission scenario indicate that this decrease is likely to continue,
which ultimately will result in a seasonal complete absence of arctic sea ice. The
majority of simulated scenarios predict a lack of sea ice in September 2055. [1]
One of the most significant results of this development is the possibility of estab­
lishing trade passages in across the arctic, which provide the shortest possible
maritime link between the North Atlantic and Asia­Pacific ports. Sea­based trans­
portation accounts for about 90% of the global trade[2]. Therefore, the capacity
to monitor future routes is of great importance.
Currently, the northern sea route along the Russian coast and the Northwest pas­
sage through the Canadian archipelago are the fastest shipping rouse between
the North Atlantic and Asia­Pacific. Maritime traffic along these routes has seen
a significant increase in the amount of seasonal traffic during the annual period
of minimum ice coverage.[3] These conditions have led to a greatly increased
2
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:14==
political interest in the Arctic region both with respect to commercial and military
maritime activity.
1.2.1
Arctic Observation Area
For the duration of this report the arctic circle will be modelled as an area extending
from the coordinate with at 90 degree latitude, with a radius of 2620 kilometers.
This area can be seen in figure 1.1 in which the AGI Systems Toolkit (STK) defines
the circular region.
When determining the coverage ability of methods later in this report this is the
coverage area which is referred to.
Figure 1.1: Computation area of the arctic circle. Modelled using the Systems
Tool Kit (STK)
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
3
==PAGE:15==
1.3
Ship identification
There are several methods of monitoring ship activity. The most common method
of tracking maritime vessels is by use of the Automatic Identification System (AIS).
As of 31st December 2004, all ships of above 300 gross tonnage on international
voyage, and all passenger ships regardless of ship size are required to be fitted
with a an AIS for identification.[4] AIS is a system capable of providing information
about the identity of the ship, and its type, size, course, speed, navigational status,
and safety related information. This information is transmitted to shore stations,
other ships, aircraft, and spacecrafts. The AIS must also be able to receive the
same information from other ships, monitor and track ships, and exchange data
with shore facilities.
AIS operate in the very high frequency (VHF) spectrum. On average, an AIS is
able to detect AIS from other maritime vessels within 20­30 nautical miles (37­56
km). The 2 channels that AIS operates on are the 161.975 MHz simplex for ship to
ship and the 162.025 MHz duplex for ship to shore.[5] The system itself consists
of one VHF transmitter, two VHF TDMA receivers, one VHF DSC receiver, and
a standard electronic link to marine sensor systems. The position and the timing
that is provided in the emitted signal is normally derived from GPS information.
Originally, AIS was only intended to transmit signals to other maritime vessels and
shore­based facilities. However, improvements in the technology have resulted
in AIS signals to be received by low orbit satellites with suitable equipment. This
allows for complete global coverage of the AIS tracking data, permitting any user
of the AIS to get localization data of any AIS.
However, the requirements to be fitted with an AIS only concerns commercial mar­
itime vessels, but not military naval vessels. Ordinarily, military naval vessels will
still be equipped with an AIS which will be turned off if they are deployed in a re­
gion of low naval traffic[4]. In addition, there are reports of commercial vessels
turning off their AIS for periods of time and reports of vessels operating illegally
without the use of an active AIS.[6] Thus, AIS cannot be considered an absolute
method of tracking maritime vessels. If comprehensive tracking of maritime activ­
ity is required, AIS must be supplemented by other means of observation.
1.4
Cubesats
A Cubesat is a specific subset of nanosatellites that are comprised of 10 x 10 x
10 cm3 cubes, each of which has a maximum mass of 1.33 kg. Multiples of these
structures can be joined together to create Cubesats of varying sizes.[7] Cubesats
are additionally defined by being entirely manufactured and built with commercial
off­the­shelf (COTS) components. Cubesats originated in 1999 at the California
State University and Stanford University as a method to develop low cost, low
mass satellites within a short time frame. These satellites were primarily planned
for educational purposes, but Cubesats have often been used to demonstrate
space based technology for potential use in larger satellite missions. Cubesats
are usually classified in the subset of satellites called nano­satellites which en­
4
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:16==
compasses all satellite with mass between 1­10 kg.
Figure 1.2: Structure of the different Cubesat configurations [7]
The various configurations of Cubesats can be seen in figure 1.2. Cubesats are
categorized into the classes 1u, 2u, 3u, 6u and 12u. These configurations are the
standards used by Cubesat developers, as the standardization leads to reduced
costs. The mass of each Cubesat unit varies between 1.0 and 1.3 kg.
Cubesats have become increasingly common in both the commercial and military
space sectors due to miniaturization of electronic components; specifically the
improvements in attitude determination and control systems (ADCS), communi­
cation, power generation and propulsion systems.
Due to the small size and standardized design of the Cubesat system, they can
be launched very inexpensively by piggy­backing off other satellite launches with
a different primary payload. They accomplish this by fitting into a poly picosatellite
orbital deployer (P­POD), which releases the Cubesat into orbit. However, the P­
POD system imposes a large number of constraints for the size and weight of the
Cubesat, so that it does not disrupt the primary payload while being released.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
5
==PAGE:17==
The low expense of building and launching Cubesats into orbit means that it is
significantly easier to construct larger constellations of satellites, which may be
able to considerably increase the coverage in earth observation missions, pro­
vide mission redundancy and decrease the impact of systematic data collection
errors. Constellations of Cubesats working in parallel also enable other means of
observation by providing a synthetic parallax length between satellites that would
not be realistically possible with a single satellite aperture.
1.5
Maritime detection
Remote surveillance of maritime activity is an area of research that has experi­
enced a surge in recent years. Maritime activity encompasses a wide range of
commercial and governmental activities, including fishing, transportation, drilling,
and military operations. In this context, we define Maritime Domain Awareness
(MDA) as the knowledge of any maritime activity that may have an influence on
security, safety, the economy, or the environment.
For any global actor to achieve a high degree of MDA, various sources of informa­
tion have to be combined from land based, sea airborne and satellite sensors. This
information is then overlayed with data from Geographical Information systems
(GIS) and ship directories to form a cohesive map of maritime activity. Detection
of maritime activity enables a large amount of different possible applications such
as maritime safety, rescue, monitoring sea pollution, traffic planning, anti­piracy,
detection of illegal fishing and smuggling detection. [8]
Ships are detectable with different and distinct sensor types, fitted on a vari­
ety of platforms.
The different types of sensors can be divided into two sub­
groups: cooperative and non­cooperative surveillance systems.[9] The distinc­
tion between these two groups is that cooperative systems allow ships to send
information about themselves while non­cooperative systems collect information
independently of the ships cooperation.
Of the cooperative systems, AIS is the most widespread implemented. Other co­
operative system include the Long­range identification and tracking (LRIT) system
and the Vessel Monitoring System (VMS), which is used for smaller fishing ves­
sels. For satellite applications only AIS has mission heritage and the others are
terrestrial based methods.
Systematic Ship detection is separated into three steps: [10]
• Ship detection and localization.
• Vessel classification and discrimination between vessel and non­vessel.
• Vessel identification.
Of these 3 steps only the first 2 are relevant for this thesis, since non­cooperative
observation methods cannot generally link vessels to a specific registered identity
without a priori information.
6
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:18==
In general, object detection is a very well researched field in image analysis. Ship
detection is a unique subset of object detection, due to the variable nature of the
sea surface, which has an inherently morphic nature. Sea surface features like
ocean waves can make it difficult to distinguish ship shapes with automatic object
recognition software.
1.6
Satellite Maritime Detection
In the space domain, which is the focus of this report, maritime detection is pos­
sible with satellite platforms in lower earth orbits. Satellite detection has several
advantages over other platforms such as the global coverage, remote location
access, and regular updates. However the cost and production time is a limit­
ing factor. Due to it’s unique advantages, satellite detection is a key aspect of
maintaining MDA. Satellites are capable of maritime detection with both optical,
infrared and radar sensors. Optical and infrared sensor systems are constrained
by several factors such as requiring daylight or obfuscation by cloud cover.[5]
Thus radar detection has become the prevailing method of detection as it is not
impacted by the night time or cloud cover.
Radar detection by satellite is normally accomplished with Synthetic Aperture
Radar (SAR) systems: SAR systems are variants of the beam radars, which uses
the movement of the emitting source and the receivers in order to create a 3d
map, by pulsing radar signals and then receiving the reflected signals, after which
time the sensor has travelled a distance and can observe from a different angle,
creating a synthetic aperture length, which greatly increases the spatial accuracy.
SAR systems can map the sea surface regardless of weather conditions, which
makes them well suited for ship detection. However, accurate discrimination be­
tween vessels and non­vessels requires a high spatial resolution, which in term
requires a high power SAR system that can only be provided by very heavy and
costly satellites.
Optical satellite imaging typically have a high degree of spatial resolution, due to
optimization of Very High Resolution (VHR) optical sensors.[5] However, they are
also the sensor type least resistant to climate conditions as they cannot pierce
cloud cover and function significantly worse when there is no daylight. Therefore,
data from optical sensors can be used to supplement or verify data from other
sources but cannot generate a complete map by itself.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
7
==PAGE:19==
2
Theory
This section provides a brief discussion of the theoretical outline for the different
technological methods involved in the possible satellite payload. Radar systems
will be discussed in slightly greater detail since they are essential to several key
methods in the project.
2.1
Radar basics
In it’s most basic form, a radar system is a device which emits an Radiofrequency
(RF) electromagnetic (EM) wave, in a specific direction, and then detects an echo
of the emitted wave reflected back. The energy of the observed echo can inform
the system of distance to the target, by comparing it with the time difference end
energy of the transmitted signal.
Figure 2.1: Image of the basic Radar scenario, with a monostatic radar antenna
transmitting and receiving a signal [11]
In terms of components, the general radar system consists of a transmitter that
emits a electromagnetic signal to an antenna which focuses and emits the signal
in a specific direction. The emitted signal is reflected by an object and is radiated
in many different directions. A portion of the reflected echo wave is scattered to­
wards the radar system where it is intercepted by the radar antenna, which trans­
mits it to a receiver where the signal is processed to determine the character of
the target object.
The most common radar signal is a series of short pulses, in a rectangular shape
which modulates a sine­wave carrier. The target range can be determined by
the time TR between emitting and receiving the signal. Given the speed of light
c(≈3 ∗108m/s) the range to the target is determined by the following
R = CTr
2
(2.1)
8
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:20==
The radar system switches between an emitting mode and a receiving mode, in
which the duration of the emitting mode τ is far shorter than the duration of the
receiving mode T (T >> τ). The duration of the transmitting mode can be re­
garded as a pulse, and the time between each pulse must be long enough that all
reflected radiation is detected by the system before the next pulse is transmitted.
If the time between pulses is too short then the system is unable to determine
from which pulse the echo wave emanated from, making range estimation unfea­
sible. The frequency of the radar system pulse fp is therefore constrained by the
range of possible distances to the object of interest. A maximum range of the dis­
tance to the target can be determined from the pulse frequency fp. This maximum
unambiguous range is defined as.
Run =
c
2fp
(2.2)
The ratio of the time that the system is radiating to the time it is not radiating is
the duty­cycle of the radar waveform.
2.1.1
The Radar Equation
The radar equation is a formula that relates the range of a given radar to the
transmitter, receiver, antenna, target and environment. The radar equation can be
used to determine the maximum range of radar. Given an isotropically radiating
antenna, transmitting with power Pt, the power density measured at range R is is
determine with the inverse square law and is modelled as.
P =
Pt
4πR2
(2.3)
For a radar antenna radiating in a certain direction, the increase in power at a
certain location compared to that which would result from an isotropic radar is
defined as the Gain (G) of the antenna. The power density in a given direction
can then be written
PTG
4πR2
The amount of energy intercepted by the target which is radiated back at the radar
is described by the radar cross section σ and the effective area of the receiving an­
tenna AE. The power of the received echo signal PR at range R can be described
by
PR = PtGAEσ
(4π)2R4
(2.4)
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
9
==PAGE:21==
The maximum range within which the radar can detect an object is attained when
PR is equal to the minimum signal strength detectable by the radar receiver Smin.
The maximum range can be described using the following form of the radar equa­
tion:
Rmax = ( PtGAEσ
(4π)2Smin
)
1
4
(2.5)
2.1.2
Radar Waveform
The typical radar uses a simple square pulse waveform, with a set peak power Pt.
The average power of the simple pulsed waveform is
Ptτfp
and the total energy of the cycle is Ptfp. The waveform of the pulse extends over
a range of cτ. Therefore, the system is capable of distinguishing between two
different targets when the range between them is greater than
δR = cτ
2
Longer pulses are required in order for the echo to have enough energy to be
detected at the given range, so faster pulses are used for close range and slower
pulses are used for longer ranges. The range resolution of the radar can be in­
creased by modulating the pulse by increasing the spectral width of a slower pulse
and using this to obtain the same resolution as a shorter pulse.
It is also possible to use a continuously radiating radar which instead measures
the Doppler shift of the reflected signal in order to determine the movement of
the observed target. The range can then be observed by modulating the carrier
waveform with frequency.
10
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:22==
3
Maritime Detection Methods
The goal of this project is to determine the most efficient method of Maritime
surveillance (MS) in the arctic using space­borne sensors. In this section the
methods which can be used for satellite based maritime surveillance will be intro­
duced and explained.
3.1
Passive Detection Systems
The term “passive detection systems” is used to describe a general subset of
detection systems that function non­cooperatively with an EM emitter and do not
emit EM radiation of their own. Passive detection of radar emitting systems is a
newer area of research which seeks to provide an alternative method of wide­area
surveillance by using the characteristics of illuminator’s of opportunity (IoO’s).
The advantages of this method are firstly the low cost and lack of detectability of
the system, secondly a possible significant increase in the possible sensor field
of view (FOV). The size of the receiving antenna and the antenna gain does not
need to be as large as for an active system, because the travel distance of the
signal is only half of a comparable echo signal.
The downsides of this method of observation includes the scarcity of information
about the target. Passive detective systems can only detect that a target is emit­
ting radiation and the location of that emittance. Another downside of this method
is that it is only capable of detecting target which are actively emitting signals in
the frequency range that the passive sensor is attuned to. Therefore, the operat­
ing frequency for the radar receiver must be carefully considered.
3.1.1
Passive Coherent Location
A subset of these systems is the passive coherent location (PCL) system. PCL
functions similarly to an active radar system, in that it uses the echo of reflected
signals to generate geometrical data, with the key difference being that the reflec­
tion of other emitters is used instead of emanating from the system itself. PCL
often uses signals from radio and television services or mobile communication.
The system detects the time difference of arrival (TDOA) from the direct signal
and the echo signal and uses this to determine the distance to the target.[12]
3.1.2
GNSS­R
A subset of the PCL system earlier described is the Global Navigation Satellite
System Reflectometry (GNSS­R). Most Passive radar receivers use terrestrial il­
luminators. However, many of these terrestrial illuminators do not give sufficient
offshore coverage in order to provide full maritime surveillance and space­borne
illuminators are therefore preferred to provide detection in open sea regions. Es­
pecially navigation satellites can provide a great deal of information from the GPS
and GLONASS satellite constellations, as well as the newly developed Galileo and
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
11
==PAGE:23==
BeiDOu­2. All together this provides over 100 possible space­borne illuminators,
which provide global coverage.[13]
The GNSS satellites provide location data to terrestrial users, but the navigation
signals from the GNSS systems, which are scattered from the earth surface, can
be collected by GNSS­R space­borne receivers. The strength of these scattered
signals is often very low and therefore GNSS­R are designed to collect signals
close to the specular reflection point, which is the area called the glistening zone,
where the reflection is strongest.[14]
Figure 3.1: The Glistening point for the GNSS­R system [15]
The space­borne system is designed to receive both the direct signal from the
GNSS satellite and the reflected signal. By processing these two signals the sys­
tem obtains a rough scan of the surface. Due to the lightweight nature of passive
systems GNSS­R satellites can be deployed in large constellations of micro­ or
nanosatellites.
The global access to GNSS illuminators which offer many potential signal sources
gives a low revisit time for observation by GNSS­R. However due to the Geosta­
tionary orbit of GNSS satellites the signal strength is weakened near the earth
poles, which also results in a low grazing angle incidence, which further increases
the atmospheric attenuation in the path loss of the signal.
The spatial resolution which is possible with GNSS­R is fairly low, due to the
low signal strength. GNSS­R is therefore mostly used for survey of larger sea
state conditions such as surface roughness, ice sheet analysis and oil spill detec­
tion. The general spatial resolution which is in the order of kilometers is generally
only sufficient for detection of large structures such as oil platforms. As such the
GNSS­R system is not well suited for detection of most commercial maritime ves­
sels.
3.2
Passive RF Emitter Detection
As determined by international SOLAS regulation every ship with a length of 45
meters or more is required to be equipped with a navigational radar, which trans­
12
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:24==
mits in the X­band wavelength in the range 9.3 – 9.5 Ghz or 3 cm wavelength.[4]
Navigation radars can be also be found in most smaller maritime vessels such as
fishing boats due to the safety that they provide while traversing sea conditions,
this is even more so the case in arctic latitudes due to the prevalence of hazardous
sea conditions such as icebergs. Thus, it can be assumed that ships in the Arctic
will employ navigational radar.
Maritime navigational radar’s typically emit pulses with an output power in the
range of 5 – 75 kW[16], while the shape of the antenna lobe is very narrow in the
horizontal (azimuth) direction a ( 0.75 – 4 degrees)[16] and wider in the vertical
(elevation) direction (20 – 30 degrees)[16]. The radar is typically pointed in the
horizontal direction where it performs a scanning motion with a fixed rotation rate,
which is dependent on the type of transmitter. Using a passive radar detector the
navigational radar signal can be detected and processed in a variety of different
ways, in order to allow for localization of the signal source.
3.2.1
Marine Navigation Radar target
A navigation radar detector consists of a series of bistatic radar antenna which
are attuned to specific radar frequencies in the x­band wavelengths. This can
allow for detection of signals at great ranges, thus the distance of detection is
mostly limited by the size of the emitting antenna lobe and the horizon distance
to the satellite. This gives the detector a wide coverage, and thus we have a
large swath size for detection and a lowered target revisit time which is optimal
for continuous maritime surveillance.
One function of the detector is to determine the angle of arrival (AoA) of the re­
ceived signal, which requires the use of several antenna working in conjunction.
The angle can be derived in the time domain or the phase domain. In the time
domain, the signal location is derived from the Time Difference of Arrival (TDoA).
In the phase domain, the Angle of Arrival (AoA) is determined by comparison of the
phase difference of the signal measured by the receivers. These various methods
will be further detailed later in this thesis.
The obvious downside of this method of detection is that it restricted to detection of
vessels which implement navigation radars in the specific wavelengths. As of now
we have assumed that all currently operating navigational radars operate in the
standard regulation wavelengths. However such an assumption may be subject
to change if this method of detection becomes more widely implemented, in order
to purposefully avoid detection.
Alternatively, if the detector is attuned to a larger range of radar wavelengths then
the system becomes increasingly susceptible to measurement noise and errant
signal errors which would require additional onboard processing of signal and
likely decrease the signal detection rate.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
13
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Sat­AIS
Satellite automatic identification system (AIS) systems broadcast in VHF bands.
Therefore, the range of the signal is mostly a function of the signal strength and
the distance to the local horizon.
For ground­based communication, the range of AIS is typically 20 to 40 nautical
miles. Due to being limited by line of sight it is difficult to use AIS in open sea en­
vironments using terrestrial sensors. This problem can be overcome with satellite
based AIS (Sat­AIS) receivers, which allows for reception of AIS signals from any­
where within the Sat­AIS receivers field of view, which enables global tracking of
AIS systems. A Sat­AIS in a 600 km orbit enables AIS communication range of
up to 1440 nautical miles.[5]
AIS messages convey key location data and identification information about the
vessel. Analysis of space­borne AIS receivers have shown that they provide an al­
most 100% probability of detection. Sat­AIS instruments have been demonstrated
by the Norwegian space center and ESA, aboard the AISSat and Norsat satellite
constellations.[17]
14
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Synthetic Aperture Radar
A synthetic aperture radar (SAR) is a high­resolution detection system that is ca­
pable of object detection under any climate since radar waves are affected much
less by scattering and absorption in the atmosphere. A SAR system function
as a monostatic radar system, which means that the transmitting and receiv­
ing antenna are co­located. The SAR system works by transmitting frequency­
modulated pulse wave­forms and then receiving the reflected footprint. The SAR
platform moves in the along­track (azimuth) direction, while the reflected signal is
received in the cross­track(elevation) direction.[5] The echo signal is processed
by the system to generate a two­dimensional image of the reflected scene in terms
of slant range and azimuth coordinates.
The SAR system aims to create an image which represents the radar reflectivity
of the scene being observed, this can be expressed as the radar cross section
(RCS). The reason that SAR is used over other radar imaging methods is because
the SAR provides a high resolution both in the azimuth direction and the range
direction.
Figure 3.2: The Geometric parameters of the synthetic aperture radar scenario
[5]
The features of the processed image depend on the image scattering properties
of the materials in the scene, as well as the sensor parameters, such as viewing
angle, frequency, polarization and spatial resolution. SAR systems are a widely
implemented method of ship detection, and thus many automatic detection al­
gorithms have been developed. However, the detection capability of a SAR is
heavily affected by the speckle noise, which is not actual noise but an interfer­
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
15
==PAGE:27==
ence pattern that is caused by radar scattering off rough surfaces. In order to
process ship detection the system performs constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR)
processing, to identify outliers from an threshold above the ambient noise of the
observed scene.
Generally, SAR systems are able to switch between different operational modes,
which are capable of either increasing resolution at the cost of decreasing the
swath size or increasing the swath at the cost of the resolution. In addition, the
other system parameters of the SAR sensor can be varied in different modes
such as the incidence angle and the polarization. SAR imaging also relies on the
approximation that targets are stationary during the imaging process. If the targets
are in motion as is often the case with MS then the target will appear misplaced
in the azimuth direction of the resulting image.
An important feature of SAR imaging is polarimetry. Modern complex radar sen­
sors can be considered polarimetric, which means that they are capable of mea­
suring several different polarizations and they are therefore capable of measuring
the polarization­dependent characteristics of a target, which can provide addi­
tional information about the material of the observed target.
3.5
Optical sensors
Non microwave imaging sensors can generally be divided into 4 categories: opti­
cal, reflected infrared, thermal infrared, and hyperspectral. The categories optical
and reflected infrared are often combined due to their similarities, both being pas­
sive sensors without active EM emitters and instead relying on external radiation
mainly from the sun. Optical sensors covers the visible range of the EM spectrum
0.4 µm – 0.7 µm and the reflected infrared sensors cover the near infrared bands
up to 3 µm.
Optical sensors can be further divided into panchromatic sensors and multispec­
tral (MSP) sensors. Panchromatic gives the highest spatial resolution, while the
MSP sensor can give more information from the different color bands which may
be necessary to properly identify maritime activity.
MSP sensors generally provide images in several optical bands and in a panchro­
matic band which has a higher spatial resolution than any of the spectral bands.
The complete image can then be constructed from combining the spectral bands
with the panchromatic image to produce an image with a high spatial resolution.
[18]
Some multispectral sensors can also measure channels with infrared wavelength
radiation to estimate surface temperature. These infrared signals are independent
of sunlight and are generated from heat in the surface object, however the spatial
resolution of these is significantly lower in the order of 30 – 100 m.[5]
Vessel identification using MSP imaging is done with threshold­based methods
where images are compared against known geometrical and spectral character­
istics of targets. Spectral information in the images can also be used for classifi­
cation of the observed vessels, which is not possible with SAR imaging.
16
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:28==
Hyperspectral (HSP) sensors constitute a newer variation of MSP that is capable
of measuring a far greater amount of spectral channels in the visible and infrared
portion of the EM spectrum. This gives up to 1 nm spectral resolution.[5] This
spectral resolution can allow for measuring spectral signatures and making it pos­
sible to identify any material or substance by comparing it with their respective
spectral profiles.
This means that HSP imaging can be used to detect properties un­observable by
other sensors such as detection of submarines and other underwater activity. The
high spectral resolution can also make it possible to identify camouflaged targets.
However, processing the data generated by HSP requires advanced image pro­
cessing and high data storage capabilities, which makes it difficult for continued
surveillance. The spatial resolution of HSP system is also significantly less than
MSP sensors.
3.5.1
Detection Method Table
The advantages and disadvantages of the various detection methods are sum­
marized in the table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Overview of Satellite maritime detection methods
Instruments
Advantages
Disadvantages
Sar
High Spatial Resolution
Polarimetric Information
Resistant To Weather
High Power Requirement
Low Swath Coverage
Sat­AIS
High Detection Probability
Global Coverage
Low Power Requirement
High FOV
Resistant to Weather
Multiple Signal Interference
Require AIS Instrument
Require Cooperation
Vulnerable To Spoofing
Multispectral
Optical
Moderately high Resolution
Low computing cost
Dependent on Weather
Dependent on Solar Flux
Hyperspectral
Optical
Very High Spectral Resolu­
tion
Dependent on weather
Dependent on Solar Flux
Low spatial Resolution
High Computing Power
Panchromatic
Optical
Very High Spatial resolution
No Spectral Information
Dependent on Weather
GNSS­R
Global Coverage
Resistant to Weather
Low Power Requirement
Very low Resolution
Poor Detection Probability
Radar
Emitter
Detection
Global Coverage
Resistant to Weather
Low Power Requirement
High Detection Probability
Require Target Radar
Cannot identify signal source
Requires specific frequency
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
17
==PAGE:29==
4
Mission Requirements
4.1
Mission Statement
The continuous shrinkage of the arctic ice sheet provides a global incentive for in­
creased Artic shipping opportunities, and likewise also a possibility of illegal naval
activity. Monitoring naval activity in this region is of special interest due to the
favorability of the new shipping routes.
Due to the remoteness of the arctic, naval supervision is mostly restricted to
space­borne earth observation, with RF frequency observation. Use of AIS surveil­
lance is easily susceptible to tampering and falsification, therefore more robust
methods of identification and geolocalization are required. Due to AIS tampering
new methods of maritime surveillance are required for the arctic region in the near
future.
Recent developments in Nanosat architecture and components have paved the
way for utilization of RF observation by Cubesat satellites. Due to Greenland be­
ing a part of the kingdom of Denmark, there is a Danish incentive to being an
active participant in arctic maritime surveillance initiatives.
4.2
Mission objectives
Primary Objective
• Detection and geolocalization of non­AIS compliant naval vessels of medium
or greater size in the arctic region.
Secondary objectives:
• Detection of AIS compliant naval vessels of any size.
• Identification of vessels for search and rescue operations.
• Cross reference of observed vessels with international naval register.
• Proof of concept for cubesat­based maritime surveillance methods.
• Increasing the active role of Denmark in the arctic political sphere.
4.3
Requirement definition
The central driving factor behind mission analysis is derivation and iteration of
mission requirements. We separate this into user requirements, top­level require­
ments and system requirements. The user requirements are immutable and de­
18
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:30==
fine the top­level requirements which then trickle down into the system level re­
quirements. The system level requirements will typically undergo a series of it­
erations in a mission analysis process. For this project, a first iteration level of
requirements will suffice for analysis.
4.3.1
Selecting a potential customer profile
In order to specify a set of mission requirements it is first required that the needs
of the user are specified. These needs set the constraints for the mission pa­
rameters.
As specified earlier, the mission concerns the extension of Danish
surveillance capacity in the Arctic area. Such surveillance has both economic
and military applications and there are several different actors with interest in the
specific capability. With regards to economic actors, companies such as Maersk
with interest in maritime shipping, could have an interest in maritime surveillance
in the Arctic area. However, I have found little evidence to suggest that maritime
shipping companies have extended interest in completely funding satellites uti­
lized for maritime surveillance. Considering this, the obvious choice of a potential
buyer is the national defence­oriented organizations.
Although the Danish national investment in satellite technologies is comparatively
small, the Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization (DALO) has
previously partnered with the Danish Cubesat developer Gomspace to launch
earth observation nano­satellites.
Of special interest is the Gomx­4a satellite
named ”Ulloriaq”[19]. Ulloriaq was developed with the purpose of ship and air
traffic surveillance in the arctic area as well as the capacity to take photos with an
optical imager when the weather was clear enough to allow for it. Based on this
information we can choose DALO as the hypothetical buyer for the system as this
allows for defining the economic boundaries of the project. Ulloriaq was funded
by DALO for a total sum of 11.7 million dkk, including both the development cy­
cle, launch and upkeep costs of the satellite. This is a very small cost in terms
of satellite development. Part of the explanation of the low cost may be that the
Ulloriaq benefits from technological heritage from previous Gomspace missions.
Additionally, Ulloriaq was developed as part of a satellite constellation wherein
the other satellite GomX­4b was funded by the European Space Agency (ESA),
which may have further reduced the development cost of the singular satellite.
Setting DALO as the potential buyer gives a scope of the potential mission budget,
as well as additional other points that can be extrapolated for defining the mission
requirements.
4.3.2
Mission lifetime
For satellite missions we can distinguish between two different types of missions
that determine the mission goal: experimental type missions and operational type
missions. Experimental type missions serve mostly as a proof of concept for satel­
lite technologies. Thus, they are designed for shorter lifetimes than operational
missions and are usually not optimized for longevity. From the mission objectives
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
19
==PAGE:31==
defined previously it can be extrapolated that this mission is primarily an opera­
tional type, as it is intended to keep continuous surveillance on the arctic area.
Knowing that in the past DALO has a space section budget there is reason for
extending the mission lifetime in order to increase the cost­effectiveness of the
mission.
The mission operational lifetime can also be determined by another considera­
tion: in order to fulfill an objective of continuous arctic surveillance, the lifetime
of the satellite must be greater than the total time it would require to develop a
replacement. Thus, the satellite lifetime must be greater than the total Cubesat
development cycle. The Ulloriq satellite mission can be used as a reference case
to estimate the length of development cycle. The Ulloriaq satellite mission was ini­
tially contracted in October 2016 and the mission was launched in February 2018
[19] ­ giving an approximate estimate of a 17 month development time. However
it is possible that development of the satellite was started before being sponsored
by DOLA . We may instead refer to the to the estimated average development
time of Cubesat satellites which is 18 to 24 months [7] , only slightly above the
development time for Ulloriaq. Thus the lifetime of the satellite should be at least
2 years.
Mission Budget Requirements
The mission budget is a central driving constraint for all aspects of the mission
design. There are several different ways to estimate the cost of a space mission
primarily by analogy or by parametric methods. For this mission an analogical es­
timation will be used. The Ulloriaq mission is used as a reference point to derive
a mission budget since I expect to have a similar use case.
The cost of the DALO funding for the Ulloriaq was 11.7 million dkk.[19] The dif­
ferences in goals for these two missions must be considered, since the former is
designed as a technological demonstration, which can be defined as experimen­
tal type mission. The arctic observation mission is designed as a operational type
mission intended for earth observation. Therefore, the development and opera­
tion of the mission is likely to be greater and the expected monetary expenditure
must reflect this.
Based on these considerations, a mission budget requirement of 20 million dkk
fits the mission objectives and is mostly consistent with previous expenditure by
the desired user.
4.3.3
Mission Coverage Requirements
Another essential asset of planning for the mission is the response time and the
coverage of the satellite payload. In order to gain maritime domain awareness,
the mission needs to regularly identify the location of all ships in the arctic area.
The drivers for the coverage are the payload field of view (FOV), the satellite orbit
and the satellite constellation number. To establish full MDA over the arctic area,
20
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:32==
the payload observation swath must cover the entire area above the arctic circle
at 66’ degrees latitude. This area is mostly covered by choosing an polar low
earth orbit for the satellite, as this ensures that the path of the satellite orbit will
eventually circumspect the arctic area. However, the area must be observed at a
certain frequency. The frequency of which the arctic area must be covered is the
parameter by which the coverage requirement is defined.
If we study the arctic shipping routes we find that the shortest available route is
the Transpolar Sea Route (TSR) currently only available to heavy icebreakers
due to the arctic ice. The recession of ice will open the way for general shipping.
The TSR has a length of 2,100 nautical miles.[2] Average cruising speed of a
container­ship is estimated to be 24 knots or 37 kmph[20]. Thus the average time
in which a container­ship would be able to cross the TSR is 3.6 days.
Container­ships are among the slower moving possible targets among our targets
of interest. Several naval class vessels are capable of rapid velocity. An example
of a modern high speed light naval vessel is the Norwegian Skjold­class corvette,
which can move at a speed of 60 knots in optimal sea conditions[21]. This means
that it could traverse the TSR in 1.45 days. This journey would exceed the maxi­
mum range of the ship but serves as an example of the upper boundary of naval
ship speeds. To establish arctic MDA we must be able to detect a vessel in the pro­
cess of crossing the arctic and as such the full arctic coverage must be achieved
with frequency greater than 1.45 days or approximately 35 hours.
However, the mission response time to ground station must also be considered,
which is the period between the object detection and data downlink during ground
station pass. If for MDA we wish to both detect and register an arctic vessel be­
fore it has crosses the TSR then the total duration of the coverage frequency and
response time must be less than 35 hours.
Separating the area coverage frequency into a 24 hour period and the maximum
response time into 11 hours provides a total estimate which is below the 35 hour
collective restraint.
This observation frequency is sufficient to detect ships at least once when travers­
ing the arctic routes. If additional information about the ship heading and ability to
distinguish between ships based on geolocalization in the absence of ship identi­
fication is needed, then a greater coverage frequency is required.
4.3.4
Detection Accuracy Requirements
In addition to the detection probability, an important requirement for the observa­
tion payload is the detection accuracy, or the maximum allowable geolocalization
error for the localization. The localization error can be defined in terms of spatial
error or spacecraft pointing error, the relation of these two types is variable and
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
21
==PAGE:33==
depends on the orbit altitude and the squint angle of the satellite payload. If a
ship is localized with satellite observation methods, there is not necessarily any
method of providing identification. In such case there is no way to distinguish be­
tween ships with any other methods than by positioning. If the error in positioning
is greater than the distance between the ships then the system is no longer capa­
ble of correctly tracking the ships independently.
The mission is developed for detecting ships in transit, where the expected ship
density is lower than surrounding port areas, therefore an element of tracking er­
ror is allowed while the system is still capable of fulfilling a goal to track multiple
objects. Defining a detection accuracy of 10 km provides an acceptable compro­
mise for the mission.
4.4
Mission top level requirements
The top level requirements for the mission are summarized in table4.1
Table 4.1: Mission top level requirements
Functional mission requirements
Performance
Geolocalization must have maximum
pointing error of 10 km in the Azimuth and
horizontal directions
Coverage
Mission must cover entirety of Arctic area every 24 hours
Response Time
Data transmission to ground station must happen within
12 hours of observation
Operational mission requirements
Lifetime
Mission must be operable for a minimum of 2 years
Data Link
Must be able to transmit all data at each ground station pass
Mission constrains
Mission cost
Total mission cost must not exceed 20 Million Dkk
Mission characteristics
Mission must follow Cubesat Parameters
22
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:34==
5
First Maritime Surveillance
Method review
This section aims to provide an initial investigation of potential geolocalization
methods suited for maritime surveillance. The aim of this section is to narrow
down the list of appropriate methods for the satellite payload design. As such, the
defining characteristics of each method will be covered and analysed with respect
to the goals and the requirements of the mission. The applicability of the specified
method will be evaluated with respect to the essential mission parameters.
An important distinction must be made between imaging and non­imaging meth­
ods. As implied by the name, imaging methods create a composite image of a
scene observed by the receiver, which is interpreted to identify targets of interest.
Non­imaging systems are comprised of passive observation methods, which re­
quire an interaction between the observer and signals emitted by target.
5.1
Imaging systems accuracy
An aspect which is essential to concretize when evaluating capacity of imaging
geolocalization methods is their spatial resolution. In this project, I will define the
spatial resolution of the satellite imaging method as their ground sample distance
(GSD). Determining the spatial resolution of a satellite imager is not a straight­
forward procedure. Therefore, it is important to understand what is meant by the
spatial resolution when reviewing the observation capabilities of the satellite.
GSD is defined as the relation of consecutive pixels in the imager to the ground
area, or more accurately the ground distance between each pixel­centre. Accord­
ingly, the GSD is proportional to the imaging pixel size and the orbit height of the
satellite and is inversely proportional to the imager focal length. The GSD can be
expressed by the following
GSD = Orbitheight ∗
Pixelsize
Focallength
(5.1)
The larger the value of the GSD, the less detail is observable by the imager.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
23
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Optical Imaging Methods
The optical spectrum geolocalization methods is a category that encompasses
a range of different optical imaging bands: panchromatic, multispectral, near­
infrared, and infrared.
Among these, the highest resolution is found in the panchromatic imager due to
combining input from all bands in the optical spectrum. As described earlier, the
panchromatic image can be synthetically overlayed with other images in order to
sharpen the resolution. This is referred to as pan­sharpening.
5.2.1
Wake detection
As discussed earlier, optical imaging is problematic for maritime surveillance due
to the effect of environmental factors. However the optical imaging allows for one
crucial identification aspect: to detect the wake of the ship instead of the ship
itself. This is possible because the wake of the ship observed is brighter than
then surrounding sea, yet dimmer than clouds, which allows the imager to track
the ship from the location of the ship’s wake which requires a far lower amount of
spatial resolution.
The ship’s wake will often have a stronger optical reflection characteristic, and
since the wake extends a significant distance away from the ship, it can be used
for geolocalization even when the ship itself is obscured. The wake is identified
by the characteristic structure of its shape which can be seen in 5.1. Figure 5.1
shows that the ship’s wake is comprised of a series of transverse and divergent
waves within a wave envelope.
Figure 5.1: characteristic structure of a ship wake [22]
Thus the geolocalization process with an optical imager becomes a multistage
process. The image is taken and then potentially sharpened with a correspond­
ing panchromatic image and heighten contrast in order to highlight the ship’s wake
patterns. Then, the pattern of the shape is used to calculate the location of the
ship.
24
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: The probability of ship detection as a function of the pixel size as
percentage of ship length [23]
Figure 5.2 shows the detection probability with an optical imager as a function
of the spatial resolution. It can be observed that the detection probability is sta­
ble and above 95% up until the spatial resolution of the imager is equal to 15%
or less of the total ship length, at which point the probability begins to rapidly de­
cline. From the requirements it is specified that the satellite must have a detection
probability of minimum 95%, therefore the spatial resolution of the imager must
be at leash 15% of the ship length.
Thus in order to ascertain the required resolution for the optical imager, we must
first know the sizes of objects that the mission is interested in detecting. An exam­
ple of the smallest type transport vessels which is currently rated for arctic travel,
is the Minik Arctica. The ship has a length of 45.3 m[24]. Thus the optical imager
must have a GSD resolution of 6.75 m, in order to have a discovery probability
which is above 95 % for ships of this class.
5.2.2
Optical sensor model for maritime surveillance
The range of optical imagers with sufficient spatial resolution in GSD that can be
operated by a Nanosatellite is very limited. Table 5.1 lists optical cameras inteded
for small satellite missions [25].
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
25
==PAGE:37==
Table 5.1: Possible optical imagers
Camera Model
Weight
Power
GSD
Swath size
Dragonfly Caiman Imager
1.8 kg
10 w
6 m
12 km
Dragonfly Chameleon imager
1.6 kg
10 w
10 m
40 km
Dragonfly Gecko imager
0.4 kg
4.5 w
39 m
80 km
Dragonfly Mantis Imager
0.5 kg
4.6 w
16 m
32 km
Simera sense Hyperscape 100
1.1 kg
7 w
4.75 m
19.4 km
SCS space Monitor Imager
3 kg
N/A
6.5 m
13 km
Kairospace 90mm Camera
1.4 kg
4.2 w
3 m
9.95 km
The challenge of selecting an appropriate optical instrument for the arctic observa­
tion project is selecting an imager which is capable of operating aboard a cubesat
satellite, whilst providing sufficient spatial resolution and possessing an accept­
ably large sweep size such that it can survey the entire arctic area at the require­
ment interval.
5.2.3
Optical sensor applicability
In order to determine the applicability of the optical sensor for mission design, it is
important to refer to the project requirements. In selecting a sensor the foremost
requirement is the detectability and the coverage provided by the optical sensor.
In order to determine the coverage ability of the optical imaging method the Drag­
onfly Gecko imager was chosen from table 5.1 Due to having the largest swath
size, however the spatial resolution is not not high enough to provide a 95 detec­
tion probability for all arctic vessel.. The STK program was used to determine the
accumulated coverage over a 24 hour period was determined with respect to the
area definition of the arctic circle shown in figure 1.1.
26
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.3: Accumulated coverage for an optic sensor with swath width of 80 km,
evaluated over a 24 hour period
From the results of the coverage analysis in figure 5.3 it can be observed that the
Dragonfly Gecko imager can only cover 25 % of the area in a given 24 hour period.
From this I conclude that the optical imaging method is not capable of satisfying
the coverage requirement for the mission.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
27
==PAGE:39==
5.3
Synthetic Aperture Radar Method
Synthetic aperture radar (SAR) are active illuminators that function mostly inde­
pendently of the weather or illumination conditions of the illuminated area. SAR
systems uses the movement of the radar antenna across a region of space; thus
SAR instruments are an ideal method for satellite­based earth observation due to
the area per time ratio that the satellite covers.
5.3.1
Design Principles of Synthetic Aperture Radar
The SAR produces a high­resolution image of a scene by using its processor to
produce a synthetic large antenna equivalent. This gives the radar a high level of
resolution in the cross­range direction of the satellite’s movement. The resolution
in the range direction can be increased by the system by using shorter pulses or
by using pulse compression. The range resolution ∆R is given as a function of the
signal bandwidth B, related by
∆R = C
2B
(5.2)
Conversely the resolution in the cross­range direction ∆X is proportional to the
antenna 3­dB beamwidth ∆θ and the range R, which is expressed by
∆X = R ∗∆θ
(5.3)
For the arctic observation scenario there are several unique disadvantages when
operating SAR observation instruments. Because SAR measures the topology of
the environment it can be hard to differentiate between objects such as icebergs
and ship, since the returned height profile may be closely aligned. However, this
effect can be corrected by use of polarization, which measures the backscattering
coefficient of the target and can therefore be used to differentiate between differ­
ent types of maritime objects.
As mentioned in section 3.4, SAR instruments are often operated in distinct modes,
referred to as the” stripmap” mode and the ”spotlight” mode. The difference in the
modes is the steering of the SAR antenna during a satellite pass. In stripmap
mode the camera attitude is kept fixed during the pass surveying a swath area
with low resolution, whilst in spotlight mode the antenna focusses on a smaller
specific area during the pass, which substantially increases the spatial resolution
of the imager. Therefore the resolution of the SAR instrument is generally given
separately for the different modes of operation. Given that the mission concerns
the detection of large numbers of moving targets in a wide area, the instrument is
expected to operate in stripmap mode, which imposes a severe constraint to the
spatial resolution required for maritime detection.
When operating in stripmap mode, the highest possible resolution in the cross­
range direction is
∆X ≥La/2
(5.4)
28
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:40==
Where La is the length of the SAR antenna. To avoid echo ambiguity in the signal
and maximize the swath, the product of the antenna length and cross­track width
Wa should be
LaWa > 4vλRm
c
tanη
(5.5)
Where V is the satellite velocity, λ is the radar wavelength, Rm is the distance to
middle of the swath and η is the look angle of the antenna. This gives a corre­
sponding maximized swath width Wg,max of
Wg,max =
cLa
4vsinη
(5.6)
Thus the relationship between the maximized swath size is linearly related to the
antenna length, which in turn is inversely related to the maximal possible spatial
resolution. The antenna size may also be reduced by a smaller noise bandwidth
of the antenna.
Figure 5.4: 1 (Left) Figure of SAR design parameters. (right) Spatial resolution as
a function of Bandwidth and look angle, for the Capella X­sar satellite [26]
5.3.2
Nanosatellites and SAR
The size requirements for a nanosatellite imposes a great number of restrictions
on the design of the radio antenna. The class of nanosatellites have a weight re­
quirement below 10 kg, and the shape of the satellite must generally be designed
so that it can be embedded in mass storage along with other nanosatellites in a
shared rocket launch that delivers it into orbit trajectory.
Thus, the physical size of a nanosatellite mounted antenna is severely limited, and
accordingly the respective wavelength of the SAR antenna must be very large.
This in turn would require that the wavelength would be placed into the ku wave­
band above 100 GHz, or into the microwave frequency range.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
29
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: Atmosheric attenuation as a fucntion of wavelength [27]
At such wavelengths the signal attenuation caused by the orbital environment has
a much greater effect on the absorption of the radar signal. As can be seen from
figure 5.5 a significant increase of the atmospheric attenuation occurs above 118
GHz frequency range.[27]
Due to this atmospheric attenuation the SAR based nanosatellite missions have
been restricted to the ream of weather and atmosphere monitoring purposes, as
the attenuation of higher frequencies only allows for limited signal penetration into
the atmosphere.
5.3.3
Project Applicability
There are several aspects of the SAR instrument that must be considered when
analyzing its role in a potential mission. Based on the list of user requirements
we know that weight and size of the instrument are vital factors, especially when
considering the size of contemporary SAR missions. An additional consideration
is whether the possible ground track swath size of the satellite is able to guaranty
full surveillance of the Arctic within the specified time limit.
Foremost of the counterarguments against SAR in arctic maritime use is the typi­
cally low swath size of the SAR. A comparable mission is the ICEYE. Which has a
1 m spotlight mode resolution in a 5 x 5 km area and a 3 m spatial resolution in a
30 km swath.[28]. However the ICEYE satellite is not in the nanosatellite category
Given the 30 km swath size, it becomes extremely difficult to continually survey
an area as large as the Arctic. From the user requirement list it is stated that the
entire arctic area must be observed at an interval of 24 hours. As such, we can
expect that a swath size of 30 km or below is insufficient for full ground track cov­
erage of the Arctic region.
This can be seen by constructing a ground swath simulation with the STK toolkit.
For this simulation I will be using an example SAR instrument which meets the
30
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:42==
specified requirements in terms of weight and spatial resolution at a reference
satellite height of 500 km. The results of the simulation are shown in figure 5.6.
The figure shows that over a 24 hour period, the accumulated coverage will only
reach 13%.
Figure 5.6: Accumulated coverage of a SAR sensor with a 30 KM swath over a
24 hour period
From this i can conclude that a SAR method cannot met the coverage require­
ments of the mission.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
31
==PAGE:43==
5.4
Passive Bi­static Radar Detection Method
Review
Passive bistatic radar detection refers to a larger subgroup containing several
methods that will be explained following. In general, passive radar detection refers
to a type of radar system that uses a bistatic radar configuration, which does not
emit it’s own radar signal. Instead, the passive radar system relies on external
illuminators, or localizing a source of radar signals directly.
5.4.1
GNSS Based Passive Radar
As discussed in sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, one emerging technology for earth ob­
servation is passive radar systems that use different radar sources as illuminators
of opportunity in order to create a scene. By using an illuminator of opportunity,
bistatic radar system can function similarly to a synthetic aperture radar by gener­
ating a image. Most commonly, this is achieved by using widespread radar signals
from commercial generators, which are reflected off a surface and then measured
by the receiver in addition to measuring the direct signal from the emitter. By tak­
ing the difference of the reflected signal and the unimpeded signal, a scene can
be constructed from the array of time differences.
Due to being passive radars, GNSS based systems are very scalable and can be
fitted on nano­satellite spacecrafts since there is no requirement for the transmit­
ting antenna size or transmitting power.
The GNSS are among the most popular illuminators for such systems as they
can provide global coverage when compared to terrestrial illuminators. However,
since GNSS satellites are situated in high earth orbits the signal strength is not
very high. This can make detection of the signal and clutter attenuation very dif­
ficult for the receiver. To overcome this weakness, integration over larger time
periods can be used for land­based systems. Naturally, this option is not acces­
sible for a satellite pass.
These methods of passive radar generally require a higher amount of comput­
ing in order to process the scene, as there are more variables introduced by the
position and signal from the illuminator. Additionally, the spatial resolution which
is possible with these method is quite low and they may not be well suited for a
comprehensive maritime surveillance application, although they may be possibly
be used for supplementary observation.
From what is known of the GNSS­R detection method it is not capable of meeting
the requirements for the mission.
32
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:44==
5.5
Non­cooperative Radar Emitter Tracking
The other subset of bistatic passive emitter systems is comprised of those that
localize a signal emitter. Since the receiver does not control the waveform of the
signal and lacking any priori information about the emitter location, several differ­
ent receivers are required in order to locate the emitter.
One trait shared by almost all maritime vessels which are operating in open sea
is the use of navigational radar systems, that are used for identifying, tracking
and positioning of other maritime vessels as well as control for collision detection
with debris. Radar systems can function mostly independently of weather and
atmospheric conditions, which makes them a necessity for navigation when other
methods are obfuscated by environmental conditions. Due to the safety provided
by marine radar, such systems are mandated by law on every ship which has a
total tonnage of 3000 or greater.[4]
Marine radars are among the simplest widely used radar systems since they are
designed to detect ideal metallic reflectors that are situated in a uniform reflection
environment. The universality of navigation radar on maritime vessels mean that
they serve as ideal emitters for non­cooperative passive radar localization.
Localization with a passive emitter tracking system is done in two steps: [1] The
signal parameters used for geolocation are captured by the radar system: the sig­
nal parameters are the time of arrival, frequency of signal at arrival and phase at
arrival. [2] the observed parameters of the signal are used in order to generate an
estimate of the emitter position. Recording the parameters of the emitter signal
in order to generate a geolocalization estimate requires several receivers, and for
a space­borne radar system an array of satellites are in many cases required for
robust estimation which is resistant to errors in the signal and the satellite’s inter­
nal clock and positioning based systems.
Several different key algorithms can be implemented in order to determine the
location of the emitter based on the signal received at several different observer
locations. These algorithms can be separated into 2 general super­groups: hyper­
bolic location systems and direction­finding systems. Hyperbolic location systems
are defined as time difference of arrival systems, which determine the location of
the emitter based on the differences of the received signal arrival time at several
observer locations. Location determination based on time difference of arrival re­
quires triangulation, meaning that the signal must be observed by a minimum of 3
different receiver locations. The arrival time measurements at 2 receivers form a
combined arrival time that then determines the position of the emitter as a hyper­
bolic with the 2 receivers as foci. Then the emitter location is determined by the
intersection of several hyperbolic arrival time distances generated from 3 or more
stations. Given 3 receivers, 2 different hyperbolic intersections are determined,
of which the correct location can be determined from priori information.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
33
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.7: Figure of the TDoA localization scenario where emitter position is
found from intersection of hyperboloids
5.5.1
Time Difference of Arrival
There are several different methods to determine the intersection of the TDOA
derived hyperboloids, The simplest of which is the explicit solution using a lin­
ear least square approach. This method determines the geolocation solution by
changing the nonlinear TDOA estimates into a set of linear equations, by finding
an intermediate value with linear least square regression. Following the constraint
of the emitter being on the earth surface, the explicit solution can be found with
two TDOA estimates from 3 receivers
5.5.2
Angle of Arrival
Angle of Arrival is a geolocation method which is used to calculate the angle at
which a signal is propagating and then utilizing this information in order to gen­
erate a line of bearing which is then used to geolocate the signal emitter. The
implementation of the AoA method differs from TDoA, as it is composed of an
array of systematically separated small receivers that measure the angle of the
signal by measuring the phase difference in the signal waveform as it arrives at
each of the receivers in the array. The angle is then used to determine the bear­
ing line, and by finding an intersection with the bearing line and earth surface, the
location of the signal emitter is derived.
5.5.3
Mission Applicability
Determining the applicability of the passive radar for arctic maritime surveillance
there are several parameters that require consideration. Of special interest are
34
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:46==
the size, weight, power, detection ability and the observation swath.
Since passive radars are bistatic, they significantly decrease the requirements for
the size of the antenna. Additionally, the power requirement is also much lower
than for other observation systems, in these aspects the passive emitter tracking
radar is a very well suited choice for the arctic observation mission.
The swath of the passive emitter tracking system is not determined with respect to
the system, but is rather determined by the radiation pattern of the emitting radar,
and that which is obscured by the horizon. This means that the potential swath
size is several magnitudes greater than what is possible with other detection and
observation methods.
The flaw in passive emitter tracking is that it requires the target to be operating a
radar within a specified set of parameters: power and frequency range, which the
satellite is looking for. However, there is a possibility that maritime vessels may
take additional steps to avoid detection that could include turning off navigational
radars, this is a risk that is also necessary to consider in a comparative method
assessment.
In order to characterize the marine navigation radar, a list of antenna and transmit­
ter parameters given from the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) rec­
ommendations are used.[16] Since there is no single standardized set of charac­
teristics for maritime navigation radars, the assumption is made that most current
systems will follow ITU parameters.
Table 5.2 describes the antenna and transmitter parameters for navigation radars
operating in the x­band. For this project I will be working with the radar param­
eters described by ITU recommendations since it is assumed that most military
and civilian navigation radar operate in the x­band frequency and therefore the
antenna can be approximated by the the given parameters.
The target frequency that I will be operating with in this report is the 9.2 GHz,
Given a minimum pulse duration of 0.03 µs, this results in a signal bandwidth of
33 MHz.
For the beamwidth of the radar emitter, a vertical beamwidth of 25 degrees is used
for the emitter elevation angle; this angle with respect to the radar emitter defines
the heel of the sensor swath. It is given that the lowest reasonable elevation angle
where the radar signal is still detectable is 5 degrees elevation angle with respect
to the emitter. This angle with respect to the emitter defines the toe of the sensor
swath. This is illustrated in figure 5.8. Note that I assume a spherical earth shape
for this project.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
35
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.2: Marine navigation radar parameters
Characteristic
Maximum
Minimum
Antenna Parameters
Beamwidth (to ­3db) (degrees)
Horizontal axis
2.3
0.75
Vertical axis
26.0
20.0
Sidelobe Attenuation
Within 10 degrees
31
23
Outside 10 degrees
4 0
30
Gain (dB)
40
30
Rotation rate (rpm)
60
20
Transmitter parameters
Peak Power (kW)
50
5
Frequency (MHz)
9445 +­ 30
9375 +­ 30
Pulse duration (microsecond)
1.2
0.03
Pulse repetition Frequency (Hz)
4000
375
Table 5.3: List of ITU parameters for marine navigation radar in the x­band fre­
quencies [16]
Figure 5.8: Geometric parameters of the satellite and target system[29]
36
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:48==
From the elevation angles, the squint angles of the satellite can be determined
according to
β = arcsin(
R
R + hcosϵ)
(5.7)
Which gives the squint angles of βtoe = 68.5 and βheel = 57.83 which results in a
equivalent beamwidth of θ = 10.67.
With this, the sensor swath can be modelled in STK in order to give a 24 hour
coverage analysis over the arctic area. The results are shown in figure 5.9. It
can be seen that the accumulated coverage of the passive radar swath covers
the entirety of the coverage area within 24 hours, which fulfils the requirements of
the project.
Figure 5.9: Accumulated Sensor coverage over a 24 hour period of the passive
radar detector given the parameters of the marine navigation radar
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
37
==PAGE:49==
5.6
AIS Localization Method
Localization of Maritime vessels can be accomplished with the Automatic Identifi­
cation system (AIS).
Satellite based AIS sensors require low amounts of power, and they have there­
fore been been used as a secondary payload for LEO Earth observation satel­
lites. Constellations of smaller satellites such as nanosat’s (1­10 kg satellites)
have been launched in larger constellations such as the Spire Globals Lemur
constellation comprised of 90 nano­satellites in LEO. These satellites are gen­
erally launched in polar orbits, which causes a high revisit time for targets near
the equator and a shortened revisit time for targets near the poles.
AISSat­1 was the first satellite with a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) at 635 km altitude
which provided the experimental groundwork for future use of Sat­AIS.[17] How­
ever future missions have shown that Sat­AIS has low probability of identification
in areas with high maritime activity, which is caused by interference from several
simultaneous signals.
5.6.1
AIS signal interference
In order to avoid interference from simultaneous signals, AIS operate in a time
division multiple access scheme (TDMA), which describes a method of access
for multiple channels in the same frequency where each emitter is divided into
different time slots so the signals don’t overlap.Thus, for all AIS systems within a
region of 1500 km all messages are synchronized so that none of the messages
overlap. This avoids signal collision within the target region on the terrestrial level.
However, the larger the field of view (FOV) of a space­borne AIS receiver can
detect signals from more than one of these regions which causes a higher risk of
signal collision and resulting information loss.
An additional problem for the space­based AIS sensor is the saturation of infor­
mation caused by too many messages being received in areas of high maritime
traffic. This problem only occurs in areas of high traffic such as the Mediterranean
Sea or the Baltic sea and is therefore less of a problem in the arctic region. Mes­
sage collision and saturation are the primary limiting factors of the space­borne
AIS sensors, which can affect the probability of detection.
5.6.2
AIS project Applicability
Given the low cost and low weight of AIS systems, they can be fitted onto Cubesat
missions at a low payload cost. An example of a AIS receiver which fit’s the mis­
sion criteria is the QUbeAIS receiver, which is an software defined Radio (SDR)
based receiver developed by satlab. The QubeAIS has a weight of less than 55
gram and a peak power consumption of 850 mW.
However as previously stated, localization by AIS completely relies upon compli­
ance with AIS guidelines. Thus the detection probability cannot be ensured for
AIS signals.
38
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:50==
For this reason the AIS localization method will not be investigated any further in
this report.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
39
==PAGE:51==
5.7
First Maritime Surveillance Method review:
summary
During this initial method review the following maritime detection methods have
been excluded.
• Synthetic Aperture Radar: The power requirement of the SAR sensor is
too large to be accomodated by a Cubesat power system. The Cubesat body
cannot provide a sufficiently large baseline for a radar signal in the relevant
frequency range. The coverage of approximately similar small SAR systems
does not provide sufficient coverage of the arctic region.
• Optical Imaging sensor: The spatial resolution required for ship detection
results in a low swath size which is not able to meet the coverage require­
ment. The imaging method is vulnerable to the effect of atmospheric obfus­
cation such as low light conditions and cloud coverage.
• AIS: The AIS method cannot provide reliable detection of high interest tar­
gets since mutual AIS compliance cannot be ensured.
• GNSS­R: The coverage of GNSS near the polar regions is too low to provide
sufficient resolution for maritime detection.
Having excluded these methods from further analysis, the methods that I chose
to continue with are the radar emitter tracking methods.
40
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:52==
6
Second Maritime Surveillance
Method Review
This section of the report concerns the second iteration of review for the maritime
surveillance methods, In the previous review of methods, several of the potential
satellite based methods for maritime surveillance have been excluded for con­
sideration given the project parameters. The methods that will continue on the
second method review are the following
• Time difference of Arrival Emitter tracking
• Angle of arrival Emitter tracking
This second review concerns the respective efficiencies of these methods within
the scope of the given project requirements. Both of these methods are passive
emitter tracking methods. Therefore, there are several similarities between the
methods.
6.1
Satellite Orbit Considerations
In the first method review a reference orbit of 500 km altitude was used for the
coverage definition as a reference orbit before more design parameters of the
satellite was considered.
After finishing the first method review the passive radar emitter tracking method
has been selected as the chosen method for thesis project. Therefore, I wished
to select an orbit which maximizes the performance of the chosen method. The
radar emitter tracking method is dependent on the strength of the signal between
the radar emitter and the satellite antenna. Therefore, minimizing the loss path
distance will increase the received signal strength of the satellite receiver.
A new satellite orbit height was chosen to minimize path loss while fulfilling the
requirement of 2 years lifetime. STK simulation can determine the orbit lifetime of
a satellite given the satellite and orbit parameters. The drag force exerted upon
the satellite is a function of the satellite mass drag coefficient and effective cross
sectional area.
These simulations assumed that the satellite follows a 6u Cubesat architecture
and allowed for a mass total of 8 kg. The simulations also assumed a drag coef­
ficient of the the satellite CD = 2.2 and a worst case 0.6 m2 cross sectional area.
Based on these assumptions, simulations with the STK lifetime tool found that a
450 km sun synchronous orbit will result in a 2 year orbital lifetime.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
41
==PAGE:53==
6.2
Passive radar signal strength
The methods are based on the link between the radar emitter which is the ship
navigation radar and the satellite­based radar receiver. Both of these methods
are then described as a relationship between the Radar transmitter characteris­
tics and the transmitter characteristics.
6.2.1
Received radar power
The signal connection of the radar link between the navigation transmitter and the
satellite receiver is an important part of the consideration for the efficiency of the
passive emitter tracking especially for the AoA determination
Following is the equation for the path loss given as a function of distance and
frequency
Lp(4πdf
c
)2
(6.1)
and the received power at the receiver is described by
Pr = PtGtGR
Lp
(6.2)
Pt is the transmitted power GT is the transmitter gain Gr is the receiver gain.
6.2.2
Noise power
The noise power produced by an electric system can be described approximately
as an ideal ohmic transistor at a given temperature. The noise power described
by this system is given by
PN = KTψ
(6.3)
Where K is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature of the system and ψ is
the bandwidth of the received signal.
The Antenna and the early noises in the receiver can be bundled together since we
can assume from the gain of the LNA that the influence of the remaining system
components on the noise figure is minimal. The total receiver noise temperature
can be determined from the following equation [29]
Treceiver = T0(F −1) + L ∗TLNA + L ∗T3
GLNA
(6.4)
Where T0 = 290K is reference noise temperature. With this the noise power
can be estimated. Given that the noise power and the received signal strength is
determined from the link budget then the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the system
can be determined as given by
SNR = PR
PN
(6.5)
42
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:54==
6.3
Time Domain emitter localization
For methods in the time domain category of localization methods only the arrival
time of the signal is used. There are several different methods in which the po­
sition of a radar emitter can be determined in the time domain. However, the
method which is investigated in this report is the time difference of arrival local­
ization method.
6.3.1
Time Difference of arrival theory
There are several different methods to determine the intersection of the TDOA
derived hyperboloids, The simplest of which is the explicit solution using a lin­
ear least square approach. This method determines the geolocation solution by
changing the nonlinear TDOA estimates into a set of linear equations, by finding
an intermediate value with linear least square regression. Following the constraint
of the emitter being on the earth surface the explicit solution can be found with at
least three TDOA observations.
Given a set of N receivers where N≥2, Where arrival time at the i’th receiver is
ti. The TDOA of a signal between an initial receiver one and the i’th receiver is
Defined by
ti,1 = t1 −ti; i = 1, 2, …N
(6.6)
Which can then be converted into a range from speed of light c
ri.1 = tic
(6.7)
Given the coordinates xi, yi, zi of the I’th receiver and the coordinates of the emitter
xT, yT, zT, the distance between them is expressed as
ri =
√
(xi −xT)2 + (yi −yT)2 + (zi −zT)2
(6.8)
In order to simplify equations, the following term is introduced.
Ki = x2
i + y2
i + z2
i
(6.9)
Then the emitter location can be described using a set of linear equations derived
from the least square method.


Xt
YT
ZT

=


x1
y1
z1
x2
y2
z2
x3
y3
z3


−1
= 1
2


K1 + r2
E ∗r2
1
K2 + r2
E ∗r2
1 −2r2,1 −R2
2,1
K3 + r2
E ∗r2
1 −2r3,1 −R2
3,1


(6.10)
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
43
==PAGE:55==
This set of equations describe the position of the signal emitter in terms of the
first receiver distance r1. These terms of the emitter locations can then be substi­
tuted into the earlier expression for ri, which results in a fourth order polynomial,
which results in four roots. The root that is nearest to the earth surface is then
determined. Alternatively, solving with four receivers results in a second order
polynomial with two roots.
6.3.2
TDoA solution: Taylor Series Estimation
A more computationally intensive solution for TDoA geolocalization is based on
Taylor series approximation. This approach differs from the explicit solution in
that it is an iterative process, and thus is more computationally intensive, but it in
turn offers error resistance. The Taylor series method can be used to determine a
least sum squared error solution for a series of linearized equations derived from
TDOA.
The Taylor series method requires an initial guess of the emitter location which
initiates the iterative process, and the convergence of the Taylor series approxi­
mation is dependent on the value of the initial guess, consequently an erroneous
initial guess will lead to a longer iterative process or a failure of convergence. The
major benefit of the Taylor approximation is the result of error ellipse, providing
a verification of the geolocalization accuracy. The explicit and the Taylor series
approach can be combined by using the result of the explicit solution as the initial
guess.
The Taylor series method begins similarly to the explicit method in that a series
of TDoA data is converted into differences in range for the respective receivers.
Following an initial guess of the emitter location the distance with respect to the
i’th receiver is determined in the same way as with the explicit solution.
ri.guess =
√
(x1 −xguess)2(y1 −yguess)2(z1 −zguess)2
(6.11)
The elements of the least square solution can then be defined. First the difference
between the measured range ri,1,measured and the range of the guess ri,1,guess is
described by the following matrix.
z =


r1,1,measured −r1,1,guess
r2,1,measured −r2,1,guess
rN,1,measured −rN,1,guess


(6.12)
The partial derivatives of the ranges with respect to the emitter coordinates term
are determined as ai,1, ai,2 and ai,3. From these the A matrix is defined.
A =


a1,1
a1,2
a1,3
a2,1
a2,2
a2,3
aN,1
aN,2
aN,3


(6.13)
44
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:56==
Given the gaussian variance of the measurement, a covariance matrix can be
defined
R = σI
(6.14)
Where σ is the gaussian variance of the measurement and I is an identity matrix.
Given the partial derivative A matrix and the covariance matrix R, the least square
error can be described with
δ =


δx
δy
δz

= [ATR−1A]−1ATR−1z
(6.15)
The least square error can then be used to update the initial emitter location guess


Xt,new
yt,new
zt,new

=


Xt + δx
Yt + δy
Zt + δz


(6.16)
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
45
==PAGE:57==
6.4
Parameters for TDOA
The TDoA localization algorithm is dependent on the accuracy of the receiver time
measurement accuracy, i.e. the capability of the receiver to detect the peak pulse
of received signal. Noise in the signal makes it more difficult to determine the pulse
of the received signal and increases the time measurement error amplitude.
Given the time measurement error of using GPS systems is 40 µs then the equiv­
alent distance is a distance of 12 m, which is a far larger baseline than what is
possible with a single satellite. As according to TDoA theory previously described
then a minimum of 3 sensors are required for triangulation of the emitter position
and thus TDoA localization with cubesat’s requires a constellation of minimum 3
satellites.
6.5
TDOA simulation
In order to determine the accuracy of the TDoA method in the project scenario, a
simulation is carried out in Matlab with a algorithm that approximately recreates
the detection scenario given a varying set of parameters. The scenario is simu­
lated for the situation in which the radar emitter is at the toe of the radar swath in
which the distance to the distance between them is 1944 km.
The simulation incorporates both a linear position localization and a nonlinear
position estimation using Taylor approximation.
For the simulation, a simplified satellite constellation is used in which all satellites
are located in a straight line with uniform spacing between them. The simulation
scenario in which there are 4 satellites can be seen in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The positions of the satellite receivers and signal emitter, in a straight
line satellite constellation
46
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:58==
The most important parameter for the TDoA method is the time measurement
accuracy of the receiver, since measurement of arrival time is the only information
that the system records form the emitter signal.
The TDoA result is simulated for 3 different number of satellite constellations each
of the constellations is spaced such that the total width of the constellation does
not exceed the size of the horizontal antenna beamwidth θ3dB,Horzontal = 0.75 which
at the heel of the radar footprint translates to a distance of 2544 km.
Figure 6.2: The position estimate error for function with taylor approximation of
straight line constellation
The results of the simulation are shown in figure 6.2, which show that accuracy of
the TDoA method fulfills the requirement of less than 10 km positioning error for
constellations of 4 or more satellites even given a GPS time synchronization error
of 40 µs. For 3 satellites the positioning algorithm becomes far more unstable,
which provides a more unreliable positioning solution.
6.6
TDoA method Summary
It has been shown with simulation that the TDoA method can be used as for pas­
sive radar localization with a positioning accuracy which fulfills the project require­
ments. However this requires a number of 4 satellites positioned in a constella­
tion.
Since the TDoA method only requires a single receiver in each satellite, this means
that the size of the payload can be scaled down. For a satellite design with no
other payloads the TDoA method may be implemented for a 1u cubesat, which
significantly decreases the cost.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
47
==PAGE:59==
6.7
Phase comparison Based Direction of Arrival
determination
The angle of arrival method is based on generating a line of bearing from several
observations of the signal phase and comparison of the phase change.
There is one fundamental problem when implementing phase comparison based
direction of arrival estimation, which is that the system is unable to distinguish
between full wavelengths of phase shifts. Thus, any measured phase shift which
is greater than 2π will be registered as an ambiguity in the measurement, and will
result in an error in generating a line of bearing. This ambiguity is dependent on
the frequency of the signal, the beamwidth of the radar receiver and the distance
between antenna elements which are used for the phase comparison. As a result
of this, the beamwidth of the design antenna array and the inter­receiver distance
is limited by the ambiguity. The ambiguity can be removed if the antenna baseline
is smaller than the greatest phase shift between the antenna array boresight and
the maximum of the main beamwidth:
∆θ = 2π
If the target carrier frequency of the fc of the receiver is known and the beamwidth
of the receiver θ3db is known then the maximum baseline of the array before giving
rise to ambiguities is
Dambiguity =
λ
2 ∗cos(π−)θ3db
(6.17)
This assumes that only signals within the antenna array beamwidth are detected.
Given a θ3db = 10 beamwidth then the maximum baseline of the antenna is Dambiguity =
0.12m
6.8
Angle of arrival Theory
The AoA method determines the angle of the incident signal with respect to the
plane of the signal receivers, which can then be utilized in order to generate a line
of bearing or steering vector. The AoA method uses a series of closely connected
antenna, rather than the spatially separated receivers required for TDoA geolo­
cation, this design feature can be a significant advantage in small scale satellites
which may not be able to fully separate receivers to provide a precise TDoA ge­
olocation solution.
The AoA bearing line is determined with the angles θ and ϕ, where ϕ is the vertical
angle with respect to the satellite movement vector and θ is the horizontal angle
with respect to the satellites direction of orbit.
48
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:60==
In order to find a geolocalization solution with AoA, the intersection between the
bearing angle and the earth surface is determined. For a multiple satellite con­
stellation each of the space­borne receivers determine their own unique line of
bearing, and therefore a least square solution is implemented to determine the
central point of all the bearing angles, but in this project, only a single satellite
scenario will be simulated.
In this derivation of the AoA method the antenna are assumed to be in the form
of uniform linear arrays.
Figure 6.3: Figure of propagating radar signals received at an antenna array[30]
Assume an uniformly spaced array of N antenna, where the k’th number is de­
scribed by x(k) and the distance between each antenna described by D. An prop­
agated wave carries a baseband signal s(t), which is incident on the plane of
antenna at angle θ. The signal is received at each antenna element at a different
time, first arriving at element 0, where it is assumed that the phase of the wave is
zero. Then the phase of the wave at each element is compared to the phase at
element 0.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
49
==PAGE:61==
6.8.1
Multiple Signal Classification (MUSIC)
In order to determine the angle from a set of phase measurements at an antenna
array the MUSIC algorithm is implemented. This algorithm determines the direc­
tions of a set of uncorrelated received signal measurements, by using eigenvalue
decomposition of the sensor covariance matrix for the given antenna array.[31]
The steering vectors that correspond to the received signals are in the signal sub­
space; per definition they are then orthogonal to the noise subspace. Subspace
direction of arrival methods function by calculating a set of all possible steering
vectors and then, determining which of these that are orthogonal to the noise sub­
space QN[30]. Given an incoming signal with an associated steering vector α(θ)
it can be found that
α(θ)H ∗QN = 0
(6.18)
The MUSIC algorithm can then be described by the following equation.
PMUSIC(θ) =
1
αH(θ
(6.19)
Which gives a maximal value when θ approaches α(θ). The MUSIC algorithm can
be more computationally expensive than other methods for determining angle of
arrival but is capable of handling multiple simultaneous signal arrivals.
6.8.2
AoA parameters
In order to model the AoA simulation it is first important to determine the relation­
ship of a error in the steering vector position to an error in the spatial localization
accuracy. This relationship is separate for the squint angle and the azimuth an­
gle of the satellite, since an error in the squint angle determination of the steering
vector will have a far greater impact on the accuracy.
The beamwidth for an array of antenna where the spacing between each element
is d = λ/2 can be approximated with the following expression if it is assumed that
the antenna are isotropic radiators.
θB = 102
N
(6.20)
Thus in order to approach the squint angle beamwidth of the passive emitter
method we would need a series of 10 antenna.
Given a simulation scenario where the emitter is at the toe of the radar footprint
then a maximum position error of 10 km is equivalent to an angle error in the
steering vector of 0.026 in the azimuth direcion, the maximum angle error can be
determined to be approximately 0.295
50
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:62==
Given the earlier equations for the SNR we can estimate the SNR of the antenna
array given a 10 degree beamwidth in both the horizontal and vertical planes. For
this analysis the LNA amplifier of CGY2222UH/C2 [32] is used with a noise figure
of 1.5 and a Gain of 20 then the SNR of the aray becomes SNRula = 28.7dB
6.9
AoA Simulation
In order to determine the accuracy of the AoA localization method, a detection
scenario is simulated in Matlab where the satellite is equipped with an uniform
linear array (ULA) with a variable number of antenna, the plane of which lies in
the squint angle of the satellite.
The reference ULA has 10 antenna which are distanced at half the carrier fre­
quency in order to minimize ambiguities.
First there are several different methods of beam­forming for the angle of arrival
determination, in addition to the previously described MUSIC algorithm. As such
the first calculation is a comparison of the MUSIC algorithm and another subspace
method the Esprit.estimator over a range of noise values.
Figure 6.4: Simulation of the accuracy performance of different DOA algorithms
in Matlab
The results can be seen in figure 6.4. The figure shows that the MUSIC­root algo­
rithm outperforms the Esprit estimator over the range of noise variance. Therefore
the root version of the MUSIC algorithm will be used for AoA simulations going
forward. In addition, it is shown that for the standard configuration the RMSE is
below 0.026 at a SNR=28.7 which satisfies the pointing requirements
There are several more parameters which enter into the MUSIC algorithm. The
algorithm samples over a number of snapshots of the system, which is equivalent
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
51
==PAGE:63==
to the number of times that the emitter signal is sampled.The effect of the number
of snapshots is simulated in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Simulation of RMSE angle error as a function of the number of snap­
shots given for varying levels of SNR
Figure 6.5 show that the steering vector error as a function of snapshot number
decreases after 10 snapshots and show little change after 20 total snapshots are
taken.
From this an appropriate sampling frequency of the radar receiver can be selected
so that the system can work with at least 10 snapshots of the signal.
Figure 6.6: Simulation of RMSE angle error as a function of the number of antenna
in the ULA
From figure 6.6 we see the RMSE as a function of the number of antenna in the
52
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:64==
array. While the resulting receiver gain is not reflected in the simulation we see
that the impact of lower receiver numbers is less significant for higher values of
SNR.
6.10
AoA method Summary
The AoA simulation shows that the algorithm is capable of meeting the require­
ments for the localization accuracy if the parameters of the antenna array can be
fulfilled. With these simulations it is found that as the dominant factor in the preci­
sion of the steering vector determination is the value of the SNR. This is consistent
with expectations since the MUSIC algorithm is a subspace method.
Further investigation should be done into the azimuth steering vector angle but
the effect of steering vector error is lesser in that direction. In addition the effect
of increasing the number of incoming signals will have a significant effect on the
average precision of the steering vector generation.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
53
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
The work carried out in this project has evaluated the feasibility of various satellite
based methods for a maritime surveillance in the arctic region. I assumed a max­
imum budget of 20 million dkk, a minimum lifetime of 2 years, a requirement of
vessel localisation with an error of less than 10 km, and a requirement of covering
the arctic circle every 24 hours. Based on costs, the project was limited to the
Cubesat design architecture.
Various detection methods were considered for the project: SAR, AIS, Optical
imaging, passive emitter detection, and GNSS­R. Based on literature review,
both AIS and GNSS­R were excluded from the list of suitable detection meth­
ods. For satellite based detection, AIS runs the risks of signal confluence and
of non­compliance.The GNSS­R method is hampered by low signal strength and
resolution. Coverage analysis of SAR and optical imaging methods determined
that they were not capable of satisfying the coverage requirement. Thus only pas­
sive emitter tracking methods were selected for further analysis, since they were
shown to satisfy the coverage requirement.
Several Matlab algorithms were developed in order to calculate the respective
localization accuracy of each methods in the time domain and methods in the
phase domain. In the time domain the TDoA method was implemented using a
combination of linear estimation and Taylor Series approximation.
Both methods were able to localize a radar emitter with a better accuracy than
the 10 km given by the requirements. However, achieving such precision with the
TDoA required a constellation of at least 4 satellites.
Due to the difficulty comparing the efficiency of a satellite constellation to a single
satellite it is hard to directly compare the efficiencies of the two methods. How­
ever, given the drawbacks of operating a constellation of satellites compared to
a single satellite I conclude that the Phase comparison based AoA method using
the MUSIC algorithm is the best suited method for maritime observation of the
arctic are using Cubesat satellites.
Many assumptions were made during this analysis and following simulation, which
might further influence the localization method accuracy in ways that were not
accounted for during this project. These include modelling the earth surface as a
perfect sphere, the effect of the respective satellite and radar emitter movements,
which were not taken into account for the simulation scenario.
The process of sorting methods has shown that the secondary objectives of the
mission cannot be accomplished given the top­level requirements. This is owing
to the fact that the radar emitter methods are not capable of vessel classification
and sorting.
54
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:66==
8
Future work
The original goal of this project also included design review of the satellite with a
given payload including a power budget analysis and a communication link budget
review. However there was not sufficient time for the construction of the satellite
design during this project.
Given more time a satellite design concept could have been constructed to allow
for a more detailed analysis of the accuracy of the radar emitter tracking meth­
ods. Such specific satellite designs would allow for more detailed system wide
comparison of the two different methods. Such designs will involve constructing
the AOA based payload as a 6U cubesat and the TDOA based payload onboard
a constellation of 4 1U Cubesats.
A more detailed study would also be able to model a specific currently used model
of the maritime navigation radar and create a simulation environment which would
take into account the movement of the satellite and the radar emitter and investi­
gate other algorithms for radar emitter tracking such as scan time arrival estima­
tion or frequency difference of arrival which may also be well suited for an Arctic
Cubesat mission.
Further investigation could be made into the implementation of a hybrid system
using 2 or more of the detection methods such as including the AIS receiver so that
the satellite could natively distinguish between AIS compliant and non­compliant
targets. This would allow the mission to meet the secondary mission objectives,
which the radar emitter tracking methods are not capable of fulfilling by them­self.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
55
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Ting Wei et al. “Projections of Arctic sea ice conditions and shipping routes
in the twenty­first century using CMIP6 forcing scenarios”. In: Environmental
Research Letters 15.10, 104079 (Oct. 2020), p. 104079. DOI: 10.1088/1748-
9326/abb2c8.
[2]
Malte Humpert and Andreas Raspotnik. “The Future of Arctic Shipping Along
the Transpolar Sea Route”. In: Arctic Yearbook 2012 (Aug. 2012), pp. 281–
307.
[3]
High North News. Cargo Volume on Northern Sea Route Reaches 35m
Tons, Record Number of Transits. Accessed: 2022­05­22. URL: https://
www.highnorthnews.com/en/cargo-volume-northern-sea-route-reaches-35m-
tons-record-number-transits.
[4]
Regulation 19 ­ Carriage Requirements for Shipborne Navigational Systems
and Equipment. Accessed: 2022­05­24. URL: https://www.liscr.com/sites/
default/files/SOLAS%20V_Reg19.pdf.
[5]
Giovanni Soldi et al. “Space­Based Global Maritime Surveillance. Part I:
Satellite Technologies”. In: IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Mag­
azine 36.9 (Sept. 2021), pp. 8–28. DOI: 10.1109/maes.2021.3070862. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1109%2Fmaes.2021.3070862.
[6]
Athanassios Goudossis and Sokratis K. atsikas. “Towards a secure auto­
matic identification system (AIS)”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Tech­
nology (2019). DOI: 10.1007/s00773-018-0561-3.
[7]
A Basic Guide to Nanosatellites. Accessed: 2022­05­24. URL: https://alen.
space/basic-guide-nanosatellites/.
[8]
B. E. White and S. K. Semy. “Case study: Maritime domain awareness”.
In: 2010 IEEE International Systems Conference. 2010, pp. 575–580. DOI:
10.1109/SYSTEMS.2010.5482463.
[9]
A.M. Ponsford, Peter Willet, and Guy Germana. “Effective Maritime Do­
main Awareness based on persistent active surveillance using long­range
ground­based radar to cue reconnaissance and enforcement assets”. In:
Nov. 2011.
[10]
“Vessel detection and classification from spaceborne optical images: A lit­
erature survey”. In: REMOTE SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT 207 (2018),
pp. 1–26. ISSN: 0034­4257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2017.12.033. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425717306193.
[11]
M Skolnik. Introduction to radar systems. 1962.
[12]
R. Tharmarasa et al. “Multitarget Passive Coherent Location with Transmitter­
Origin and Target­Altitude Uncertainties”. In: IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems 48.3 (2012), pp. 2530–2550. DOI: 10.1109/TAES.
2012.6237607.
[13]
Debora Pastina et al. “Maritime Moving Target Long Time Integration for
GNSS­Based Passive Bistatic Radar”. In: IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems PP (May 2018), pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/TAES.2018.
2840298.
56
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:68==
[14]
Qingyun Yan, Weimin Huang, and Giuseppe Foti. “Quantification of the Re­
lationship Between Sea Surface Roughness and the Size of the Glistening
Zone for GNSS­R”. In: IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 15.2
(2018), pp. 237–241. DOI: 10.1109/LGRS.2017.2782728.
[15]
Qin Peng and Shuanggen Jin. “Significant Wave Height Estimation from
Space­Borne Cyclone­GNSS Reflectometry”. In: Remote Sensing 11.5 (2019).
ISSN: 2072­4292. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/5/584.
[16]
International Telecommunications Union. TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF MARITIME RADIONAVIGATION RADARS. [Accessed: 2022­05­24]. URL:
http://www.surfermag.com/features/maldives-controversy/.
[17]
eoportal. AISSat­1
AISSAT­2 (Automatic Identification System Satellite)
Nanosatellite Constellation. Accessed: 2022­05­25. URL: https://eoportal.
org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/a/aissat-1-2.
[18]
Christina Corbane, Fabrice Marre, and Michel Petit. “Using SPOT­5 HRG
Data in Panchromatic Mode for Operational Detection of Small Ships in
Tropical Area”. In: Sensors 8.5 (2008), pp. 2959–2973. ISSN: 1424­8220.
DOI: 10.3390/s8052959. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/8/5/2959.
[19]
EOportal. GomX­4 (GomSpace Express­4) Mission. Accessed: 2022­05­
20. URL: https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/g/
gomx-4.
[20]
The Geography of Transport Systems. Fuel Consumption by Containership
Size and Speed. Accessed: 2022­05­08. URL: https://transportgeography.
org/contents/chapter4/transportation-and-energy/fuel-consumption-containerships/.
[21]
seaforces. Skjold class Corvette. Accessed: 2022­05­15. URL: https://www.
seaforces.org/marint/Norwegian-Navy/Corvette/Skjold-class.htm.
[22]
Wei Yu et al. “A Moving Ship Detection and Tracking Method Based on Op­
tical Remote Sensing Images from the Geostationary Satellite”. In: Sensors
21 (Nov. 2021), p. 7547. DOI: 10.3390/s21227547.
[23]
Jesse Versteegen et al. “On Payload Spatial and Spectral Resolutions for
Automatic Ship Detection in Satellite Images”. In: 2018 Fifth International
Workshop on Earth Observation and Remote Sensing Applications (EORSA).
2018, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/EORSA.2018.8598581.
[24]
Royal Arctic. Particulars Minik Arctica. [Accessed: 2022­05­26]. URL: https:
//www.ral.dk/media/879148/2019_07_minik_arctica_web.pdf.
[25]
Satsearch. CubeSat cameras and optical payloads for small satellites on the
global marketplacet. Accessed: 2022­05­24. URL: https://blog.satsearch.co/
2020-03-25-optical-payloads-for-small-satellites-a-sector-overview.
[26]
Sung Wook Paek et al. “Small­Satellite Synthetic Aperture Radar for Con­
tinuous Global Biospheric Monitoring: A Review”. In: Remote Sensing 12
(Aug. 2020), p. 2546. DOI: 10.3390/rs12162546.
[27]
Ahmed El Oualkadi. “Trends and Challenges in CMOS Design for Emerging
60 GHz WPAN Applications”. In: Feb. 2011. ISBN: 978­953­307­183­1. DOI:
10.5772/15494.
[28]
eoportal. ICEYE Constellation of SAR X­band microsatellites. Accessed:
2022­05­22. URL: https : / / directory . eoportal . org / web / eoportal / satellite -
missions/i/iceye-constellation.
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
57
==PAGE:69==
[29]
Hansen Flemming. “Introduction to Spacecraft Systems and Design Radio
Communication part 2: slides”. University Lecture. 2017.
[30]
Jeffrey Foutz, Andreas Spanias, and Mahesh Banavar. Narrowband Direc­
tion of Arrival Estimation for Antenna Arrays. 2008.
[31]
mathworks. MUSIC Super­Resolution DOA Estimation. [Accessed: 2022­
05­25]. URL: https : / / se . mathworks . com / help / phased / ug / music - super -
resolution-doa-estimation.html.
[32]
6 – 12.5 GHz 1.5 dB NF Low Noise Amplifier. CGY2222UH/C2. Ommic.
URL: https://www.ommic.com/datasheets/OMMIC_ADI_LNA_CGY2222UH.
pdf.
58
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:70==
A
Appendix
A.1
MUSIC AoA alogirthm
1
%% Music AoA implementation
2
% modelling the receiver array with uniform positioning
3
clc; close all;
4
%%
5
6
fc = 9.2e9;
% Operating frequency
7
fs = 10e6;
% Sampling frequency
8
lambda = physconst('LightSpeed')/fc;
% Wavelength
9
N =10; % the number of radar receivers in linear array
10
ula = phased.ULA('NumElements',N,'ElementSpacing',lambda/2);
11
numsig=1; % the number of ignals
12
pos = getElementPosition(ula)/lambda;
% Element position in ...
wavelengths
13
ang1 = [90;86];
% Direction of the signals
14
% angs = [ang1 ang2];
15
angs =ang1;
16
Nsamp = 20;
% Number of snapshots
17
SNR=10; % the singal o noise ratio
18
noisePwr = db2pow(-SNR);
% Noise power
19
% noisePwr = 0.05;
% Noise power
20
rs = rng(2012);
% Set random number ...
generator
21
signal = sensorsig(pos,Nsamp,angs,noisePwr);
22
ang_true = az2broadside(angs(1,:),angs(2,:));
23
24
%% Varying levels of noise
25
SNR_i=0:0.1:30; % vector of signal to noise power ratio
26
ang_rootmusic_err_avg=zeros(1,numel(SNR_i));
27
ang_esprit_err_avg=zeros(1,numel(SNR_i));
28
ang_music_err_avg=zeros(1,numel(SNR_i));
29
num_mc=100; %Number of manto carlo simulations f0r the parameter
30
for i=1:numel(SNR_i)
31
for j=1:num_mc
32
noisePwr = db2pow(-SNR_i(i));
% Noise power
33
signal = sensorsig(pos,Nsamp,angs,noisePwr);
34
rootmusicangle = phased.RootMUSICEstimator('SensorArray',ula,...
35
'OperatingFrequency',fc,...
36
'NumSignalsSource','Property','NumSignals',1);
37
rootmusicangle.ForwardBackwardAveraging = true;
38
ang_rootmusic_err(j) = abs(rootmusicangle(signal)-ang_true);
39
40
espritangle = phased.ESPRITEstimator('SensorArray',ula,...
41
'OperatingFrequency',fc,'ForwardBackwardAveraging',true,...
...
42
'NumSignalsSource','Property','NumSignals',1);
43
ang_esprit_err(j)=abs(espritangle(signal)-ang_true);
44
end
45
ang_rootmusic_err_avg(i)=sqrt(sum(ang_rootmusic_err.^2)/num_mc);
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
59
==PAGE:71==
46
ang_esprit_err_avg(i)=sqrt(sum(ang_esprit_err.^2)/num_mc);
47
end
48
%%
49
close all
50
figure
51
hold on
52
semilogy(SNR_i,ang_rootmusic_err_avg ,'g')
53
semilogy(SNR_i,ang_esprit_err_avg)
54
yline(0.026,'r')
55
title('RMSE angle err as function of SNR')
56
xlabel('RMSE angle err [deg]')
57
ylabel('SNR ratio [dB]')
58
legend({'Root MUsic','Esprite','0.026 deg err'},'Location','southwest...
')
59
grid on; grid minor;
60
hold off
61
62
%% Varying levels of samples
63
Nsamp_i=1:1:50; % vector of signal to noise power ratio
64
ang_rootmusic_err_avg=zeros(1,numel(Nsamp_i));
65
num_mc=100; %Number of manto carlo simulations f0r the parameter
66
SNR=28.7; % the singal o noise ratio
67
noisePwr = db2pow(-SNR);
68
for i=1:numel(Nsamp_i)
69
for j=1:num_mc
70
signal = sensorsig(pos,Nsamp_i(i),angs,noisePwr);
71
rootmusicangle = phased.RootMUSICEstimator('SensorArray',ula,...
72
'OperatingFrequency',fc,...
73
'NumSignalsSource','Property','NumSignals',1);
74
rootmusicangle.ForwardBackwardAveraging = true;
75
ang_rootmusic_err(j) = abs(rootmusicangle(signal)-ang_true);
76
end
77
ang_rootmusic_err_avg(i)=sqrt(sum(ang_rootmusic_err.^2)/num_mc);
78
end
79
%%
80
% figure
81
hold on
82
semilogy(Nsamp_i ,ang_rootmusic_err_avg ,'b')
83
yline(0.026,'r')
84
title('RMSE angle err as function of N Snapshots')
85
ylabel('RMSE angle err [deg]')
86
xlabel('Number of snapshots')
87
legend({'Rootmusic SNR=28.7 dB','0.026 deg err'},'Location','...
southwest')
88
grid on; grid minor;
89
%% Varying amount of Receivers
90
N_reci =4:1:20; % the number of radar receivers in linear array
91
numsig=1; % the number of ignals
92
ang_rootmusic_err_avg=zeros(1,numel(N_reci));
93
num_mc=100; %Number of manto carlo simulations f0r the parameter
94
SNR=28.7; % the signal to noise ratio
95
noisePwr = db2pow(-SNR);
96
for i=1:numel(N_reci)
97
for j=1:num_mc
98
ula = phased.ULA('NumElements',N_reci(i),'ElementSpacing',lambda/2);
99
pos = getElementPosition(ula)/lambda;
% Element position in ...
wavelengths
60
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:72==
100
101
signal = sensorsig(pos,Nsamp,angs,noisePwr);
102
rootmusicangle = phased.RootMUSICEstimator('SensorArray',ula,...
103
'OperatingFrequency',fc,...
104
'NumSignalsSource','Property','NumSignals',1);
105
rootmusicangle.ForwardBackwardAveraging = true;
106
ang_rootmusic_err(j) = abs(rootmusicangle(signal)-ang_true);
107
108
end
109
ang_rootmusic_err_avg(i)=sqrt(sum(ang_rootmusic_err.^2)/num_mc);
110
end
111
%%
112
% close all
113
% figure
114
hold on
115
plot(N_reci,ang_rootmusic_err_avg ,'k')
116
yline(0.026,'r')
117
title('RMSE angle err as function of Array antenna N')
118
ylabel('RMSE angle err [deg]')
119
xlabel('Number of antenna in array')
120
legend({'Rootmusic SNR=28.7 dB','0.026 deg err'},'Location','...
southwest')
121
grid on; grid minor;
122
% hold off
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
61
==PAGE:73==
A.2
TDOA algorithm
1
h = 4.5e5; %m, Satellite orbit height
2
R_E = 6.371e6; %m, Earth Radius
3
eps = 5*pi/180; %rad, elevation angle at toe of footprint
4
% distance to toe of footprint
5
d_slant = sqrt( (h+R_E)^2 -R_E^2*cos(eps)^2 ) - R_E*sin(eps); % slant...
range of satellite at toe
6
% trigonometric calculations
7
z_sat = d_slant * sin(eps); % Relative x-coordinate of the satellite ...
constellation with respect to emitter
8
x_sat =
d_slant * cos(eps); % Relative z-coordinate of the satellite...
constellation with respect to emitter
9
horizontal_beam=0.75/180*pi; % the minimum of radar horizontal ...
beamwidth
10
max_dist=d_slant*tan(horizontal_beam); % maximum distance between all...
satellites in order for all to be within beam
11
%% TDOA Implementation straight line constellation
12
%parameters
13
M=5; % number of satellite receivers
14
E = linspace(30,0.1,100);
15
trials = 100;
16
fail_thr = 1e10;
% threshold for fail of estimator
17
RMSE = zeros(length(E),1);
18
for m=1:length(E)
19
rmse = zeros(trials ,1);
20
err_std = E(m)*1e-5; %tdoa measurement error std in sec
21
for k=1:trials
22
%sensor positon vectors
23
P = zeros(3,M); %includes all antenna positon vectors
24
for ii=1:M
25
P(:,ii)=[x_sat;(ii-2)*max_dist;z_sat];
26
end
27
p_T=[0,0,0]'; % defining the emitter position
28
% finding TOAs
29
dummy = repmat(p_T,1,M)-P;
30
toa = zeros(M,1);
%includes all toa information
31
for ii = 1:M
32
toa(ii) = norm(dummy(:,ii))/c;
33
end
34
tdoa = toa-toa(1); tdoa(1)=[];
35
tdoa = tdoa + err_std*randn(M-1,1); % TDoA observation with radom ...
error variable
36
% tdoa = tdoa + err_std; % TDoA observation without radom error ...
variable
37
%%% Linear Solution
38
p_1 = P(:,1);
39
40
dummy = P(:,2:M)';
41
A = 2*[(p_1(1)-dummy(:,1)), (p_1(2)-dummy(:,2)), (p_1(3)-dummy(:,3)),...
-c*tdoa];
42
b = (c*tdoa).^2 + norm(p_1)^2 - sum((dummy.^2),2);
43
x_lin = pinv(A)*b;
44
rmse(k) = norm(p_T-x_lin(1:3))^2;
45
%%% Taylor Series Expansion Solution
46
p_T_0 =x_lin(1:3);
62
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:74==
47
% p_T_0 = p_T + in_est_error*randn(3,1);
%initial estimate with ...
some error (penalty term)
48
d = c*tdoa;
49
f = zeros(M-1,1);
50
del_f = zeros(M-1,3);
51
52
for ii=2:M
53
f(ii-1)=norm(p_T_0-P(:,ii))-norm(p_T_0-P(:,1));
54
del_f(ii-1,1) = (p_T_0(1)-P(1,ii))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,ii))^-1 - (p_T_0...
(1)-P(1,1))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,1))^-1;
55
del_f(ii-1,2) = (p_T_0(2)-P(2,ii))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,ii))^-1 - (p_T_0...
(2)-P(2,1))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,1))^-1;
56
del_f(ii-1,3) = (p_T_0(3)-P(3,ii))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,ii))^-1 - (p_T_0...
(3)-P(3,1))*norm(p_T_0-P(:,1))^-1;
57
end
58
59
x_nonlin = pinv(del_f)*(d-f)+p_T_0;
60
rmse(k) = norm(p_T-x_nonlin)^2;
61
end
62
63
fails = sum(rmse > fail_thr^2);
64
RMSE(m) = sqrt(mean(rmse(rmse < fail_thr^2)));
65
end
66
figure
67
semilogy(E*1e-10,RMSE);
68
ylabel('RMSE (m)');
69
xlabel('\sigma_e (sec)')
70
grid on; grid minor;
71
hold on
72
%%
73
% Plotting the earth sphere structure
74
[XE1,YE1,ZE1]=sphere;
75
XE2=XE1*RE;YE2=YE1*RE; ZE2=ZE1*RE-RE;
76
% %shows the sensor position , target and estimation
77
figure
78
plot3(P(1,:), P(2,:),P(3,:),'o'); hold on;
79
plot3(p_T(1), p_T(2),p_T(3),'k*');
80
surf(XE2,YE2,ZE2);
81
xlim([-range_T range_T]);ylim([-range_T range_T]);zlim([-range_T ...
range_T]);
82
xlabel('x-axis'); ylabel('y-axis'); zlabel('z-axis');
83
if ¬method_flag
84
plot3(x_lin(1), x_lin(2),x_lin(3),'md','MarkerSize',7.75);
%...
target estimate with linear solution
85
else
86
plot3(x_nonlin(1), x_nonlin(2),x_nonlin(3),'ms','MarkerSize',7.75...
);
87
end
88
legend('Sensor Positions', 'Target Position', 'Target Estimation')
89
grid on;
90
hold off;
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
63
==PAGE:75==
A.3
SNR noise temperature and Link Budget
calculation
1
% definition of parameters
2
eps = 5*pi/180; %rad, elevation angel at toe
3
h = 450; %km, satellite orbit height
4
R = 6371; %km, Earth radius
5
Beamw = 10; % deg, antenna half power beamwidth
6
7
d = sqrt( (h+R)^2 -R^2*cos(eps)^2 ) - R*sin(eps); %km, slant range
8
f = 9.2*10^9; %Hz, signal frequency
9
% calculation of the path loss
10
L =32.45+20*log10(d)+20*log10(f/10^6); %dB, loss path
11
Gt=27; %dB, transmitter gain
12
13
Pt=10*log10(12000); %dBW, transsmitter oiwer
14
bitps=10*log10(1/0.03*10^6); %dBHz,
15
EIRP = Pt+Gt; %dB
16
17
Gr = 175^2/Beamw^2; %,
18
Gr = 10*log10(Gr) - 3; %dB, -3 dB polarization loss
19
Tr = 170; %K, estimated below (T_rx)
20
GoT = Gr - 10*log10(Tr); %dB
21
Pr_Radar = Pt + Gt + Gr - Lp; %dBW
22
T0 = 290; % K
23
k = 1.38*10^(-23); %J/K
24
25
EbN0 = EIRP - Lp + 228.6 - bitps + GoT; %dBW
26
27
NF_LNA = 1.5; % dB
28
29
T_LNA = T0*(10^(NF_LNA/10) - 1); % K
30
G_LNA = 10^(20/10); %
31
L_rec = 10^(0.75/10); %
32
T3 = 1000; % K,
33
T_rx = T0*(L_rx -1) + L_rec*T_LNA + L_rx/G_LNA*T3; % noise temperature...
of receiver
34
BandW=33*10^6; % Hz, signal bandwidth
35
36
P_N = k*T_rec*33*10^6;
37
Pr_scalar = 10^(Pr_Radar/10);
38
39
SNR = Pr_scalar/P_N; % the signal to noise ratio
64
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
==PAGE:76==
Arctic Maritime Observation Methods
65
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
