==PAGE:1==
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and
Microwave Emitting Layer Depth on First-Year
Sea Ice with Saline Snow
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and
Microwave Emitting Layer Depth on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
June, 2022
By
Nicolai Steiner Pedersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Electrical Engineer-
ing, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Nicolai Steiner Pedersen - s164059
Signature
Date
ii
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Sea ice thickness is estimated indirectly by measuring the ice freeboard and snow cover
with altimeter. While radiometers can be used to measure the temperatures at the various
interfaces of the structure. However, snow properties often interfere with measurements
and cause errors in the estimate. This report describes the creation of correction models
to both measurements.
For this purpose two models were used to simulate the response of altimeters and ra-
diometers to artificial ice floe profiles. These profiles contain layer wise information about
a snow-ice structure. By varying the snow parameters the response of the models were
used to determine which properties would need to be corrected for. The models were
created using regression analysis.
Testing was carried out by applying the models for a large number of profiles and evalu-
ating the results. After adjusting the models, both achieved failure rates of 2% or below.
Ultimately concluding that the correction models, succeeded in improving the track point
and emission layer estimate to a significant degree.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Rasmus Tonboe, Lecturer, National Space Institute, Microwaves and Remote Sensing
Thank you to Rasmus Tonboe for advise and support during this project.
Family
Thank you to my family help with editing and grammar checks.
iv
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Signal Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Radar Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Microwave Radiometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Altimeter Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Radiometer Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Linear and Polynomial Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Implementation
17
3.1
Description of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Altimeter Model Variable Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Radiometer Model Variable Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Emission Layer Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Track Point Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
31
4.1
Altimeter Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Radiometer Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
Emission Layer Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Track Point Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5
Discussion
61
5.1
Variable Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.2
Emission Layer Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.3
Track Point Correction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.4
Potential Error Sources in Real World Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.5
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
6
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
71
A Appendix: Supplementary Plots
73
A.1 Radiometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.2 Altimeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
B Appendix: Source Code
78
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Sea ice is an integral part of the ecosystem in the arctic, and is a key contributor to cir-
culation system. Monitoring changes in sea ice thickness and concentration is therefore
important for monitoring the effects of climate change. Measurements of sea ice thick-
ness has been carried out, through a variety of missions over the years. Missions like
Cryosat-2[1] which has been operating since its launch in 2010, uses a radar altimeter to
measure sea ice freeboard. This is the height that an ice floe is elevated above the local
sea surface. Another instrument used is the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer
2(AMSR2)[2] which among other things measures sea ice and snow temperatures. How-
ever, sea ice thickness can’t be measured directly and instead has to be inferred from
other measurements. These methods require knowledge of the properties of the ice floe
and snow cover. Information such as density and the thickness of snow cover is vital to
accurately estimate sea ice thickness. But they also require knowledge of the sea ice
freeboard. While a method to estimate both ice and snow thickness using measurements
of the temperatures at the Air-Snow Interface(ASI) and the Snow-Ice Interface(SII) has
been proposed by Hoyeon Shi[3].
A major uncertainty is how accurately can the sea ice freeboard and interface tempera-
tures be measured. Unfortunately, there are significant issues with accurately measuring
these quantities. While the snow surface temperature can be measured with a very high
degree of accuracy[4]. The same can not be said of ice freeboard and snow-ice interface
temperatures. Ideally the freeboard measured by an altimeter would correspond to the
snow-ice interface, thus allowing it to be used directly to estimate ice thickness. However,
the reality is that signal attenuation and loss in the snow layer often means that there is
a significant difference between the measured freeboard and the actual ice freeboard.
Likewise, while the desired temperature measurements of a microwave radiometer is that
of the snow-ice interface, there is in many cases a major offset. It has previously been
assumed that radar backscatter, stems primarily from the snow-ice Interface[5]. That the
measured radar freeboard is equal to the ice freeboard. But more recently it has become
clear that densely packed snow layers and the presence of brine in the snow cover causes
a upward displacement of the main radar scattering horizon[5]. This displacement causes
the ice thickness to be overestimated.
As this is a known issue a variety correction formulae have previously been proposed to
offset this problem. One method proposed by Mallet et al. corrects for the slower propaga-
tion speed of microwaves through the snow layer[6]. This correction works as a function
of snow thickness and density. The previously mentioned work by Shi et al. likewise in-
cludes two corrections, the first, like Mallets paper corrects for wave propagation speed.
The second term is a correction for the vertical displacement of the radar scattering hori-
zon. This term relies on a displacement factor of the scattering horizon, as a fraction of
the total snow thickness. This ultimately requires one to guess at this factor. It is therefore
desirable to derive a correction model for the radar measurements. Likewise the snow-ice
interface temperatures measured by radiometers are also in need of a correction.
The correction models proposed in this report aims to make corrections to radar free-
board and radiometer snow-ice interface measurements. The models will correct for the
properties of snow layer, such as snow thickness, salinity, temperature and density. The
project uses two previously created models to simulate the response of a radar altime-
ter, as well as a microwave radiometer, to profiles created to simulate a wide variety of
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
1
==PAGE:8==
snow conditions. These profiles will also be artificial, to give full control of the input. The
response of the models will then be used to evaluate the various snow properties’ effect
on radar freeboard and measured temperature respectively. This will be used to evaluate
and decide which properties will be included in the corrections models. Then the models
will be created using regression analysis, of simulated data sets from the altimeter and
radiometer models. These models will then be tested and refined until a satisfactory level
of accuracy has been reached. The results of the analysis and corrections models will
be presented and discussed. Outlining strengths and weaknesses as well as proposals
for improvements that could be implemented in the future, or things there wasn’t time to
implement.
2
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
2.1
Signal Scattering
2.1.1
Surface Scattering
Signal scattering occurs when a electromagnetic wave interacts with medium. There are
two scattering mechanisms, these are surface- and volume scattering.
Surface scattering happens when the wave interacts with a surface or more accurately
an interface between two media with different electric and magnetic properties such as
the interface between air and snow or the interface between snow and ice. How the
wave interacts with the surface depends on the incidence angle, surface roughness and
dielectric properties. In general the wave will have one component being scattered back
into the first medium and another component being transmitted into the second medium. If
the surface has very low surface roughness, the incident wave will interact with the atoms
at the interface in such a way that a part of the wave is reflected with angle equal to the
incident angle. This is also called specular reflection. If f.ex. the incidence angle is 90°,
such as if using an altimeter, then the wave will be scattered straight back. The second
component is transmitted into the second medium. An illustration of the scattering on a
smooth surface can be seen in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of surface scattering off a smooth surface, with specular scattering
reflecting the wave at an angle equal to the incident angle. As well a component trans-
mitted into the lower medium[7].
In the case of a rough surface the reflection will behave differently as roughness increases.
The wave will be reflected in all directions, with the amount of radiation in each direction
being dependent on the roughness. In the case of a very rough surface the wave is
reflected equally in every direction. An illustration of the reflected wave with increasing
surface roughness can be seen in figure 2.2
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the reflected component of the surface scattering on a rough
surface. As the roughness increases the amount of energy reflected in all directions in-
creases while the amount reflected at an angle equal to the incidence angle decreases[7].
2.1.2
Volume Interaction
Volume interaction, as the name implies, is the scattering of an EM wave in a volume of
some medium. An important property in volume scattering is the dielectric constant ϵ:
ϵ = ϵ′ + i · ϵ′′
(2.1)
The imaginary part is a loss factor, which is a measure of the mediums ability to absorb
and transform the energy. This will then cause a loss of the signal power as the wave
travels through the material. The degree of loss is heavily dependent on the properties of
the medium for example dry snow will have very little loss, but as water or brine content
increases the loss factor increases dramatically[7]. When talking about an inhomoge-
neous medium, losses will also be induced by scattering in all directions while propagat-
ing through the materiel. The penetration depth of an EM wave can be expressed as a
function of the wavelength of the wave and the dielectric constant.
LP = λ ·
√
ϵ′
2 · π · ϵ′′
(2.2)
Where LP is the penetration depth and λ is the wavelength of the traveling wave. From
the equation that the imaginary part of ϵ has a major impact on the penetration depth. As
the loss factor becomes larger the penetration depth decreases. It is also evident from the
equation that wavelength of the propagating wave also influences the penetration depth.
Meaning a longer wavelength will be able to penetrate deeper into a material. F.ex. a L-
band(20cm) wave will be able to penetrate 10 times deeper than a Ku-band(2cm) wave[7].
Figure 2.3 shows a plot of penetration as a function of frequency for first-year ice(FYI),
multi-year ice(MYI) and pure ice. Also shown is a plot of penetration depth in snow as a
function of volumetric water content.
4
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.3: The first plot shows the penetration depth as a function of frequency, for pure
ice, FYI and MYI. As the frequency increases the penetration depth decreases, likewise
pure ice has the highest penetration while FYI with its higher salt content has the lowest.
The second plot shows the penetration depth in snow as a function of volumetric water
content. Generally, as the water content increases the penetration depth decreases[7].
The plot shows that as frequency increases (meaning wavelength decreases) the pene-
tration depth decreases. Also shown is the difference between different ice types. Pure
ice has the highest penetration depth, as there are no impurities to attenuate the signal.
FYI has the lowest penetration depth as this will generally have the highest salt content
which increases the loss factor of ϵ, while MYI which has undergone desalinization and
thus has lower salt content is in the middle. From the second figure it is clear that as water
content increases the penetration depth falls off dramatically especially for high frequency
signals[7].
2.2
Radar Altimetry
Remote sensing instruments i.e. the measuring of objects from a distance, generally fall
into two general categories: active and passive. Active means that some kind of radiation
is emitted by an instrument. This then interacts with a target and is usually scattered back
to the instrument, where the return wave is measured. Passive instruments on the other
hand generally rely on measuring radiation from the target object.
A radar altimeter, is an active instrument and works on the principles of a pulse radar,
meaning that radio or micro waves are emitted from the radars antenna in short pulses.
The pulse then hits an object and is scattered in multiple directions including back towards
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
5
==PAGE:12==
the radar, this is called Backscatter. This return echo is then picked up by the antenna,
displaced in time by some delay or the travel time to and from the target. The distance to
the target can then be derived by the simple equation:
R = c · td
2
(2.3)
Where R is the range to the target, c is the speed of light and td is the travel time mea-
sured by the radar. It is divided by two since travel time is two way. The radar can then
be mounted on some platform usually either a plane or a satellite. Assuming the radars
position is known to a high degree of accuracy, then by looking straight down at nadir,
the height of the radar above the ocean can then be measured. From these height mea-
surements the height of an ice floe and the snow layer on top can be measured. Typically
called the snow- and ice freeboards, Fs and Fi respectively. The received altimeter mea-
surements take the form of a Waveform, which starts when the EM wave hits the target
and rises until the back end of the wave has entered object. From here the illuminated
area becomes annular and the waveform stops rising and becomes constant. A sketch
of the waveform with can be seen in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: A sketch of the general form of a received waveform, it starts a t=0 and rises
until it reaches maximum power and from there remains constant. The half power t50 time
marked.
At half the maximum power on the x-axis is what is called the half power time(t50), which
is the time delay between the start of the waveform and when it reaches half the maximum
power. The time delay between pulse emission and return plus t50 is referred to as a Track
Point. This is converted to a distance measured above ice sheet by the radar. Because
it is only used in the context of the derived distance, track point in this report will be used
to refer to the distance and not the time. The track point can be used to estimate some
physical interface usually the snow-ice interface. The track point is calculated using the
equation:
TP = Hr −c · (td
2 + t50)
(2.4)
6
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:13==
Where TP is the track point, Hr is the radars height above the ocean surface. In principle
one could use the time delay to some other fraction of the total power, like 20 or 80 percent
however the half power time is generally considered to give the best estimate of the track
point[8]. To get an accurate freeboard, both the ice floe track point and the track point
for the ocean surface is measured. That is then added on to get the freeboard relative to
the ocean surface. The freeboard can then be used to estimate the thickness of the ice
floe. This does require some extra knowledge of the snow and ice layers, such as snow
thickness(Hs) and the densities of the snow and ice, as well as assuming hydrostatic
equilibrium. Assuming this the following equation can be used to estimate ice thickness[9]:
Hi = Fi ·
ρwater
ρwater −ρice
+ Hs ·
ρsnow
ρwater −ρice
(2.5)
Where Hi is the ice thickness and ρ denotes the respective densities. Generally the track
point is imagined as a scattering surface[9], located somewhere in the snow-icepack.
Though it is important to note that it is not an actual surface but rather a projection of the
track point onto a horizontal surface. Figure 2.5 shows a sketch of the geometry of the
altimeter and ice sheet with snow layer.
Figure 2.5: A sketch of the geometry of the altimeter measurement. Hs and Hi are the
snow- and ice thickness respectively, Fs and Fi are the snow- and ice freeboards. The
radar signal penetrates the snow layer until the imagined scattering horizon is reached.
This is also referred to as the radar freeboard(Fr) or track point, and can be displaced up-
or downwards depending on the properties of the snowpack.
When the radar penetrates into the snow, it is generally believed that backscatter happens
entirely through specular surface scattering[9]. While volume scattering is negligible, al-
though the intervening snow layer does cause losses and attenuation of the signal and
therefore cannot be ignored. In earlier times it was assumed that the snow layer had no
effect on the radar signal and that all the backscatter came from the snow-ice interface.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
7
==PAGE:14==
Based experiments in which an ice layer with a thick snow layer on top was measured.
Measurements were taken with a aluminium plate on top as a reference, and then without
it. The results suggested that the backscatter happened entirely at the snow-ice inter-
face[10] However, over the years it has become clear that this is not always the case, and
that the snow layer often does affect the signal. Likewise, ideally the track point would
coincide with the snow-ice interface. It is however clear that this is not actually the case
in most situations, and is probably located somewhere inside the snow layer[5].
According to eq. 2.5 it is possible to estimate the ice thickness from the snow thickness
and the ice freeboard. However, since the radar freeboard(Fr) found by radar measure-
ments will not align with the SII it is therefore necessary to correct it. In the paper ”Si-
multaneous estimation of wintertime sea ice thickness and snow depth from space-borne
freeboard measurements”, the author Hoyeon Shi suggests a possible correction to eq.
2.5. This includes two correction terms one for the EM waves speed of propagation in the
snow layer:
Fc = (ηs −1) · f · Hs
(2.6)
The other regarding the upwards displacement of the scattering surface[3].
Fp = (1 −f) · Hs
(2.7)
Where ηs is the refractive index of snow layer, and f is a factor regarding the depth of the
scattering surface inside the snow layer. For f=1 the surface would be at the snow-ice
interface and f=0 would be the air-snow interface. This is then used to derive an equation
for estimating Hi and by extension Hs. It does require knowledge of internal temperatures,
but this will be discussed in more detail in the next section.
An example of a current mission flying a radar altimeter is Cryosat-2, which was launched
in 2010. The satellite’s main instrument is a radar altimeter called Synthetic Aperture
Radar and Interferometric Radar Altimeter or (SIRAL). SIRAL is a single band radar which
operates in the ku-band. The satellite orbits at 720km in a polar orbit[1].
8
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Microwave Radiometry
A radar altimeter is one method of measuring sea ice, another used method is a radiome-
ter, which is a passive instrument. Any object with a physical temperature above absolute
zero emits energy, a radiometer is named so because it measures this emitted energy.
For sea ice application a microwave radiometer is often used, these are radiometers at
operate in the microwave frequency band (300MHz - 300GHz). The power measured by
a radiometer is typically expressed as a temperature, and an object radiates a Brightness
Temperature(TB). To measure TB an antenna is used to pick up the emitted energy, and
the output of the antenna is called the antenna temperature(TA). The general principle
can be seen in figure 2.6[11].
Figure 2.6: The general principle of a radiometer, which is an antenna measuring the
thermal energy emitted by an object[12].
The goal of the radiometer attached to the antenna is to relate the measure TA to the
TB of the object measured. This means the radiometer is a receiver calibrated to accu-
rately measure TA. The receiver will then select a portion of the antenna signal that falls
within some frequency bandwidth(B), centered around a center frequency. The band-
width is predefined when designing the receiver. The selected signal is then amplified by
a gain(G), and is then presented in whatever manner best serves a particular use. At this
point it’s important to note that since TB is the natural radiation of an object, the received
signal is a stochastic(random) signal and essentially a noise signal. This is because in an
ideal world the receiver would only manage the received TA. However, in the real world
noise(TN) will also be introduced into the system, from f.ex. the electronics of the receiver
itself. A simple overview of a receiver can be seen in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: A simple overview of a radiometer receiver, along with the equation of the
output power[12].
The figure shows a very simple overview of a radiometer receiver. The equation for the
output power(P) is also given, where k is Boltzman’s constant. Since TA and TN are
two independent noise signals, they will add together in the receiver, which is also seen
in the equation. Once this happens it is essentially impossible to separate them again.
The problem then becomes how to detect the desired signal in the noisy signal. To help
with this one would design a receiver with a low radiometric resolution, which defines a
radiometers ability to distinguish between the two random signals, and is given by[11]:
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
9
==PAGE:16==
∆T = TA + TN
√
B · τ
(2.8)
Where τ is a integration time, which a time period over which the signal is integrated. This
helps to smooth out the random fluctuations in the signal.
Actual radiometers flown on missions tend to have multiple channels. This allows for
observations at multiple frequency bands[13].
As an example of a microwave radiometer being flown currently is the AMSR2. This
is an instrument mounted on the Global Change Observation Mission satellite orbiting
at 700km. AMSR2 operates six channels operating at 7.3, 10.65, 18.7, 23.8, 36.5 and
89GHz. The radiometer operates as a rotating scanner, covering a swath with a width of
1450km[2].
2.3.1
Microwave Observation
For ocean and sea ice observation the microwave band is a popular region of the EM
spectrum. This is because microwaves can more easily penetrate the atmosphere. Unlike
other frequency bands like infrared, which cannot penetrate cloud cover and can therefore
only be used in clear sky conditions[14]. Though even with these limitations they are still
very useful for certain applications.
The snow and ice being observed are dielectric materials, which interacts with EM waves
and have a dielectric permittivity ε. This is a complex number where the real part is
the refractivity (its ability to bend EM radiation that enters) and the imaginary part is a
loss factor. The permittivity is not the same as the dielectric constant mentioned earlier.
The permittivity determines things like the speed of light, reflection and transmission at
interfaces, and absorption inside materials. For snow the permittivity is dependent on its
density and water content, while in ice its dependent on brine- and air pocket volume.
Material interactions are also governed by other properties: emissivity(e), reflectivity(R)
and also transmissivity. Emissivity is in most cases equated with absorptivity, meaning a
materials ability to absorb incident radiation and re-emit later. These properties generally
come into play when radiation of some kind is incident upon the material. Reflectivity,
as the name implies, determines how large a fraction of the energy is reflected off the
surface. This is obviously opposed to emissivity/absorptivity, and the two are related by
the equation[14]:
e = 1 −R
(2.9)
This means that as e increases R will decrease. Emissivity is a fraction between 0-1,
0 being a perfect reflector and 1 is called a blackbody which is a theoretical object that
absorbs all incident energy. In this case all the energy radiated would be emitted. In
reality there are no known ideal blackbodies in nature, however some object do get close.
Like snow, which is a near blackbody in the infrared spectrum, and therefore is a near
perfect emitter. Infrared radiometers can therefore give precise measurements of snow
surface temperatures[4]. In the microwave range however they are generally not perfect
emitters. In this case TB is somewhat lower than an objects physical temperature. A
effective physical temperature(Teff) is related to the TB by the emissivity[14]:
TB = e · Teff
(2.10)
10
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:17==
2.3.2
Ice Thickness Estimation
Finally, as promised with measured temperatures its possible to estimate ice and snow
thickness. In his previously mentioned paper Shi et al[3]. Outlines a estimation method
based partially on knowledge of temperatures at the air-snow interface(Tai), the snow-ice
interface(Tsi) and the ice-water interface(Tiw). In most cases the temperature in a snow-
ice pack is assumed to be piecewise linear, which among other things can be seen in
figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: A sketch of ice sheet with snow layer on top. The red line indicates the
temperature profile which is piecewise linear. The radar scattering surface discussed
earlier, is also visible along with the correction terms Fc and Fp[3].
Based on the assumption of piecewise linear temperature profile the following equation
is derived, and that conductive heat flux is continuous across interfaces:
ksnow · Tas −Tsi
Hs
= kice · Tsi −Tiw
Hi
(2.11)
Where the k is the thermal conductivity for the respective layer. By introducing a new
variable α and rearranging eq. 2.11 it becomes:
α = Hs
Hi
= ksnow
kice
· ∆Tsnow
∆Tice
(2.12)
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
11
==PAGE:18==
Where the temperature changes are given by ∆Tsnow = Tas −Tsi and ∆Tice = Tsi −Tiw.
This allows the thickness ratio to be substituted for the temperature gradients. Introducing
α along with the correction terms for Fc and Fp into eq. 2.5 yields the equation:
Hi =
ρwater
ρwater −ρice −α · ((f · ηs −1) · ρwater + ρsnow) · Fr
(2.13)
Alternatively, α can also be obtained empirically using linear regression. By fitting a linear
equation seen below:
y = a1 · x + x0
(2.14)
where α is y and x the temperature differences, using bouy data as inputs a empirical
formulation for α is obtained[3].
In similar manner to the altimeter track point, scattering horizon. The emitted thermal
energy is generally thought of as coming from an Emission Layer in the ice floe. The
position of the emission layer generally varies with frequency, being located closer to
snow surface with higher frequency. As mentioned previously in this section, radiometers
tend to be designed with more than one frequency band channels. A often used one for
sea ice observations is located at 6.9GHz. The emission layer for this channel is typically
thought of as being located at the SII[13].
2.4
Altimeter Model
Models are commonly used to simulate the response of a radar altimeter, or other instru-
ments, to various predefined ice-snow profiles. The model used here was described in
the paper ”Simulated Ka- and Ku-band radar altimeter height and freeboard estimation
on snow-covered Arctic sea ice” by Rasmus Tonboe[9]. Broadly speaking the model is a
multi-layer radiative transfer model. The model calculates surface scattering at various
horizontal interfaces throughout the snow-ice structure. This is usually the air-snow in-
terface and snow-ice interface, though this could also be internal sub-layers inside the
snow layer. The model calculates a backscatter coefficient on a per layer basis using in-
formation about each layers properties stored in a profile, which will be discussed further
in section 3.1. These are properties such as temperature, salinity, surface roughness,
density and layer thickness. The scattering coefficient is calculated using the following
equation:
σsigma = (σsurf
i
+ T 2
i · σvol
i
)
n
∏
i=1
1
L2
i−1
· T 2
i−1
(2.15)
Where the subscript ”i” indicates the layer number, σsurf
i
and σvol
i
are the layer scattering
for surface- and volume scattering. T is the transmissivity and L is the losses. The model
then has to estimate these parameters first. The first step is to estimate the permittivity.
This is done using a mixing formula described by C. Mätzler. This formula calculates the
permittivity of a host medium(eh) containing particles(ep) of some other material. For snow
this is air with pockets of ice, which can also contain salt. For ice it is ice with particles
of brine. In practice the model computes the individual permittivities eh and ep and then
combines them in the formula described by C. Mätzler[15]:
12
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:19==
ϵeff = 2ϵh −ϵp + 2v(ϵp −ϵh) +
√
(2ϵh −ϵp + 3v(ϵp −ϵh))2 + 8ϵhϵp
4
(2.16)
Where v is the volume inclusions in each layer, which for snow is primarily dependent
on density. While for the ice it is a function of temperature and salinity. As with all the
variables in the model the permittivity is calculated for each layer. The permittivity is
used to calculate the transmission coefficient. Along with the backscatter, scattering and
absorption coefficients, the last two of which both contribute to signal losses. From these
two the total losses can then be calculated, and then the total backscatter is estimated
using eq. 2.15. The model then estimates the simulated backscatter waveform for the
profile that provides the t50 crucial for calculating the track point.
2.5
Radiometer Model
The emission model used in this project is a modification of the ”Microwave Emission
Model for Layered Snow-pack”(MEMLS). This model was originally created to model snow
cover on land, but has since been extended to work on sea ice. It is this modification which
was used[16].
MEMLS like the altimeter model uses layerwise information about a snow-ice structure.
The variables used are generally the same as altimeter model. The model estimates
TB a range of discrete frequencies, and is generally valid in the interval 5-100GHz. The
model estimates the permittivity of snow and ice by using a mixing formula like in the
altimeter model. This is again used to estimate the absorption and scattering coefficients.
This is then used to estimate the transmissivity, reflectivity and emissivity. Using these
properties TB is estimated, and from that as well as the emissivitty Teff is calculated using
the relation from eq. 2.4.
2.6
Linear and Polynomial Regression
Regression is an analysis tool that can be used to model a relationship between some
response and one or more predictor variables. The simplest form is of course that of one
predictor and one response value[17].
2.6.1
Multiple Linear Regression
Multiple regression as the name implies has more than one predictor variable. The general
form of a regression model is given by:
Y = X · β + ϵ
(2.17)
Where Y is a n × 1 vector of responses, also called dependent variables, where n is
the number of observations. X is a n × p matrix also called the design matrix where n
is again the number of observations and p is the number of independent variables. β
is a p × 1 vector of parameters where β0 is the intercept, these are unknown and are
generally what the regression is meant to estimate. ϵ is a n × 1 vector of random error
terms which are generally not observable. The regression modelling is based on a number
assumptions[17]:
• (1) Y are observed values of X · β + ϵ.
• (2) The matrix X is of full rank, meaning all the variables are linearly independent.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
13
==PAGE:20==
• (3) ϵ are independent and identically distributed, with a mean of 0 and variance of
σ2.
• (4) If X is random then ϵ is independent of X.
With these assumptions the parameters contained in β can be estimated. This is usually
done using a ”Least Squares Method” such as the ordinary least squares estimator, which
can be derived as:
ˆβ = (X′X)−1X′Y
(2.18)
This estimator provides the set of parameters which minimize error given by:
e = Y −X ˆβ
(2.19)
This is also where the name least squares comes from, because it is the method minimizes
a sum of squared errors. With parameters estimated the predicted values are then given
as:
ˆY = ˆβX
(2.20)
Model Evaluation
With the model created it is of course necessary to evaluate how accurate it is. This can
be done in a number of ways, f.ex. mean square error(MSE) and R2. The error seen
above is the difference between the true response value and the predicted. The MSE is
then the average of the squared error[17]:
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
n=1
e2
(2.21)
Another frequently used evaluation tool is as mentioned the R2, also refereed to as a
goodness of fit test. This is the ratio of the variance of the predicted values ˆY to the
variance of the known values of Y.
R2 = var(ˆy)
var(y)
(2.22)
R2 is an estimate of how well the model fits the data ranging from 0-1. For this reason
a high R2 is good as it indicates a high correlation between the model and data being
modelled. Although one should be careful about looking solely at R2.
14
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:21==
2.6.2
Polynomial Regression
Regression can also be used to model non-liner equations. Though polynomial regression
models a non-linear response, it is actually a special case of multiple linear regression.
It therefore follows the same methodology, this also extends to multivariate polynomial
regression. Although the number of terms is of course increased. For example a 2nd
order equation with two predictor variables x1 and x2 would have the general form[18]:
Y = β0 + β1 · x1 + β2 · x2 + β11 · x2
1 + β22 · x2
2 + β12 · x1 · x2 + ϵ
(2.23)
Where β1 and β2 are linear terms, β11 and β22 are quadratic terms and β12 is an interaction
term. This equation is usually represented in matrix form like the linear regression, seen
in eq. 2.17. The X matrix looks as follows:
Figure 2.9: The X matrix containing the independent variables in a multivariable polyno-
mial regression[18]
The regression is then solved using the same methods as linear regression such as the
OLS seen in eq. 2.18. There are, however some problems with multivariable polynomial
regression, notably that there is a higher risk that the variables are interdependent. Fur-
thermore that the regression might yield terms that are not actually very significant to the
estimation of Y.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
15
==PAGE:22==
16
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:23==
3
Implementation
3.1
Description of data
This project utilizes a large number of simulated profiles, which were created based on real
examples. These profiles containing the properties of the snow and ice layers. Starting
from the top of the snow layer end descending through the snow-ice interface to the bottom
of the ice floe. A profile is essentially a n × 10 where n is the depth of the whole ice floe
plus the snow layer. Each row represents a one cm layer, with the columns containing
data on each layer. Table 3.1 shows what each layer represents.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
n
TK
rms
Dens
d
pcc
sal
wc
si
type
Table 3.1: Each column in the table represents a column in a profiles, and contains infor-
mation about that layer.
The quantity n is the layer number, TK is the layer temperature in kelvin, rms is the surface
roughness, Dens is the density, d is the thickness of the layer which is always 1cm, pcc
correlation length, wc is the water content. si indicates 1 for snow or 3 for ice and finally
type is sub-groups of si, where 1 is first year snow(FYS), 2 is multi year snow(MYS) and
3 and 4 indicates first- and second year ice respectively. They serve the same purpose
but si for the altimeter model and type for the radiometer model. The radiometer can run
for multi-year ice and snow, but in this project only considers FYI and FYS. The existence
of the final column is purely because of the radiometer model.
Obviously there are more quantities in the profiles than were considered for the correction
models. As only snow depth, temperature, salinity and density were evaluated for use.
Surface roughness is a generally poorly understood quantity, and is very difficult actually
measure. Early in the project while investigating the impact of the various variables on
radar backscatter, it was used to scale the backscatter when plotting the waveform of
the altimeter model. Also the use of 1cm layers is an artificial creation, where in a real
scenario you would likely see fewer thicker layers. It was decided to use 1cm layers to
get better resolution with respects to temperature and salinity. It was decided to set the
surface roughness internally in the snow and ice layers to zero. Only the air-snow interface
and snow-ice interface has a surface roughness, since a large number of 1cm layers is
unrealistic. Water content was also not considered since this project is entirely restricted
to very dry snow and ice. As discussed earlier in section 2.1 water content greatly reduces
the penetration of EM signals. For this reason this project assumes observation carried
out during the winter.
The profiles are generated by using a test profile that was provided along with the altimeter
model as a basis. The function essentially loops through a number of layers defined by
the snow depth specified. Each layer is assigned a default value of 0.005 for rms, 0 for
wc and a pcc of 0.1 for snow and 0.2 for ice. TK, dens and sal are of given values based
on input while the number of snow layers is assigned when creating the profile. All the
profiles use a ice thickness of 150cm, because this project deals with the impact of snow
properties on the radar and radiometer measurements.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
17
==PAGE:24==
3.1.1
Temperature Profile
To generate the snow-ice profiles a temperature profile is needed. The temperature is
assumed to follow a piecewise linear increase. Meaning that the temperature increases
with one gradient in the snow layer and another one in the ice layer. Like seen in the paper
by Hoyeon Shi[3]. The profile function calculates profile based snow and ice thickness
as well as Tai. The calculation is done for each layer using the same general equation
for both the snow and ice layer. Along with Tai the calculation also requires the snow-ice
interface temperature(Tsi) and the water temperature(Tw).
T = Ti + i · Te −Ti
d
(3.1)
Where T is the layer temperature, Ti is the initial temperature which is Tai and Tsi for
snow and ice layer respectively. Te is the end temperature which is Tsi for the snow layer
and Tw for the ice layer. The subscript ”i” is the current layer depth and d is the layer
thickness for either snow or ice layer. While Tai is one of the variables for the correction
and is thus known, Tw is generally assumed to be constant at 271.35 °K[3], which is also
done here. That leaves Tsi which is calculated based on the previous two temperatures.
As well as the thermal conductivity of ice and snow, these set to 0.44W/K · m for ksnow
and 1.96W/K · m for kice based on the work done in the Hoyeon paper. Though it should
be noted that they split each layer into two intervals each. This was not done here for
simplicity’s sake and the chosen values are also close to the traditionally used k values.
Initially, the Tsi was calculated as follows:
Tsi = Tw + f · Tai
f + 1
(3.2)
Where the quantity f is given by:
f = ksnow · dice
kice · dsnow
(3.3)
However, this approach yielded very high estimates of Tsi, with very little difference be-
tween different profiles. All of them very close to to the water temperature. Eventually,
once this error was discovered the equation used to calculate Tsi was changed to[19]:
Tsi = kice · dsnow · Tw + ksnow · dice · Tai
kice · dsnow + ksnow · dice
(3.4)
This gave a lower estimate of Tsi at gave greater variance in values across profiles. Figure
3.1 shows a plot of an example temperature profile, note that the discontinuity at the start
occurs because the scripts is forcing the the first temperature to be equal to the provided
Tai as it would otherwise be slightly higher. This was done so that all the stated Tai are
actually the initial temperature in a profile.
18
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: The plot shows a temperature profile which is piecewise linear. The slight
discontinuity at the start is because the script is forcing the first element to always be the
input Tai, otherwise it would be slightly higher.
3.1.2
Salinity profile
The other important profile is the salinity profile, which extends through the snow layer.
The profiles follow one of three distributions. The first one which will be referred to as Type
1(T1), starts out low then half way through the layer it rises sharply. The second referred
to as Type 2(T2) or simply linear distribution, is perhaps unsurprisingly a distribution where
the salt content rises linearly with depth. The final one, Type 3(T3) is similar to T1 but only
starts to rise sharply 2/3 of the wave through the snow layer. The T1 and T3 distributions
are based on two physical measurements of 10cm snow layers, where the salinity was
measured each cm. A table of the data from these measurements is included in appendix
A. While in the simulated profiles the final element is always the largest this was not always
the case in the measurements they were based on, due to a certain degree of variability
in the layers. Introducing some random variance to each layer, probably by multiplying
with a random number was considered but was not carried out so as to better be able to
reproduce results later. Ultimately, the simulated salinity profiles is still follow the general
trend of the measured ones. Examples of T1 and T3 distributions can be seen in figure
3.2, both with the same inputs the only difference being distribution type.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: (a) An example of type 1 distribution. (b) Type 3 distribution with the same
inputs as the other plot.
3.2
Altimeter Model Variable Comparison
The first task was determine which variables would influence the backscatter and track
point, and be a potential candidate for the correction. This was done by exploring their
impact, using a number profiles representing different snow conditions. A profile with a
10cm non-saline snow layer, with a Tai of 250°K and density of 300kg/m3 was used as a
baseline.
With regards to salt, the main things tested was saline vs. non-saline, the level of salinity
and the different types of distributions. Furthermore, snow depth, density and finally the
temperature of the ASI which affects the temperature profile of the snow-ice pack. The
effect of temperature is also tied to salinity, because as mentioned in section 2.1 it is really
brine volume that affects backscatter. Therefore if looking at non-saline snow f.ex. then
temperature is irrelevant, but becomes increasingly impactful as salinity increases.
In general, the evaluation was split into two parts on focusing on backscatter and one on
track point. The backscatter analysis was done very simply by plotting the backscatter
for profiles with different properties. There was an issue early on, when plotting for high
salinity. As salinity increased a point was reached where there was no difference between
two profiles. This was the case for 14- and 20ppt profiles, initially this was believed to be
because the salinity had reached a saturation point. However it was eventually found to
be because of the error in the temperature profile discussed in section 3.1. This raised
the temperature of the snow layer by about 4-5°K. This can have a very large effect on
the brine volume, as can be seen in figure 3.3.
From the plot it is clear that when reaching higher temperatures -5°C and higher, the brine
volume increases very quickly. Before the error was corrected the temperature at the SII
was always around 270°K, of course leading to a very high brine volume in all cases.
Eventually, after the problem was solved, there was a notable difference when plotting
for 14-20ppt. While evaluating backscatter it was desired to see the individual contribu-
tions from the ASI and SII. This was done by modifying the function that calculates the
waveform, in the altimeter model to also output the individual contributions. Verifying that
it worked correctly, by adding the two together which was equal to the total backscatter.
20
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: A plot of the brine volume as a function of temperature. In this case for a
salinity of 5ppt.
The impact of the snow properties on the track point was measured by looking at the
difference in the t50 from the altimeter. The difference in t50 was taken relative to the
baseline specified earlier. Except in case of Tai which as mentioned requires salt to have
an effect.
3.3
Radiometer Model Variable Comparison
Like the altimeter model, the impact of snow properties on the radiometer model was
assessed by simulating the response to a variety of snow conditions. The model outputs,
among other things, the Effective Temperature(Teff) for each of the discrete frequencies
as explained in section 2.5. These are contained in vector with 14 elements. Though this
was narrowed down to 5 frequencies used in regression, which can be seen below:
6.9GHz
10.7GHz
18.7GHz
31.5GHz
36.5GHz
Table 3.2: The discrete frequencies used during variable evaluation and covered by the
correction models.
Teff is used to derive the depth at which the emission layer is located. In effect this means
finding the layer where the temperature most closely matches Teff. The this was done by
taking the difference between the temperature column from a profile and the Teff vector.
Tdiff = TK −Teff
(3.5)
The result is a n × 5 matrix where n is the number of layers in a given profile. The matrix
contains the temperature difference for every layer at each frequency. The emission layer
is then found by finding the index of minimum value of the numerical value of Tdiff. The
numerical value is used to find where the difference is closest to zero and not the smallest
value as the difference is often negative, and then the emission layer would then be placed
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
21
==PAGE:28==
at the ice-water interface. Since each row in a profile is a 1cm layer in the ice-snow
structure the index is equal to the depth. The found emission layer depth was then plotted
for each frequency. The same procedure was also carried out on a small sample of the
profiles with fewer but thicker layer, so that the entire snow layer had the same thickness.
This was to see what impact it would have, compared to 1cm layers. Though it was
ultimately decided, to proceed with the thin layered profiles.
3.4
Emission Layer Correction Model
With the influencing properties: salinity, snow depth and Tai identified the correction model
could be created. The correction is the difference between the physical temperature at
the SII and Teff. Ideally they should be the same, however as will be seen later in section
4.2 this is rarely the case, hence the need for a correction. Which should be a simple
formula that is a function of the three previously mentioned snow properties, which can
then simply be added to Teff and thus correct the difference from Tsi.
∆T = Tsi −Teff = f(Sd, s, Tai)
(3.6)
In eq. 3.6 Sd is the snow depth and sal is the maximum salinity. To create the model it was
decided to try a linear regression, to derive an expression for ∆T. First, it was necessary
to generate a simulated dataset, in the form of ∆T values and their corresponding values
of Sd, sal and Tai.
3.4.1
Dataset Creation
To create this dataset it was necessary of the generate a large number of profiles, like
the ones discussed earlier. However, a far larger number was needed to generate a
sufficiently large number of data points. In practice the method was much the same as
the earlier profiles, with the majority of the code being reused in a modified form. The
function used the three properties as inputs and outputted a profile in the same format
as before. This was then run through the radiometer model to generate the Teff values
which are then subtracted from the profiles Tsi. All of this is done inside three nested ”for”
loops, running through a number of values of each of the three snow properties. Which
are contained in three vectors, the loops then run through all the possible combinations
of the snow properties. The original values can be seen in table 3.3 as an example. Note
that these are not the final values used, but the formal is the same.
Sd
10
13
19
20
20
23
25
29
40
50
sal
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
14
20
Tai
250
252
256
258
260
262
264
266
267
268
Table 3.3: Table of regression values used in the first model. These are outdated and not
used in the final models, but the general distribution was kept.
The Sd values were chosen by looking at a sample of the Operation Ice Bridge data from
the round robin data file. The majority of the snow thickness values are found in a range
from roughly 5-35cm. In all data sets the snow depth followed a similar distribution as
seen in figure 3.4. This plot shows the number of times a snow depth occurs in the
datafile ”ESACCI −SEAICE−RRDP2−SIT −OIB−IDCSI4−ARCTIC.dat”, which
contains data from the operation ice bridge measurements. It should be noted that all the
values were rounded to the nearest full cm, both to make the plot more comprehensible
and because this was how the regression analysis was performed, due to how the code
works.
22
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: The distribution of snow depths rounded to nearest full cm in the operation ice
bridge data file, the y axis is the counted number of occurrences of each snow depth.
Therefore, it was decided to concentrate most of the values of Sd at or around 20cm with
a few outliers. The values of salinity range from 4 to 20ppt, to get a good range of values.
Similarly, Tai ranges from 250 to 268 °K, again to get a broad range values. While looping
through all the data values, ∆T for all the frequencies and is saved to a text file along
with its corresponding input values. These values of ∆T and the input variables where
initially used to fit a correction model to the data. It very quickly became clear that this
was insufficient, and the number of points was increased to 8000. In practice this meant
the vectors were increased to 20 elements each. Though the same type of distribution
was kept. One set was increased to 125000 elements, though this took a very long to
compile and was not repeated for emission layer correction model.
3.4.2
Linear Regression
Since the correction formula is dependent on three variables it was necessary to use
multiple linear regression. Matlab has numerous functions that can be used to implement
this. The formula would have the general form seen below:
∆T = a + b · Sd + c · sal + d · Tai
(3.7)
Where a,b,c and d are the coefficients found by the linear regression. As the radiometer
model outputs Teff for each of frequency across the range, which was narrowed down
to the five frequencies seen in table 3.2. It was necessary to create a linear equation for
each frequency which was done automatically via loops, each set of coefficients was then
stored in a matrix. The first models was created using the 1000 point dataset, seen in table
3.3. But the resulting corrections were in most cases very poor. A number of solutions to
the problems was attempted, such as using different regression functions and adjusting
the input variables. Using a narrowed down dataset with a tighter spread. At this stage
models were tested by visually plotting and inspecting the results. Later, more large scale
testing was used.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
23
==PAGE:30==
Eventually, the data sets was increased to the 8000 data points, the resulting model was
LRM1, short for linear radiometer model 1. However the results were generally still poor,
this meant the use of linear regression was abandoned. Eventually another attempt at
making a linear model was made with a narrowed down variable range after initial success
with the polynomial regression. The model was tested using the intervals seen in table
4.6. This model is refereed to as LRM2, both this and LRM1 was later tested on a larger
scale which will be discussed later in this section.
3.4.3
Polynomial Regression
As the precision of the linear regression model was inadequate it was decided to try using
polynomial regression. This would hopefully achieve the needed accuracy. To create the
model multivariate polynomial regression was used. Because of the number variables
used, the number terms in the fitted polynomial can very quickly get out of hand. There-
fore, it was decided to limit the polynomial fit to a second order equation, which with three
variables still yielded ten terms. Following the general formula seen below
∆T = a + b · Sd + c · sal + d · Tai + e · S2
d + f · sal2
+g · T 2
ai + h · (Sd · sal) + i · (Sd · Tai) + j · (sal · Tai)
(3.8)
Like for the linear models polynomial regression was conducted for each of the 5 fre-
quency with all the coefficients stored in a matrix.
To improve the model the number of data points used was increased to 8000. As men-
tioned a dataset with 125000 was also created, however the results where generally better
using the smaller set. To see if a better fit was possible, a third order polynomial regres-
sion was done. However, this resulted in a twenty term polynomial for no significant
improvement and was thus not repeated.
Once the results of the older polynomial regression had been analysed, a new version
was made with a narrowed scope of variables. Rough narrowing was done by keeping
two of the variables constant and then creating profiles across a range of the remaining
variable. Then the correction was applied to each profile, the results plotted and manually
evaluated. This repeated for all three variables. This showed that the model was generally
more sensitive to extreme values of snow depth, than salinity and Tai. Though this does
make some sense, because when looking at the coefficients, terms that relate to the
snow depth are larger then the other two variables. More fine adjustment to the model
was conducted with this more limited value range in mind. This new improved model,
refereed to as Polynomial Radiometer Model High(PRMH), is generally only valid in the
ranges seen in the relevant columns in table 4.6.
In an effort to extend the coverage of the correction, down to lower snow depths be-
low 10cm. A second model was created, referred to as Polynomial Radiometer Model
Low(PRML), that would work in conjunction with the previous one. The interval in which
PRML is valid can be seen in table 4.6.
However as will be discussed later, this second model did not perform well below 10cm,
despite numerous attempts to correct this. All these improved formulas were created
using 8000 datapoints because of the long compilation time, of the 125000 datapoints
set. Even with some optimizations: such as removing unneeded outputs and preventing
it from saving files, the radiometer model was a significant bottleneck when generating
datasets for regression. An overview of the fitting process can be seen in figure 3.5, the
model was refined using the same process seen in figure 3.13.
24
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: The process of the creating radiometer correction model. First the regression
intervals are defined, then the models are created by looping through the frequencies and
performing regression for each. Then the model is tested by applying it to a large number
of profiles.
As mentioned in section 2.6 in polynomial regression not all terms are necessarily signif-
icant. This was used to attempt to reduce the number of terms in the correction model.
By experimenting with removing different terms, and assessing its impact on the R2 value
and afterwards on how well it performed in testing. The derived model had six terms
instead of ten and can be seen in eq. 3.9. Unfortunately the results were mixed when
tested.
∆T = a + b · Sd + c · sal + d · Tai + e · S2
d + d · (sal · Tai)
(3.9)
3.4.4
Emission Layer Model Evaluation
After creating the model it was necessary to evaluate it, to determine if it was considered
good enough. This was done by deriving emission layer from the now corrected Teff
and comparing it to the surface derived from the uncorrected Teff. This was done in
the same using the method as when evaluating which variables should be corrected for.
For the evaluation the correction model was applied to a large number of profiles, the
number of which varied between 4000-8000 profiles depending on the model in question.
Since it was not feasible to manually plot and inspect each correction, it was necessary to
automate the evaluation following certain criteria. The primary one for a rough evaluation
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
25
==PAGE:32==
was computing the offset of both the corrected and uncorrected derived layer depth from
the known SII depth. Figure 3.6 shows a plot of the corrected and uncorrected derived
depth alongside the SII, the offset is then the difference at each frequency between the
derived depth and the actual depth.
Figure 3.6: The derived emission layer depth with and- without correction along with the
snow-ice interface.
To then determine if the correction was a bad correction, i.e the correction yields a worse
offset than the uncorrected one. The mean of the absolute value of the offset across all
frequencies was taken in both cases. Each correction case was then given a numerical
value based on the mean offset. If the corrected mean is zero then there is no offset in
any of the frequencies and the correction is perfect, in which case it’s assigned a 1. If
the corrected mean is smaller than the uncorrected mean, then the correction while not
perfect is still an overall improvement and is assigned a 2. Finally, if the corrected mean is
larger than the uncorrected then the correction is considered bad and is assigned a 0. The
assigned value along with the corresponding variables was saved in a n × 4 matrix where
n is the number of test profiles. Secondly, it is possible that while the overall correction is
better than uncorrected, individual frequencies had a worse result. To get a sense of the
of often this occurs the difference between the mean offsets was also taken.
Diff = abs(mean(offsetcor)) −abs((offsetuncor))
(3.10)
This yields a vector of five elements, one for each frequency. If the difference was negative
then the correction was larger than the error, and the derived result is worse. It should
be noted that the correction in the case where it is not perfect, but is still smaller than
uncorrected, will often overcorrect thus moving the derived emission layer into the ice
layer. In this case the correction is still considered better as the correction is still closer
to the true value. These difference values were saved in matrix form along with the first
criteria for later use.
This analysis was carried out on all the models, the results being used to narrow the range
26
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:33==
for each variable. Until a satisfactory failure percent was achieved. To get a sense of at
which value of the three variables the model was most unreliable, the first classification
was used. All the cases in which the correction had been classified as bad, was extracted
from the matrix. For each of the variables the number of times each value occurred in a
bad correction was counted. As expected this showed a general trend towards values at
both ends of the variable ranges. This was then used to narrow the variable ranges.
3.5
Track Point Correction Model
The altimeter correction was carried in a similar manner to the emission layer correction.
The analysis of altimeter model showed that all four variables had impact on the track
point. Initial experiments with correction were done in both 3D and 4D, namely with and
without density as a variable. As discussed earlier in section 2.4 altimetry operates on the
assumption that all the backscatter occurs at surface of the ice layer, and thus the track
point corresponds to this surface. However, as shown by others and mentioned earlier in
this report this is not always the case. As the properties of the snow layer can have a big
impact on the backscatter. F.ex. in the case of highly saline snow the radar signal might
not even reach the SII. Therefore the track point will likely be located somewhere inside
the snow layer. The correction models purpose will then be to displace the track point
closer to the SII. The track point is calculated using eq 2.4, the time delay from the radar
to the ice sheet is calculated by a function given alongside the altimeter model. It is also
necessary to relate the track point to the local sea surface. This was done by creating a
single layer profile to get a t50, to approximate the ocean surface. Adding it together the
track point, is estimated as:
TP = TP + (10 −(10 −c · T50Water))
(3.11)
The radar height used was arbitrarily chosen as 10m which is also seen in eq. 3.11. The
correction is then the difference between the SII and the track point as seen in eq. 3.12:
TPerr = SII −TP = f(Sd, sal, Tai)
(3.12)
Where Terr is the track point error, SII is the snow-ice interface depth in m and TP is
the track point. The correction then some function of snow depth, maximum salinity and
Tai, as mentioned previously early correction was done in both 4D and 3D. For reasons
which will be discussed in section 5.3, it was decided to move forward with only the 3D
correction model, and thus not correct for density. The SII is calculated in a function which
was provided alongside the altimeter model. The function uses full knowledge about the
profiles, which obviously will not be available during an actual measurement but is used
as the true SII and as the benchmark.
Like with the radiometer it was necessary to generate datasets for fitting. This was done
in a very similar way to the emission layer model. Generally using the same initial variable
intervals as before. Using three nested for loops as before running through all the com-
binations of inputs. Creating a profile with the input and then running the altimeter model
on each profile, to calculate the t50 value. As well as the snow freeboard and radar wave
travel time, which are both necessary to calculate the track point. Initially this process
had a very long compilation time, caused by the altimeter model acting like a bottleneck
slowing down data generation greatly. Therefore some optimizations were done to the
model, to improve compilation time. The model outputs a lot of values that, while useful
during the initial analysis of the models response to variables, were not used here as only
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
27
==PAGE:34==
t50 is needed. Therefore, all other outputs were deleted and most importantly it no longer
saved files. Finally, memory was also pre-allocated which it was not previously. This
led to significant time savings during compilation allowing for the use of many more data-
points. Altimeter regressions were generally carried out with 125000 points as opposed to
8000. All the outputs needed for calculating the track point and the corresponding values
of the snow depth, salinity and Tai were saved to a text file.
3.5.1
Regression Analysis for Track Point Correction
The track point correction model was once again made using multiple linear regression.
First, a model for the Ku-band(13.6GHz) was made, the initial model was made both and
without density. At this early stage there was experimentation with both linear regres-
sion and polynomial regression. In order to see if there was a significant difference in
performance. These early models used the same wide variable ranges as the radiome-
ter model. Ranging 10-50cm for snow depth, 4-20ppt for salinity, 250-270°K for Tai and
300-400 kg/m3 for density in the 4D case. The snow depth follows the same distribution
as earlier, being concentrated at roughly 20±10cm. The early model showed that both
linear and polynomial regression, could give and accurate correction. Though of course
the polynomial provided a wider range of variables in which it was accurate. However, this
could be overcome by again making more correction formulas to cover multiple ranges.
This was the option that was ultimately decided on, to simplify the equation from four or
five terms if using 4D regression, down from ten or fifteen terms for a polynomial. Further-
more, it would most likely be necessary to make two formulas for the polynomial anyway,
as was the case for the emission layer model. Therefore improvement of the correction
only proceeded on the linear regression model.
As mentioned the linear model was split into two, Linear Altimeter Model Low(LAML) and
Linear Altimeter Model High(LAMH), broadly ranging from 5-19cm and 20-35cm snow
depth respectively. The models were divided by their range of snow depth. The process
of narrowing was done in a similar manner as for the emission layer models. Again done
by analysing in which range of values the models performed poorly. Then narrowing the
range until a satisfactory level of precision and success was achieved.
Finally, a correction model valid for the Ka-band(35.75GHz) was also made. This model
was based on the ku-band model and follows similar variable intervals as the Ku-band
version. Because the ka-band model followed the same process, it did not go through
the same development cycle. Immediately, using a 3D linear regression model and split
into thin and thick snow layer models. These models are referred to as LAML-ka and
LAMH-ka.
3.5.2
Track Point Model Evaluation
To evaluate how well a correction model worked, it was again applied to a large number
of profiles. As the model is correcting the track point so that it is equal to the depth of the
SII. The correction error is difference between the known SII depth of each profile and the
corrected track point. The equation can be seen in eq. 3.13:
Corerr = SII −TPcor
(3.13)
Ideally, the corrected track point would be exactly equal to the SII. But this is obviously
not possible and there will always be an error. It was decided to aim for precision down to
1 cm, meaning that if the correction error is larger than 0.0099m, as seen in the inequality
below, the correction is considered to be poor:
28
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:35==
Corerr > 0.0099
(3.14)
This is still a bit rough, and a higher degree of precision would be desirable. It was briefly
attempted to achieve precision down to 1mm consistently. However, the current models
only achieve this in roughly 20% of cases. The range is already fairly small at around
15cm for snow depth. Therefore, reaching a consistent maximum error of 1mm, was not
deemed to be practically possible, as that would drastically limit the range of the model.
An overview of the work flow of the model creation process can be seen in figure 3.7. Note
that the process covered here is spread over different scripts handling different steps of
the process.
Figure 3.7: The work of creating the correction models, first defining the intervals for
variables used for fitting. Then performing the fit and finally evaluating and correcting if
necessary.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
4.1
Altimeter Comparison
In this section the results of the analysis of the impact of salinity, density, snow depth and
Tai, on backscatter and the track point will be presented. This will later be used to discuss
which variables are relevant to include in the correction to the radar altimeter model.
4.1.1
Radar Backscatter
Ku- Band Results
Here the results for backscatter in the ku-band will be presented. The salinity of snow is a
very important factor that can greatly increase the attenuation of the radar signal. Seen in
figure 4.1 is a plot of the total backscatter for four different profiles with varying maximum
salt content, these being 0, 5, 14 and 20ppt.
Figure 4.1: A plot of the total backscatter in dB for different levels of maximum salinity at
0, 5, 14 and 20ppt.
As expected the non-saline snow profile has the highest total backscatter, and decreases
as brine volume increases. This is due to the fact nearly all the backscatter occurs at the
interfaces, with the intervening layers having very little impact on the actual backscatter.
Of the two interfaces the biggest contributor is the SII, and as the salt level increases
the contribution from the SII decreases and the ASI becomes the main contributor. This
can be seen clearly in figure 4.2 where for the non-saline profile seen in sub-figure A the
SII is the largest backscatter source, as the radar wave travels through the snow layer
practically unimpeded. Even for low levels of salinity seen in sub-figure B, the SII is still
the dominant source. However, with increasing salinity the ASI becomes the dominant
source, as the radar wave is attenuated by the increased brine volume. The ASI shown
sub-figure B is for the 5ppt profile, but it will be the same in all cases as the signal has not
been attenuated yet.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
31
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a) A plot of backscatter at the ASI and the SII for non-saline snow, in this case
the SII dominates the backscatter (b) The SII compared to the ASI for the saline snow.
Plotted for max salinity of 5, 14 and 20ppt as the salinity increases the SII contribution
decreases, and the ASI becomes the biggest contributor.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) The total backscatter for the three salt distributions with 5ppt maximum
salinity. In this case the linear distribution is slightly higher than the other two. (b) The
same plot but with a 14ppt max salinity, in this case there is no difference between the
three distribution.
Another factor to consider regarding salinity is salt distribution throughout the snow layer.
If these lead to a significant difference in backscatter it might have to be taken into account.
Figure 4.3 shows two total backscatter plots for the three salts distributions, T1, linear
and T3 discussed in section 3.1, for 5 and 14ppt maximum salinity respectively. In the
case of the high salinity profile there’s a negligible difference between the different salt
32
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:39==
distribution, while in the lower 5ppt profile the backscatter for the linear distribution is
roughly 2db higher while between T1 and T3 there is again a negligible difference.
Next, the impact of snow depth will be explored, first for non-saline profiles. Seen in
figure 4.4 the backscatter for 10, 20 and 40cm snow layers. It is noticeable that the snow
depth doesn’t impact level of the backscatter, however it does increase the time delay to
maximum backscatter, as the wave has a longer distance to reach the SII.
Figure 4.4: The total backscatter for different snow depths in non-saline profiles. The
depth doesn’t impact the maximum backscattered energy, however it does increase the
time it takes to reach this.
When salt in introduced to the snow profiles, it will of course affect the total backscatter
as can be seen in figure 4.5. The two plots show the total backscatter at different snow
depths, for 5ppt and 14ppt. The shows the same displacement in time as in the non-saline
case, as well as a decrease in total backscatter.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
33
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: (a) The total backscatter for 10, 20 and 40cm snow layer at 5ppt. (b) The
same plot but at a maximum salinity of 14ppt.
The impact of density on the backscatter was also explored, the total backscatter was
plotted for 300, 350 and 400 kg/m3, in both a non-saline and saline 5ppt case. The plots
showed that in both instances density has a negligible impact on the backscatter. The
plots are included in appendix A.
The final variable to look at is Tai. In this case only saline profiles will be looked at since
temperature only has an impact if salt is present in the snow. Plots of the total backscatter
can be seen for -23.15, -10 and -7°C at 5 and 14ppt respectively. In the first case there
is no visible difference between starting temperature, but in the 14ppt case there is a
slight difference in the maximum backscatter, as the colder snow has a slightly higher
backscatter. This is likely due to the lower brine volume, and also corroborates the theory
that temperature has a higher impact in more saline snow.
34
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: (a) The total backscatter for -23.15, -10 and -7°C Tai with a maximum salinity
of 5ppt. (b) The same plot but at a maximum salinity of 14ppt.
Ka-Band Results
In this section the backscatter for ka-band will be presented. In many cases, usually in
non-saline profiles, there was very little difference from ku-band. When looking at saline
snow, differences do appear. Though this is to be expected when recalling the theory
about penetration depth discussed in section 2.1. Only the cases where there is a sig-
nificant difference from the Ku-band results will be discussed to avoid repeating results.
For the interested reader the plots are included in appendix A. The first major difference
can be seen when looking at backscatter as a result of different salt levels. A plot of the
backscatter can be seen in figure 4.7, again for 0, 5, 14 and 20ppt.
Figure 4.7: A plot of the total backscatter in dB for 0, 5, 14 and 20ppt in the Ka-band.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
35
==PAGE:42==
Compared to the Ku-band plot of the same situation, the level of backscatter is noticeably
lower. Especially for the 14ppt which is almost at the same level as 20ppt. Though this is
not surprising given the higher frequency. The only other plot that will be looked at here
is, interface backscatter for different salt levels, which can be seen in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: The backscatter contributions from the SII and ASI, the ASI contribution is the
same in all cases. Compared to the ku-band plot, the SII contribution becomes smaller
than the ASI contribution for a much lower salinity.
Compared to the to the Ku-band plot the SII contributions drops off far quicker. Already
at 5ppt is it smaller than the ASI contribution, which stands in contrast to the Ku-band
plot. Overall, it is clear that salinity has a much larger impact on backscatter at the higher
frequency.
4.1.2
Track Point Migration
In this section the different snow properties’ impact upon the track point will be presented.
Of course it will not have an impact of td but it will on the t50. This will have the effect
of either displacing the track point up- or downwards. The comparison was performed
as outlined briefly at the end of section 3.2. This section will also compare the results
between ku- and ka-band. Seen in figure 4.9 is the difference in t50 as a function snow
depth, with no salt in the snow so that the difference is purely due to snow depth.
36
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) The difference in t50 as a function of snow depth in ku-band. (b) The
difference in t50 in ka-band.
In this case there is no noticeable difference between the frequency bands. In both cases
the difference increases with depth, in which case the track point moves downwards.
Figure 4.10 shows the difference as the maximum salinity increases.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: (a) The difference in t50 as a function of maximum salinity in ku-band. (b)
The difference in t50 in ka-band.
There is a noticeable difference between frequencies, in both cases the difference is pos-
itive at low salinity and becomes negative as it increases. But in the case of ku-band the
decrease remains roughly linear. The difference at ka-band starts to bottom out at around
14ppt and becomes constant. Likely because of the ka-bands poor penetration in saline
snow, eventually a threshold is hit where the signal becomes extinct. The difference in
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
37
==PAGE:44==
t50 for density can be seen in figure 4.11.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: (a) The difference in t50 as a function of density in ku-band. (b) The difference
in t50 in ka-band.
The difference between the frequency bands negligible. In both cases the difference
decreases overall, in which case the track point is displaced upwards in the snow-ice
structure. It is not very sensitive to small differences in density though, as it plateaus
incrementally. Next, the difference for increasing Tai, first for saline snow and afterwards
non-saline snow. The saline case can be seen in figure 4.12.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: (a) The difference in t50 as a function of Tai for saline snow snow and 5ppt
in ku-band. (b) The difference in t50 in ka-band.
Though in both cases the track point is displaced upwards overall, there are major differ-
38
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:45==
ences between ku- and ka-band. At Ku-band the difference decrease is less drastic, it
also remains positive across the entire range. It also does not seem as sensitive to small
changes in Tai, as it frequently plateaus. In the Ka-band on the other the decrease is
steep across the range. The magnitude of the decrease is also a lot larger roughly a 8ns
difference vs. a 3ns difference at ku-band. Finally, for illustrative purposes the difference
for Tai in non-saline snow, can be seen in figure 4.13
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: (a) The difference in t50 as a function of Tai for none-saline snow at ku-band.
(b) The difference in t50 at ka-band.
For none-saline snow there is virtually no difference in t50 except a small discontinuity. It
occurs in both cases though at a higher temperature in in ka-band.
In conclusion all the variables affect the track point through t50 in some way. In all the
cases the overall trend was the same between frequencies, though it is affected differently.
In general ka-band is more susceptible to brine content as seen in the plots for temperature
and salinity.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
39
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Radiometer Comparison
In this section the results of the radiometer model will be discussed, when compared to the
physical temperature of the profiles. As discussed previously the comparison was carried
out by comparing the output Teff to the layer temperatures of the profiles. Teff gives
the measured temperature a emission layer, ideally this surface should correspond to the
SII. Though as will be seen, in most instances this is not the case due to the properties
of the snow. The snow packs can generally be divided into two groups saline and and
non-saline snow. First, non-saline will be looked at.
Seen below in figure 4.14 is a comparison of emission layer depth for 10, 20 and 40 cm
snow layer with no salt content.
Figure 4.14: The depth of the emission layer for different thicknesses of snow layers,
for each frequency. It’s noted that depth of the surface is slightly below the SII at all
frequencies.
In all cases the emission layer is slightly below the SII, ranging roughly from 4-1cm across
the frequency range. As expected the dry snow with no salt content is highly permeable
at the radiometer frequencies.
The impact of Tai and density were also simulated. Neither showed any impact and like
with the snow depth plots the emission layer is displaced into the ice layer. However
this is entirely due to the 10cm thickness of the snow layer. The plots are not included
here as there wasn’t a significant difference, however if interested both can be found in
Appendix A. This would suggest that for non-saline snow the only relevant variable is the
snow depth itself.
Now the saline snow group will be discussed, and in this case the other variables be-
come more relevant. Looking at salinity there are again two things to consider, the salt
distribution and the salt level. In figure 4.15 a plot of the emission layer depth for different
levels of salinity. The snow layer is 10cm thick plotted at 5ppt, 14ppt and 20ppt maximum
salinity.
40
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.15: The depth of the emission layer for increasing salt levels. These salinites
are 5, 14 and 20ppt.
From the plot it is very clear the level of salt has a big impact emission layer depth. Only at
lowest frequencies does the emission layer correspond to SII and as frequency increases
the emission layer is displaced higher up in the snow. Likely because the salt is block-
ing the radiation from the lower and higher salinity layers of the snow. As expected the
displacement of the emission layer is increased with higher salt content.
Moving on to the salt distribution the emission layer depth was plotted for 14ppt salt level
and for type 1, linear and type 3. The plots can be seen in figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: The depth of the emission layer for the three salt distributions.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
41
==PAGE:48==
Again the emission layer is displaced upwards as frequency increases. There is generally
a 1cm difference between the different distribution types. Looking at the plot the one with
the worst offset is the linear model, this could be because the linear one will overall have
a higher salt content. Conversely, type 3 has the lowest offset, this is likely due to the
opposite effect where highly saline layers only start to appear in the lower third of the
snow layer. Next, to be looked at is snow thickness in saline snow, figure 4.17 shows
the emission layer for 10, 20 and 40cm snow layers. In all cases the maximum salinity is
14ppt.
Figure 4.17: The emission layer depth for saline snow with a maximum salinity of 14ppt,
plottet for 10, 20, and 40cm snow layer.
Like the non-saline case the depth has a big impact on the emission layer depth. However
in this scenario the surface is displaced upwards into the snow layer instead. Likewise
the displacement is far larger than in the non-saline case. With the offset of the surface
becoming larger with increasing depth.
42
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.18: The emission layer depth for saline snow with a maximum salinity of 14ppt,
with varying Tai these being: -23.15, -10 and -7°C.
A plot of the emission layer depth for -23.15, -10 and -7°C Tai can be seen in figure 4.18.
Small differences can be seen, though not as systematic as for depth and salt level. The
biggest outlier being -7°C which is has the largest variation across the frequency range.
Finally, density like in the non-saline case has no effect on the emission layer. The plot
can be found in appendix A if interested.
4.2.1
Thick layers
As noted in section 3.1 snow covers will typically be packed into thicker layers, rather than
the 1cm layers used in this project. While the radiometer model works on the assumption
that the temperature increases linearly with depth regardless of layers, it was decided to
to explore the impact of using fewer but thicker layers. Therefore a few profiles with thick
layers were created with the same properties as three of the profiles. First for the 14ppt
10cm T1 profile which has been divided into three layers. Seen in figure 4.19 is a plot
of the emission layer depth for thick layered profile and its thin layered counterpart for
comparison. It is clear to see that while they both end at 5 cm depth the resolution of the
thick layered profile is far worse.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
43
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.19: (a) The depth of the emission layer for 14ppt with T1 distribution in a 10cm
snow layer with thin layers (b) The depth of the emission layer for 14ppt with T1 distribution
divided into three thicker layers.
Next, looking at the non-saline 10 cm profile which can be seen in figure 4.20, in both
cases the emission layer is displaced downwards into in the ice layer. But for the thick
layered profile it is moved all the way to the ice-water interface. This is likely caused by
the poor resolution.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.20: (a) The depth of the emission layer for in a 10cm snow layer with thin layers
and no salt. (b) The depth of the emission layer for non-saline 10 cm divided into three
thicker layers.
When looking at the 40cm snow layer profiles the results are similar. However at the
highest frequency, the displacement is slightly less. All of these differences both in this
44
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:51==
profile and in the salty one is likely due to the fact that temperature steps are much larger
in the thick layered profile.
(a) Picture 1
(b) Picture 2
Figure 4.21: (a) The depth of the emission layer for in a 40cm snow layer with thin layers
and no salt. (b) The depth of the emission layer for non-saline 40 cm divided into three
thicker layers.
4.3
Emission Layer Correction Model
In this section the results of the work on the emission layer correction model will be pre-
sented. The work can be split into two parts: linear and polynomial regression models.
The models has to correct Teff so that it matches Tsi of a particular profile, after which the
emission layer depth can be derived. The maximum and minimum errors found across
the five frequencies can be seen table 4.1.
6.9GHz
10.7GHz
18.7GHz
31.5GHz
36.5GHz
Min Error[°K]
-0.122
-0.111
-0.0886
-0.126
-0.140
Max Error[°K]
2.863
5.100
5.139
7.557
8.136
Table 4.1: The maximum and minimum Tdiff across the 5 frequencies.
4.3.1
Linear Regression
As was discussed in section 3.4 it was initially attempted to use linear regression to derive
the correction model. However, this was unsuccessful, the issue was that the correction
was very imprecise, generally over correcting and displacing the emission layer deep into
the ice layer. Seen in figure 4.22 is plot of the emission layer depth for a sample profile
with a snow depth of 20cm, max salinity of 5ppt and Tai of 250 °K, with and without applied
correction.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
45
==PAGE:52==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.22: (a) The emission layer Teff corrected by the linear model LRM1, alongside
the uncorrected and a line representing the actual temperature of the SII. (b) The layer
depth derived from Teff, both corrected and uncorrected. The black line marks the actual
depth of the SII.
From the plot it is very clear that the correction is poor, with the offset of the corrected
emission being much larger than the uncorrected one. The model overcorrects the tem-
perature at all five frequencies, with the correction error ranging from 0.5-1.1°K. This leads
to even larger errors in the derived layer. Ideally, the corrected layer should coincide SII
across all the frequencies, or at least get closer than the uncorrected. A comparison of
∆T, as seen in eq. 3.6, for this profile and the applied correction can be seen in figure
4.23. Again it is very clear that the linear model overcorrects.
46
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.23: The actual ∆T alongside the applied correction using linear formula, for the
same profile. The temperature correction is larger than the actual temperature difference,
thus leading to an over correction
Looking at the R2 value for each frequency, they are not particularly good ranging from
0.8 to 0.92. For physical applications a R2 value of 0.9 or higher is generally desired. The
GoF values can be seen in the table 4.2, in this case two of them are far below the desired
0.9.
6.9GHz
10.7GHz
18.7GHz
31.5GHz
36.5GHz
LRM1
0.81
0.84
0.90
0.91
0.92
LRM2
0.85
0.88
0.96
0.95
0.96
Table 4.2: Table of GoF values of LRM1 and LRM2.
As mentioned in section 3.4, an attempt to improve the linear model was made which is
referred to as LRM2. Both models were later tested by applying it to 8000 profiles. The
ranges of variables for these were different, as LRM1 was made to fit a much wider range.
The ranges for the LRM1 test can be seen in table 4.3, and the ranges for LRM2 can be
seen in table 4.6.
Snow Depth[cm]
5
50
Salinity[ppt]
4
20
Tai[K]
250
270
Table 4.3: Table containing the variable ranges for early and wider range.
The results were classified the manner described in section 3.4. The performance of
LRM2 was somewhat better, though it still leaves something to be desired. The results of
the evaluation for both the LRM1 and improved LRM2 model can be seen in table 4.4.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
47
==PAGE:54==
Fail[%]
Improved[%]
Perfect[%]
LRM1
43.63
49.95
6.43
LRM2
24.13
66.84
9.04
Table 4.4: Table summarizing the results of testing both the initial and improved models
on 8000 profiles.
In this test the LRM1 model failed in 43.63% of cases, which is obviously a very poor
result. In the case of the LRM2 model it failed in nearly a quarter of the instances.
4.3.2
Polynomial Regression
The Polynomial regression was a substantial improvement, even in the initial stages be-
fore any refinement of the variable ranges. The first experimental models were made us-
ing a wide range of variables. Two versions L20 and L50 which refereed to the length of
the input vectors. L20 had 8000(203) data points and L50 had 125000(503) data points, but
both had roughly the same intervals for the regression parameters. To evaluate whether
the fitted models describe the data, the R2 value is a good indicator but it’s also to plot and
visually inspect the model. Because the model is three dimensional, it is not possible to
plot as that would be a 4D plot. Therefore, 2D models were used to for this, three models
in total for all the combinations of inputs.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.24: (a) The observed values as dots, along with a plane representing the values
predicted by the regression model at 6.9GHz. In this plot snow depth and salinity are
variables and Tai is constant at 250°K. (b) The same plot with salinity held constant at
5ppt and snow depth and Tai being variables. (c) In this plot the snow depth constant at
20cm, and salinity and Tai are variables.
The plots shown are of the models for 6.9GHz, the regressions at the other frequencies
48
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:55==
yield very similar results. Therefore it was decided not to include them. In all the three
plots the predicted and observed values match up in pretty well. Although the predictions
are less accurate near the edges, but this is to be expected. Regression models tend
to be less reliable in edge cases which is why it is important to specify intervals in which
a model is valid. It is also important to reiterate that the plots above do not represent
any final model, they are only used to infer whether the three variables describe ∆T well.
The models L20 and L50 were tested on the same set of profiles as LRM1. The results
can be seen in table 4.5. The results are a substantial improvement over LRM1. Though
it is obvious that the model needs to be adjusted. As for the difference between the
two models, L50 version performed slightly worse. This is likely because the model had
randomly generated values, some of them outside the normal intervals. It is possible f.ex.
that the temperature in some rare cases where above 271.15°K. This was also the reason
this method wasn’t used again, to have better control over variables.
Fail[%]
Improved[%]
Perfect[%]
L20
22.98
62.48
14.55
L50
24.05
60.63
15.33
Table 4.5: Table summarizing the results of testing both the initial and improved models
on 8000 profiles.
The model was narrowed down in scope and split into two separate models the PRML
and PRMH as explained in section 3.4. The intervals in which each of them are valid can
be seen can be seen in
PRML
PRMH
Snow Depth[cm]
10
20
16
35
Salinity[ppt]
7
18
5
20
Tai[K]
250
265
250
267
Table 4.6: Table containing the validity intervals for PRML and PRMH models.
The PRML and PRMH models were tested in the same manner as LRM1 and LRM2.
Below are some picked examples of the different evaluation scenarios, all of them made
with PRMH. An example of a correction which is classified as perfect can be seen in figure
4.25.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
49
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.25: (a) An example a correction classified as perfect based on the derived layer
depth. (b) The corrected Teff from which the depth is derived.
By far the most common classification is improved, an example can be seen in figure 4.26.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.26: (a) An example a correction classified as improved based on the derived
layer depth. (b) The corrected Teff from which the depth is derived.
The final example is of a case classified as a bad correction, seen in figure 4.27
50
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27: (a) An example a correction classified as bad based on the derived layer
depth. (b) The corrected Teff from which the depth is derived.
PRMH was tested on 8000 profiles, while PRML was tested on 4400 profiles. Additionally,
both were tested on profiles with the same inputs but using the T3 salt distribution. The
results of the tests can be seen in table 4.7. Also shown in the table is the number of
partial fails, which is the situation where the overall the correction succeeded, but one or
more frequencies had poor corrections.
Sample size
Fail[%]
Improved[%]
Perfect[%]
Partial Fail[%]
PRML
4400
2.0
57.80
41.20
15.2
PRMH
8000
0.65
82.44
16.91
10.4
PRML T3
4400
96.55
3.45
0
98.45
PRMH T3
8000
78.84
20.93
0.24
86.68
Table 4.7: The table contains a summary of the results of testing the PRML and PRMH
models. PRML was tested of 4400 profiles, while PRHM was tested on 8000 profiles.
The rows labelled T3 are the results of the models being test on profiles with the T3 salt
distribution
In both cases the failure rate using T1 salt distribution as been significantly reduced. For
PRML the percentage is 1.4% higher than PRMH, however it also made perfect correc-
tions in far more cases. As for the corrections to T3 profiles the fail percentages are
unfortunately very high. As the results in section 4.2 showed that distribution does affect
the emission layer, this is not surprising but unfortunate nevertheless.
Finally, the coefficients for both the models can be seen in table 4.8, each column contains
a set of coefficients for it’s respective frequency. The coefficients designation a,b,c etc.
and follows the formula seen in eq. 3.8.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
51
==PAGE:58==
PRML Coefficients
6.9GHz
10.7GHz
18.7GHz
31.5GHz
36.5GHz
a
-84.743
-136.429
-126.876
-261.501
-279.074
b
87.163
164.798
208.086
286.138
303.475
c
1.336
2.474
1.477
3.146
3.299
d
0.599
0.963
0.937
1.957
2.113
e
1.757
-0.138
-1.955
-15.147
-20.211
f
8.420e-4
5.851e-4
8.0193e-4
-0.00236
-0.00291
g
-0.00105
-0.00169
-0.00173
-0.00367
-0.00401
h
0.301
0.450
0.268
0.279
0.201
i
-0.337
-0.630
-0.783
-1.058
-1.113
j
-0.00520
-0.00951
-0.00572
-0.0117
-0.0122
PRMH Coefficients
a
-155.0568
-212.183
-150.705
-258.292
-256.117
b
70.237
113.171
132.490
133.957
131.425
c
2.0401
3.451
1.894
3.460
3.361
d
1.120
1.539
1.157
2.0286
2.0578
e
-0.588
-4.696
-6.146
-10.477
-11.0452
f
0.00113
3.978e-4
7.959e-4
-0.00433
-0.00469
g
-0.00202
-0.00279
-0.00223
-0.00400
-0.00414
h
0.284
0.252
0.103
-0.0123
-0.051
i
-0.268
-0.417
-0.479
-0.468
-0.455
j
-0.00793
-0.0131
-0.00720
-0.0125
-0.0121
Table 4.8: The table contains the coefficients for the PRML and PRMH models for each
frequency. Each column represents contains the coefficients for a model, labelled in the
same manner as eq. 3.8.
As mentioned in section 3.4, some experimentation with removing different terms was
done. Overall the results were mixed, it showed some promise when dealing with thick
snow layers. That being above 19cm, however it performed poorly below this. The re-
sults of the testing can be seen in table 4.9. The model covering the thicker snow layer
performed reasonably, failing in 5.05 % but low thickness model performed very poorly.
Fail[%]
Improved[%]
Perfect[%]
low
37.75
57.34
4.52
high
5.05
70.5
24.45
Table 4.9: The table contains a summary of the results of testing the limited terms poly-
nomial regression.
4.4
Track Point Correction Model
The results presented here will be split into ku- and ka-band sections.
4.4.1
Ku-Band Correction Model
In this section the results of the track point correction model will be presented. Exactly
how large a correction the model has to make is highly dependent on the properties of the
snow layer. The maximum and minimum error for each model as well is the corresponding
variables can be seen in table 4.10.
52
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:59==
Snow Depth[cm]
Salinity[ppt]
Tai[°K]
Terr[cm]
LAML
Min Error
5
6
250
-3.25
Max Error
19
15
270
-18.14
LAMH
Min Error
20
6
250
-13.22
Max Error
34
14
264
-33.14
Table 4.10: The table reports the maximum and minimum TPerr, and the lowest and
highest variable limits for LAML and LAMH.
The track point correction model was ultimately made using linear regression. But early on
polynomial regression was also experimented with. Additionally, while it was eventually
decided to proceed with a 3D model, leaving out density, early on a 4D model was also
experimented with. The intervals for the variables can be seen in in table 4.11.
Snow Depth[cm]
10
50
Salinity[ppt]
4
20
Tai[K]
250
270
Density[kg/m3]
300
400
Table 4.11: The variable ranges for the first altimeter model test. Density is not applicable
to the 3D test.
All these were evaluated as described in section 3.5, but essentially a correction was
considered a fail if the correction error was larger than 1cm. The results and sample size
can be seen in table 4.12.
Sample size
Fail[%]
4D linear
10000
28.21
4D Poly
10000
10.53
3D Linear
1000
29.1
Table 4.12: The table reports the fail percentage as well as the sample size for each test.
4D linear refers to a four dimensional linear model, 4D Poly a polynomial model with four
variables and 3D linear a three dimensional linear model.
Unsurprisingly the Polynomial regression performed the best. The two linear models per-
formed roughly similar, with the 4D model only slightly better. Though the 4D sample size
was ten times bigger. Based in part of these results it was decided, for reasons which will
be discussed in section 5.3, to proceed with a 3D linear model. The final models were
LAML and LAMH, the intervals for which can be seen in table 4.13.
LAML
LAMH
Snow Depth[cm]
5
19
20
34
Salinity[ppt]
6
15
6
14
Tai[K]
250
270
250
264
Table 4.13: Table containing the validity intervals for LAML and LAMH models.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
53
==PAGE:60==
In table 4.14 the results of testing for the two models can be seen. They the show that
in more than 98% of the test cases both models corrected the track point to within 1cm
of the SII. When applied to profiles with the T3 salt distribution the fail percentage was
noticeably higher. With LAMH failing in 16.22% of the cases. Allowing for a 1.5cm error
that percentage falls to, 0.036% and 0.58% for LAML and LAMH respectively.
Sample size
Fail[%]
LAML
5600
1.77
LAMH
6000
1.43
LAML T3
5600
3.11
LAMH T3
6400
16.22
Table 4.14: The table reports the fail percentage as well as the sample size for each test
of the model LAML and LAMH, as well as the same test but with profiles using the T3
distribution.
Plotting the track point correction along side the SII, shows that the corerr discussed in eq.
3.13 tends to become larger as variables move towards extrema. Though in most of the
cases it stays within 1 cm of the SII. 3D plots of the TPcor alongside the the SII, in which
one of the variables is kept constant, can be seen in figures 4.28 and 4.29. The dots are
the corrected track points, while the surface is the known SII. The offset between the two
then represents an error in the correction, ideally all the points should match perfectly
with the surface. The plots in figure 4.28 suggest that the error tends be the largest at
extremes of the snow depth.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.28: (a) A plot of the SII represented as a surface, and the corrected track points
represented by the dots. In this plot Tai was kept constant at 260°K using LAML. (b) A
similar plot but for snow depth and Tai with the salinity kept constant at 9ppt using LAMH.
54
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.29: A plot of the SII represented as a surface, and the corrected track points
represented by the dots. In this case the snow depth is at a constant 12cm, the LAML
model used in for this plot.
One thing to take into account is whether or not the there is a large discontinuity at the
intersection between the two correction models. If the discontinuity is very large it will be
necessary to use a mixture of the two models near the intersection point. To check this
the both were plotted together, in this case a function of snow depth, which showed that
the discontinuity is small.
Figure 4.30: A plot of the correction to be applied, at the intersection between 19 and 20
cm there is a small discontinuity but otherwise they are linear.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
55
==PAGE:62==
The coefficients for the two models can be seen in table 4.15. The labelling follows the
general equation seen in eq. 3.7. Although the formula in that case is related to the
emission layer model, the track point models uses the same variables so equation is the
same.
a
b
c
d
LAML
0.148
-0.886
-0.00218
-0.000428
LAMH
0.388
-0.946
-0.00579
-0.00116
Table 4.15: A table of linear coefficients for the LAML and LAMH models, the coefficients
are labelled following the general form outlined in eq. 3.7.
4.4.2
Ka-Band Correction Model
As mentioned after the correction model for ku-band was made, a set of two similar models
were made for ka-band. Because they used the same methodology as the previous two,
there was no experimentation other types of models. The track point errors for ka-band
are generally larger as a fraction of the snow depth, a summary of the error can be seen
in table 4.16.
Snow Depth[cm]
Salinity[ppt]
Tai[°K]
Terr[cm]
LAML-ka
Min Error
6
6
250
-4.4
Max Error
19
15
267
-19
LAMH-ka
Min Error
19
6
250
-16.42
Max Error
34
15
267
-34.00
Table 4.16: The table reports the maximum and minimum TPerr in ka-band, and the lowest
and highest variable limits for LAML-ka and LAMH-ka.
In this case the correction error generally represents a large fraction of the snow depth.
A plot of the track point relative to the ASI and SII can be seen in figure 4.31. It is clear
that in most cases the track point is at or very near to ASI.
56
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.31: A visualization of the track point relative to the SII and ASI. In this case as a
function increasing salinity, with a Tai of 260°K and snow thickness of 20cm.
The models were both based on their respective ku-band counterpart. This means that
they both have similar intervals in which they are valid. These can be seen in table 4.17.
The results of the testing can be seen in table 4.18. The testing was carried first on the
standard T1 salt distribution, and then on T3 distributed profiles. The fail percentage is
higher on T3 distributions but if the allowed error is expanded to 1.5cm the failure rate
falls to 0.75% and 0.031% for LAML-ka and LAMH-ka respectively.
LAML
LAMH
Snow Depth[cm]
5
20
19
34
Salinity[ppt]
5
20
6
15
Tai[K]
250
267
250
267
Table 4.17: Table of the variable intervals in which the models LAML-ka and LAMH-ka
are considered valid.
Sample size
Fail[%]
LAML-ka
6400
0.98
LAMH-ka
6400
0.23
LAML-ka T3
6400
4.13
LAMH-ka T3
6400
2.63
Table 4.18: The table reports the fail percentage as well as the sample size for each test
of the model LAML-ka and LAMH-ka. The results of the same test but with profiles using
the T3 salt distribution.
Like the ku-band models 3D plots of the corrected track point, in relation to the known SII
were generated. These can seen in figures 4.32, 4.33 and 4.34.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
57
==PAGE:64==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.32: (a) A plot of the SII represented as a surface, and the corrected track points
represented by the dots. In this plot Tai was kept constant at 260°K using LAML-ka. (b)
The same plot but using the LAMH-ka model
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.33: (a) A plot of the SII represented as a surface, and the corrected track points
represented by the dots. In this plot maximum salinity was kept at 9ppt using LAML-ka.
(b) The same plot but using the LAMH-ka model.
58
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.34: (a) A plot of the SII represented as a surface, and the corrected track points
represented by the dots. In this plot the snow depth was kept at 12 cm using LAML-ka.
(b) The same plot but using the LAMH-ka model, with a snow depth of 20cm.
The two plots with constant snow depth, and varying salinity and Tai don’t follow the
plane very well, however the maximum error of both are within the 1cm limit. There are
unfortunately instances where this is not the case, generally with varying snow depth.
Figure 4.35 shows a 2D plot of the corrected track point along with the SII, as a function
of snow depth. The salinity is 15ppt and the Tai of 267°K. The plot shows that for snow
thicknesses above 31cm the corerr is slightly above 1cm.
Figure 4.35: The corrected track point for LAMH-ka, as function of snow depth. The
salinity is constant at 15ppt and Tai at 267°K, the green line is the SII, while the dashed
lines are the ± 1cm limit.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
59
==PAGE:66==
Like the ku-band model there is only a small discontinuity at the intersection between the
two models. The plot is included in appendix A if interested.
The coefficients for the two models can be seen in table 4.19. In general for both the ku-
and ka-band models tend to have a larger chance of failing when at the extremes of all
three variables.
a
b
c
d
LAML-ka
0.110
-1.0226
-0.00134
-3.1997e-4
LAMH-ka
0.144
-1.0323
-0.00179
-4.4141e-4
Table 4.19: A table of linear coefficients for the LAML-ka and LAMH-ka models.
60
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:67==
5
Discussion
In this chapter the various design decisions and results will be discussed and explained.
5.1
Variable Analysis
In this section the choice of variables that were included in the corrections models will be
discussed.
5.1.1
Altimeter Variable Analysis
First the results of the backscatter analysis will be discussed as it gives insight into signals
response to various snow conditions. With some of them leading to significant signal
attenuation and loss. The first case looked at, was saline compared to non-saline snow.
According to known theory the penetration depth decreases, depending on ice type as
newer ice typically contains more salt. This is clearly visible in first the plots of backscatter
for increasing salinity seen in figure 4.1, but also the plot of the backscatter from individual
interfaces seen in figure 4.2. The total backscatter drops off as salinity increases, this is
probably because the penetration depth decreases. When looking at the SII contributions
it becomes almost negligible when the salinity is very high, where the ASI is the dominant
source of backscatter. This is even more apparent when observing in the Ka-band, seen
in figure 4.8 where even at low salinity the ASI is the dominant backscatter source. There
was also a question of how the distribution of the salt would affect the backscatter. To that
end figure 4.3 shows two plots of backscatter for the three salt distribution types introduced
in section 3.1. There is a clear difference between the two plots. In the low salinity plot the
backscatter from the linear distribution is 2db higher, whereas in the high salinity plot the
backscatter is roughly the same. The reason for this difference could be, that in the high
salinity plot the backscatter contributions from the SII is decreased and the ASI becomes
the dominant backscatter source, which is the same for all profiles. Because there is a
negligible difference between the T1 and T3 distributions, salt distribution will not be taken
into account in the correction models. Since the linear distribution is a purely theoretical
distribution, and not likely to be encountered in nature, there is little reason to correct for
it.
As for the snow depth it did not have an effect to the total backscatter level on its own.
It did however affect how long it took to reach the maximum amplitude, as seen in figure
4.4. When combined with saline snow there is a decrease in total backscatter, as well as
an noticeable displacement of the maximum power in time. With regard to the decrease in
backscatter as snow thickness increases, this is likely due to the presence of salt, since
more layers mean more total salt content in the profile. The snow depth will have an
impact on the track point height, due the increased t50 which was seen in section 2.4.
With regard to temperature and density, density didn’t have a noticeable impact backscat-
ter. While temperature as expected had bigger impact at higher salt levels where the
colder snow had a slightly higher backscatter.
Track Point Migration and Variable Choice
The impact of snow conditions on the track point due to the measured quantity t50 was
also analyzed. A flowchart that summarizes the snow properties’ effect on the t50 can be
seen in figure 5.1. As the snow layer becomes thicker the track point moves downwards,
and t50 becomes larger. While in the case of the three other properties the track point is
displaced upwards.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.1: This flowchart summarizes the effect of the four snow properties on t50. As
snow thickness increases t50 becomes larger and the track point moves downwards.
While for the other three variables t50 decreases meaning the track point moves upwards
in the snow layer.
This was also the case for ka-band, though there was difference in the degree of the
impact on t50. With salinity and temperature typically having a higher impact at ka-band.
This would suggest that all four variables should be included in the correction model. In-
deed this was initially the case. However, in the early stages of the development of the
model it was decided to not correct for density. This was because first of all, the addi-
tional variable increases the complexity of the model. But more than that, density profiles
in snow cover is very hard to model accurately. Indeed in a lot of cases including this
project the density is assumed to be constant throughout the entire layer, but this gener-
ally not the case[20]. Typically the snow cover will be divided into distinct layers, as snow
accumulates on a ice sheet. Over time the snow might compact and undergo metamor-
phosis[20], further snow fall on top of the first layer might itself undergo metamorphosis
and compaction. This can then continue with more layers overtime until several layers
are present. Additionally, density can’t be measured remotely but is instead performed
by taking physical on-site measurements, and averaged across a snow pack[21]. There-
fore it was decided to not include snow density as a variable in the final correction model.
Finally, it was also decided focus on saline snow, as this more closely resembles FYI.
5.1.2
Radiometer Variable Analysis
The different snow properties have a significant impact upon radiometer measurements
of Tsi, as was seen in section 4.2. It is clear that there is a big difference between saline
and non-saline snow. For non-saline snow the emission layer is generally being located
in the ice layer, as the snow and ice is very permeable to the microwave measurements,
62
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:69==
especially at lower frequencies. In general the higher the frequency, the lower the pene-
tration, regardless of salt content. For saline snow the level of salinity had a major impact
on the measured temperature and by extension the emission layer. This was in all cases
was located in the snow layer and generally being displaced upwards as the observing fre-
quency increased. In addition the temperature of the snow impacts the derived emission
layer, unlike in the non-saline case. Notably the density had no impact on the radiometer
measurements in both cases. As for salt distribution there was a difference with T3 having
the least upward displacement followed by T1 and then the linear one as seen in figure
4.16. Like for the track point correction model, the linear distribution will be discounted
from the emission layer correction for same reasons as the track point correction. Actu-
ally, accounting for different distribution might be difficult, and creating different models
could be necessary.
Ultimately, it was decided to focus entirely in saline snow. As the saline profiles more
closely resemble FYI while the non-saline profiles resemble MYI which has undergone
desalinisation. Since this project is more concerned with first-year ice, only the saline
case will be corrected for moving forward. Additionally the non-saline is a very different
scenario, with the emission layer having to be corrected upwards instead of the opposite.
Finally as mentioned, profiles with thick layers were briefly explored. Because the division
of the entire ice-snow structure into 1cm layers is not very realistic, based on observed
snow packs. For saline snow, which is the focus of this project, the general trend was
the same but with markedly worse resolution. While for non-saline snow the emission
layer corresponded to the ice-water interface in most cases. The exact reason why the
radiometer model measured such a high temperature in the non-saline case was not de-
termined, as it was not the focus of the project. It might be due to the aforementioned
poor resolution. For this reason it was decided to continue using thin layers, especially
since it is still building on the assumption that the temperature rises linearly. Ultimately,
the thin layers offer far superior resolution, which is important when trying to accurately
locate the emission layer.
5.2
Emission Layer Correction Model
As mentioned in section 3.4, the correction model was initially created using multiple linear
regression however the results were unsatisfactory. It was decided to move away from
linear regression fairly early on, before large scale testing. The decision was based on
individual tests on a small sample of profiles, which were manually inspected. These
tests, other than a few exceptions, generally had similar results as the ones seen in figure
4.22. The main source of errors in identifying the SII is the fact that the temperature
difference between layers in the profiles is generally quite small. Depending on the snow
thickness and Tai it can be as low as 0.012°K up to 0.8°K. This means that even if the
correction error is small it can still easily lead to misidentifying the SII. Later, after PRMH
model was created with its much narrowed range of variables, linear regression was again
experimented with. Using the PRMH dataset the LRM2 model was created, however
individual testing once again gave similar results to LRM1. Only later were both models
tested on a large scale, like the polynomial models. These results are seen in table 4.12
and suggested, for LRM2 at least, that a linear model could be made to work in a limited
range. Although it must be noted that the LRM2 model uses the same dataset and test
range as PRMH, and still failed in nearly a quarter of the test cases. To reach a satisfactory
performance, the variable range would have to be narrowed even further, probably to
around half of its current range based on experiences from the all the other models. Thus
necessitating even more sub models, in the end it was decided that two polynomial models
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
63
==PAGE:70==
were better than probably at least 4 linear models.
Polynomial regression was ultimately chosen for the emission layer correction. It was
able to achieve a good rate of success across a acceptable range. The main drawback is
that it is fairly cumbersome, when looking at table 4.8 the model consists of five equations
with ten terms each. Though this is mostly a problem for the initial setup if implemented in
a script like it was done in this project. For PRML the models snow depth coverage was
initially intended to extend into the sub 10cm range. However, the model never worked
very well in that range, as most of the failed corrections occurred there. Though this
is of course not optimal, there is generally less of a need at those snow thicknesses.
This can be seen in figure 4.17, where for a 10cm snow layer the maximum offset is
5cm at the highest frequencies. While for 20- and 40cm the maximum offset 11 and
26cm respectively, this is not only a larger absolute offset. It also represents a far larger
proportion of the total thickness, especially for the 40cm layer. The same is naturally true
for salinity, as seen in figure 4.15, it was therefore deemed more urgent to correct for
higher salinity.
During testing both PRML and PRMH achieved good success rates on profiles using the
T1 salt distribution. Which is what they were designed for. The analysis of salt distribu-
tions impact on emission layer depth suggested there was a difference between T1 and
T3. It was originally intended to make correction models for both. However due to time
constraints only the T1 model was actually made. Because the difference in emission
layer depth was generally small between distribution types, the current models were also
tested on profiles using T3 distribution. To determine whether or not they could be used
in this scenario. However, the tests showed that both models were unable to correct
effectively.
When the emission layer correction model is used in conjunction with 2.13, the models
shows clear improvement in ice thickness estimation. In the example the ice thickness
was 160cm with a 20cm snow layer, with a maximum salinity of 8ppt and a Tai of 255°K,
thereby falling into the range of PRMH. Adjusting the displacement factor f to 0.71 and
using the uncorrected Teff results in an estimation error of 10cm at 6.9GHz to 50cm at
36.5GHz. Naturally, the error is smallest at lower frequencies This aligns with the plots
in section 4.2 all of which showed a clear trend towards an increase in displacement with
higher frequency. It also matches well with the theory that Teff at 6.9GHz corresponds to
the temperature at the SII, as it has a relatively small error of 10cm. When the corrected
Teff and the same value for f, then the error in estimated ice thickness ranges from 0.8cm
to 1.8cm across the frequency ranges. This is clearly a significant improvement, especially
the the higher frequencies where the error has been reduced by roughly 48cm. It should
be noted that these results was achieved using the empirical formulation of α seen in eq.
2.14. When the formulation for α seen in eq. 2.12 is used, the ice thickness error is slightly
higher, ranging from 6.81cm to 8.4cm. This shows that regardless of which formulation
for α is used, the emission layer correction model greatly improved the estimation of the
ice thickness in this case.
The models were designed to cover as wide a range as possible. Though obviously there
are limitations, for snow depth across the two models a range from 10-35cm is covered.
This corresponds roughly to the interval seen in figure 3.4, which is a plot of distribution of
measured snow depth from operation ice bridge. The vast majority of the measured snow
depth falls in roughly same the ranges as the models. There are extremes which are not
covered, but these are comparatively rare. As for salinity the models cover a range of
8-18ppt and 5-20ppt maximum salinity for PRML and PRMH respectively. When look-
64
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:71==
ing at other examples such as Tonboe(2021) profiles based on in situ measurements are
used. These profiles generally range in maximum salinity from 5-15ppt, in which case the
model ranges correspond well. Looking Tai, the profiles from Tonboe(2021) generally fall
into higher end of the range covered by the models. Though 4 out of the 5 profiles fall into
the range, with the exception of profile 5. It was discovered late in process that the temper-
ature profiles do not work above a Tai of 267°K, though the correction models should still
be valid for Tai from 267°K and below. Looking at other studies such as Nandan(2020)[5],
which describes profiles based on in situ measurements carried out in the arctic. These
generally have larger range than ones used in this project and Tonboe(2021). This is
especially true for salinity, the measurements range from 0 at the lowest to 25ppt at the
highest. In this case the models coverage falls in the middle. Though there is less of a
need for correction at lower salinity, so in that range it is less of a problem. However the
high end from Nandan(2020) is not covered by any of models, in which case it might be
necessary to create a model that covers this. Though from the report it’s not clear how
frequent the the maximum ranges for each measurement set is. As for snow temperature
the ranges described generally fall with in the ranges covered by the models, with one ex-
ception. In one of the measurement sets the snow temperature goes as low as -27.12°C,
while the models are only valid down to -23.15°C.
To conclude, the range covered with regards to snow depth lines up well with the measure-
ments from operation ice bridge. While salinity and temperature match the measurements
described in Tonboe(2021), and covers the middle intervals described in Nandan(2020).
5.3
Track Point Correction Model
For the track point correction model the goal was to create one set of models for both
ku- and ka-bands. How large the needed corrections are depend heavily on the snow
properties. In the ranges used in this project the TPerr can range from 3-49cm in the
widest interval used. While the range of errors in coverage of the LAML, LAMH, LAML-ka
and LAMH-ka models are smaller. The size of the correction is dominated by the snow
thickness, naturally with a thicker layer a larger correction is needed. The salinity and
temperature generally influence how far into the snow layer the track point is displaced.
The ku-band models has to correct errors ranging from 3.25-33.14cm, across the range
of both models. It is also evident that the higher the brine volume the further the track
point is displaced relative to the snow thickness. Both the maximum errors represents
nearly the entire snow layer. While at the lowest variable combinations the track point
is displaced by roughly 65% of the snow thickness. For the ka-band, error intervals for
which can be seen in table 4.16, it is noticeable that in both max error cases the track
point is at the snow surface. This is not actually an edge case as even at the minimum
error of the thick snow model there is only a 2.58cm difference, between the TPerr and
the snow thickness, or 86.42% of the snow thickness. This could also be seen in figure
4.31, where even at a temperature and salinity in the middle of the range, the track point
was located very near to the ASI.
Following the first tests it was decided to use linear regression, and only use three vari-
ables. Though polynomial regression performed better, a simpler model is desired if pos-
sible. The results also indicated a linear model could be made to work by having two
instead of one model. Indeed the models achieved coverage of roughly the same range
as the emission layer models. This also means that both the models have the same pros
and cons with regard to covering the ranges of measured values in real situations as the
emission layer model.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
65
==PAGE:72==
The plots 3D plots in section 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 of the track point vs SII showed that the
corrected track point in general fell within the 1cm limit. Except for a few edge cases, in
the extremes of input values. At first glance figure 4.29 and the corresponding plots for
ka-band seen in figure 4.34 looks very bad, however the actual values of the maximum
error are in most cases well within the stated error limit of 1cm. For the plots with variable
snow depth, the largest error is around 1cm at the most extreme inputs (in the corners).
While it would very desirable to have a perfect match between the track point and SII, a
1cm error is still far better than f.ex. a 18cm error. During testing the ka-band models
performed slightly better than their ku-band counterparts. The ku-band models also has
a problem as there is a small gap between the two models. This reaches from 19-20cm
while this was not a problem in this project as all the profiles used integers for snow depth
due to how the code works. However, if used in a real world application the models could
be used with snow depths which are floats and thus the small gap between in the LAML
and LAMH could pose a problem. The ka-band models do not have this problem as their
coverage is slightly large.
It was also necessary to check if the discontinuity between the two models in each fre-
quency is large. The plot for ku-band can be seen in figure 4.30, while the plot for ka-band
is very similar and thus only included in appendix A. In both cases the discontinuity is very
small and thus a mixing formula between them will not be necessary.
Because the emission layer model was created first, much of that work could be reused.
As result the track point correction model was made in a much shorter frame of time. It
even works into slightly thinner snow covers, reaching down to 5cm as opposed to 10cm.
When testing using T3 salt distributions the models did fail more frequently. The increase
in 3 of the cases was not dramatic, the increase being a few percent at most. However
the LAMH failure rate increased to 16%, the reason for such a dramatic increase for this
one model is not known at this time. An increase in failure rate is not surprising as the
model was created using solely T1 distribution. The models can probably still be used,
though one should be mindful of the higher risk of failure. If a max error of 1.5cm is
acceptable then the failure rate falls to a level similar to that of the T1 profiles. This
results in increased error when utilizing the track point correction to estimate ice thickness
using eq. 2.5. If the estimated SII is off by an error of 1.5cm this results in an error
in ice thickness that is roughly 4cm larger than with a SII error of 1cm. An error in the
estimated SII of 1.5cm gives a total ice thickness error of about 12cm. In most cases,
when the corrected track point is used to estimate the ice thickness, there is a 2-3cm
error in the estimated ice thickness. This represents a significant improvement, as when
using the uncorrected track point the error in the ice thickness estimation is slightly more
than 1m. Even with a track point correction error of 1.5cm the ice thickness estimation still
represents a significant improvement. It should also be pointed out that such a large error
is an edge case. For LAML, LAML-ka and LAMH-ka in more than 95% of all track point
corrections the error was less than 1cm. For LAMH this is significantly lower at 84% of
all corrections, and should definitely be kept in mind if using it on snow with a salt profile
resembling T3.
5.4
Potential Error Sources in Real World Application
Both the models were of course created using artificial profiles. Therefore, while the
correction model might work well in these cases there are a number of sources of potential
errors if used on real snow data. One is the fact that the salinity profiles are approximations
of observed measurements, and there are differences between the two as remarked in
66
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:73==
section 3.1. A real snow pack would likely also have internal layers which haven’t been
modelled here, essentially treating the entire snow cover as a single layer.
During testing the models also enjoyed full and accurate knowledge of the snow proper-
ties. This is not likely be true for real world applications where it might be necessary to
make guesses at the variables based on other measurements carried out over the years.
This will of course affect the correction being made.
5.5
Future Works
If there had been time, more work would definitely have been put into eliminating super-
fluous terms from the emission layer model. The results seen in table 4.9 suggest that a
simpler model is possible, even if the current results are not acceptable. More research
into what terms can be dropped would also be needed, as due to time constraints only
limited work could be put into this. It might be necessary to use different general equa-
tions between the models covering different snow depth intervals. Because the low snow
depth model worked dramatically worse than the model for thicker snow.
Additionally, in the interest of simplifying the models, one could also look into having some
kind of correction term for frequency instead of 5 separate equations. As there is a no-
ticeable trend in how the emission layer estimated is displaced upwards with frequency.
This would help to decrease the bloat present in the current emission layer models.
Finally, the emission layer models both failed when applied to profiles using the T3 salt
distributions. As mentioned all the models were created using T1 distribution by default.
Given the results it is unlikely that the current models can be improved to also work on T3
distribution, it will therefore be necessary to make separate models for these. But due to
time constraints this was not done.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
67
==PAGE:74==
68
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:75==
6
Conclusion
This report describes the creation of correction models for radar altimeter track points and
microwave radiometer emission layer. This first entailed familiarization with the models,
and how to use them. The next step was to create the profiles, which required temper-
ature and salinity profiles. The temperature profiles were made on the assumption that
the temperature rises in a piecewise linear fashion down through the snow and ice floe.
The salinity profiles were based on two examples of salinity measurement. Both mea-
surements were carried out with a resolution of 1cm, and showed different distributions
of the salt. Though in both cases it was concentrated in the bottom with the top layers
being relatively free of salt. A third distribution type was created, which is a strictly linear
increase in salt with depth. With the profiles created, the input data for profiles was in
place. The next step was to evaluate the models response to different snow properties,
this was then used to decide which variables to include in the correction models. This
showed that for emission layers the model would correct for snow thickness, salinity and
Tai. While the track point was affected by all three and additionally the snow density.
The track point correction model was created using linear regression. While originally in-
tended to correct for all four variables, it was ultimately decided to leave out density. Due
to the fact that models tend to have a limited interval in which it accurately models the in-
tended relationship, it was split into two models for thin and thick snow cover respectively.
Two sets of models was created to cover both ku and ka frequency bands.
The radiometer model was likewise split into two models for thin and thick snow. Like the
track point model it was initially tried to implement linear regression. Unfortunately, these
linear models didn’t achieve the desired accuracy, and had a tendency to overcorrect.
Therefore, the correction model was implemented using polynomial regression instead.
Both models were tested by applying the corrections to a large number of profiles. The
quality of the corrections were then evaluated, based on criteria set up for each model.
For the emission layer model this was if the mean of all the offsets from the SII was larger
than the uncorrected ones. While for the track point model it was if the correction error
was larger than 1cm. Using the models, variable ranges was adjusted until a satisfactory
fail percentage was achieved, usually below 2%, with the lowest being 0.4%.
The corrections were then plotted to get a better understanding of the results. This showed
that the plots broadly matched the requirements set for accuracy. For the track point
correction it was observed that there was some deviation from the known position of the
SII by corrected track point. Though except for a few fringe cases they were all within
the 1cm limit set during evaluation. As for the emission layer though in some cases the
corrected emission layer, aligned with the SII. In most cases the correction was not perfect
but overall still an improvement over the non-corrected emission layer.
Finally, discussion explaining the the design decision made throughout the project. Over-
all, the desired objectives were achieved, though there is some room for improvement.
First of all, because the emission layer was created using polynomial regression it is rather
cumbersome to use, with its ten terms as opposed to 5. On top of this since the radiome-
ter model MEML measures across a range of discrete frequencies, it was necessary to
cover, though this was narrowed down to five frequencies. This was achieved by making
separate models for each, though always kept as part of the same system of models.
This only adds to the considerable bloat already present from the polynomial regression.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
69
==PAGE:76==
Thus it would be very desirable to find a way to simplify the models. An option which
was experimented with, but never finished due to time constraints, was simply eliminating
terms from the polynomial model which are statistically insignificant. While also finding
an alternative to using five separate equations for frequencies, maybe using a correction
term instead.
There is also a question about coverage. The models cover the ranges discussed in
Tonboe(2021) in most cases, however Nandan(2020) outlines the results from different
measurement field campaigns. Some of these reach significantly higher peak salinity than
are covered by any of the models created. Therefore it might be necessary to extend the
models’ coverage, or create new ones to cover this range.
In conclusion, the main objectives were accomplished and the models show good results
in the test environment outlined. Though were is some room for refinement, especially
with regard to the emission layer model. How well the different models will perform when
applied to real world measurements remains to be seen.
70
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
T. Parrinello et al. “CryoSat: ESA’s ice mission – Eight years in space”. eng. In: Ad-
vances in Space Research 62.6 (2018), pp. 1178–1190. ISSN: 18791948, 02731177.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2018.04.014.
[2]
Keiji Imaoka et al. “Status of AMSR2 instrument on GCOM-W1”. eng. In: Proceed-
ings of Spie - the International Society for Optical Engineering 8528 (2012), p. 852815.
ISSN: 1996756x, 0277786x. DOI: 10.1117/12.977774.
[3]
Hoyeon Shi et al. “Simultaneous estimation of wintertime sea ice thickness and
snow depth from space-borne freeboard measurements”. eng. In: Cryosphere 14.11
(2020), pp. 3761–3783. ISSN: 19940424, 19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc-14-3761-2020.
[4]
Dorothy K. Hall et al. “Comparison of satellite-derived and in-situ observations of
ice and snow surface temperatures over Greenland”. eng. In: Remote Sensing of
Environment 112.10 (2008), pp. 3739–3749. ISSN: 18790704, 00344257. DOI: 10.
1016/j.rse.2008.05.007.
[5]
Vishnu Nandan et al. “Snow Property Controls on Modeled Ku-Band Altimeter Esti-
mates of First-Year Sea Ice Thickness: Case Studies from the Canadian and Norwe-
gian Arctic”. eng. In: Ieee Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations
and Remote Sensing 13 (2020), pp. 1082–1096. ISSN: 21511535, 19391404. DOI:
10.1109/JSTARS.2020.2966432.
[6]
Robbie D. C. Mallett et al. “Brief Communication: Conventional assumptions involv-
ing the speed of radar waves in snow introduce systematic underestimates to sea
ice thickness and seasonal growth rate estimates”. eng. In: Cryosphere Discussions
(2019), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 19940440, 19940432. DOI: 10.5194/tc-2019-198.
[7]
“Solid-Surface Sensing: Microwave and Radio Frequencies”. In: Introduction to the
Physics and Techniques of Remote Sensing. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2006. Chap. 6,
pp. 201–340. ISBN: 9780471783398. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/0471783390.ch6.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/0471783390.ch6. URL: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/0471783390.ch6.
[8]
Rasmus T. Tonboe. “Radar backscatter modelling for sea ice radar altimetry”. eng.
In: (2021).
[9]
Rasmus T. Tonboe et al. “Simulated Ka-and Ku-band radar altimeter height and
freeboard estimation on snow-covered Arctic sea ice”. eng. In: Cryosphere 15.4
(2021), pp. 1811–1822. ISSN: 19940424, 19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc- 15- 1811-
2021.
[10]
SG BEAVEN et al. “LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS OF RADAR BACKSCAT-
TER FROM BARE AND SNOW-COVERED SALINE ICE SHEETS”. eng. In: Inter-
national Journal of Remote Sensing 16.5 (1995), pp. 851–876. ISSN: 13665901,
01431161. DOI: 10.1080/01431169508954448.
[11]
Niels Skou and David Le Vine. Microwave Radiometer Systems, Design and Analy-
sis. eng. Artech House, 2006, xi, 222 p (unknown). ISBN: 1580539742, 1580539750,
9781580539746, 9781580539753.
[12]
Neils Skou. Microwave Radiometer Systems: Design and Analysis of Real Aperture
Systems. 2019.
[13]
Sang Moo Lee, Byung Ju Sohn, and Seong Joong Kim. “Differentiating between
first-year and multiyear sea ice in the Arctic using microwave-retrieved ice emis-
sivities”. eng. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 122.10 (2017), pp. 5097–5112.
ISSN: 21562202, 01480227, 21698996, 2169897x. DOI: 10.1002/2016JD026275.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
71
==PAGE:78==
[14]
Tom Carrieres et al. Sea Ice Analysis and Forecasting: Towards an Increased Re-
liance on Automated Prediction Systems. eng. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
DOI: 10.1017/9781108277600.
[15]
Christian Mätzler. “Improved Born approximation for scattering of radiation in a gran-
ular medium”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Physics 83.11 (1998), pp. 6111–6117.
ISSN: 10897550, 00218979. DOI: 10.1063/1.367496.
[16]
Christian Matzler et al. Thermal Microwave Radiation - Applications for Remote
Sensing. Vol. 52. Jan. 2006. ISBN: 978-086341-573-9. DOI: 10.1049/PBEW052E.
[17]
David A. Freedman. Statistical models: Theory and practice. eng. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2009, pp. 1–442. ISBN: 0511602588, 0511603363, 0511604149, 0511650701,
0511815867, 0521112435, 0521743850, 110718827x, 1107384419, 9780511602580,
9780511603365, 9780511604140, 9780511650703, 9780511815867, 9780521112437,
9780521743853, 9781107188273, 9781107384415. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511815867.
[18]
Priyanka Sinha. “Multivariate Polynomial Regression in Data Mining: Methodology,
Problems and Solutions”. eng. In: International Journal of Scientific Engineering
Research 4.12 (2013), pp. 962–965. ISSN: ISSN 2229-5518.
[19]
Mohammed Shokr and Nirmal Sinha. Sea Ice: Physics and Remote Sensing. eng.
wiley, 2015, pp. 1–579. ISBN: 1119027888, 1119027896, 1119027969, 1119028000,
9781119027881, 9781119027898, 9781119027966, 9781119028000. DOI: 10.1002/
9781119028000.
[20]
Joshua King et al. “Local-scale variability of snow density on Arctic sea ice”. eng. In:
Cryosphere 14.12 (2020), p. 4323. ISSN: 19940424, 19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc-
14-4323-2020.
[21]
Forsst Sanja et al. “Thickness and density of snow-covered sea ice and hydrostatic
equilibrium assumption from in situ measurements in Fram Strait, the Barents Sea
and the Svalbard coast”. In: Annals of Glaciology 5257 (May 2011). DOI: 10.3189/
172756411795931598.
72
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:79==
A
Appendix: Supplementary Plots
A.1
Radiometer
In figures A.1 and A.2 plots of the emission layer for different Tai and density.
Figure A.1: The depth of the emission layer for different starting temperature, thus shorter
temperature ranges.
Figure A.2: The depth of the emission layer for different values of density of snow.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
73
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.3 shows the emission layer depth for different densities in saline snow.
Figure A.3: The emission layer depth for saline snow with a maximum salinity of 14ppt,
with varying snow density plotted for 300,350 and 400 kg/m3.
A.2
Altimeter
Backscatter plots for density in ku-band can be seen in figure A.4.
(a) Picture 1
(b) Picture 2
Figure A.4: (a) The total backscatter for 300, 350 and 400 kg/m3 with a non-saline profile.
(b) The same plot but at a maximum salinity of 5ppt.
Additional backscatter plots for ka-band can be seen in figures A.5, A.6 and A.7.
Additional backscatter plots can be seen in
74
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:81==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.5: (a) The total backscatter for 10, 20 and 40cm snow layer at 5ppt in ka-band.
(b) The same plot but at a maximum salinity of 14ppt.
(a) Picture 1
(b) Picture 2
Figure A.6: (a) The total backscatter for 300, 350 and 400 kg/m3 with a non-saline profiles
in ka-band. (b) The same plot but at a maximum salinity of 5ppt.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
75
==PAGE:82==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.7: (a) The total backscatter for -23.15, -10 and -7°C starting temperature with
a maximum salinity of 5ppt in ka-band. (b) The same plot but at a maximum salinity of
14ppt.
Seen in figure A.8 is a plot of the correction models intersection in ka-band.
Figure A.8: A plot of the correction for snow depth across the intersection of the two ka-
models. The discontinuity is very small.
Measurements of salinity in 10cm snow layers with a 1cm resolution can be seen in figure
A.9. Included here with the permission of Rasmus Tonboe. Carried out on Febuary 20.
2020 by Rasmus Tonboe.
76
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:83==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.9: (a) Measurements of salinity in a 10cm snow layer, taken in situ to a 1cm
resolution. This measurement forms the basis for the type 1 distribution. (b) Again in situ
measurements, this one forms to the basis for the type 3 distribution.
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
77
==PAGE:84==
B
Appendix: Source Code
This appendix contains code listings for some of the main implementations. Note that this
is by no means an exhaustive list, but only the most important was included. Seen below
is a modified version of the cryomod altimeter model provided by Rasmus Tonboe.
1
%backscatter model for snow and ice
2
3
% inputs: number of layers , Temp(K), roughness , Layer density , depth,
correlation length , salinity , water content , type
4
% output:
5
function thalv=cryomod6(num,TK,rms,Dens,d,pcc,sal,wc,si,freq)
6
7
d2rf=0.01745329;
8
%ia=47.0;
9
ia=0.0;
10
k=(2 .*3.14159) ./(0.3 ./freq);
11
eair=1.0+0.0i;
12
ang_ia=ia .*d2rf;
13
14
n=max(size(num));
15
if n == 0
16
return
17
end
18
19
%temperature from Kelvin to Celsius
20
T=TK-273.15;
21
22
%correlation length in meters
23
pcc=0.001 .*pcc;
24
25
% porosity of snow
26
snow_porosity = porosity(wc, Dens(1),Dens(2));
27
28
% water saturation
29
S = wc(1)/snow_porosity(1)*100;
30
31
% find the volume of brine depending on type ice or snow
32
v = zeros(n,1)';
33
for idx=1:n
34
if si(idx) == 1
35
v(idx)=Dens(idx) ./926;
36
else
37
v(idx)=Vb(T(idx),sal(idx));
38
end
39
end
40
41
%dielectric constant of background and particles
42
eh = zeros(n,1)';
43
ep = zeros(n,1)';
44
for idx=1:n
45
if si(idx) == 1
46
eh(idx)=1.0+0.0i;
47
ep(idx)=epice(TK(idx),freq,sal(idx));
48
else
49
eh(idx)=epice(TK(idx),freq ,0);
50
ep(idx)=ebrine2(freq,T(idx),sal(idx));
51
end
78
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:85==
52
end
53
54
%effective dielectric constant using a two-phase PVS form. for spheres
55
e = zeros(n,1)';
56
for idx=1:n
57
e(idx)=eice_s2p(eh(idx),ep(idx),v(idx));
58
end
59
60
for idx=1:n
61
if si(idx) == 1
62
63
if (S > 15)
64
e(idx)=slush_permittivity(freq,TK(idx),snow_porosity(1),sal(idx));
65
66
else
67
e(idx)=snow_permittivity(freq,TK(idx),Dens(idx),sal(idx));
68
end
69
end
70
end
71
72
ang = zeros(n,1)';
73
for idx=1:n
74
if idx==1
75
ang(idx)=transang(ang_ia,eair,e(idx));
76
else
77
ang(idx)=transang(ang(idx-1),e(idx-1),e(idx));
78
end
79
end
80
81
82
%Fresnell reflection and transmission coefficients
83
R = zeros(n,1)';
84
R_ = zeros(n,1)';
85
Rll = zeros(n,1)';
86
T_ = zeros(n,1)';
87
Tll = zeros(n,1)';
88
for idx=1:n
89
if idx==1
90
R(idx)=FR_(0,0,eair,e(idx));
91
R_(idx)=FR_(ang_ia,ang(idx),eair,e(idx));
92
Rll(idx)=FRll(ang_ia,ang(idx),eair,e(idx));
93
T_(idx)=FT_(ang_ia,ang(idx),eair,e(idx));
94
Tll(idx)=FTll(ang_ia,ang(idx),eair,e(idx));
95
else
96
R(idx)=FR_(0,0,e(idx-1),e(idx));
97
R_(idx)=FR_(ang(idx-1),ang(idx),e(idx-1),e(idx));
98
Rll(idx)=FRll(ang(idx-1),ang(idx),e(idx-1),e(idx));
99
T_(idx)=FT_(ang(idx-1),ang(idx),e(idx-1),e(idx));
100
Tll(idx)=FTll(ang(idx-1),ang(idx),e(idx-1),e(idx));
101
end
102
end
103
104
%R
105
%scattering and absorption coefficients and Loss
106
107
ks = zeros(n,1)';
108
kb = zeros(n,1)';
109
ka = zeros(n,1)';
110
ke = zeros(n,1)';
111
loss = zeros(n,1)';
112
ss = zeros(n,1)';
113
for idx=1:n
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
79
==PAGE:86==
114
115
ks(idx)=iborn_s2p_sc(eh(idx),ep(idx),e(idx),v(idx),k,pcc(idx));
116
kb(idx)=iborn_s2p_bc(eh(idx),ep(idx),e(idx),v(idx),k,pcc(idx));
117
ka(idx)=iborn_s2p_ab(eh(idx),ep(idx),e(idx),v(idx),k);
118
%ka(idx)=HWabsorp(e(idx),k);
119
ke(idx)=ks(idx)+ka(idx);
120
ks(idx);
121
ka(idx);
122
ke(idx);
123
124
%loss
125
loss(idx)=extloss(d(idx),ang(idx),ke(idx));
126
127
%ss(idx)=goptics(R(idx),rms(idx),ang(idx-1));
128
%ss(idx)=goptics(R(idx),rms(idx),0);
129
ss(idx)=UC(R(idx),rms(idx));
130
131
end
132
133
%n
134
%total backscatter
135
parts_hh=rt(n,kb,ss,loss,T_);
136
HH=10.*log10(sum(parts_hh));
137
parts_vv=rt(n,kb,ss,loss,Tll);
138
VV=10.*log10(sum(parts_vv));
139
% disp("total lin"), disp(sum(parts_vv));
140
% disp("parts lin:"), disp(parts_vv);
141
% disp("total db"), disp(VV);
142
% disp("parts db:"), disp(10.*log10(parts_vv));
143
144
[tids,tpower]=waveform(n,0.001.*parts_vv ,d',e);
145
146
len=max(size(tpower));
147
148
thalv=1e-11;
149
phalv=10000.0;
150
shalv=9999.0;
151
tpeak=0.0;
152
ppeak=tpower(len-1);
153
154
for idx=1:len-1
155
if (tpower(idx) <=(0.5.*tpower(len-1)))
156
thalv=tids(idx);
157
phalv=tpower(idx);
158
shalv=tpower(idx+1)-tpower(idx);
159
end
160
end
161
162
%data=[tids;tpower];
163
164
end
Listing B.1: Modified version of the altimeter model provided by Rasmus Tonboe. The
modifications are small optimizations to speed up compilation especially when the model
run through thousands of iterations.
Seen below is the main script implementation the polynomial regression for the emission
layer correction. It creates the regression model and then applies it to a test sample of
profiles and records the results.
80
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:87==
1
clear all;
2
close all;
3
4
freqs= [6.9, 10.7, 18.7, 31.5, 36.5];
5
6
% Chosen model for low: L20_low2 , test interval: low
7
8
% Chosen model for high: L20_improved , test interval: improved2
9
10
% low
11
% salinity = round(linspace(7,18,20),2);
12
% T = round(linspace(250,265,20) ,2);
13
% snowDepth = 10:20; % snow depth
14
15
16
17
% version: improved
18
% salinity = round(linspace(3,20,n),2);
19
% T = round(linspace(250,270,n),2);
20
% snowDepth = 18:35; % snow depth
21
22
% version: improved low
23
% salinity = round(linspace(5,20,20),2);
24
% T = round(linspace(250,270,20) ,2);
25
% snowDepth = 5:20; % snow depth
26
27
% version low 3
28
% salinity = round(linspace(5,15,20),2);
29
% T = round(linspace(250,265,20) ,2);
30
% snowDepth = 5:15; % snow depth
31
32
% version: low 4
33
% salinity = round(linspace(8,18,20),2);
34
% T = round(linspace(250,265,20) ,2);
35
% snowDepth = 5:15; % snow depth
36
37
% version: improved2
38
salinity = round(linspace(5,20,20),2);
39
T = round(linspace(250,270,20),2);
40
snowDepth = 16:35; % snow depth
41
42
% load regression variables 8000 elements
43
% Var_20 = importdata('Variables\Variables_L20_low2.txt');
44
% delta_T_20 = importdata('deltaT\deltaT_L20_low2.txt');
45
46
Var_20 = importdata('Variables\Variables_testTing.txt');
47
delta_T_20 = importdata('deltaT\deltaT_terms_testTing.txt');
48
Var_20(:,1) = Var_20(:,1)*0.01;
49
50
fitCo_20 = zeros(10,5); % polyvaln
51
GoF_20 = zeros(5,1);
52
for i = 1:5
53
p_20 = polyfitn(Var_20,delta_T_20(:,i),2);
54
fitCo_20(:,i) = p_20.Coefficients;
55
GoF_20(i) = p_20.R2;
56
57
end
58
59
60
a = min(delta_T_20);
61
b = max(delta_T_20);
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
81
==PAGE:88==
62
63
[M,i] = min(abs(delta_T_20),[],1);
64
65
[fnum,err]=fopen('analysis things\cor_performance_high_final.txt',"w");
66
[fnum3,err3]=fopen('analysis things\overview_high_final.txt',"w");
67
68
n = length(snowDepth);
69
m = length(snowDepth)^3;
70
trueLayerOffset = zeros(m,5);
71
corLayerOffset = zeros(m,5);
72
cor_performance = zeros(m,5);
73
shitty_cor = zeros(m,5);
74
improve = zeros(m,1);
75
overview = zeros(m,4);
76
k = 0;
77
for
q = 1:length(salinity) % loop
78
for w = 1:length(snowDepth)
79
for e = 1:length(T)
80
k = k + 1;
81
82
str = "Profiles_test2\profile_"+salinity(q)+"ppt_"+snowDepth(w)+"
cm_"+T(e)+"K_T1.txt";
83
str2 = "Teffv_test2\Teffv_"+salinity(q)+"ppt_"+snowDepth(w)+"cm_"+
T(e)+"K_T1.txt";
84
%
str = "Files_T3\Profiles_high\profile_"+salinity(q)+"ppt_"+
snowDepth(w)+"cm_"+T(e)+"K_T1.txt";
85
%
str2 = "Files_T3\Teffv_high\Teffv_"+salinity(q)+"ppt_"+snowDepth
(w)+"cm_"+T(e)+"K_T1.txt";
86
87
dataFile = importdata(str2);
88
dataFile_2 = importdata(str);
89
90
dataFile = dataFile(2:6);
91
TK = dataFile_2(:,2);
92
salt = dataFile_2(:,7);
93
si = dataFile_2(:,9);
94
95
for j =1:size(dataFile_2 ,1)
96
if (si(j) == 3)
97
sal = salt(j - 1);
98
SD = (j - 1)*0.01;
99
snowBot = (j - 1);
100
break
101
end
102
end
103
Tai = TK(1);
104
105
% L20 correction
106
cor_L20 = fitCo_20(1,1:5)*SD^2 + fitCo_20(2,1:5)*(SD*sal) +
fitCo_20(3,1:5)*(SD*Tai)...
107
+ fitCo_20(4,1:5)*SD + fitCo_20(5,1:5)*sal^2 + fitCo_20(6,1:5)*(
sal*Tai) + fitCo_20(7,1:5)*sal...
108
+ fitCo_20(8,1:5)*Tai^2 + fitCo_20(9,1:5)*Tai + fitCo_20(10,1:5);
109
110
corrected_L20 = dataFile + cor_L20;
111
112
diff = TK - dataFile;
113
[M,i] = min(abs(diff),[],1);
114
115
diff_cor_L20 = TK - corrected_L20;
116
[M_cor_L20 ,i_cor_L20] = min(abs(diff_cor_L20),[],1);
117
82
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:89==
118
Tsi = TK(snowBot);
119
trueOffset = Tsi - dataFile;
120
corErr = trueOffset - cor_L20;
121
Error = corrected_L20 - Tsi;
122
123
trueLayerOffset(k,:) = i - snowBot;
124
corLayerOffset(k,:) = i_cor_L20 - snowBot;
125
126
if (mean(corLayerOffset(k,:)) == 0)
127
improve(k) = 1;
128
129
elseif (mean(abs(corLayerOffset(k,:))) < mean(abs(trueLayerOffset(
k,:))))
130
improve(k) = 2;
131
132
else
133
improve(k) = 0;
134
end
135
136
overview(k,1) = salinity(q);
137
overview(k,2) = snowDepth(w)*0.01;
138
overview(k,3) = T(e);
139
overview(k,4) = improve(k);
140
141
cor_performance(k,:) = abs(trueLayerOffset(k,:)) - abs(
corLayerOffset(k,:));
142
143
144
data = [cor_performance(k,1),cor_performance(k,2),cor_performance(
k,3),cor_performance(k,4),cor_performance(k,5)];
145
data3 = [overview(k,1),overview(k,2),overview(k,3),overview(k,4)];
146
fprintf(fnum,'%5.3f %5.3f %5.5f %5.5f %5.5f\n',data ');
147
fprintf(fnum3,'%5.3f %5.3f %5.5f %5.5f\n',data3 ');
148
149
if mod(k,1000) == 0
150
k
151
end
152
153
154
end
155
end
156
end
157
158
fclose(fnum);
159
fclose(fnum3);
Listing B.2: Main emission layer correction model implementation script.
Seen below is the model evaluation script, it utilizes the output data from the previously
seen implementation script.
1
clear all;
2
3
cor_performance = importdata('analysis shit\cor_shittiness_high_T3.txt');
4
overview = importdata("analysis shit\overview_high_T3.txt");
5
6
7
b = [overview(:,1:3) cor_performance];
8
9
bad_cor = overview(overview(:, 4) == 0, :);
10
perfect_cor = overview(overview(:, 4) == 1, :);
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
83
==PAGE:90==
11
improve_cor = overview(overview(:, 4) == 2, :);
12
13
14
percent_fail = length(bad_cor(:,1))/length(overview(:,1))*100;
15
percent_perfect = length(perfect_cor(:,1))/length(overview(:,1))*100;
16
percent_improve = length(improve_cor(:,1))/length(overview(:,1))*100;
17
18
19
% counting for Bad
20
badSal_low = bad_cor(:,1);
21
badSD_low = bad_cor(:,2);
22
badT_low = bad_cor(:,3);
23
24
[C_SD_low ,ia_SD_low ,ic_SD_low] = unique(badSD_low);
25
SD_counts_low = accumarray(ic_SD_low ,1);
26
value_counts_SD_low = [C_SD_low , SD_counts_low];
27
28
[C_sal_low ,ia_sal_low ,ic_sal_low] = unique(badSal_low);
29
sal_counts_low = accumarray(ic_sal_low ,1);
30
value_counts_sal_low = [C_sal_low , sal_counts_low];
31
32
[C_T_low ,ia_T_low ,ic_T_low] = unique(badT_low);
33
T_counts_low = accumarray(ic_T_low ,1);
34
value_counts_T_low = [C_T_low , T_counts_low];
35
36
% counting for perfect
37
PerSal = perfect_cor(:,1);
38
PerSD = perfect_cor(:,2);
39
PerT = perfect_cor(:,3);
40
41
[C_SD_per ,ia_SD_per ,ic_SD_per] = unique(PerSD);
42
SD_counts_per = accumarray(ic_SD_per ,1);
43
value_counts_SD_per = [C_SD_per , SD_counts_per];
44
45
[C_sal_per ,ia_sal_per ,ic_sal_per] = unique(PerSal);
46
sal_counts_per = accumarray(ic_sal_per ,1);
47
value_counts_sal_per = [C_sal_per , sal_counts_per];
48
49
[C_T_per ,ia_T_per ,ic_T_per] = unique(PerT);
50
T_counts_per = accumarray(ic_T_per ,1);
51
value_counts_T_per = [C_T_per , T_counts_per];
52
53
partial_fail = cor_performance(any(cor_performance <0,2),:);
54
percent_partial_fail = length(partial_fail(:,1))/length(cor_performance(:,1))
*100;
Listing B.3: Emission layer performance evaluation script.
Seen below is the main track point correction model implementation script. Also cre-
ates the model from datasets and then tests the model on a large sample of test profiles,
recording the results.
1
clear all;
2
close all;
3
4
thalv_water = 63.96;
5
6
% ku_3D_high3 is the chosen model for thick snow in ku band, interval set:
7
% high 3
8
9
% ku_3D_low2 is the chosen model for thin snow in ku band, interval set:
84
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:91==
10
% low end 4
11
12
% ka_3D_low_L50 is the chosen model for thin snow layers in ka-band
13
% interval set: low end 4 ka
14
15
% ka_3D_high3 is the chosen model for thick laters in ka-band, interval
16
% set: high 3 ka
17
18
Var = importdata("Reg_variables\variables_ka_3D_high3.txt");
19
TP = importdata("Reg_variables\outVal_ka_3D_high3.txt");
20
Var(:,1) = Var(:,1).*0.01;
21
Var = [ones(size(Var(:,1))) Var];
22
snowt = TP(:,1);
23
icet = TP(:,2);
24
sfb = TP(:,3);
25
dlay = TP(:,4);
26
thalv = TP(:,5);
27
28
track_point_water = 10 - (10.0 - 0.003*(thalv_water));
29
track_point = (10.0 - 0.003*(dlay + thalv)) + track_point_water;
30
SII = sfb - snowt;
31
32
TP_error = SII - track_point;
33
34
35
[fit_coeff ,bint,r,rint,stats] = regress(TP_error ,Var);
36
37
38
%% correction test
39
% old variable set
40
% snowDepth = [10 13 19 20 20 23 25 29 40 50]; % snow depth
41
% salinity = [4 5 7 8 9 10 11 12 14 20]; % max salinity
42
% T = [250 252 256 258 260 262 264 266 267 268]; %start temp
43
44
% improved low end variable set
45
% snowDepth = 5:25;
46
% salinity = round(linspace(4,12,20),2);
47
% T = round(linspace(250,270,20) ,2);
48
49
% improved low2
50
% snowDepth = 5:20;
51
% salinity = round(linspace(4,12,20),2);
52
% T = round(linspace(250,265,20) ,2);
53
54
% low end 3
55
% snowDepth = 5:15;
56
% salinity = round(linspace(4,14,20),2);
57
% T = round(linspace(250,265,20) ,2);
58
59
% low end 4
60
% snowDepth = 6:19;
61
% salinity = round(linspace(6,15,20),2);
62
% T = round(linspace(250,267,20) ,2);
63
64
% low end 4 ka
65
% snowDepth = 5:20;
66
% salinity = round(linspace(5,20,20),2);
67
% T = round(linspace(250,267,20) ,2);
68
69
% improved high end variable set
70
% snowDepth = 20:40;
71
% salinity = round(linspace(10,20,20),2);
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
85
==PAGE:92==
72
% T = round(linspace(250,270,20),2);
73
74
% high end 2
75
% snowDepth = 20:35;
76
% salinity = round(linspace(10,20,20),2);
77
% T = round(linspace(250,270,20),2);
78
79
% high 3
80
% snowDepth = 19:34;
81
% salinity = round(linspace(6,14,20),2);
82
% T = round(linspace(250,264,20),2);
83
84
% high 3 ka
85
snowDepth = 19:34;
86
salinity = round(linspace(6,15,20),2);
87
T = round(linspace(250,267,20),2);
88
89
90
91
n = length(snowDepth);
92
m = length(snowDepth)*length(salinity)*length(T);
93
correction_error = zeros(m,4);
94
k = 0;
95
for q = 1:length(salinity)
96
for w = 1:length(snowDepth)
97
for t = 1:length(T)
98
k = k + 1;
99
%
str = "Profiles_low\lowL40\profile_"+salinity(q)+"ppt_"+
snowDepth(w)+"cm_"+T(t)+"K_T1.txt";
100
%
dataFile = importdata(str);
101
dataFile = profile_creator_auto3(salinity(q),snowDepth(w),T(t)
,300);
102
num = dataFile(:,1);
103
TK = dataFile(:,2);
104
rms = dataFile(:,3);
105
Dens = dataFile(:,4);
106
d = 0.01*dataFile(:,5); % depth converted to m from cm
107
pcc = dataFile(:,6);
108
salt = dataFile(:,7);
109
wc = dataFile(:,8);
110
si = dataFile(:,9);
111
112
%freq=13.6; % ku band
113
freq=35.75; %ka-band
114
115
116
g=max(size(num));
117
for j =1:size(dataFile ,1)
118
if (si(j) == 3)
119
sal = salt(j - 1);
120
SD = 0.01*(j - 1);
121
break
122
end
123
end
124
Tai = TK(1);
125
126
thalv_test=cryomod6(num,TK,rms,Dens,d,pcc,salt ,0.01.*wc,si,
freq);
127
[sfb_test ,dlay_test]=freeboard(d,Dens);
128
[snowt_test ,icet]=thickness(g,d,si);
129
130
cor = fit_coeff(1) + fit_coeff(2)*SD + fit_coeff(3)*sal +
86
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:93==
fit_coeff(4)*Tai;
131
132
track_point_test = (10.0 - 0.003*(dlay_test*1e11 + thalv_test)
) + track_point_water;
133
track_point_cor = track_point_test + cor;
134
SII_test = sfb_test - snowt_test;
135
136
correction_error(k,1) = snowDepth(w);
137
correction_error(k,2) = salinity(q);
138
correction_error(k,3) = T(t);
139
correction_error(k,4) = SII_test - track_point_cor;
140
141
if mod(k,1000) == 0
142
k
143
end
144
145
146
end
147
end
148
end
149
150
writematrix(correction_error ,'Analysis\3D_cor_error_high_T3_ka.txt');
Listing B.4: Main track point correction model implementation script.
Seen below is the model test evaluation script for the track point correction model.
1
clear all;
2
3
cor_error_3D_low = importdata('Analysis\3D_cor_error_low_T3_ka.txt');
4
cor_error_3D_high = importdata('Analysis\3D_cor_error_high_T3_ka.txt');
5
6
max_error_3D_low = max(abs(cor_error_3D_low(:,4)));
7
min_error_3D_low = min(abs(cor_error_3D_low(:,4)));
8
9
max_error_3D_high = max(abs(cor_error_3D_high(:,4)));
10
min_error_3D_high = min(abs(cor_error_3D_high(:,4)));
11
12
badness_3D_low = find(abs(cor_error_3D_low(:,4)) >0.0099);
13
badness_3D_high = find(abs(cor_error_3D_high(:,4)) >0.0099);
14
fail_percent_3D_low = length(badness_3D_low)/size(cor_error_3D_low ,1)*100;
15
fail_percent_3D_high = length(badness_3D_high)/size(cor_error_3D_high ,1)*100;
16
17
cm2_3D_low = find(abs(cor_error_3D_low(:,4)) >0.015);
18
cm2_3D_high = find(abs(cor_error_3D_high(:,4)) >0.015);
19
fail_percent_cm2_3D_low = length(cm2_3D_low)/size(cor_error_3D_low ,1)*100;
20
fail_percent_cm2_3D_high = length(cm2_3D_high)/size(cor_error_3D_high ,1)*100;
21
22
23
shitty_var_3D_low = cor_error_3D_low(abs(cor_error_3D_low(:, 4)) > 0.0099, :);
24
shitty_var_3D_high = cor_error_3D_high(abs(cor_error_3D_high(:, 4)) > 0.0099,
:);
25
26
% counting for low end formula
27
badSD_low = shitty_var_3D_low(:,1);
28
badSal_low = shitty_var_3D_low(:,2);
29
badT_low
= shitty_var_3D_low(:,3);
30
31
[C_SD_low ,ia_SD_low ,ic_SD_low] = unique(badSD_low);
32
SD_counts_low = accumarray(ic_SD_low ,1);
33
value_counts_SD_low = [C_SD_low , SD_counts_low];
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
87
==PAGE:94==
34
35
[C_sal_low ,ia_sal_low ,ic_sal_low] = unique(badSal_low);
36
sal_counts_low = accumarray(ic_sal_low ,1);
37
value_counts_sal_low = [C_sal_low , sal_counts_low];
38
39
[C_T_low ,ia_T_low ,ic_T_low] = unique(badT_low);
40
T_counts_low = accumarray(ic_T_low ,1);
41
value_counts_T_low = [C_T_low , T_counts_low];
42
43
% counting for high end formula
44
badSD_high = shitty_var_3D_high(:,1);
45
badSal_high = shitty_var_3D_high(:,2);
46
badT_high = shitty_var_3D_high(:,3);
47
48
[C_SD_high ,ia_SD_high ,ic_SD_high] = unique(badSD_high);
49
SD_counts_high = accumarray(ic_SD_high ,1);
50
value_counts_SD_high = [C_SD_high , SD_counts_high];
51
52
[C_sal_high ,ia_sal_high ,ic_sal_high] = unique(badSal_high);
53
sal_counts_high = accumarray(ic_sal_high ,1);
54
value_counts_sal_high = [C_sal_high , sal_counts_high];
55
56
[C_T_high ,ia_T_high ,ic_T_high] = unique(badT_high);
57
T_counts_high = accumarray(ic_T_high ,1);
58
value_counts_T_high = [C_T_high , T_counts_high];
59
60
61
62
dim = 3;
63
all = cor_error_3D_high(:,dim);
64
65
[C_all,ia_all,ic_all] = unique(all);
66
counts_all = accumarray(ic_all ,1);
67
value_counts_all = [C_all, counts_all];
68
69
70
per = [C_sal_high ,(value_counts_sal_high(:,2)./value_counts_all(1,2))*100];
Listing B.5: Track point correction model performance evaluation script.
88
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
==PAGE:95==
Simulated Sea Ice Radar Freeboard and Microwave Emitting Layer Depth
on First-Year Sea Ice with Saline Snow
89
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
