==PAGE:1==
Deep Learning-based Perception For Con-
struction Robotics
Haonan Mou (s202560)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Deep Learning-based Perception For Construction Robotics
Report written by:
Haonan Mou (s202560)
Advisor(s):
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
01 February- 01 July 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Me Myself, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is a promising but challenging research topic. Unsupervised
learning based monocular depth estimation can solve the problem of lack of ground truth
and is one of the most popular research methods for monocular depth estimation. In
this project, in order to obtain the depth information of the construction scene, so as
to further realize the purpose of distance detection between humans and robots, after
comparing various models, two unsupervised learning-based monocular depth prediction
models are selected.
The main objective of this thesis was to apply a self-supervised monocular depth estima-
tion model for the construction site to obtain accurate dense depth map without ground
truth depth.
To achieve this, a dataset based on images of construction sites was first collected and
training files were generated. Then, based on the new dataset, three sets of comparative
experiments were conducted: 1) Comparison of stereo and monocular training methods;
2) The two selected models were trained using the same dataset to compare their qual-
ity; 3) Test The adaptability of the model to the indoor environment. Through these
experiments, both models can perform well on some specific datasets, and it is concluded
that the self-supervised learning-based monocular depth prediction model can be used
in complex environments such as construction sites.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
There are a few people I want to thank, all of whom have helped me a lot with my
project. First of all I want to thank my supervisor Prof. Evangelos Boukas, who gave
me guidance from the beginning and solved my puzzles during the weekly meetings.
Then I want to thank Marek who helped me with the training dataset and the camera
instalment.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The LOFT Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Depth Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deep Learning Models For Depth Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Deep Learning Based Monocular Depth Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Method
13
3.1
Self-Supervised Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Model 1 - ”Monodepth2” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Model 2 - ”Manydepth”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Experiments and Results
21
4.1
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Stereo/Monocular Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Indoor Environment Issue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Discussion and Future Work
33
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusion
37
Appendices
39
A Appendix
41
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The LOFT Project
This thesis is part of the LOFT project, which is in collaboration of DTU, SDU and
DTI. Due to the complex environment of construction sites, accidents may occur if the
line of sight is blocked when moving large materials. In addition, uneven roads also
make porters vulnerable to injury. In recent years, due to the research and development
of artificial intelligence and autonomous robots, it has become possible for intelligent
robots to replace humans in dangerous and complex environments. The project aims
to apply the robotics and AI technologies in the construction sector, to transport ma-
terial for workers reliably and eﬀiciently. To be more specific, this thesis will focus on
advanced perception of robotics, specifically with human-robot distance estimation. To
fulfill the goal, a deep learning based monocular depth estimation (MDE) method will
be proposed and implemented.
There are a lot of deep learning-based monocular depth estimation methods, which in-
clude supervised learning methods, unsupervised learning methods, and semi-supervised
learning methods. Considering the diﬀiculty of getting large scale and precise ground
truth depth maps, this thesis will mainly consider unsupervised learning based monoc-
ular estimation methods.
1.2
Objectives
1. Learn the basics of deep learning, such as several basic deep learning models, back-
propagation algorithms, gradient descent, etc.
2. Read the related papers to understand the research status of monocular depth esti-
mation based on deep learning.
3. Compare existing deep learning based MDE methods and and choose one or two
models suitable for construction site.
4. Change the structure of the robot to make it suitable for capturing images.
5. Get dataset from the construction robot and pre-process it.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
6. Build deep learning model (based on the chosen method) and train the model.
7. Test the trained model, until it reaches the ideal results.
8. Compare different MDE models.
9. Test in real-time construction robot set-ups.(optional)
1.3
Thesis Outline
Chapter 1 - Introduction:This chapter introduces the LOFT project, the objectives
and outlines of the thesis.
Chapter 2 - Related Work:In this chapter, the research states will be discussed
firstly. Then the three main deep learning models will be introduced. Finally we’ll go
through the state-of-art deep learning based monocular depth estimation methods.
Chapter 3 - Method:In this chapter, the general idea behind self-supervised monocu-
lar depth estimation will be introduced. Then will discuss the two self-supervised MDE
models and their improvements.
Chapter 4 - Experiments and Results:In this chapter, the dataset collection and
pre-processing will be discovered at the beginning. Then the experiments and results
will be discussed.
Chapter 5 - Discussion and Future Work:This chapter is mainly about discus-
sion on issues in the thesis and the summary of the experiments. Future work would
also be discussed here.
Chapter 6 - Conclusion:This chapter is a brief conclusion of the thesis.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
2.1
Depth Estimation
2.1.1
An Overview
Depth estimation is a classical problem in computer vision, which can enhance our
understanding and perception of 3D environment. Therefore, depth estimation plays
an essential part in a wide range of applications, such as autonomous driving, virtual
reality and many autonomous robotics system tasks. [Tia+19]
Active depth estimation methods can directly refer the 3D information by utilizing
devices like RGB-D camera, LIDAR sensors, structured light and other technologies
which depend on the reflections on the object surface to get depth information. However,
most of the active depth estimation methods have limitations for real-time applications.
For example, RGB-D cameras and structured light usually suffer from their measurement
range, so that most of the application scenarios are limited to close-range indoor scenes.
LIDAR sensors can only refer to sparse depth map, which leads to the restriction of
some application scenarios requiring precise dense depth map. Moreover, the devices
mentioned above are either too heavy or too big, or require a lot of computing and
energy resources to get the depth information, which makes it impossible to apply those
methods on some small robot systems such as micro drones.
In this cases, RGB cameras can be used for most of the small robotic systems due to its
cheap price, light weight and small size. Therefore, image-based depth estimation has
been studied intensively over the past years.
2.1.2
Monocular Depth Estimation
Many traditional depth estimation methods use binocular cameras to capture stereo
images. Through stereo matching and triangulation, the disparity map can be calculated
from the two stereo images. However, some complicated preparations need to be done
before using binocular camera, such as camera alignment and calibration. There could
also be problems for stereo matching when it comes to some less-texture areas, because
the camera can not capture enough features in those areas.
Monocular depth estimation method only takes images or video frames from a single
RGB camera as input, then output the estimated dense depth map. Because it does not
depend on expensive and heavy equipment, monocular depth estimation can be applied
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Related Work
to various fields, including applications that require extremely light weight equipment
such as micro-UAVs. Monocular depth estimation has been a hot research topic in the
past decades. According to the different technologies they rely on, monocular depth
estimation methods can be divided into traditional methods, machine learning based
methods and deep learning based methods.
2.2
Deep Learning Models For Depth
Estimation
In this section, the three main deep learning models are introduced. They are convo-
lutional neural networks(CNN), recurrent neural networks(RNN) and generative adver-
sarial networks(GAN).
2.2.1
CNN
Convolutional neural networks are wildly used in many computer vision applications
due to its powerful network structures, which can automatically extract image features.
It is a kind of feed-forward neural network that uses less parameters than conventional
techniques to simultaneously extract depth information and reconstruct depth maps .
Convolutional layer, pooling layer, fully connected layer, and activation function are the
four key layers that make up CNN. These layers allow CNN to learn the two-dimensional
spatial properties of the input image. The pooling layer reduces the size of the input
feature map in a max-pooling or average-pooling manner; the fully connected layer
is typically located at the end of the CNN to output the results; and the activation
function is typically a continuously differentiable nonlinear function to avoid pure linear
combinations. The convolutional layer converts the input into depth features.
Figure 2.1: The general framework of encoder-decoder models[Min+21].
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Deep Learning Models For Depth Estimation
5
2.2.2
RNN
As seen in Fig. 2.2, RNN is a sequence-to-sequence model with memory capabilities
that is added to monocular depth estimation in order to learn temporal information
from video sequences. RNN is composed of three components: an input unit, a hidden
unit, and an output unit. The outputs of the previous hidden unit and the current input
unit are used as the hidden unit’s input. In addition, Hochreiter et al. [HS97] suggested
a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) unit, that may acquire long-term dependencies
using a three-gate structure: input gate layer, forget gate layer, and output gate layer.
Figure 2.2: The general framework of RNN[Min+21].
2.2.3
GAN
Most supervised monocular depth estimation networks do not work well when there is
no or insuﬀicient GT, and generative adversarial networks can solve this problem. GAN
consists of two modules: the discriminator decides whether the input depth map is true
or false, and the generator predicts the depth map as a depth estimate network, as
illustrated in Fig. 2.3.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Related Work
Figure 2.3: The general framework of Gan-based supervised learning MDE method.
2.3
Deep Learning Based Monocular Depth
Estimation
Deep neural networks have powerful feature learning ability, therefore, they are widely
used in computer vision applications, such as image classification, object detection and
so on. Deep learning models are also introduced in the monocular depth estimation area.
The first deep learning-based MDE model was proposed by Eigen et al. [EPF14] in 2014.
Since then, researchers have come up with many innovative deep learning-based MDE
methods and made significant improvement in this area.
In this section, some representative deep learning-based MDE methods will be intro-
duced. According to the dependency on the ground truth depth map, those methods
are divided into three types: Supervised, Self-Supervised, and Semi-Supervised.
2.3.1
Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Supervised learning-based MDE methods need a single RGB image and its correspond-
ing ground truth(GT) depth information at training stage. The network take the image
and its GT depth map as input. Then the scene structure information can be learned
through the depth network, to estimate a dense depth map as output. The model is con-
strained by the depth loss, which is the difference between the GT depth map and the
estimated depth map. The parameters will be updated using back-propagation method,
by minimizing the loss function. The pipeline of supervised learning-based MDE method
can be seen in Fig. 2.4.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Deep Learning Based Monocular Depth Estimation
7
Figure 2.4: The pipeline of supervised learning-based MDE method.
The first deep learning-based MDE method was introduced by Eigen et al. [EPF14]
in 2014. The model has two deep network stacks: one is used for predicting the coarse
depth map from the entire source image, another one refines the global prediction using
local information. Different to other normal scale-dependent errors, a scale-invariant
error was also introduced in the paper as the loss function.
Bhat et al. [BAW20] propose a new transformer-based architecture block, which divides
the estimated depth map into bins. The centre value of the bins can be learned for
every image. This work enables the network to learn to adaptively focus on regions of
the depth range which are more probable to occur in the scene of the input image. The
final depth estimation is a linear combination of the bin center values.
Conditional Random Field (CRF) [LMP01] is a conditional probability distribution
model under the condition of a given input sequences. Depth estimation was described
by Liu et al. as a challenging continuous conditional random fields (CRF) learning issue
[Liu+16]. Three modules are included in the network they design: a continuous CRF
loss layer, a pairwise part, and a unary part. Superpixel segmentation is done on the in-
put images first. For the intended network to predict depth values, only picture patches
that are centered around each superpixel are sent.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
Figure 2.5: The pipeline of supervised learning-based MDE method combined with
CRF[Min+21].
2.3.2
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Supervised learning-based MDE methods have shown their great ability to estimate
depth map from a single colour image. Those methods train the depth network with
the image and its corresponding ground truth depth map, which comes from some well-
organized and labeled data sets. However, expensive devices such as LIDAR or RGB-D
cameras are needed when collecting the ground truth depth information. Besides that,
it also needs a huge amount of labor work to manually label the data. To solve this prob-
lem, researchers have investigated self-supervised learning based MDE methods, which
can train the depth network without ground truth depth map.
According to types of input images, there are two different self-supervised MDE meth-
ods: one is based on stereo training, takes stereo images to train the depth network;
another one is based on monocular training, takes monocular image sequences to train
the depth network. Both stereo and monocular training based methods take the depth
estimation as a view synthesis problem and the whole network is constrained with a
image reconstruction loss.
2.3.2.1
Stereo Training
Self-supervised MDE method based on stereo training takes stereo image pairs at train-
ing stage, then tested on a single image. The training process(see Fig. 2.5) can be
described as follows: the network takes the stereo left(target) and right(source) images
as input, which are taken from the same scene but with slightly different perspectives.
The depth network can estimate a disparity map/depth map for the left image. Using
the estimated depth map, alongside the known camera intrinsics and the transformation
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Deep Learning Based Monocular Depth Estimation
9
between left and right images, the right image can be warped to an new image which is
similar to the left image. The network is trained with the reconstruction loss, which is
the sum of pixel difference between the warped image and the source image.
Figure 2.6: The pipeline of self-supervised learning-based stereo MDE method.
Godard et al.[] design a left-right consistency loss to train the self-supervised depth
network, where the left and right images will be reconstructed simultaneously. Com-
pared to solving for reconstruction loss alone, the new network can result in better
performance.
Garg et al.[GGR16] proposed the stereo learning based self-supervised MDE method in
2016 by adapting the general encoder-decoder neural network architecture. This new
network can be trained with a self-supervised manner and constrained by a reconstruc-
tion loss. Based on [GGR16], many researchers began to use the stereo images to train
the depth estimation network with self-supervised learning method.
2.3.2.2
Monocular Training
Self-supervised MDE method based on monocular training have a wider range of appli-
cation scenarios, since those methods only need consecutive images or video frames from
a single RGB camera. It can alleviate the dependency of expensive binocular cameras.
Self-supervised leaning models trained with monocular video frames need to estimate
the camera pose and depth information at the same time. The general models(see Fig.
2.6) can be described as follows: the network takes three consecutive frames from a
monocular video as input, they are one target image(I(t)) and two source images(I(t-1)
and I(t+1)). Similar to the stereo learning methods, the depth network also estimate a
disparity map from the source image. The pose network takes the target source image
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related Work
and the frame adjacent to it, then estimate the relative camera pose between those two
frames. The estimated depth map and relative camera pose are then used for warping
the source image to get a new reconstructed target image. The whole network is also
constrained by a image reconstruction loss.
Figure 2.7: The pipeline of self-supervised learning-based monocular MDE method.
Zhou et al. [Zho+17] develop a self-supervised model which jointly train a depth
estimation network and a camera pose estimation network. The supervisory signal is
a reconstruction loss based on warping nearby views to the target using the computed
depth and pose. However, the framework suffers from occlusions and moving objects in
the scene.
Inspired by [Zho+17], Godard et al. [GAB18] make some architectural and loss inno-
vations based on the depth-pose estimation network. Firstly, a minimum reprojection
loss is designed to handle occlusions. Then a auto-masking loss is used to leave out the
frames which violate the camera motion assumptions. Finally, a full-resolution multi-
scale sampling method is applied to reduce visual artifacts. This framework has been
proven to be a effective method for self-supervised monocular depth estimation.
Shu et al. [Shu+20] propose a new framework for monocular learning MDE tasks. The
network architecture has three sub-components: a depth network and a pose network as
in [GAB18], [Shu+20] to estimate depth map and relative camera pose, and a FeatureNet
for single-view reconstruction. The FeatureNet can generate features for a single image,
which can be used to define the feature-metric loss. The whole framework is constrained
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Deep Learning Based Monocular Depth Estimation
11
by this feature-metric loss. This model can achieve comparable results even to some of
the supervised methods.
2.3.3
Semi-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Self-supervised learning based MDE methods eliminate the dependence on large quan-
tity of ground truth depth maps, but the accuracy is often not as good as supervised
methods due to occlusion, dynamic objects, etc. Therefore, researchers propose the semi-
supervised learning method, by using a small amount of images with their ground truth
depth the accuracy and robustness of the models can be greatly improved.
The general semi-supervised MDE network(see Fig. 2.7) can be described as follows:
The model is initially trained using a little amount of labeled training data until it per-
forms well. The trained network is then used to unlabeled training data to generate
pseudo labels, which may not be entirely correct, as outputs. The generated pseudo
labels and input images in the unlabeled training data are connected to the labels and
input images from the labeled training data. The model is then trained in a similar
manner to the first phase.
Figure 2.8: The pipeline of semi-supervised learning-based monocular MDE method.
By mixing supervised and unsupervised loss terms, Kuznietsov et al. [KSL17] create
the first semi-supervised learning MDE network. Unlabeled stereo pictures and image-
sparse depth pairings are used to train the network. To supplement supervised training,
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Related Work
unsupervised learning based on direct picture alignment between stereo images is used.
It has been demonstrated through experiments that semi-supervised results outperform
supervised and unsupervised results.
Ji et al. [Ji+19] develop a semi-supervised adversarial learning network which is trained
on a large number of unlabeled monocular pictures and a limited number of image-depth
pairings. The framework comprises of two discriminator networks to rate the accuracy
of the calculated depth map along with a generator network for depth estimation. Unla-
beled photos are sent to the generator during training in order to produce depth maps.
The two discriminator networks give the generator input in the form of a combined loss
so that the generator can produce a depth map that is consistent with the natural depth
value distribution.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Method
3.1
Self-Supervised Training
As mentioned in the previous chapters, it requires costly devices and large number of
manual labelling for getting the ground truth depth maps. It seems impossible to col-
lect the GT depth of the dynamic outdoor environment(in our case, it’s the construction
site) within a limited time. Therefore, after comparing among lots of deep learning-based
MDE methods, this thesis will focus on the self-supervised training methods.
3.1.1
Reprojection Error
The self-supervised learning-based MDE methods take the depth estimation as a novel
view synthesis problem￿given one input view of a scene, synthesize a new image of
the scene seen from a slightly different viewpoint. First, the depth prediction network
takes the target image as input and outputs the predicted depth map Dt, while the
pose prediction network inputs two adjacent video frames (one target image, one source
image, and outputs a predicted relative camera pose Tt→t′. There are With Dt and Tt→t′,
plus the camera intrinsics K, we can warp it(see Equation 3.2 and Fig. 3.1) to the plane
of the source image.
Lp =
X
t′
pe (It, It′→t)
(3.1)
It′→t = It′ ⟨proj (Dt, Tt→t′, K)⟩
(3.2)
pe (Ia, Ib) = α
2 (1 −SSIM (Ia, Ib)) + (1 −α) ∥Ia −Ib∥1
(3.3)
SSIM(x, y) =
(2µxµy + c1) (2σxy + c2)

µ2
x + µ2
y + c1
 
σ2
x + σ2
y + c2

(3.4)
The supervisory signal a photometric reprojection loss , which is defined as Equation
3.1. Here pe is a photometric reconstruction error, e.g. the L1 distance in pixel space.
Note the <> is the bilinear sampling [Jad+15] operator, that linearly Lpinterpolates the
values of the 4-pixel neighbors (top-left, top-right, bottom-left, and bottom-right) of the
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Method
pixel from the target source. SSIM [Wan+04] is structural similarity, it’s value is from
-1 to 1, which measures how similar is of the two given images.
Figure 3.1: Image warping process.
Another term need to be introduced is the edge-aware smoothness [GMB17](see
Equation 3.5). where d∗
t = dt
√dt is the mean-normalized inverse depth to discourage
shrinking of the estimated depth.
Ls = |∂xd∗
t| e−|∂xIt| + |∂yd∗
t| e−|∂yIt|
(3.5)
The reprojection loss Lp and edge-aware smoothness loss Ls will be used as part of
the whole loss function for self-supervised based MDE models.
3.2
Model 1 - ”Monodepth2”
Many self-supervised methods for monocular depth estimation produce lower quality
of depth map than supervised methods. Gordad et al. [GAB18] propose a new self-
supervised learning-based MDE framework, named Monodepth2, which can greatly im-
prove the model performance and close the gap between self-supervised and supervised
methods for monocular depth estimation. In this thesis, the open source code of Mon-
odepth2 will be adapted to train on the new data set which is collected from a construc-
tion site using a mobile robot.
In this section, three main contributions of Monodepth2 will be discussed: Per-Pixel
Minimum Reprojection Loss, Auto-Masking Stationary Pixels and Multi-scale Estima-
tion.
3.2.1
Per-Pixel Minimum Reprojection Loss
To calculate the reprojection error, traditional self-supervised depth estimation methods
always average the the error into all source images at training time. This could severely
affect the model performance when occlusions happen, in which the pixels exist in one
frame but disappear in the next frame. In this case, if the network correctly estimates
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Model 1 - ”Monodepth2”
15
the depth for such a pixel, the target color in an occluded source image will probably
not match the target, leading to a significant photometric error penalty.
A per-pixel minimum photometric loss(see equation 3.5) is proposed to solve the oc-
clusion problem. The minimum photometric loss is simply used to replace the average
photometric loss among every source image.
The general idea(see Fig. 3.2) can be described as follows: when there’s no occlusion,
the correspondence of the pixel in the target image and source images are good, the
reprojection error would be low using both minimum or averaged error. However, when
occlusion or disocclusion happens to a pixel, it appear in the previous source frame but
disappear in the next source frame. The average reprojection loss will force the network
to match the occluded pixels, which leads to higher error. While the minimum reprojec-
tion error would only only matches each pixel to the view in which it is visible, leading
to sharper results.
Lp = min
t′ pe (It, It′→t)
(3.6)
Figure 3.2: Minimum reprojection error[GAB18].
3.2.2
Auto-Masking Stationary Pixels
When using monocular video frames to train the self-supervised MDE models, we assume
the camera is moving and there’s no moving objects in the scenes. If the assumption is
violated, the performance of the model could suffer dramatically during test time. Those
affects could be presented on the estimated depth map, as a form of infinite ’holes’. In
order to alleviate the impact of this problem on the model performance, an auto-masking
method is proposed, to leave out stationary pixels found in two adjacent frames. Those
stationary pixels might come from the objects which move at the same velocity as the
camera, or the frames captured by the camera which is not moving at all.
The auto mask µ is applied to the minimum reprojection error. The auto mask is binary,
so µ ∈{0, 1}. Not like other methods, the mask is computed on the forward pass of the
network instead of being learned from object motion.
As mentioned above, the auto mask is set to filter out stationary pixels which come from
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Method
consecutive frames. Those pixels denote a low texture region, a static camera, or an item
moving at an equivalent relative translation to the camera. Therefore, µ only includes
those pixels where the reprojection error of the warped image It′→t is lower than that of
the original, unwarped source image It′.(see Equation 3.6). Denote that [] is the Iverson
bracket, this function is defined to take the value 1 for the values of the variables for
which the statement is true, and takes the value 0 otherwise.
µ =

min
t′ pe (It, It′→t) < min
t′ pe (It, It′)

(3.7)
3.2.3
Multi-scale Estimation
When the bilinear interpolation method is used for approximate sampling to obtain the
value of the pixel on the warped map, the local gradient problem is often encountered.
At the same time, in order to avoid the local minimum problem affecting the training
results, many deep learning based MDE methods use multi-scale depth estimation to
solve the problem. This method usually adds up the losses at each scale as the total
loss. However, in low-resolution depth maps , some areas with missing surface texture
will lead to large errors, which will affect the entire loss function.
In order to solve this problem, the model is improved on the multi-scale depth prediction
method. Instead of calculating the loss for all depth maps of different scales (resolutions)
then summing them up as other methods. The low-resolution intermediate layer depth
map is upsampled to the same resolution as the input image, and then reprojected and
sampled with bilinear interpolation to get new warped maps with higher resolution.
Figure 3.3: Full-resolution muti-scale[GAB18].
Final Loss
The loss function of the entire framework is defined by the combination of a masked
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Model 2 - ”Manydepth”
17
reprojection loss and a edge awareness loss (see Equation 3.7)
L = µLp + λLs
(3.8)
3.3
Model 2 - ”Manydepth”
Compared to many state-of-art self-supervised learning based MDE methods, [Wat+21]
propose a new framework which uses cost volume in both training and testing stage.
This change can improve the performance of the depth estimation network. According to
[Wat+21], their model can compete most of the existing self-supervised monocular depth
method. Therefore, this model is adapted in this thesis to apply on the construction
scenario.
3.3.1
Building a cost volume
In order to use the information of multiple frames of images during model training
and testing, cost volume is created to measures the geometric compatibility between
the pixels from It and nearby source frames from a monocular video. Similar to other
monocular learning based MDE methods, it needs a depth network to predict depth
map Dt and a pose network to estimate relative camera pose Tt→t′.
Define a collection of ordered planes P with depths linearly spaced between dmin and
dmax, each perpendicular to the optical axis at It. Given a hypothesised depth d ∈P,
with the known camera intrinsics and predicted pose Tt→t′, each target frame will be
warped to the viewpoint of it’s adjacent source frame It. Then a warped feature map
will be obtained. Now define the final cost volume: it’s the absolute difference between
the warped features and the features from It, at each d ∈P. Note that the cost volume
will be averaged by each source frame. The pipeline of the cost volume depth estimator
can be seen in Fig. 3.4, we can see that the cost volume and the feature map of the
target image are taken as the input to a depth incoder.
Figure 3.4: Cost volume depth estimator [Wat+21].
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Method
3.3.2
Adaptive cost volumes
The cost volume needs to know the range of the depth value d in advance, i.e., dmin and
dmax. Like other deep learning network parameters, dmin and dmax need to be input as
a hyperparameter to train the network. And this hyperparameter needs to be learned
from the characteristics of the dataset, or it is derived from the binocular camera.
By allowing dmin and dmax to be learned from the data so they can adjust themselves
during training as the network finds its own scaling, a novel adaptive cost volume is
proposed. The process of building the adaptive cost volume can be described as follows:
First, compute the average min and max of each Dt over a training batch, utilizing the
most recent predictions from the network of Dt. These are then used to update the
dmin and dmax estimations of an exponential moving average with momentum 0.99. The
model weights are saved along with dmin and dmax, which are then fixed at test time.
3.3.3
Addressing cost volume overfitting
The information in the cost volume is only trustworthy in particular circumstances, such
as in static zones with textured surfaces. The cost volume will be an inaccurate source of
depth information in areas where objects are moving or when surfaces lack texture. And
the cost volume methods will be more severely affected than other monocular learning
based MDE models. Because when there’s moving object in the frame e.g., the reprojec-
tion error will have additional source to learned the information from the cost volume.
Network dependence on cost volume increases throughout training. It trusts it too much
rather than ignoring the cost volume surrounding moving items. The final depth map
then includes artifacts in the cost volume from moving objects during both training and
testing.
To solve this problem, a separate monocular depth network is introduced to estimate
depth, only when the cost volume is not reliable. This depth network estimates depth
map ˆDt for each target source, and will be discarded after training. This separate depth
network works as the same way as the main depth network by sharing the pose network
and having the same scale. A binary mask M identifies potentially problematic pixels
in our multi-frame output. Here a consistency loss is defined: put an L1 loss on Dt in
these masked locations to encourage predictions that are similar to ˆDt.
Lconsistency =
X
M
Dt −ˆDt

(3.9)
The binary mask M is 1 in areas that are thought to be untrustworthy and 0 in all
other areas. Denote Dcv to be the minimum depth that the cost volume can produce,
the mask M is defined by comparing Dcv and ˆDt. The Mask M is 1 only when Dcv and
ˆDt differ significantly.(see Equation 3.10)
M = max
 Dcv −ˆDt
ˆDt
,
ˆDt −Dcv
Dcv
!
> 1
(3.10)
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Model 2 - ”Manydepth”
19
3.3.4
Static cameras and startofsequences
For our strategy, using numerous frames at test time poses two potential diﬀiculties.
The first problem arises when attempting to forecast depth for a single image or those
at the beginning of a sequence when It−1 does not exist. In order to solve this issue,
we substitute a tensor of zeros for the cost volume during training with probability p.
This pushes the network to learn to only use features that come straight from It for
these photos. The cost volume is then simply replaced with zeros at test time when
It−1 does not exist. The second situation occurs when the camera is stationary between
It−1 and It. In this case, the previous frame input to the cost volume is replaced with
a color-augmented version of the target source itself, in order to handle this at training
time, with probability q.
The final loss is defined as follows: (see Equation 3.11)
L = (1 −M)Lp + Lconsistency + Lsmooth
(3.11)
Where Lsmooth is the smoothness loss.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments and Results
4.1
Dataset
4.1.1
Data collection
To apply the deep learning based monocular depth estimation for construction robotics,
we need to collect a large number of images as training set for the deep learning models.
The construction site(see Fig.
4.1) is near Copenhagen centre, and there are many
different scenes, such as outdoor stone ground, indoor field, underground parking lot,
etc., which can provide rich datasets for model training.
Figure 4.1: The construction site in centre Copenhagen.
To mimic the movement of the autonomous robot, we mounted the camera on it
while capturing pictures, but manually drove the robot to capture pictures of various
scenes. It is a three-wheeled robot with strong wheels,(see Fig. 4.2) suitable for travel-
ing on construction sites. To prevent rainy weather, we also installed a lightweight clear
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Experiments and Results
plastic sheet on top of it for waterproofing.
Figure 4.2: The robot used for collecting data set.
The images are captured by a stereo camera, ZED 2.(see Fig.
4.3).
ZED 2 is
a powerful AI-based stereo camera, with functions of spatial object detection, stereo
videos recording, etc,. Moreover, it uses neural networks to reproduce human vision, can
estimate rough disparity maps for the stereo images. So that after calculations, we can
regard those disparity maps as the ground truth depth map.(For technical parameters,
please refer to the appendix)
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Dataset
23
Figure 4.3: The Zed 2 camera used for collecting data set.
4.1.2
Image and training file pre-processing
The raw data set contains three folders, two of them are the left and right images cap-
tured by the ZED 2 stereo camera. The other one is the raw disparity maps estimated
by the Deep depth module of ZED 2 camera. The raw disparity maps are used for model
evaluation since there’s no ground truth depth maps in our case.
Before training a model on the data set, it needs to undergo a series of pre-processing.
The first step is to rename the images and sort them according to the time series of the
videos.(see Fig. 4.4). Because when applying the monocular training, the network needs
adjacent frames as input, the dataloader needs to find consecutive video frames based
on the number.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Experiments and Results
Figure 4.4: Image rename.
The second step is to create training and validation files(see Fig. 4.5) according to
the image names. The example training file include three columns, they are: folder name
which contains sub-folders of the left and right images, frame number and left/right in-
formation(shortened in ’l’ or ’r’) which is used to locate the sub-folder of the images.
Figure 4.5: Training files.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Dataset
25
Finally, the training and validation files need to be randomized(see Fig. 4.6). A
completed data set contains five folders of left-right images, a training txt file and a
validation txt file.
Figure 4.6: Training files randomization.
Due to the limitation of data transmission rate, we lost a lot of frames, so that not all
pictures have their corresponding left or right binocular views. In addition, the disparity
map roughly estimated by the camera is not one-to-one corresponding to the left image,
resulting in We cannot compare data if we train with all monocular video images.
For the next experiments, three different data set has been created:
Dataset A: this dataset contains all paired left-right stereo images and the correspond-
ing disparity maps which are estimated by the ZED 2 camera. There are 4170 images
in total, we take 42 images for test set, 3711 images for training set and the left 417 for
validation set.
Dataset B: this dataset consists of the images with their corresponding disparity maps
which are estimated by the ZED 2 camera. Note that those images are not paired left-
right stereo ones. There are 6925 images in total, we take 69 images for test set, 6163
images for training set and the left 693 for validation set.
Dataset C: this dataset include all the images that captured by the stereo camera.
But they are not corresponding stereo images and have no estimated disparity maps
for evaluation. There are 27905 images in total, we take 280 images for test set, 24835
images for training set and the left 2790 for validation set.
Dataset A is used to compare the two monocular depth estimation methods: stereo
training and monocular training. While Dataset B is used to compare the two monocu-
lar learning based MDE models, as mentioned in chapter 3. Dataset C is used to study
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Experiments and Results
the impact of non-consecutive frames and lack of training data on monocular learning
based MDE methods.
4.2
Evaluation Metrics
Absolute relative difference (AbsRel), root mean square error (RMSE), RMSE (log), and
square relative error (SqRel) [Don+21]are the most commonly used quantitative metrics
for assessing the performance of monocular depth estimation techniques. Denote that
the Di and D∗
i are the estimated depth and ground truth depth at the pixel indexed
by i. N represents the total pixel numbers of the estimated depth map and GT depth
map(they have same amount of pixels).
Absolute Relative Difference (Abs Rel): defined as the average value over all the image
pixels of the L1 distance between the ground-truth and the estimated depth, but scaled
by the estimated depth:
AbsRel = 1
N
X
N
|D∗
i −Di|
Di
(4.1)
Squared Relative Difference (Sq Rel): defined as the average value over all the image
pixels of the L2 distance between the ground-truth and the estimated depth, but scaled
by the estimated depth:
SqRel = 1
N
X
N
|D∗
i −Di|2
Di
(4.2)
The linear Root Mean Square Error (RMSE): defined as:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
X
N
|D∗
i −Di|2
(4.3)
The logarithm Root Mean Square Error (RMSE log): defined as:
RMSE log =
v
u
u
t 1
N
X
N
|log D∗
i −log Di|2
(4.4)
Accuracy under a threshold: is the percentage of predicted pixels where the relative
error is within a threshold. The formula is represented as:
max
 Di
D∗
i
, D∗
i
Di
!
< threshold
(4.5)
where the values of threshold usually set to 1.25, 1.252, 1.253.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Stereo/Monocular Training
27
4.3
Stereo/Monocular Training
In this section, we want to compare the two different self-supervised monocular depth
estimation methods: stereo training and monocular training. To achieve this goal, the
model Monodepth2 will be utilized, since it has both training options.
Dataset A will be used for both training methods. There are 3711 images in the training
set, 417 images used for validation.
After training the model with two learning methods, the estimated depth maps(see Fig.
4.7 and Fig. 4.8) can be visualized. As shown in the result, for the same model, using
stereo training method can get much better performance than the monocular training
method.
This seems to be different from the results shown in [GAB18], which says
there’s only small differences between the two training methods. The reason could be
the insuﬀicient training set, which only has 3711 images. But even with such insuﬀicient
training images, the stereo model can perform fairly well. So where’s problem? After
checking the image sequences, some frame were found to be missing, resulting in discon-
tinuous picture sequences.(see Fig. 4.9) This could severely affect the performance of
the monocular training-based model, since the method takes adjacent frames which have
slightly different viewpoint to estimate camera pose. Now that the difference between
the two images is too large, the error of the pose network will also increase, which will
seriously affect the performance of the model.
(There are more good examples of depth map prediction trained with stereo methods in
the appendix)
Figure 4.7: Depth maps estimated by stereo/monocular training method(indoor).
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Experiments and Results
Figure 4.8: Depth maps estimated by stereo/monocular training method(outdoor).
Figure 4.9: Intermediate Frame Loss.
The missing intermediate frames may be caused by two reasons: one is the data
transmission eﬀiciency problem mentioned above; the second is that the robot does not
move forward at a uniform speed. Therefore, we can conclude that if the data set is not
well organized(eg. there are lost frames in the consecutive sequences), it’s better to use
stereo training-based MDE methods to solve the depth estimation problem.
4.4
Model Comparison
Since both monocular training based MED models mentioned in chapter 3 made some
great improvements on their frameworks, which can perform quite well based on KITTI
data set(a well established data set for self-driving). In this section, to explore whether
those models can solve the task of depth estimation in the construction site, we train
the two models(note that in Monodepth2 we train the model with monocular training
manner, as Manydeoth has only monocular training mode) with Dataset B. There are
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Model Comparison
29
6163 images as training set, and 693 images for validation.
The results are shown in the depth maps(see Fig. 4.10). We can see that due to the same
intermediate frame loss problem discussed in chapter 4.3, neither model can predict a
relatively accurate depth map. For example, we can even see the texture of a person’s
clothes, instead of a patch of the same color, because in the depth map, areas that are
the same distance from the camera should be rendered with a similar color.
Figure 4.10: Depth maps estimated by two models.(trained with dataset B).
Instead of applying the evaluation metrics on the bad estimated depth maps, we train
the two models using Dataset C, with fairly suﬀicient training and validation set(27905
images for training and 2700 for validation). Note that there’s no disparity maps esti-
mated by the stereo camera, which we can use for evaluation. But the results can still
be seen from the depth maps(see Fig. 4.11).
As can be seen from the first row of pictures, Monodepth2 performs better because the
object in the lower left corner can be seen from the depth map it predicts, and the outline
of the cart in the distance is also clearer. The same conclusion can be drawn from the
following line of pictures. In the depth map predicted by Monodepth2, you can observe
the person on the left. The color of the legs closer to the camera is brighter, and the
outline of the upper part of the person is sharper.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Experiments and Results
Figure 4.11: Depth maps estimated by two frameworks.(trained with dataset C).
4.5
Indoor Environment Issue
After doing some investigation, we found that most of the MDE methods are trained
and tested on KITTI or some other datasets for autonomous driving. Some articles also
mention that MDE may not perform as well in indoor environments as outdoors. So we
wondered whether these models could perform indoor depth prediction work, especially
in complex indoor environments like construction sites.
Indoor environments often have lighting problems, which may result in a lack of texture
on surfaces. To explore the influence of indoor environment on the depth prediction
model, we remove 318 indoor images in Dataset B, which is about 5 percent of the train-
ing sets. Then using the processed dataset to train the model Manydepth, as [] mention
this framework can handle the problem of low-texture regions in the image and more
robust to different environment.
The results can be seen in Fig. 4.12 that the model does not perform well in both cases
and cannot give more accurate depth map predictions. It is still possible that there are
too many consecutive frame drops in Dataset b, causing it to affect the model perfor-
mance much more than the indoor environment.
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Indoor Environment Issue
31
Figure 4.12: Depth maps.
Estimated by the same model, but one is trained with
all images and one is trained with few indoor images. images are from
dataset B.
Similar to section 4.4, instead of compute the evaluation metrics, we train the model
with Dataset C, which can greatly improve the impact of lost frames on the model. 4354
indoor images(around 15.6 percent of the original Dataset) have been removed from the
data set before training, so there are 20961 images for training, and 2355 for validation.
We can see from the results in Fig 4.13. The results show that the removal of indoor
environment pictures during training has little effect on the performance of the model.
Conversely, a model trained based on all images can show more details on the depth
map, as shown in the green box in the above figure, and can also better distinguish
objects from the background, as shown in the red circle in the figure below.
For two models with similar performance, we should have used the evaluation matrix to
quantify the performance of the model more accurately on the data. Unfortunately, as
mentioned earlier, Dataset D does not have a disparity map corresponding to the image
that can be approximated as GT depth maps. We will refer to this in future work.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Experiments and Results
Figure 4.13: Depth maps.
Estimated by the same model, but one is trained with
all images and one is trained with few indoor images. images are from
dataset c.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion and Future Work
5.1
Discussion
5.1.1
Dataset Issues
Issues With The Training Set
It is well known that datasets have a significant impact on deep learning models. Train-
ing on a standardized and suﬀicient dataset can greatly improve the performance of
the model. For this thesis, during the training phase, the impact of the dataset on the
depth prediction model mainly comes from two aspects: first, insuﬀicient training image
samples which could greatly reduces the accuracy of the model. It can be seen from Fig.
5.1 that this model cannot give a relatively accurate depth map regardless of stereo or
monocular training based method. Second, the video frame discontinuity problem men-
tioned in Chapter 4, leads to greatly impaired performance when using the monocular
method to train the model.
Figure 5.1: Depth maps with bad results.
Issues With The Statistical Evaluation
Since it is diﬀicult to acquire GT depth maps with professional equipment such as
LIDAR, and requires a lot of manual labeling and other work, this thesis mainly focuses
on self-supervised based MDE methods. However, this leads to a problem that there
is no GT depth map used to evaluate the model’s ability of predicting depth maps on
the data. To solve this problem, we use the zed 2 binocular camera in the process of
collecting pictures, which contains a pre-trained depth prediction network based on the
deep learning model. Therefore, we can approximately use the disparity map predicted
by this camera as GT to evaluate the model data.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Discussion and Future Work
But when comparing the so-called GT predicted by the zed 2 camera with the depth map
predicted by the depth model mentioned in the paper, a huge difference between them
is found. As can be seen from Figure 5.2, for a well-predicted depth map, its disparity
value and GT differ by several times, which makes the data evaluation of the model
meaningless.
Therefore, in the experiment, we mainly use the visualization method,
ignoring the step of calculating the error matrix.
Figure 5.2: GT disparity issue.
5.1.2
Results Of The Experiments
In Chapter 4, the experiments and their results have been discussed in detail. Here is a
summary of it.
Stereo/Monocular Training
To compare the stereo and monocular MDE methods based on self-supervised learning,
we use the model - Monodepth2 because it has two training modes to choose from. After
Training on the same training set but with different training methods, we can conclude
from the predicted depth map that for some new datasets, the stereo training method
can get much better results than the monocular based method. This is because the
newly acquired dataset has not undergone extensive pre-processing, such as filtering out
discontinuous frames. This will lead to a large error compensation for the pose predic-
tion model in the monocular training mode, which affects the results.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Future Work
35
Model Comparison
It is very diﬀicult to judge which model performs better, because after training the model
on Dataset B, neither model can predict a relatively acceptable depth map during the
test phase. So even if there is a so-called GT depth map that can be used for data eval-
uation, it loses its meaning of comparison, because the depth prediction given by the
model at each pixel is quite random in this case. When the model is trained on Dataset
C, it can estimate a better depth map, but there is no GT depth available provided
by Dataset C, and it can only be judged from the depth map that Monodepth2 has a
better prediction effect, and is robust to distinguishing the object edges from background.
Indoor Environment Issue
The indoor environment is often poorly lit, which leads to problems such as lack of
surface textures when capturing images. Many articles also show that the vast majority
of monocular depth estimation is applied in outdoor environments. In order to verify
the adaptability of the selected model to the indoor environment, the same model was
retrained after removing indoor images, which account for about 15 percent of all images
in Dataset C. The results show that the selected depth prediction model performs almost
the same before and after even with a large number of dark underground parking lot
scenes.
5.2
Future Work
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation based on deep learning is a very promising
research work, which can be applied to the fields of unmanned driving and autonomous
robots. For example, in this thesis, the monocular depth estimation is first applied in
complex architectural scenes, and after a satisfactory result is obtained, through some
calculations and modeling, it can be deployed to the robot to estimate the real distance
between the human and the robot. However, due to the late collection of data and the
fact that it takes a lot of time to train a deep learning-based MDE model, some thesis
objects have not been completed. Some possible future work directions are listed below:
Improve The Dataset quality
As mentioned earlier, the quantity and quality of datasets greatly determines how good
a deep learning model is. Although a dataset of 27,000 images has now been produced,
its quality still needs to be improved. For example, although the problem of video frame
loss has been improved a lot compared to the first two datasets, the issue still exists. It
may be that some frames change too quickly due to not driving the robot at a constant
speed. Also, always remember to turn off the camera when the robot is stopped, other-
wise there will be more static frames which can affect the model performance.
Further exploration is needed to see whether the so-called GT disparity maps predicted
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Discussion and Future Work
by the Zed 2 binocular camera is reliable. Because the disparity predicted by the camera
is also the result of a pre-trained depth prediction network. After comparison, it is found
that the results predicted by the model selected in the paper are quite different from
the GT disparity.
Deploy On A Real Autonomous Robot
With a relatively high-quality dataset, the selected monocular depth estimation model
may achieve a satisfactory performance. At this point, the trained model can be de-
ployed on a real autonomous robot for real-time depth prediction.
Real-time issues need to be taken into account, because deep neural networks often have
very complex network structures, which require a huge amount of computation and can-
not meet the real-time requirements. For the two selected models, Manydepth takes
close to a second to infer a depth map on my PC, which is obviously not suitable for
real-time deployment. Future work can include a search for a monocular depth predic-
tion model with a simpler network and faster computation. [Pog+18]
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The main objective of this thesis was to apply a self-supervised monocular depth estima-
tion model for the construction site to obtain accurate dense depth map without ground
truth depth. This has been well implemented, and we can see from the experimental
results in Section 4 that through the stereo training method, we can train a monocular
depth prediction model that can predict better quality based on only 4000 stereo images.
For the method based on monocular training, we also obtained a relatively good model
for monocular depth prediction, based on nearly 27,000 monocular images.
The first three objectives has been completed, since it’s the first stage of the thesis. By
taking some online courses and reading papers, I have learned the basic knowledge of
deep learning, and can apply the deep learning methods on the real-life applications.
The research status and development of monocular depth estimation have been stated
in related works. Also, after comparing different kinds of deep learning-based monoc-
ular depth estimation methods, it is concluded that self-supervised methods are more
suitable for new data set.
The fourth objective is to make the robot suitable for collecting image data in the
construction site. We added two brackets and a cross-post to the robot to hold the
binocular camera in a higher position so as not to record the wheels as well. In addition,
a lightweight plastic plate is added on top of its head to make it work in rainy days.
The fifth objective is to collect data and do some preparation before training. To do
this, we went to the construction site in Copenhagen centre and got the image dataset.
For the dataset pre-processing, 3 different data set have been established, with left and
right images and training files.
The sixth-eighth objectives are the main objectives of this thesis, which is discussed at
the beginning of this chapter, also can be seen in chapter four.
Overall, the project was a success. Two deep learning-based monocular depth prediction
models were successfully applied on a new dataset of construction site images and ob-
tained relatively good depth maps. It is hoped that after subsequent experiments such
as data set optimization and model parameter optimization, it can be further deployed
on real robots to realize real-time depth prediction for distance estimation.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
Appendices
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
ZED 2 camera technical manual
==PAGE:52==
42
A Appendix
==PAGE:53==
A Appendix
43
==PAGE:54==
44
A Appendix
==PAGE:55==
A Appendix
45
Discarded depth map with good quality
==PAGE:56==
46
A Appendix
==PAGE:57==
A Appendix
47
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[BAW20]
Shariq Farooq Bhat, Ibraheem Alhashim, and Peter Wonka. “AdaBins: Depth
Estimation using Adaptive Bins.” In: CoRR abs/2011.14141 (2020). arXiv:
2011.14141. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.14141.
[Don+21]
Xingshuai Dong et al. “Towards Real-Time Monocular Depth Estimation for
Robotics: A Survey.” In: CoRR abs/2111.08600 (2021). arXiv: 2111.08600.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.08600.
[EPF14]
David Eigen, Christian Puhrsch, and Rob Fergus. “Depth Map Prediction
from a Single Image using a Multi-Scale Deep Network.” In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Edited by Z. Ghahramani et al.
Volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014. url: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2014/file/7bccfde7714a1ebadf06c5f4cea752c1-
Paper.pdf.
[GAB18]
Clément Godard, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Gabriel J. Brostow. “Digging Into
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation.” In: CoRR abs/1806.01260
(2018). arXiv: 1806.01260. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01260.
[GGR16]
Ravi Garg, Vijay Kumar B. G, and Ian D. Reid. “Unsupervised CNN
for Single View Depth Estimation: Geometry to the Rescue.” In: CoRR
abs/1603.04992 (2016). arXiv: 1603.04992. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1603.04992.
[GMB17]
Clement Godard, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Gabriel J. Brostow. “Unsupervised
Monocular Depth Estimation With Left-Right Consistency.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). July 2017.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory.” In:
Neural Computation 9.8 (November 1997), pages 1735–1780. issn: 0899-
7667. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. eprint: https://direct.mit.
edu/neco/article-pdf/9/8/1735/813796/neco.1997.9.8.1735.pdf.
url: https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[Jad+15]
Max Jaderberg et al. “Spatial Transformer Networks.” In: Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems. Edited by C. Cortes et al. Volume 28.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2015/file/33ceb07bf4eeb3da587e268d663aba1a-Paper.pdf.
==PAGE:60==
50
Bibliography
[Ji+19]
Rongrong Ji et al. “Semi-Supervised Adversarial Monocular Depth Estima-
tion.” In: CoRR abs/1908.02126 (2019). arXiv: 1908.02126. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1908.02126.
[KSL17]
Yevhen Kuznietsov, Jorg Stuckler, and Bastian Leibe. “Semi-Supervised
Deep Learning for Monocular Depth Map Prediction.” In: The IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). July 2017.
[Liu+16]
Fayao Liu et al. “Learning Depth from Single Monocular Images Using Deep
Convolutional Neural Fields.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 38 (2016), pages 2024–2039.
[LMP01]
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira. “Conditional Ran-
dom Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence
Data.” In: Morgan Kaufmann, 2001, pages 282–289.
[Min+21]
Yue Ming et al. “Deep learning for monocular depth estimation: A review.”
In: Neurocomputing 438 (2021), pages 14–33. issn: 0925-2312. doi: https:
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neucom . 2020 . 12 . 089. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231220320014.
[Pog+18]
Matteo Poggi et al. “Towards real-time unsupervised monocular depth es-
timation on CPU.” In: CoRR abs/1806.11430 (2018). arXiv: 1806.11430.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.11430.
[Shu+20]
Chang Shu et al. “Feature-Metric Loss for Self-supervised Learning of Depth
and Egomotion.” In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2020. Edited by Andrea
Vedaldi et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pages 572–
588. isbn: 978-3-030-58529-7.
[Tia+19]
Guanzhong Tian et al. “ObjectFusion: An object detection and segmenta-
tion framework with RGB-D SLAM and convolutional neural networks.” In:
Neurocomputing 345 (2019). Deep Learning for Intelligent Sensing, Decision-
Making and Control, pages 3–14. issn: 0925-2312. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neucom.2019.01.088. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0925231219301377.
[Wan+04]
Zhou Wang et al. “Image Quality Assessment: From Error Visibility to Struc-
tural Similarity.” In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13 (2004),
pages 600–612.
[Wat+21]
Jamie Watson et al. “The Temporal Opportunist: Self-Supervised Multi-
Frame Monocular Depth.” In: CoRR abs/2104.14540 (2021). arXiv: 2104.
14540. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14540.
[Zho+17]
Tinghui Zhou et al. “Unsupervised Learning of Depth and Ego-Motion from
Video.” In: CoRR abs/1704.07813 (2017). arXiv: 1704.07813. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1704.07813.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:62==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
