==PAGE:1==
Short-range terrain mapping
Changrun Liu (s202721)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Short-range terrain mapping
Report written by:
Changrun Liu (s202721)
Advisor(s):
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
3 January- 17 June 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Changrun Liu, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Intelligent robots are an important research direction in the modern society. Under-
standing the surrounding environment is an important symbol of robot intelligence. Si-
multaneous localization and mapping (SLAM, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping)
technology and deep learning approach are important for achieving this goal. In this
paper, a combination of deeplabv2 and ORB-SLAM2 is implied to achieve 3D semantic
map, which will help the robot to understand the surrounding and localize the objects.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Backgroud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Possible solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Software framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Work environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Image Segmentation
9
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Dataset introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Deeplabv2 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Experimentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Summery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
3D point cloud reconstruction
23
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
ORB feature extraction and matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
ORB-SLAM2 system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Experimentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Module test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Outlier Removal
31
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Open3d
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
DBSCAN clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
iv
Contents
5.4
Experimentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Future work
35
7
Conclusion
37
8
Appendix
39
8.1
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Bibliography
41
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Intelligent robots are an important research direction in the modern society. Under-
standing the surrounding environment is an important symbol of robot intelligence. Si-
multaneous localization and mapping (SLAM, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping)
technology is important for achieving this goal.The existing SLAM algorithm realizes
the robot positioning by establishing a geometric map, and the geometric map can only
ensure that the robot can avoid obstacles to reach the designated location, and cannot
complete more advanced tasks. Therefore, this paper build a 3D semantic map construc-
tion algorithm based on deep learning to improve the information level of 3D maps and
help robots better understand the surrounding environment.
1.1
Objectives
The original objectives are to:
• Detection of irregularities in floor using pointcloud or depth image data e.g. through
classification or scene analysis
• Filter pointcloud data to isolate usable data
• Test solution in robot simulation environment using Gazebo
• Test solution on a test rig built specifically for the purpose of testing the solution
• Implementing a solution that is ready to communicate with other nodes in the
robot software stack ie. endpoints
Due to some limitation that will mention below, the objectives change to create a system
that can tell the robot if the surrounding is safe to navigate. Using 3D camera to detect
obstacles and build up maps for robot navigation.
• Detection of the indoor objects that the robot may face by using point cloud or
depth image data e.g. through classification or scene analysis
• Filter pointcloud data to isolate usable data
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Limitations
The project should use the company Seasony’s newly constructed robot for plant trans-
port in a vertical farming environment to detect floor defects and obstacles near the
robot, but the robot was delayed, and access to sensor data from a vertical farming
plant was refused. The project aim was therefore shifted to a more general approach.
Although a simulation environment has been built, the quality of the simulation is not
accepted. In that way, this system can only be tested on open source indoor dataset.
However, there is little dataset built by mobile robot. Lots of open source dataset are
built with hand hold situation, which increase the diﬀiculty for the noise reduction parts.
1.3
Thesis outline
In this section, an overview of chapters in the paper is presented. Chapters brief intro-
duction will also be presented.
• Chapter2: Give a brief introduction to the project. Show the related works in
this area. Provide the possible solution for the objectives raised in chapter 1.
• Chapter3: A deeplabv2 model is introduced to fulfill the image segmentation task.
This chapter includes introduction, the training process, and the test performance
of the network.
• Chapter4: ORB-SLAM2 frame work is introduced to build up the 3D point cloud.
• Chapter5: Outliers removal and objects localization is achieved by using open3d
library
• Chapter6&7: Future work and conclusion
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
In this chapter, an analysis of the project will be presented. The specific method to
solve the problem we mention in chapter1 will be discussed. The test environment and
the dataset will also be shown in this chapter.
2.1
Backgroud
In the field of robotics, an important issue is how to make the robot obtain its own
environment information, because only after the robot has correctly modeled its own
environment can the robot successfully complete other tasks such as navigation and so
on. To solve this problem, the robot first needs to have the ability to perceive the envi-
ronment. In practical research, robots often obtain relevant environmental information
through sensors such as cameras, GPS, lasers, and sonar.
What SLAM(Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) needs to solve is the problem
of how to use the original information of the sensor to estimate the position of the
robot and the map information of its environment at the same time. The input of the
SLAM algorithm is continuous sensor information. For example, in visual SLAM, the
input information is the continuous image frame sequence of the robot’s environment
collected by the camera. The output information is the current position of the robot
and the pointclouds map of the environment where the robot is located. However, in the
mainstream SLAM algorithm, the robot’s position and point cloud information are only
dense or sparse geometric points in space, and the position of these spatial points cannot
identify obstacles in the environment to obtain useful information. This will make the
robot unable to use the point cloud information for subsequent navigation and other
behaviors.
The current progress in deep learning provides a direction to solve this problem. The
powerful feature learning ability of deep neural network has made significant progress
in the field of image recognition and object detection.
By integrating visual SLAM with deep learning, we can enable the robot to obtain
richer semantic information through the camera to better carry out navigation, object
recognition and other related activities.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Analysis
2.2
Related work
SLAM algorithm is the basis of semantic map construction. Visual SLAM algorithms
can be divided into feature-based SLAM methods and direct SLAM methods according
to the difference in using image information.
The feature-based visual SLAM method refers to detecting and extracting feature
points from the input image, and calculating the camera pose and mapping the envi-
ronment based on 2D or 3D feature matching. If the whole image is processed, the
computational complexity is too high, and the feature is widely used because it can
save the important information of the image while effectively reducing the amount of
computation.
The monocular vision SLAM of key frames has gradually developed[KM07][KM08][MT14],
the most representative of which is parallel tracking and mapping (PTAM)[KM07]. A
separate task and run on two threads. The literature[MMT15] is a monocular vision
SLAM system proposed on the basis of key frames. The entire SLAM process is divided
into three threads: positioning, creating a map, and closing the loop. The same ORB
features are used for these three tasks, and the essential map is introduced. concept to
speed up the closed-loop correction process.The Kinect camera launched by Microsoft
can obtain image information and depth information at the same time, which simplifies
the process of 3D reconstruction, and because of its low price, SLAM based on RGB-
D data has been rapidly developed. The literature[Hen+14] is the earliest proposed
method for 3D reconstruction of indoor environments using RGBD cameras, extracting
SIFT features from color images and finding corresponding depth information on depth
images. Then use the RANSAC method to match the 3-D feature points and calculate
the corresponding rigid body motion transformation, and then use this as the initial
value of ICP (iterative closest point) to obtain a more accurate pose. RGBD SLAM
usually uses the ICP algorithm for pose estimation. The literature[Hen+12] is similar
to the literature[Hen+14], the difference is that SURF feature extraction is performed
on color images, and ICP is used to optimize the motion transformation, and finally the
Hogman pose graph optimization method is used to obtain the global optimal pose.
The purpose of semantic segmentation is to assign each pixel in the image. A cate-
gory label is an important step in semantic mapping. Deep learning method can achieve
higher-precision semantic segmentation.At present, semantic segmentation based on
deep learning technology is changing with each passing day. Researchers have proposed
many excellent algorithms, such as Mask R-CNN[He+17] which can perform detection
and instance segmentation at the same time, and PSPNet[Zha+17] for semantic segmen-
tation.
In terms of semantic composition, the SLAM++ system proposed by Salas-Moreno
et al. is currently a better semantic mapping method[Sal+13]. It compares the features
of the point cloud with the pre-prepared object database. If a matching object is found,
the corresponding point cloud put in the map. However, SLAM++ can only map prede-
fined objects, and its features for template matching are manually extracted. Hermans
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Possible solution
5
et al. believe that dense semantic segmentation of 3-dimensional point clouds is diﬀicult,
but the segmentation effect on 2-dimensional images is relatively low. Therefore, we use
Bayesian update and dense conditional random field to perform 2D-3D label transfor-
mation to generate semantic maps in 3-dimensional space. Concha et al. fused semantic
segmentation with semi-dense large-scale direct method (LSD) monocular SLAM, ob-
tained the plane in the image through superpixel segmentation, and used the large-scale
direct method to obtain more significant features such as edges and fused the two to get
The disadvantage of denser real-time mapping results is that the accuracy of the plane is
not ideal[ESC14]. Tateno et al. proposed to use a convolutional neural network (CNN)
to predict the depth map and fuse it with the depth measurement results obtained by
monocular SLAM[Nak+18]. A semantic map from a single perspective is obtained, and
this method mainly focuses on depth prediction and fusion. McCormac et al. proposed
to use dense ElasticFusion to build a 3-dimensional environment map and use a decon-
volutional neural network for image segmentation[McC+17]. This method is relatively
time-consuming and consumes a lot of resources.
2.3
Possible solution
In this section, possible solutions are discussed to fulfill the objectives mentioned in
section 1.1. The solutions should be able to deal with image segmentation, 3D terrain
mapping, and obstacles localization.
Image segmentation aims to help robots to detect floor,wall and different kinds of
obstacles symbols nearby. Since the real data from Seasony is not available mentioned
in section1.2, the segmentation test is based on the TUM dataset. Besides, the real time
performance also needs to be considered. In this case, the deeplabv2 is implemented
to segment the RGB images from the TUM dateset. For training the neural network,
COCO dataset is used.
For the 3D terrain mapping part, a 3D pointclouds map will be built in this part,
combining with the image segmentation and the depth information, a 3D semantic map
will be built. ORB_SLAM2 is currently an excellent algorithm framework in SLAM
based on feature detection, mainly including three threads of tracking, local mapping,
and loop correction. It will be used to build up the 3D point clouds map based on the
feature detection.
At last, to refine the 3D semantic maps some method from open3d will be use to
down-sample the pointclouds and remove the outliers. Open3d is a powerful library
in Python with great well-built functions for point cloud processing, Finally, DBSCN
clustering will be used to localize the obstacles and bounding boxes will be added to
localize the obstacles.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Analysis
2.4
Software framework
To make it clear of how the solutions work, the flow chart is shown below:
Figure 2.1: The Flow chart of how the system work.
The input data are rgb images and depth images from TUM dataset. Then the input
data are send to the ORB_SLAM2 framework, at the same time the image segmentation
process will start by using the deeplabv2 model. The semantic map will be built with the
process. After the whole semantic map is built, outliers will be removed and bounding
boxes will be added. With the output from ORB_SLAM2, the outputs will be a .txt
file that records the camera’s trajectory, a 3D semantic pointclouds map with bounding
boxes.
2.5
Work environment
The operating system, programming language, libraries, and other tools used in this
project are explained here.
• Ubuntu 20.04: the operating system
• Python 3.8 and C++: the programming language
• Pytorch 1.9.0 + CUDA 10.2: for implementing neural network and training with
GPU
• ORB_SLAM2: an open source library for simultaneous localization and mapping
==PAGE:15==
2.6 Summary
7
• Open3d 0.13: a library in Python for point cloud processing
• C++14: C++ compiler standard
2.6
Summary
In this chapter, an analysis of the backgroud and related works are presented in section
2.1 and 2.2. After these two section, a brief introduction of the research status has
been done. Section 2.3 present the methods using in this paper to solve the objectives
mentioned in section 1.1. Section 2.4 gives the flow chart of the system which will help
readers to understand the whole system. Finally in section 2.5 the required software
environment is described.
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Image Segmentation
3.1
Introduction
The image segmentation module aims to determine the semantics of each pixel in the
image. The label will be used to build up the 3D semantic map. Based on the limitation
mentioned in section 1.1, we will use the COCO-Stuff[CUF18] dataset to train the model
and use the TUM[Stu12] dataset to test the system. Each pixel from the input image
would be labeled by the type it belongs to. Then, the label map would be the output.
Combining with the CPython sever, output will be sent to the 3D reconstruction part
that build up the semantic point cloud map.
3.2
Dataset introduction
3.2.1
COCO-Stuff dataset
The COCO-Stuff dataset is an extension of COCO dataset created by Microsoft, it
adds dense pixel-wise stuff annotations to augment COCO dataset. The figure below
shows several annotated images from the COCO-Stuff dataset. There are 164K images
that are annotated in total, showcasing the complexity of the images, the large number
and diversity of stuff classes, the high level of accuracy of the annotations, and the
completeness in terms of surface coverage of the annotations.
Figure 3.1: COCO-Stuff dataset[CUF18].
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Image Segmentation
COCO-Stuff contains 172 classes: 80 thing, 91 stuff, and 1 class unlabeled. The 80
thing classes are the same as in COCO [CUF18]. The 91 stuff classes are curated by
an expert annotator. The class unlabeled is used in two situations: if a label does not
belong to any of the 171 predefined classes, or if the annotator cannot infer the label of
a pixel.
3.2.2
TUM dataset
The TUM dataset consists of 39 sequences that recorded in two different indoor envi-
ronments. Each sequence contains the color and depth images, as well as the ground
truth trajectory from the motion capture system. It is recorded by a Microsoft Kinect
with highly accurate and time-synchronized ground truth camera poses from a motion
capture system.
Figure 3.2: Microsof Kinect[Stu12].
Figure 3.3: Motion
capture
sys-
tem[Stu12].
There are two types of RGB-D data that can be used for testing process:
• Handheld SLAM
• Robot SLAM(with a Kinect that was mounted on an ActivMedia Pioneer 3 robot)
Figure 3.4: Handheld-SLAM
RGB Image.
Figure 3.5: Handhel-SLAM
depth Image.
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Deeplabv2 Introduction
11
As the figure shows, the Handheld SLAM data has objects like chairs, computers,
keyboards, floors, etc.For the Robot SLAM, there are less objects,but it has less DOF
(degree of freedom) that will make the reconstruction process much more stable. We will
use the Handheld SLAM to test the performance of the segmentation neural network
and the Robot SLAM can be used to test the 3D reconstruction and the 3D obstacles
detection.
Figure 3.6: Robot-SLAM RGB
Image.
Figure 3.7: Robot-SLAM
depth Image.
3.3
Deeplabv2 Introduction
DeepLab is an approach that combines deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)
and probabilistic graphical models (DenseCRFs). The figure shows the structure of the
deeplabv2.
Figure 3.8: Deeplabv2 structure[Web+21].
Compare with DCNNs the deeplabv2 mainly solve the two problems below:
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Image Segmentation
• Repeated pooling downsampling results in a large drop in resolution, and location
information is diﬀicult to recover.
• The information of objects of different scales will loose in the down sampling
process.
• The spatial invariance of DCNN, the loss of position information will make the
final segmentation result rough and lose details
The solutions are shown in the structure:
• Atrous convolution
• ASSP￿Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling￿
Image input, enter the modified DCNN (VGG-16 or ResNet-101, hole convolution, ASSP
are all here), get a feature map with slightly smaller resolution, and then perform bilinear
interpolation to restore the resolution, use full Connect CRFl to improve segmentation
results (denoising, smoothing, better capture of boundaries).
3.3.1
Atrous convolution
The main role of atrous convolution is to:
• Expanding the receptive field: In order to increase the receptive field and reduce
the amount of computation in deep net.
Down-sampling (pooling ) is always
performed, so that although the receptive field can be increased, the spatial resolu-
tion is reduced. In order not to lose resolution and still expand the receptive field,
atrous convolution can be used. This is useful in detection, segmentation tasks.
On the one hand, a larger receptive field can detect and segment large targets, and
on the other hand, a higher resolution can precisely locate the target.
• Capture multi-scale context information: Hole convolution has a parameter to set
the dilation rate, which means filling the convolution kernel with dilation rate-1
zeros. Therefore, when different dilation rates are set, the receptive field will be
different, and That is, multi-scale information is obtained. Multiscale information
is important in vision tasks.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Deeplabv2 Introduction
13
Figure 3.9: Atrous convolution[Web+21].
3.3.2
ASSP(Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling)
After a feature map is obtained, a parallel structure is connected. Each branch structure
in the parallel structure is the same. The only difference is the expansion rate of the
respective convolutions. As shown below. Convolutions with different expansion rates
can obtain different receptive fields. A convolution with a small expansion rate has a
small receptive field and has a better effect on small-scale object recognition; convolution
with a large expansion rate has a large receptive field and has a good effect on large-scale
object recognition.
Figure 3.10: Atrous convolution[Web+21].
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Image Segmentation
3.4
Experimentation
3.4.1
Performance evaluation
The goal of the training process is to find out the proper weights that minimize the train-
ing loss. The loss function is an effective tool to enable weights update and performance
evaluation. The training loss and test loss trends could help realize the training situa-
tion, for example, whether there is overfitting at this training. We use the cross-entropy
function as the loss function for training part:
LCE = −
n
∑
i=1
ti log (pi)
where ti is the binary truth label for sample i belonging to the certain class, pi is the
predicted probability that i belongs to this class.
IOU(Intersection over Union) is another performance evaluation criteria commonly
used in image segmentation.
It measures the gap between predicted pixels and the
ground truth. The IOU could be calculated through the equation:
IoU = target ∧prediction
target ∪prediction
For the semantic task, there are two evaluation of IOU:
• Mean Intersection over Union: MeanIoU is the average of IoU for each class. Its
calculation is also divided into two steps:1.For each class, a ratio of intersection
and union is computed. The numerator of this ratio, like MPA, is the number of
correct predictions under the category; the denominator has a larger range, which
means that the category is predicted to be the sum of other categories and other
categories are predicted to be the category.2.Average the calculated results for all
categories.
MeanIoU =
1
k + 1
k
∑
i=0
pii
∑k
j=0 pij +
∑k
j=0 pji −pii
• Frequency Weighted Intersection over Union: It is to use the number of categories
of each category as the weight, which category has more number and which cate-
gory has more weight.
FWIoU =
1
∑k
i=0
∑k
j=0 pij
k
∑
i=0
pii
∑k
j=0 pij
∑k
j=0 pij + ∑k
j=0 pji −pii
There are also two evaluation for accuracy:
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Experimentation
15
• Pixel Accuracy￿It is the simplest indicator. It represents the ratio of the number
of correct predictions for all pixel classes to the total number of pixels.
PA =
∑k
i=0 pii
∑k
i=0
∑k
j=0 pij
• Mean Pixel Accuracy: Its calculation is divided into two steps: 1. For each cate-
gory, calculate the ratio of the number of correct predictions under the category
to the total number of pixels in the category 2. Average the calculation results of
all categories
MPA =
1
k + 1
k
∑
i=0
pii
∑k
j=0 pij
3.4.2
Optimizer
How to update the weights is determined by the loss function. The basic idea is to find
the direction that function gradient descents.
Assuming that the model parameters are wt the loss function is L(wt) the loss func-
tion L(wt) is the partial derivative of the parameter wt, that is, the gradient is ∇wtL(wt),
and suppose the learning rate is α, then use the gradient descent method to update The
parameters are:
wt+1 = wt −α · ∇wtL(wt)
The basic idea is shown below:
Figure 3.11: Gradient decent update.
To make the process quicker, we use the SGD(Stochastic Gradient Descent) optimizer
for this project. Suppose the total number of training samples is n, and the samples are
{(x1, y1) , · · · , (xn, yn)}, each time the parameters are updated, only one sample (xi, yi)
is selected to calculate its gradient. The parameter update formula is:
wt+1 = wt −α · ∇wtLi
(
w, xi, yi)
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Image Segmentation
Since SGD only needs to calculate the gradient of one sample for each parameter update,
the training speed is very fast. Even in the case of a large number of samples, only a
part of the samples may be needed to iterate to the optimal solution. But each iteration
is not in the direction of the overall optimization, resulting in very large fluctuations in
the gradient descent, and it is easier to jump from one local optimum to another, and
the accuracy decreases.
3.4.3
Module test
Since the COCOStuff164K dataset is a very large dataset, the training process is time
consuming. As mentioned in section 1.1, this system is just a test verification for the
objectives. The final performance of the system is:
Pixel Accuracy
Mean Accuracy
Mean IoU
FreqW IoU
66.8
51.2
39.1
51.5
To test the real time performance, the camera from the computer is used. The mean
time for the system to deal with the image is less than 1.5s. (With the GPU hardware
of MX250, time computed from read the image to label map is returned ) Considering
the MX250 is the GPU from two years ago and with the total classes number 172 which
will decrease the speed of the processing, the system is acceptable with real time task
given the situation of fixing indoor environment. The semantic results is shown below:
From the result, person(purple), lights(yellow), wall-staff(yellow), cup(blue), phone(dark
green), scissors(light green) and other-stuff(red) can be detected and relative pixels are
printed to different colors based on the color maps. From the result, most object is
correctly detected. For the wall, sometime it is detected as other-stuff, this might caused
by the illumination problems and the whole white background.
To test the performance of multiple objects, the TUM indoor dataset is used. The
segmentation result is shown below.
From the results, most of the detected objects are classified into right classes. Given
the situation that all of test images are not in the training dataset. In the future to
meet the requirements of Seasony, real life dataset can be collected and annotated for
training and testing.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Experimentation
17
Figure 3.12: Real time segmentation with different objects.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Image Segmentation
Figure 3.14: Test on TUM dataset 2.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Experimentation
19
Figure 3.15: Test on TUM dataset 3.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Image Segmentation
Figure 3.16: Test on TUM dataset 4.
3.5
Summery
In this chapter, The dataset for training and testing are introduced. The basic idea is:
given the limitation mentioned in section1.1, a dataset that includes almost everything
we will meet in the world is used for training and a dataset can meet the indoor envi-
ronments are chosen for testing. Deeplabv2 – the model for image segmentation was
introduced. The structure of the model and the improvement are presented.
To demonstrate the performance of the model, the performance evaluation are intro-
duced. In order to train the model in a faster way, SGD optimizer is used.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Summery
21
Finally, the module test is shown both with the real time performance and the
performance when meeting the real indoor environment with multi objects.
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
3D point cloud
reconstruction
4.1
Introduction
To build a 3D map, you first need to know the relationship between the images the rela-
tionship between the images is extracted and matched to obtain the relationship between
the images system, then map two-dimensional pixels with labels to three-dimensional
space, and finally use point cloud stitching algorithm to build up the 3D semantic point
cloud map.
4.2
ORB feature extraction and matching
Generally speaking, the mainstream feature point methods mainly include scale-invariant
feature transform (SIFT) algorithm, speeded up robust feature (SURF) algorithm, ori-
ented FAST and rotated BRIEF (ORB) algorithm, and comprehensively consider real-
time performance and robustness, the ORB algorithm is mainly selected for feature
extraction and matching.
The detection principle of Oriented FAST keypoints(ORB) is shown in Figure.
Figure 4.1: ORB Features.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 3D point cloud reconstruction
First select a circle with p point as the center and r as the radius, and then judge
whether there are consecutive n points on the circle whose pixel value is greater than
Ip + T (where Ip is the pixel value of p point, T is the threshold), if it meets the
requirements It is considered to be a key point, otherwise it is discarded. BRIEF is a
binary descriptor, and the descriptor vector consists of 0s and 1s. Take two random
pixels (such as p and q) near the key point, if p>q, take 1, otherwise take 0.
By
calculating 128 such pairs of p, q, a 128-dimensional vector is finally obtained, and the
key sub is obtained.
After extracting the features, it is necessary to perform feature matching on the two
images to find the corresponding relationship between them. Generally speaking, in
order to obtain higher matching accuracy, the brute force matching method is used for
matching. The principle is mainly to calculate the Euclidean distance of all points. ,
select the point with the smallest euclidean distance from the current point to match.
Using the camera to collect two laboratory scene pictures and brute force matching, the
matching results are shown in Figure.
4.3
ORB-SLAM2 system overview
ORB-SLAM2 is a complete SLAM system for monocular, stereo and RGB-D cameras,
including map reuse, loop closing and relocalization capabilities. This system can work
in real-time in a wide variety of environments. The structure of ORB-SLAM2 is shown
below:
Figure 4.2: ORB-SLAM2 frame work.
ORB-SLAM2 works on three tasks working simultaneously: tracking, local mapping
loop closing. In its tracking part, ORB-SLAM2 does frame-by-frame feature matching
and compares them with a local map to find the exact camera location in real-time. It
does a motion-only bundle adjustment so as to minimize error in placing each feature in
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Experimentation
25
its correct position, also called as minimizing reprojection error. Then comes the local
mapping part. ORB-SLAM2 makes local maps and optimizes them using algorithms like
ICP (Iterative Closest Point) and performs a local Bundle Adjustment so as to compute
the most probable position of the camera.
Finally, it uses pose-graph optimization
to correct the accumulated drift and perform a loop closure. It’s necessary to perform
Bundle Adjustment once after loop closure, so that robot is at the most probable location
in the newly corrected map. After the addition of a keyframe to the map or performing
a loop closure, ORB-SLAM2 can start a new thread that performs a Bundle adjustment
on the full map so the location of each keyframe and points in it get a fine-tuned location
value.
4.4
Experimentation
As the limitation mentioned in section 1.2, the TUM dataset is used for this part to test
the system. The introduction for TUM dataset is in section 3.2.2.
Figure 4.3: Sever frame work.
4.4.1
The sever(sever.py)
Since the deeplabv2 model is written based on python, and ORB-SLAM2 is written based
on C++, there will be running conflicts when running synchronously, so the semantic
segmentation part is written into the server to realize the synchronous running of the
two threads. The sever takes the RGB frame image from ImageSec.cc and then it call
back the runSegModel() function from the inference.py that can segment the image and
return a prob map that shows the class of the pixel. the prob map is delivered to the
ImgeSec.cc which is the client of the sever.
4.4.2
The client(ImageSec.cc)
The ImageSec.cc is the client of the system, there are three functions in the ImageSec.cc.
• connectServer():To build up connection with the sever.
• handleImage():To send the image to the server and receive the returned semantic
segmentation result(prob map).
• closeClientSockfd():To shut down the client.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 3D point cloud reconstruction
4.4.3
3D semantic map
The ORB-SLAM2 can realize the point cloud map building, to add the semantic infor-
mation to the point cloud map. Some changes has been made.
Build up a new class – PointCloudMappingClient.
There are Firstly, after the
Keyframe is update, it is delivered to the insertKeyframe() function in this class. With
the unique_lock and condition variable(Keyframe) synchronization, these can make sure
the two threads(ORB-SLAM2 and semantic point cloud drawing) work synchronously.
The other main function is generatePointCloud(), this function read the RGB image and
the depth image as well as the pose information. After it reads the image, it call the
client to get the prob maps after image segmentation. An assoiateAndUpdate() func-
tion is written to help match up the 2D points to 3D position(With the depth image).
The semantic point cloud will be built by the function mergePointCloudFromImage()
function. The input and output for using the PointCloudMappingClient is shown below.
Figure 4.4: PointCloudMappingClient thread.
4.5
Module test
4.5.1
Test for the sever
Firstly the sever is running to listen to the port, the results is like this:
Figure 4.5: Running the sever.
After running the point clouds building program, the connection is built the sever
starting to read the image and call the function to do the image segmentation.
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Module test
27
Figure 4.6: Build up the connection.
4.5.2
Test of the 3D semantic map
After the connection is built, the ORB-SLAM2 thread and the semantic map building
thread will run at the same time the result is shown below:
Figure 4.7: Process the 3D semantic map.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 3D point cloud reconstruction
4.5.3
Test of the real time performance
Due to the limitation for the computer hardware, the program always be denied by the
GPU with the error of short of storage. The system is tested in the COREi5 CPU with
10th generation. The real time performance is 0.3 frame per seconds. Although that
might seems too slow for the robot, consider the condition without GPU accelerate and
without the high level CPU(like COREi7 or COREi9), the system still shows some real
time performance.
4.5.4
Results for 3D semantic maps
Here the different semantic maps based on different TUM dataset:
Figure 4.8: TUM rgbd_dataset_freiburg1_xyz dataset.
Figure 4.9: TUM rgbd_dataset_freiburg3_long_oﬀice_household dataset.
Figure 4.10: TUM rgbd_dataset_freiburg2_pioneer_slam dataset.
==PAGE:37==
4.6 Summary
29
4.6
Summary
In this part, the using of ORB-SLAM2 combining with deeplabv2 mentioned in the previ-
ous section is introduced. Firstly, introduction for ORB-SLAM2 is presented, including
the theory of ORB features and the structure for ORB-SLAM2 system. Secondly, the
code for combine the ORB-SLAM2 and deeplabv2 is introduced, including the sever
and the client as well as some changes for the raw ORB-SLAM2 framework. Finally the
results are shown in the module test part.
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Outlier Removal
5.1
Introduction
As the result shown in chapter 4, the final results have lots of outliers. This may cause
by the inaccuracy of the ORB features, the unstable lighting conditions, noise when
doing the image segmentation and etc. All these outliers may have bad influence on
object recognizing, therefore it is important to remove the outliers.
To let the the situation more close to Seasony may face, we use the map that is
built by the pioneer robot to test the outlier removal system. The dataset collect by the
mobile robot can make sure a more steady correlation between frame to frame compare
with the handheld dataset, and the coordinate system after map building is easy to
recognize.
5.2
Open3d
Open3D is an open source library that enables rapid development and manipulation of
3D data. Open3D exposes a carefully chosen set of data structures and algorithms in
C++ and Python. The backend is highly optimized and set up for parallelization.
The core features of Open3D include:
• 3D data structures
• 3D Data Processing Algorithms
• Scene reconstruction
• Surface registration
• 3D visualization
5.3
DBSCAN clustering
Although different objects has been classified, to adding the bounding box for each
object. The classification based one the density of the point cloud still need to be apply.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Outlier Removal
DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Application with Noise) algorithm is
a typical density-based clustering method.
It defines a cluster as the largest set of
densely connected points, can divide regions with suﬀicient density into clusters, and
can find clusters of arbitrary shapes in noisy spatial datasets. There are two important
parameters in the DBSCAN algorithm: Eps and MmPtS. Eps is the neighborhood radius
when defining density, and MmPts is the threshold when defining core points.
The data points are divided into the following 3 categories in the DBSCAN algorithm:
• Core points: An object is a core point if it contains more than the number of
MmPts points within its radius Eps.
• Boundary point: An object is a boundary point if the number of points within its
radius Eps is less than MinPts, but the object falls within the neighborhood of the
core point.
• Noise point: An object is a noise point if it is neither a core point nor a boundary
point.
[Sch+17]
5.4
Experimentation
Firstly, some basic removal of outliers is applied to the 3D map. Removes points that
are further away from their neighbors compared to the average for the point cloud and
removes points that have few neighbors in a given sphere around them. The results is
shown below: After the basic removal, a bounding box is given to remove the floor so
Figure 5.1: Result after basic outlier removal.
that the object information can be filter out.
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Experimentation
33
Figure 5.2: Remove the floor.
A down sample process is applied to the 3D map to make it faster for the clustering
process. The result after DBSCAN cluster is shown below:
Figure 5.3: Clustering result.
Finally the bounding box for each object is added based on the classes, the result is
shown below:
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Outlier Removal
Figure 5.4: Final result.
5.5
Summary
In this part, some post processing for 3D semantic map. The open3d library is introduced
which is the library for point cloud processing. After that a clustering method for helping
recognize the location of the object is introduced. Finally, the result with bounding boxes
is shown.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Future work
In this chapter, expected future work is presented based on the solution and test result
of this project.
Base on the limitation mentioned in section 1.2, some improvement should be made
as list below:
• Data for real situation: A more related data should be collect, so that the
training process can be done in a more suitable way. The accuracy of the model
may also improve, since related data is used for training.
• Using more powerful hardware: All the results are tested in the hardware
from middle level. The real time performance is not that good with this level of
hardware. Lots of related works are tested in a high level hardware environment,
which shows great real time performance. An improvement of hardware is needed
in the future to improve the real time performance for this system.
• A ROS2 version: As Seasony is using ROS2 as their robot operating system
this system should be port to ros2.
In the starting progress of this project, a
simple simulation environment has been built in gazebo. And an object recognition
system with YOLOv5 have been tested on this system. Although the simulation
is too simple to accept, it verify the possibility to apply neural network for object
recognition in ros2.
• 2D map: The 3D semantic map maybe not enough for robot navigation. An idea
is to project the map into 2D, so that the robot can use the map for navigation
and object detection.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This project achieve a system that can use rgb and depth information to detect different
indoor objects and localize them with a bounding box.
To begin with, the deeplabv2 model is used to do the real time segmentation. This
will help the robot to have a basic understanding of the environment.
After that, some modify on ORB-SLAM2 can achieve the 3D semantic map building,
which bring the objects to a 3D coordinate. This gives the robot a better understanding
to the 3D environment.
Finally, some methods are apply to filter out the 3D useful information.
Although there are limitations, such as no related data can be use, no suitable
simulation environment. This project do achieve the objectives in a more general way,
which gives a basis for the improvements.
==PAGE:46==
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 8
Appendix
8.1
Code
https://github.com/ChangR-Liu/Master-thesis.git
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[CUF18]
Holger Caesar, Jasper Uijlings, and Vittorio Ferrari. “Coco-stuff: Thing and
stuff classes in context.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. 2018, pages 1209–1218.
[ESC14]
Jakob Engel, Thomas Schöps, and Daniel Cremers. “LSD-SLAM: Large-
scale direct monocular SLAM.” In: European conference on computer vision.
Springer. 2014, pages 834–849.
[He+17]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask r-cnn.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision. 2017, pages 2961–2969.
[Hen+12]
P Henry et al. “RGB-D mapping: Using Kinect-style.” In: The International
Journal of Robotics Research 31.5 (2012).
[Hen+14]
Peter Henry et al. “RGB-D mapping: Using depth cameras for dense 3D
modeling of indoor environments.” In: Experimental robotics. Springer. 2014,
pages 477–491.
[KM07]
Georg Klein and David Murray. “Parallel tracking and mapping for small
AR workspaces.” In: 2007 6th IEEE and ACM international symposium on
mixed and augmented reality. IEEE. 2007, pages 225–234.
[KM08]
Georg Klein and David Murray. “Improving the agility of keyframe-based
SLAM.” In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2008, pages 802–
815.
[McC+17]
John McCormac et al. “Semanticfusion: Dense 3d semantic mapping with
convolutional neural networks.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2017, pages 4628–4635.
[MMT15]
JMM Montiel, R Mur-Arta, and Juan D Tardós. “ORB-SLAM: A versatile
and accurate monocular.” In: IEEE Trans. Robot. 31.5 (2015), pages 1147–
1163.
[MT14]
Raúl Mur-Artal and Juan D Tardós. “Fast relocalisation and loop clos-
ing in keyframe-based SLAM.” In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2014, pages 846–853.
[Nak+18]
Yoshikatsu Nakajima et al. “Fast and accurate semantic mapping through
geometric-based incremental segmentation.” In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 2018,
pages 385–392.
==PAGE:50==
42
Bibliography
[Sal+13]
Renato F Salas-Moreno et al. “Slam++: Simultaneous localisation and map-
ping at the level of objects.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2013, pages 1352–1359.
[Sch+17]
Erich Schubert et al. “DBSCAN revisited, revisited: why and how you
should (still) use DBSCAN.” In: ACM Transactions on Database Systems
(TODS) 42.3 (2017), pages 1–21.
[Stu12]
Jurgen Sturm. RGB-D SLAM dataset and benchmark. 2012.
[Web+21]
Mark Weber et al. “Deeplab2: A tensorflow library for deep labeling.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09748 (2021).
[Zha+17]
Hengshuang Zhao et al. “Pyramid scene parsing network.” In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017,
pages 2881–2890.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
43
==PAGE:52==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
