==PAGE:1==
Decentralized Remote Attestation
of Distributed Services with
Blockchain
Sebastian Posselt - s200613
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
The Internet-of-Things (IoT) continues to grow and develop. Smart devices,
smart infrastructure, and smart cities are becoming parts of our lives and this
introduces new vulnerabilities. IoT devices are typically small, cheap, and re-
source constrained devices. Complex security measures may be impossible or
too resource draining and this makes them inherently insecure.
The objectives of this thesis are 1) to research and analyze the current state-
of-the-art of remote attestation (RA) protocols that deals with trust, device
collaboration, and blockchain, 2) research how a RA protocol can support all
types of information ﬂow through a distributed service, and 3) design a RA
protocol for distributed services that is secure and suitable for use in multi-
party network.
This thesis presents the novel remote attestation protocol DReADS, designed to
address the current challenges in the state-of-the-art of RA. It is a trustless, de-
centralized, and publicly veriﬁable protocol that incorporates a blockchain sys-
tem with the Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) consensus mechanism. DReADS is
designed for use in distributed services communicating via the publisher/subscriber
method and supports all types of information ﬂow through a distributed service.
The protocol attests the collaboration between devices by securing the shared
data and the state of the devices in every interaction. DReADS is secure against
common IoT adversaries and suitable for use in multi-party networks, but the
blockchain incorporation incurs a large overhead that may be too much for some
IoT devices. Oﬄoading responsibilities to a fog node is proposed as a possible
remedy, but the severity of the issue and longevity of the remedy is dependent
on the individual system.
==PAGE:4==
Abstrakt (Danish)
Fænomenet Internet-of-Things (IoT) forsætter med at vokse of udvikle sig.
Smart enheder, smart infrastruktur og smart cities er ved at blive integrere-
de dele af vores liv og dette bringer nye usikkerheder med sig. IoT enheder er
som regel små, billige og ressourcesvage. Avancerede sikkerhedsforanstaltninger
kan være umulige eller for ressourcekrævende, og dette gør dem usikre af natur.
Formålet med denne afhandling er 1) at undersøge og analysere state-of-the-
art fjernattesterings protokoller som beskæftigere sig med tillid mellem enheder,
samarbejde og blockchain. 2) Undersøge hvordan en fjernattesterings protokol
kan understøtte alle informationsﬂow i distribuerede servicer. 3) Designe en
fjernattesterings protokol for distribuerede servicer der er sikker og brugbar i
netværk med mange parter.
Denne afhandling præsenterer en ny fjernattesterings protokol kaldet DReADS,
som er designet til at addressere nuværende udfordringer i fjernattesterings fel-
tet. Det er en tillidsløs, decentraliseret og oﬀentlig veriﬁcerbar protokol, som
indbefatter brugen af et blockchain system der benytter sig af Proof-of-Elasped-
time konsensus protokollen. DReADS er designet med henblik på brug i distri-
buerede serviser der kommunikerer igennem en publisher/subscriber metode og
den understøtter alle typer af informationsﬂow deri. Protokollen attesterer både
samarbejdet mellem enheder og den data de udveksler. DReADS sikre imod ty-
piske modstandere i IoT og arter sig til brug i netværk med mange parter, men
blockchain elementet har nogle omkostninger der kan vise sig for store i en IoT
sammenhæng. En mulig løsning på dette problemet kan være at aﬂæsse block-
chain ansvaret fra meget udfordrede IoT enheder til fog-nodes, men størrelsen
på problemet er individuelt og system afhængig og det samme er eﬀektiviteten
af løsningforslaget.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
Lyngby, 13-June-2022
Sebastian Posselt - s200613
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstrakt (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis and research objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
6
2.1
Remote attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Adversary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Publish and subscribe architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Related Works
13
3.1
Distributed attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Self-attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Publicly veriﬁable attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Attestation with network consensus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Attesting device interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Attestation with blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Protocol Design
30
4.1
Project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
System model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
4.1.2
Adversary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Minimum hardware requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
The DReADS protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
High-level overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Blockchain design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.3
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.4
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.1
Choice of blockchain system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.2
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Implementation
47
5.1
Hyperledger sawtooth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.1.1
Issues encountered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
DReADS implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Hyperledger Sawtooth update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
52
6.1
Comparative analysis of DReADS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Conﬁdentiality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Self-attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.5
Concerns with DReADS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.6
Oﬄoading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion & Future Work
61
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Computers are becoming omnipresent in modern society and are embedded in
more and more things, from the light bulbs in our houses to sensors in our
sewage pipes. Smart devices, smart factories, and smart cities are staring to
rooting themselves in our lives and as the Internet of Things (IoT) is increasing
[14], so is the need for security in these systems. Eﬀorts to reduce the size, the
price, and energy consumption of IoT devices generally makes them simplistic
and resource constrained.
They are purposely designed with a very limited
number of tasks in mind and complex security measures may be impossible
or too resource draining. The Mirai botnet was the result of a malware that
targeted IoT devices and is an example of the consequences of poor security in
IoT devices and the severity of the problem. It was responsible for one of the
largest distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks in history [13] and consisted
of 600.000 devices at its peak [7].
IoT devices are deployed in multiple sectors across the globe. Their many ap-
plications can make them attractive target for hackers, as they may contain
sensitive information such as health and personal data or they may be critical
parts of a production line or industrial control system. Their interconnected
nature means that attacks can quickly be ampliﬁed by infecting neighbors. An-
other attractive characteristic of IoT devices for hackers, is the short distance
between the digital and physical worlds. IoT devices may be actuators or they
may provide data to actuators and that means an attack can quickly have phys-
==PAGE:10==
2
ical consequences. A serious example of such an attack is Stuxnet that caused
substantial damage to Iran’s nuclear program by attacking programmable logic
controllers (PLCs) [47].
While IoT devices’ limited security makes it diﬃcult to protect against adver-
saries, remote attestation (RA) can help detect when devices become compro-
mised. In its basic form it is a challenge/response scheme between a devices,
called a prover, and a trusted veriﬁer. The prover receives a fresh challenge
from the trusted veriﬁer and replies with a testament of its memory state and
the challenge. The veriﬁer then checks the testament against a list of trusted
states and determines if the device is compromised or not. The testament is
often an accumulated hash of speciﬁc static memory addresses that for example
contains program code. If the hashes do not match, it shows that the devices
is running a modiﬁed version of the code. However, there needs to be a root
of trust on the device to ensure that compromised devices are not just sending
back pre-calculated testaments.
RA implemented only through software depends on strong assumptions about
adversary capabilities and it makes it unsuitable for many domains [9].
On
the other end of the spectrum is hardware-based RA that relies on specialized
hardware to establish a root of trust on the devices. This method is very secure
and eﬀective, but the cost of the specialized hardware is high which makes
it problematic in the context of IoT. In between the two lies a cost-eﬀective
compromise called hybrid remote attestation. It uses a combination of software
and minimal specialized hardware to establish a trust anchor on the devices. The
ﬁeld has developed a lot through the past years and to a point where there now
are many state-of-the-art RA protocols designed for a wide variety of networks.
Many protocols are considered swam attestation or collective attestation, which
attests large groups of devices. Their focus is often on eﬃcient attestation and
they vary in their domains and ways to achieve eﬃcient attention.
Only few RA protocols consider the communication or collaboration between
devices and this can cause security problems; especially in distributed services.
A Distributed service is a service composed of multiple collaborating devices
each hosting microservices1. If an uncompromised device acts on input from
a compromised device, the state and the output of that device may also be
compromised; even without the presence of an adversary on the device. There-
fore is should be considered compromised as well. This can cause a hard to
detect ripple eﬀects and this is exactly the case in Stuxnet, where a compro-
mised PLC provided input to a chain of uncompromised devices and resulted in
unexplainable failures downstream.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microservices
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Problem statement
3
With huge networks like smart cities, smart factories, etc., also comes the issue
of trust. Centralized trusted entities can be ﬁne in small scale networks where
devices are owned and operated by the same party, but large scale networks like
the ones in smart cities can have multiple owners, users, and device manufactures
which all have to trust each order in order for the network to function correctly.
Centralized entities poses a problem in such systems, as the controller of the
central entity holds a huge power over the network. Especially so if devices
are forced to trust the central entity with no ways to verify the correctness of
its actions. Decentralization, transparency, and public veriﬁability are eﬀective
measures to aid trust in multi-party systems and are also part of the foundation
of blockchain systems like Bitcoin and Ethereum, which service something as
trust sensitive as trading assets. IoT networks can possess some of the same
issues that blockchain technologies aim to ﬁx.
Issues such as centralization,
trust, and robustness may be mitigated by blockchain technologies and, while
blockchain has already been incorporated in RA, its possibilities, limitations,
and potential usages are still not fully explored.
1.1
Problem statement
The ﬁeld of remote attestations has many state-of-the-art protocols today that
suite a wide a variety of diﬀerent IoT networks. The majority of these protocols
focus on secure and eﬃcient attestation and relatively few protocols consider
the communication or collaboration between devices. This is despite that many
IoT systems may employ the same method of communication, as prevalent IoT
communication protocols, such as MQTT, DDS, and AMQP, all accommodate
asynchronous publisher/subscriber communication [15].
If a protocol only focuses on attesting individual device’s health, it will likely
fail to discover compromised states where a perceived uncompromised device
is reacting to input from a compromised device. Conversely, if a protocol is
focusing on the overall network health, it may discover a compromised device
and regard the whole network or cluster as compromised. This can be a very
ineﬃcient overestimation, as it may only be a small subset of interactions in
the network that are compromised by that device, but because the interactions
between devices are not considered the whole network/cluster is regarded as
inoperable.
The SARA protocol is an example of a protocol that speciﬁcally targets asyn-
chronous distributed services that communicate via the publisher/subscriber
method. The protocol attests the collaboration and communication between
devices by iteratively building a trace of attestation reports, inputs, and out-
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Thesis and research objective
4
puts of all services involved in a distributed service execution, which is then
veriﬁed by a central trusted veriﬁer. However, the design does not accommo-
date information ﬂows that contains multiple dependencies, which are a single
service that depends on inputs from two or more services. Nor does it lend itself
well for multi-party settings, as it relies on a centralized trusted veriﬁer.
Considerations about trust and creating trust in multi-party settings is not
a focus point of many RA protocols. However, when trust is not a prioritized
consideration in the design, it may lead to issues moving forward, as the need for
multi-party trust becomes increasingly common with the continued growth and
development in IoT. Public veriﬁability is one method to aid trust in multi-party
settings and is an attribute of some RA protocols today. Blockchain systems
have also been combined with RA and is another tool used in situations where
trust is important. Proactively considering the issues with device interactions
and trust can help protocol designs be secure and relevant both presently and
in the future.
1.2
Thesis and research objective
This thesis sets out to research and analyze the current state-of-the-art of remote
attestation protocols that deals with trust, device collaboration, and blockchain.
Additionally it sets out to research how to design a novel RA protocol that tar-
gets asynchronous distributed services communicating via publisher/subscriber
and is suitable for use multi-party networks. Speciﬁcally, the objectives of this
thesis are summarized by the following research question:
• RQ one: Research which methods remote attestation protocols utilize
today to aid or ensure trust, how device interactions are considered, how
blockchain systems are currently used in RA, and how blockchain systems
can provide trust in an IoT setting.
• RQ two: How can a remote attestation protocol for distributed services
support all types of information ﬂows.
• RQ three: How can I design a remote attestation protocol that it is secure
and resilient against common adversary types in IoT and is suitable for
use in multi-party networks.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Contributions
5
1.3
Contributions
The contributions of this thesis can be summarized to:
• A literature review of the current state-of-the-art remote attestation pro-
tocols that deals with trust, device interaction, and blockchain. As well
as a discussion of the protocols and their characteristics.
• The design of a novel RA protocol called DReADS that attests the inter-
action between devices in asynchronous distributed services. The protocol
incorporates a blockchain system that stores all events in the network
and enables tracing every type of information ﬂow through a distributed
service by references to previous events.
• DReADS is secure against a remote software adversary and replay attacks,
man-in-the-middle attacks, and other attack types where the adversary is
controlling the network. The protocol is completely decentralized and uses
a blockchain system to establish public veriﬁability and a trustless system
suited for multi-party networks.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter explains some of the core concepts of this thesis. In section 2.1 it
explains remote attestation and some of its important distinctions. Afterwards
in section 2.2, it goes other the diﬀerent kinds of adversaries and their capabili-
ties. In section 2.3 it explains the publisher/subscriber paradigm, and lastly in
section 2.4 it goes over the fundamentals of blockchain and blockchain systems.
2.1
Remote attestation
Remote attestation (RA) is a security method for detecting whether a device
has been compromised by authenticating the identity and the integrity of the
device. The basic version of RA is a challenge/response scheme that involves
two parties: a prover, which is the device being attested, and a trusted veriﬁer.
The veriﬁer will send a unique and fresh challenge to the prover that replies
with a report of its local state and the challenge. What the report contains
depends on the type of RA, but it is typically an accumulated hash of static
memory regions that contains program code or conﬁguration ﬁles (more on this
later). Including the challenge ensures that the reply is freshly generated for
that request. The measurements are matched with an expected result and the
veriﬁer can then determine if it trusts the state of prover.
There are three
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Remote attestation
7
architectural categories of RA protocols: software-based, hardware-based, and
hybrid.
Software-based
protocols do not rely on any speciﬁc hardware, but instead
establishes a root of trust through strong assumptions of the adversary’s capabil-
ities and properties of the device and network [9]. Such assumption can be run-
time of procedures, free memory on the device, compressibility of code, and net-
work delays. One example of a software-based protocol is SWATT (SoftWare-
based ATTestation for Embedded Devices), which calculate a checksum of a part
of memory. The protocol’s security relies on an assumption that the runtime of
calculating this checksum will deviate noticeably if the device is compromised
[36]. There are many possible attacks on software-based attestations, as the as-
sumptions do not always hold and because adversaries’ capabilities can improve
over time. This makes software-based attestation unsuitable for many domains.
Hardware-based
attestation relies entirely on specialized hardware compo-
nents to act as root of trust on the device. An example of such is the Trusted
Platform Module (TPM) that is a dedicated microcontroller to perform task
such as:
• public key cryptographic operations,
• key management and generation,
• secure storage of keys and other secret data,
• hardware random number generation,
• and integrity measurement and attestation.
It is designed to enable tamper-proof attestations of the device even if the de-
vice is compromised. Such specialized hardware are expensive and thereby not
always an option; especially in an IoT setting [10].
Hybrid
attestation is a cost eﬀective middle ground between software-based
and hardware-based attestation. It relies on minimal specialized hardware like
read-only memory (ROM) and a memory protection unit (MPU) to securely
store program code, cryptographic keys, and provide access control speciﬁc parts
of memory.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Adversary model
8
An important diﬀerence between RA protocols is what they measure on the
devices to determine trust. There are two main distinction here: static attes-
tation and dynamic attestation. static attestation will measure static parts of
memory such as executable binaries and conﬁgurations ﬁles. This is an eﬀec-
tive way to detect malicious software changes or device conﬁguration changes,
but it does not protect again runtime attacks such as buﬀer overﬂow attacks
or return-oriented programming attacks [10, 48]. To protect against runtime
attacks, dynamic attestation uses more sophisticated forensic tools to analyze
volatile memory or memory accesses. E.g., dynamic attestation may monitor
the control ﬂow of programs or the read and write addresses associated with pro-
gram execution. Due to the complexity of protecting against runtime attacks,
most of the RA protocol targeting IoT devices rely on static attestation.
The last important distinction between protocols is the scope of the attesta-
tion. Some protocols aim at attesting single devices, while others attest whole
networks or clusters of devices. The latter is called swarm attestation or collec-
tive attestation and are typically a one-to-many scheme were one veriﬁer attests
many provers. Swarm attestation typically uses some form of logical topology
network to transport information eﬃciently within the network, e.g., spanning
trees and clustering. Such topologies incurs an overhead to construct and often
relies on a static network, I.e. devices do not move around the network.
In
dynamic networks, maintaining such logical topologies becomes a diﬃcult and
computationally expensive task and many protocols resort to a more unstruc-
tured method of propagating information.
2.2
Adversary model
Diﬀerent RA protocols protect against diﬀerent adversaries types. Adversary
models vary in granularity in the literature, but can be summarized by the
following categories:
• A remote software adversary can exploit existing vulnerabilities in
software of a device. This includes modifying unprotected software run-
ning on the device or injecting and executing malware without physical
access to the device.
• a mobile software adversary builds on top of the remote software ad-
versary, but has the additional ability to move the malware. If the malware
can move to another memory region or delete itself, it is called transient
malware. This type of malware can be used in time-of-check to time-of-use
attacks, which exploits the time interval between checking that the device
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Publish and subscribe architecture
9
is secure and the use of the device. If the malware is moved to another
device, and thereby infecting it, it is called migratory malware [48].
• An intrusive hardware adversary has access to the physical device
and can take it apart, inspect the memory, clone the device, or alter the
hardware. This type of adversary is very diﬃcult to protect against. A
few RA protocols oﬀers some protection, but it rely on an assumption that
a physical attack causes a detectable downtime or delay [38, 24, 28].
• A non-intrusive hardware adversary has full control of the commu-
nication medium and eavesdrop, replay, reorder, etc. the messages to and
from the device.
This type of adversary can also launch non-intrusive
side-channel attacks such as timing, memory, and acoustic.
To reason
about the eﬀects of capabilities controlling the communication medium,
the Dolev-Yao model can be used [42]. It is a model that lets an adversary
capture, modify, compose, decompose, and in every way forge messages.
The adversary cannot break encryption or reverse hashes, but may decrypt
any message if in possession of the key.
2.3
Publish and subscribe architecture
The publish-subscribe architecture is a messaging paradigm used to disseminate
information in a scalable, eﬃcient, and reliable manner. It is often used in large
networks and distributed systems where synchronous point-to-point messaging
is too ineﬃcient or otherwise problematic.
Publishers produce and categorize date that is then consumed by subscribers.
Subscribers express interest in certain events and categories to brokers, which in
turns are responsible for managing subscriptions and selecting which subscribers
receive which events in a process called ﬁltering.
In some pub/sub systems
subscribers and publishers may not be online at the same time. In such cases,
the brokers are also responsible for delivering events to subscribers when they
come online.
Pub/sub systems are often categorized into topic-based systems, contend-based
systems, or a hybrid of the two. Topic-based systems means that events are
categorized by data topics, e.g., temperature, humidity, and wind speed. It is
typically a coarse categorization that leads to subscribers receiving more events
than they are interested in, as many publishers produce data with the same
topic. However it allows for eﬃcient ﬁltering and routing of events at the broker.
In content-based system, interests in events are expressed as sets of constraints
==PAGE:18==
2.4 Blockchain
10
on the data; often by the use of relational operators and regular expressions.
How to parametrize subscriptions varies between systems, but it is typically
a very ﬁne-grained categorization. The large number of possible subscriptions
leads to a higher load at the brokers as both ﬁltering and routing becomes vastly
more complex and it is often not practical or possible to match each possible
subscription to a multicast group.
Type-based systems are a hybrid between topic-based and content-based sys-
tems that allows for a coarse-grained structure on events on which precise con-
straints can be expressed. For instance, temperature > 20. These types of
systems results in a middle ground both in terms of load at the brokers and
expressiveness of the subscriptions.
Pub/sub systems can also categorized by their topology. Centralized pub/sub
has a single broker for the whole system. This makes managing subscriptions
easy, but it can become a bottleneck for scalability and cause latency issues
if the network is geographically spread out. It also becomes a single point of
failure for the system. Distributed pub/sub has multiple brokers spread out
through the network. This mitigates the problems of centralized pub/sub, but
increase the diﬃculty of managing brokers’ responsibilities. [37]
2.4
Blockchain
Blockchain has been highly popularized by Bitcoin and other cryptocurrency in
recent years. This has lead to some confusion as to what blockchain is, because
there is a diﬀerences between blockchain systems such as cryptocurrency and
the data structure blockchain. Blockchain systems are concrete implementations
that employs the blockchain data structure, typically in conjunction with cryp-
tology, decentralization, and distributed consensus algorithms. The blockchain
data structure is essentially a linked that uses hash pointers instead of regular
pointers to link the previous block to the next.
A block is made up of two things: a body and a header.
The body stores
arbitrary data and the header is used to store security parameters speciﬁc to
each blockchain system and the hash pointer referencing the previous block. In
most systems the header includes the hash pointer, a protocol version number,
a timestamp, and the merkle root of the body. The merkle root is an aggregated
hash that is used to uniquely and concisely identify the content of the body and
in protecting the body from forgery. It is calculated by hierarchically hashing
and combing the data until it is reduced to a single hash. An example of how to
calculate the merkle root of four transactions is given in Figure 2.1. The hash
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Blockchain
11
Figure 2.1: Example of how the merkle root of four transactions is calculated
pointer is made by hashing the previous block and keeping that hash in the
header of the next, thus, linking the two. This system continues until the initial
block of the chain is reach, called the genesis block. The blocks are typically
fortiﬁed with digital signatures, which provides integrity, authenticity, and non-
repudiation. Changing the data in a block will causes its hash to no longer
matches the one in the header of the next. This creates a cascading eﬀect that
requires the recalculation of hashes in all subsequent blocks, as updating the
the hash will reproduce the problem in the next link until the head is eventually
reached.
Blockchain systems can be divided into private (permissioned) blockchains and
public (permissionless) blockchains. Private blockchain systems can be private
because they operate in a private network or because participants need to be
authorized. Such authorization is likely to incurs some form of centralized trust,
but private blockchains are required to be completely decentralized. While they
typically are decentralized, they can be implemented and designed as seen ﬁt
and centralized blockchain systems can be a good and practical solution in some
use cases. Private blockchain systems can have applications in many domains,
e.g. governance, monitoring and tracking.
Public blockchain systems, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, are typically decen-
tralized and trustless systems. “A trustless system means that the participants
involved do not need to know or trust each other or a third party for the system
to function” 1. Instead the trust is moved onto the protocol and, especially,
the consensus mechanism. The decentralized design removes any single point of
failure and the blockchain is kept in all the nodes of the systems and functions
as a distributed database. Entries to the database are agreed on by a consensus
mechanism, but collectively agreeing on the entries is no easy feat and what
is known as the “The Byzantine Generals Problem” has been studied for years.
If all devices in a network are trustworthy and cannot crash it, agreeing on
which block to add is simply a synchronization problem. However, if devices
can crash there needs to contingencies for that. This is known as crash fault tol-
erance (CFT). If devices can have arbitrary faults, such as crashing, corrupted
messages, or even malicious intend, it is called a byzantine fault and resiliency
against these is known as byzantine fault tolerance (BFT). Solutions to the the
byzantine generals problem dates back to 1982 and still used Practical Byzantine
1https://academy.binance.com/en/glossary/trustless
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Blockchain
12
Fault Tolerance algorithm (PBFT) was introduced in 1999. These algorithms
are voting based protocols that incurs a high communication overhead due to a
high level of coordination between devices. This can in turn pose a scalability
problem when systems have many nodes that needs to agree. In 2008, Satoshi
Nakamoto published a paper called “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash
System” which introduced a new style of consensus where nodes solve crypto-
graphic puzzles and the ﬁrst to solve it is elected leader and can choose what
block to add to the blockchain. This type of consensus has less coordination
between devices and less of a communication overhead, but instead it incurs a
computational overhead. As the system is asynchronous, race conditions can oc-
cur where two nodes may add diﬀerent by equally valid block to the blockchain
at the same time. This situation is also possible if a malicious actor tries to
spend the same money twice, known as the double spend problem. This causes
a fork in the blockchain and is solved by the longest chain rule, which makes
nodes view the longest available chain as the correct one. The consensus mech-
anism in Bitcoin is called Proof-of-Work (PoW) and many scheme inspired by
PoW has been proposed in recent years.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Related Works
There are many diﬀerent RA protocols today with diﬀerent properties, domains,
and security considerations. In designing or selecting an appropriate RA pro-
tocol, it is important to consider various characteristics such as adversary type,
network behavior, functionality, domain, and use cases. This chapter describes
six characteristics of RA protocols and gives examples and explanations of state-
of-the-art RA protocols with these characteristics. There are other state-of-the-
art RA protocols, but these has been selected for their considerations of device
interactions, trust, or their use of blockchain. The chapter ﬁnishes with a dis-
cussion of its ﬁndings in section 3.7.
3.1
Distributed attestation
Distributed attestation aims to eliminated the need for a centralized trusted
veriﬁer. The centralization becomes a single point of failure for the protocols
and can limits their scalability. In setting where multiple parties deploy devices
to the same network, there may also be a trust issue with who controls the central
veriﬁer. Distributed attestation moves the trust away from a single entity and
onto the protocol itself. Distributed attestation is often a central feature in RA
protocols for autonomous networks. The following three protocols are examples
of distributed attestation.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Distributed attestation
14
ESDRA
(Eﬃcient and Secure Distributed Remote Attestation) [30] is a swarm
attestation protocol and was the ﬁrst to propose a many-to-one scheme where
many devices act as veriﬁers to attest one prover. In ESDRA, the devices of the
network are divided into clusters and each cluster has a cluster head. The di-
vision is based on communication distance between devices. Devices within the
clusters perform a linking phase with neighboring devices, where certiﬁcates of
legal states and other protocol parameters that allows neighbors to attest each
other are exchanged. All devices have a trust score updated at each attestation
and attestation is triggered when a device’s trust score gets below a certain
threshold or by a timer. At attestation time, the neighbors sends a challenge
to the prover. The prover calculates a response based on the challenge and its
current memory state and sends back the response. The neighbors then veriﬁes
the state of the prover and each neighbor forwards the attestation result to the
cluster head, which eventually aggregates all the attestation results of all devices
within the cluster.
US-AID
(Unattended Scalable Attestation of IoT Devices) [24] is a swarm at-
testation protocol that targets large dynamic and autonomous networks, which
meaning that devices can move within the network and have no supervision.
When devices join the network or move to new parts of the network, they ex-
change certiﬁcates of their legal software states with their new neighbors. Like
with ESDRA, the attestation is self-triggering. At random intervals, devices
attests their neighbors one by one in a challenge/response manner. However,
the protocol is considered a one-to-many scheme as one device can attest many
provers. If a device does not pass attestation, the veriﬁer drops communication
with the comprised device and it will eventually be isolated by its other neigh-
bors as well and be unable to maliciously aﬀect the network further. To protect
against intrusive hardware adversaries, US-AID also incorporates a heartbeat
protocol in which a periodical ping/message is send between neighbors to alert
neighbors about a device’s presence and liveliness.
SAFEd
(Self-Attestation For networks of heterogeneous Embedded Devices)
[38] is another distributed attestation protocol for dynamic and autonomous
networks in which device can be both provers and veriﬁers. Devices are all part
of a distributed hash table (DHT) that is a modiﬁed version of Chord1. When a
device joins the network, a certiﬁed hash of a legal device state is stored in the
DHT. When a device needs to communicate with another, it acts as veriﬁer and
sends a challenge to the prover, which responds with a hash of its memory state.
The veriﬁer then queries the DHT for the certiﬁed legal state and compares it
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chord_(peer-to-peer)
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Self-attestation
15
with the prover’s response. It is a one-to-many scheme, as any device can attest
any other, which also makes it practical in an autonomous setting.
3.2
Self-attestation
Self-attestation, or self-attesting, allows devices to verify the attestation them-
selves and the attestation result can be a simple true of false. It works by a
device hashing some parts of its memory and comparing that hash to a locally
stored list of hashes representing trustworthy states. This method relies on the
assumption that the list of legal hashes is securely stored and cannot be altered
by an adversary. This requires a root of trust on the device, such as the TPM
or other specialized hardware like ROM.
The distinction between self-attesting and self-triggering can be blurry in RA
literature as they are often used in conjunction. It is possible for a RA protocol
to be self-attesting but attestation is triggered by another device, and for a
self-triggering protocol to have an external veriﬁer. In this thesis, self-triggering
means that attestation is initiated by some internal event, e.g. a pseudo random
timer, while self-attesting is as previously described.
ERASMUS
(Eﬃcient Remote Attestation via Self-Measurement for Unat-
tended Settings) [12] is meant for time-sensitive and/or safety-critical applica-
tions and was the ﬁrst RA protocol to decouple attestation and veriﬁcation
in time. Self-attestation is initiated on a pre-established schedule that is ad-
vantageous to normal operations of the device, and the result of which stored
locally. An external veriﬁer will periodically request these attestations to con-
ﬁrm the health of the devices, but the attestation are also veriﬁed by the device
itself. The collection of attestations incurs limited interruptions of services as
are already computed.
SALAD
(Secure And Lightweight Attestation of Dynamic networks) [29] is
a swarm attestation protocol aimed at dynamic networks.
As devices move
around in the network, it becomes costly to maintain a logical network topol-
ogy to propagate and collect information. Instead, a network owner will sends
an attestation request to an arbitrary device. This device then propagates the
attestation request to all its immediate neighbors, who will do the same. After
receiving an attestation request, a device will perform self-attesting and an-
nounce the result to its neighbors who stores it locally. As devices continue to
move around the network, each device will eventually have build a snapshot of
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Publicly veriﬁable attestation
16
the entire network state. The network owner can then ask any device for the
state of the network.
3.3
Publicly veriﬁable attestation
In most attestation protocols, the attestation report and attestation result is
only available to the interacting parties, but some protocols allow other members
of the network to view and verify any attestation result. Publicly veriﬁability can
aid trust between devices, especially in multi-party settings, as every attestation
claims can be veriﬁed by the member of network and, thereby, removing the
motivation for dishonest claims as they are easily disproved.
SANA
(Secure and Scalable Aggregate Network Attestation) [3] is a swarm
attestation protocol that uses a multi-signature scheme to make the attestation
publicly veriﬁable. Devices in the network can be aggregators or provers and it
is possible that a device is both. A trusted veriﬁer chooses an aggregator from
which a spanning tree is created by ﬂooding the network with an attestation
request. When the attestation request reaches the provers, they compute their
attestation response and send it to their parent in the spanning tree.
The
parent will aggregate its children’s responses and propagate them further up the
spanning tree. The back-propagation and aggregation continuous until the root
is reached and the aggregated responses are send to a trusted veriﬁer. Knowing
all the public keys of the network enables the computation of an aggregate public
key that in turns enables the veriﬁcation of the network attestation.
PASTA
[28] is a swarm attestation protocol for autonomous networks of em-
bedded devices.
It is a many-to-many scheme that is facilitated by Schnorr
multisignatures. Any device in the network can initiate an attestation process
and attestation is triggered when a device sees that the last attestation it partic-
ipated in has exceed some time threshold. The initiator ﬁrst creates a spanning
tree with itself at the root, by sending out a token generation request that is
propagated through the network. Upon receiving such request, a device will
perform self-attestation. If the attestation fails, the device will not participate
further in the token generation. Otherwise, it back-propagate its identity and
commitment to the attestation to the initiator. The spanning tree functions as
a multi-hop communication network and at each node the information from the
lower levels is aggregated. When the root has received all the identities and com-
mitments, a challenge based on a timestamp and the aggregated commitments
and identities is propagated down the tree. Participants at each level create a
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Attestation with network consensus
17
partial signature over the time and identiﬁers and propagates this back up the
tree to the initiator. Again, information is aggregated at each level. Once all
signatures has reached the initiator, a token is created. This token contains the
timestamp, prover identiﬁes and aggregated signatures of the involved provers
and symbolizes a ﬁnished attestation.
After the token generation process, the token is distributed throughout the sys-
tem. Its aggregated signature design makes it veriﬁable to any device that par-
ticipated in its creation. The token distribution also creates a sense of consensus
of the network state.
3.4
Attestation with network consensus
Consensus in regards to RA protocols, is not necessarily the classical consensus
problem in distributed computing and multi-agent system [39].
Attestation
with network consensus refers to a protocol’s eﬀorts to coordinate some form of
consensus on the network state between device. In dynamic networks, it can be
diﬃcult to retrieve the network state as the networks is largely unstructured.
One method to remedy this, is to keep a perception/snapshot of the network
state in each device. That way any device can relay the network state back to a
requester. Some protocols tries to iteratively construct such a perception in all
devices by continuous coordination, some protocols are sure to reach consensus
because of a consensus mechanism, and others implement a tiered network where
only the upper tiers coordinate to reach consensus.
PADS
(Practical Attestation for Highly Dynamic Swarm Topologies) [4] is
meant to attest swarms of devices that operate in dynamic networks. In such
networks, devices may only be periodically available and the network may not
be fully connected.
In PADS, devices can be in three state: compromised,
healthy, and unknown. The two ﬁrst are self-explanatory and unknown means
that the device cannot be reached and its state is therefore unknown. Every
device performs self-attestation at synchronized random intervals. Each device
stores its own attestation result along with its perception of the state of every
other device in the network. This snapshot is then broadcasted to the rest of
the network using the minimum consensus protocol [32]. The device shares its
snapshot with all of its neighbors. When a neighboring device receives such
a snapshot, it updates its own and propagates this aggregated information to
its neighbors. The local state of all devices will converge in a ﬁnite amount of
iterations that depends on the structure of the network [4, p.21], at which, each
device will hold a snapshot of the network state. However, reaching consensus
==PAGE:26==
3.5 Attesting device interaction
18
incurs a big communication overhead that increases drastically as the number
of devices in the network grows and can restricts the protocols’ scalability.
SHeLA
(Scalable Heterogeneous Layered Attestation) [34] is a swarm attes-
tation protocol that uses an edge layer to deal with what the authors, Rabbani
et al., claims are unrealistic assumptions of the computational power of devices,
in other swarm protocols. Many swarm attestation protocols requires devices
to act at both prover and veriﬁer and this may not be possible for some re-
source constrained devices. SHeLA is a three-tier architecture with IoT devices
on the bottom level, edge layer devices in the middle, and a network owner
on the top level.
The attestation method in SHeLA can be any one-to-one
challenge/response scheme, but how attestation is triggered and what data is
attested is left unspeciﬁed.
An IoT device is registered with a speciﬁc edge node during deployment and it is
only this edge node that can verify its attestation response. So when a edge node
has attested a reachable IoT device, it stores the response locally. If the IoT
device is registered with that edge node, it will verify the response. The edge
layer devices will periodically synchronize their unveriﬁed stored attestation
responses and view of the network state, such that the unveriﬁed response can
be veriﬁed by the correct edge node and all edge nodes have a complete snapshot
of the network state. This enables the network owner to ask any edge layer
device for a snapshot of the network state.
3.5
Attesting device interaction
Considering how devices interact has not been a focus point in the protocols
presented thus far. However, when devices share information they become cou-
pled with each other and this can help the spread malware if one is infected.
Attesting the communication and collaboration between devices can increase the
security in a network, but it can also improve eﬃciency in some cases. When a
swam attestation protocol detects a compromised device, it will, in many cases,
regard the whole network/cluster as compromised. This may be a large overes-
timation of the compromised device’s inﬂuence, but a more precise estimation
is not possible when the interaction of devices is considered.
SARA
(Secure Asynchronous Remote Attestation for IoT Systems) [15] is
an asynchronous RA protocol for distributed services communicating via pub-
lisher/subscriber.
Because it is asynchronous, it incurs little interruption of
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Attesting device interaction
19
services in the network. SARA aims to solve the problem of compromised de-
vices aﬀecting the state of other devices. When a trusted device reacts to input
from a compromised device, it should be considered compromised as well, even
without the presence of an adversary on the device
Figure 3.1: A toy example of a distributed service with a compromised bright-
ness sensor. This example is inspired from the you example in [15].
A toy example of the issue can be seen in Figure 3.1 and shows a distributed
service composed of a brightness sensor, a smart light bulb, and a smart alarm
that can detect burglars. The brightness sensor sends an input to the smart bulb
to turn up the lights as it gets darker outside and the smart alarm will send an
input to the smart bulb causing the lights to ﬂash if it detects an intruder. If the
home owners wake up in the middle of the night, because the lights are ﬂashing,
they will naturally suspect that someone has broken into their home and call the
police. However, it is the brightness sensor that has been compromised by an
adversary, causing the same indistinguishable state where the lights are ﬂashing.
Figure 3.2: The input and output of a publisher and a subscriber in the SARA
protocol. The ﬁgure is taken from [15]
SARA attests chains of collaborating services to ensure the output and input of
==PAGE:28==
3.5 Attesting device interaction
20
each device is trustworthy and thereby also the service they jointly provide. It
does so by chaining inputs, outputs, and attestation results of previous service
to the output of each device, as seen in Figure 3.2. A central trusted veriﬁer
initiates attestation by sending an attestation request to a publisher device.
The publisher then performs attestation and sends its GHVp to its subscriber.
As the publisher is the ﬁst service is the chain, GHVprevious will start as 0.
When a subscriber receives the message from the publisher, it will also performs
attestation and compute its own GHVs, in which the received GHVp is assigned
to GHVprevious. As subscribers may also be publishers, a chain of attestation
reports from previous services will be formed.
The trusted veriﬁer will at some point request the attestation report of a sub-
scriber and, thereby, also receives the attestation reports of all its previous
services. Based on the attestation reports, inputs, outputs, and timestamps,
the veriﬁer can determine which devices are compromised and which has been
inﬂuenced by compromised devices.
ARCADIS
(Asynchronous Remote Control-Flow Attestation of Distributed
IoT Services) [17]. One of the authors behind SARA has also published a dy-
namic attestation version of SARA called ARCADIS. The two protocols are
close to identical in most aspects, except that ARCADIS uses dynamic attesta-
tion instead of static. This is to protect against return oriented programming
(ROP) attacks and data attacks designed to target the control ﬂow of an execu-
tion. The dynamic attestation method is the same as in the C-FLAT protocol
[1], where an accumulated hash value is computed over the control-ﬂow path of
the service execution. The trusted veriﬁer keeps a database of the valid control-
ﬂow paths of each service and the valid distributed services in order to verify
devices and their collaboration.
SERALDEB
(Scalable and Eﬃcient Remote Attestation protocol for Large
Distributed Event-Based systems) [35]. As with SARA and ARCADIS, SER-
ALDEB targets networks of devices communicating via publisher/subscriber.
The protocol is a three-tier system that resembles SHeLA’s a lot, with a trusted
veriﬁer at the top, an edge layer in the middle, and IoT devices at the bottom.
The edge layer devices act as brokers in the publisher/subscriber scheme. The
veriﬁer picks a random data topic to attest and an arbitrary edge layer device.
The edge device then propagates the attestation request to all other edge layer
devices. When an IoT device related to that data topic, subscriber or publisher,
connects with a broker, the IoT device is attested and the attestation report is
stored on the edge device. After a certain time, the veriﬁer sends a collection
request to an arbitrary broker that propagates it to the other brokers. A span-
==PAGE:29==
3.6 Attestation with blockchain
21
ning tree is created by the propagation and the stored attestation reports are
then back-propagated and aggregated at each hop. Once all attestation reports
have reach the broker that initiated the collection, they are aggregated once
more and send to the trusted veriﬁer for veriﬁcation.
By using the data topics of the publisher/subscriber scheme, the network is
grouped into clusters. Since attestation is done only one clusters at a time,
devices outside that cluster can to continue their work uninterrupted.
DIAT
(Data Integrity ATtestation for resilient collaboration of autonomous
systems) [2] is a protocol that focuses on attesting the data that autonomous
interacting devices exchange. While SERALDEB, SARA, and ARCADIS target
publisher/subscriber communication, DIAT is a protocol for a request-respond
type communication.
As with ARCADIS, DIAT uses dynamic attestation in the from of control-ﬂow
monitoring. Devices that request data act as veriﬁers and the devices providing
the data will act as provers. When a device produces some requested data, its
service execution is monitored internally by a special module. A representation
of the execution path and the requested data is then digitally signed and send
back to the requester. The integrity of the service execution is then veriﬁed
by the requester, which has knowledge of which executions paths are trusted.
This interaction can be extended to incorporate multiple interacting devices by
including the attestation reports of every collaborating device. E.g., the device
D1 requests data from D2 and D2 is dependent on data from D3. D1 will receive
the requested data from D2 along with the signed attestation report from both
D2 and D3. This extension also makes the protocol a one-to-many scheme.
3.6
Attestation with blockchain
This category of attestation protocols is a fairly new research area and protocols
use blockchain technologies for various reasons, such as storage of attestation
data or invocation of attestation via smart contract. Diﬀerent blockchain tech-
nologies accommodates diﬀerent security properties, but generally blockchain
systems will provide tamper resistance and a degree byzantine fault tolerance
to the protocols.
==PAGE:30==
3.6 Attestation with blockchain
22
TM-COIN
(or TCB Measurement-Coin) [33] TCB stands for Trusted Com-
puting Base2 and in TM-Coin this means the parts of the OS responsible for the
trusted execution environment (TEE) and the protocol code. It is a hardware-
based attestation protocol that uses the ARM TrustZone to provide the TEE
and a custom made blockchain infrastructure with a PoW consensus mechanism.
TM-Coin uses blockchain to store the attestation reports of devices. The proto-
col has a network of trusted veriﬁers that also functions as miners in blockchain
protocol. A veriﬁer sends an attestation request to a device that then computes
an attestation report of its TCB. The attestation is broadcasted to the network
of veriﬁers for validation and acceptance on the blockchain, after which, any
veriﬁer can access the attestation report and verify the device’s trustworthiness.
DAN
(Distributed Attestation Network) [27] is similar to TM-COIN in re-
gards to how the protocol utilizes blockchain. Devices are attested by either a
challenge-response method or self-triggering. The attestation reports are added
to the blockchain where veriﬁer nodes then verify the attestations and submit
the result to the blockchain. When someone wants to communicate with an
IoT device, the blockchain can then be quired and a trust decision can be made
based on result and time since attestation. The main diﬀerence to TM-COIN is
that a more complete history of events is stored on the blockchain and not only
the attestation reports.
BARRET
(BlockchAin Regulated REmote aTTestation) [8] is an attestation
protocol that tries to prevent computational denial of service (CDoS) attacks
by imposing a ﬁnancial fee for each attestation. The problem BARRET tries
to solve is the same that sometimes motive the use self-triggering.
A mali-
cious agent my continuously send RA requests to disrupt normal operations
and thereby perform a CDoS attack. In BARRET, veriﬁers pay a gas fee to
run a smart contract on the Ethereum network. The smart contract sends the
attestation request to the prover that then performs the attestation. The attes-
tation report is published on the blockchain and also send back to the veriﬁer
that initiated the attestation process. The veriﬁer then veriﬁes the attestation
and submits the result to the blockchain for the rest of the network to see.
PERMANENT
(Publicly vEriﬁable ReMote Attestation for iNtErNet of
Things through blockchain) [6] is a protocol that is publicly veriﬁable, decen-
tralized, and distributed. It secures devices deployed in untrustworthy environ-
ments, by proposing a protocol with byzantine fault tolerance and a tamper-
proof distributed database of past attestations in the from of a private blockchain.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_computing_base
==PAGE:31==
3.7 Discussion
23
Devices performs a self-triggering self-attestation at random times, and attesta-
tion results are broadcasted to the network and added to the blockchain using
the Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) consensus protocol. PERMANENT uses
the history of attestations to determine a trust score for each device. This give
granularity to the term trusted, as opposed to most protocols binary perception
of trusted or untrusted.
3.7
Discussion
Most of the protocols presented in this chapters belong to several of the cat-
egories and share characteristics (an overview of protocols’ characteristics can
be seen in Table 3.1). This is because many of them are are designed to work
in similar environments, such as, large autonomous networks or solves similar
problems like eﬃciency, but some protocols share characteristics because there
are inherent relationships between them.
Any protocol that employs self-attestation will also be distributed, as every
device acts as a veriﬁer. This relationship is sometimes used speciﬁcally to give
a protocol distributive properties, other time the self-attestation itself provide
the wanted eﬀect. E.g., ERASMUS uses self-attestation to limit interruptions of
normal operations, while SALAD uses self-attestation to distribute attestation.
Attestation with blockchain, public veriﬁability, and attestation with network
consensus, are related by the design of blockchain systems. Whether the used
blockchain system is permissioned or permissionless, are the transactions pub-
licly veriﬁable to the members of the network and there is consensus on the
network state between devices. Blockchain systems will generally also provide
a distributive characteristic to the network, but not necessarily distributed at-
testation. E.g., the TM-COIN design incorporates a network of trusted veriﬁers
that also acts as the miners, but it is not speciﬁed how large this network is.
This important if the design is meant to provide distributed attestation and
not only be a sort of load balancing feature with the blockchain as the task
pool. This also explain why distributed attestation is only partial marked for
TM-COIN in Table 3.1.
==PAGE:32==
3.7 Discussion
24
Protocol
Distributed
attestation
Self-
attestation
Publicly ver-
iﬁable attes-
tation
Attestation
with network
consensus
Attesting de-
vice interac-
tion
Attestation
with
blockchain
ESDRA
○
○
○
○
○
○
US-AID
○
○
○
○
○
○
SAFEd
○
○
○
○
○
○
ERASMUS
○
○
○
○
○
○
SALAD
○
○
○
è
○
○
SANA
○
○
○
○
○
○
PASTA
○
○
○
○
○
○
PADS
○
○
○
○
○
○
SHeLA
è
○
○
è
○
○
SARA
○
○
○
○
○
○
ARCADIS
○
○
○
○
○
○
SERALDEB
○
○
○
○
○
○
DIAT
○
○
○
○
è
○
TM-COIN
è
○
○
○
○
○
DAN
○
○
○
○
○
○
BARRET
○
○
○
○
○
○
PERMANENT
○
○
○
○
○
○
Table 3.1: Table of remote attestation protocols and their characteristics. è means that the given characteristic only
partially applies.
==PAGE:33==
3.7 Discussion
25
There is also a relationship between public veriﬁability and network consensus,
although it is not visible in Table 3.1. Because public veriﬁability gives arbitrary
devices access to all attestations, all devices can calculate the same network state
and thereby reach consensus. While consensus can be build on the back of public
veriﬁability, it may not be needed or practical to do so. E.g., SALAD utilizes
consensus to retrieve the network state from any device, while the spanning tree
in SANA makes the attestation result easily obtainable. For this reason, there
is no need for consensus in SANA and it will only incur an overhead. However,
It can easily be achieve if all devices are required to know the aggregate public
key and if the ﬁnal aggregated attestation is distributed back down the spanning
tree like it is done in PASTA.
Self-triggering attestation is often used in conjunction with self-attestation, but
it is more of a tendency than a relationship between the two characteristics.
Individually they both provide security features and they require the same spe-
cialized hardware to establish a root of trust on the devices. With the hardware
already present, it is easy to add either of the features to the protocol. Self-
attestation can provide distributiveness and autonomy, while self-triggering is
often used as a deliberate tool to protect against CDoS attacks or attest at
optimal times.
Besides TM-COIN, other protocols also have partial characteristics in Table 3.1.
SHeLA is a tiered network where consensus is only established between edge
layer devices. The IoT devices in the network never reach consensus on the
network state, nor do they try. Additionally, the synchronization between edge
layer devices is periodical, so the validity of the snapshot is dependent on how
much and how frequent devices move within the network. The consensus in
SALAD has a similar problem. The consensus is contingent on enough time
has passed since initiating the attestation and the network owner retrieving the
network state. That interval is in turns dependent on how frequent and how
much devices move around in the network. SALAD, SHeLA, and PASTA, also
have little to no considerations for faulty or malicious devices, compared to for
instance PADS or the blockchain protocols that are CFT or BFT. Instead these
considerations are handled by assumptions and diﬀerent adversary models, but
the validity of those assumptions should be seriously considered if someone is
to chose either of these protocols because of their consensus feature. It may
be reasonable to assume that an adversary cannot compromise the integrity
of an attestation report or the security of a TEE, but faults and delays from
crashes, page faults, or network congestion are realistic occurrences in most
domains. Consensus measures without any crash or fault tolerance or without
termination can be considered as optimistic consensus.
It is surprising that so few protocols are considering the way devices communi-
cate, when prevalent communication protocols such as MQTT [43], DDS [41],
==PAGE:34==
3.7 Discussion
26
and AMQP [40] all accommodate an asynchronous publisher/subscriber pat-
tern [15].
Yet, only SARA, ARCADIS, and SERALDEB focus on this type
of communication. It would seem that many IoT systems are more likely to
share communication method than network characteristics such as autonomous,
supervised, dynamic, static, size, and their geographical distribution. The prob-
lem SARA solves demonstrates why the communication is important and why
the collaboration between devices should be considered. Within the category
of swarm attestation protocols, the protocols can identify which devices are
compromised, but tracking the eﬀects of a malicious device seems beyond the
scope of all protocols besides SARA and ARCADIS. This can lead to ineﬃcient
overestimations of which part of the network to consider compromised.
Attesting the collaboration in a distributed service is comparable to control ﬂow
attestation, which attests the execution paths through a piece of software, as
in ARCADIS and DIAT. A distributed service can be viewed as single piece
software and its internal microservices as nodes in a control ﬂow graph. As
networks may support multiple and even concurrent services, the complexity of
attesting such control ﬂow greatly increases. The method introduced in SARA
is an elegant way to handle the complexity and the protocol will likely become
increasingly popular with the increase in IoT devices and distributed services,
but it has some limitations. SARA relies on a central trusted veriﬁer, which
limits scalability and introduces a single point of failure. Besides the vulnera-
bility it poses, it also means thats all members in multi-party network situation
will have to trust this centralized entity. Additionally, SARA does not support
information ﬂows with multiple dependencies. If a service is dependent on in-
puts from two or more independent devices, SARA cannot accurately depict the
previous services as it is only designed to handle a single path. A toy example
of such a situation is given in Figure 3.3, where a smart radiator is turned on if
the temperature gets below 20 degrees and if motion is detected in the room.
This is a simplistic example, but it is easy to imagine more complex versions
of this type of information ﬂow. A concrete example of both the information
ﬂow and trust problems is the National Data Buoy Center’s website3 that shows
a map of 1330 diﬀerent weather stations deployed around the world. Weather
stations measure, amongst other things, sea temperature, wind speed, wind
direction, and pressure. The weather agencies around the Gulf of Mexico will
with certainty monitor these data points as they measure the prerequisites for
hurricanes in the area. The weather stations shown on the website are owned
by a 100 diﬀerent organizations and used by multiple others. Trust is a big issue
in such systems and critical services can only depend on data from this network
if they can be sure of its integrity. A hurricane alert service build with data
from buoys is an example of a distributed service with multiple dependencies in
3https://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/
==PAGE:35==
3.7 Discussion
27
Figure 3.3: An example of a situation where one device is dependent on input
from two other devices
a multi-party network (and with critical application), where SARA would be a
well suited RA protocol.
Blockchain systems are extensibility used in situations with multiple parties
and where trust and security are of utmost importance, for instance trading
currencies and securities. Typically they provide security in the form of a trust-
less system that is tamper-resistant, BFT, decentralized, and publicly veriﬁable.
Blockchain has also made is way into remote attestation in recent years and,
while protocols like BARRET seems more novel than practical, other protocols
can be very useful to aid trust in multi-party system. The PERMANENT pro-
tocol exempliﬁes this very well. Besides the aforementioned security properties,
PERMANENT also uses the stored attestations on the blockchain to calculate
a trust score, as representing the trustworthiness of devices in binary is perhaps
to simplistic in some domains. This is a useful feature made possible by the
record keeping that blockchain provides.
==PAGE:36==
3.7 Discussion
28
Although blockchain technology can increase the robustness and security of pro-
tocols, it can also incur a substantial overhead. Choosing the right consensus
mechanism is critical for performance, but it is a trade-oﬀbetween throughput,
communication overhead, and computational overhead. Throughput is impor-
tant if the domain needs rapid, frequent, and a high volume of transactions. In
the context of IoT, throughput is likely less critical than in cryptocurrencies.
Minimizing the communication and computational overhead has higher priority,
due to the resource constrained nature of IoT. Computation costs power and
some devices may be battery driven. Devices might also be too simplistic to
perform concurrent or parallel tasks, which means that the coordination of the
consensus mechanism may interrupt normal services or wake idle devices too
often.
There are many available consensus mechanisms in blockchain, from the proof-
of-X family to classic voting based protocols. In the context of IoT, proof of
elapsed time (PoET) [11] seems the optimal choice [5, pp. 20-25] and it is also
the chosen consensus mechanism of PERMANENT. Albeit, protocols under the
crash fault tolerant (CFT) category actually have better performance [5, pp.
22], they cannot handle malicious agents, which is similar to the consensus
issues of SALAD, SHeLA, and PASTA. The traditional Proof of work (PoW)
consensus protocol can be seen as an ineﬀective way to simulate a lottery, where
the winning device decides which block to add. Protocols like PoET and proof
of luck (PoL) [31] accomplishes the same distribution in the selection of a leader,
but requires drastically less computation and thereby also energy. The catch is
they require specialized hardware to establish a root of trust, but this hardware
is already a requirement in many hybrid attestation scheme. The biggest issue
with integrating blockchain in remote attestation is the continuously increasing
storage demand it presents. The Bitcoin blockchain takes up over 400 GB of
storage [44] and Ethereum took up 1185.93 GB at its peak on January 25th,
2022 [46]. The resource-constrained nature of IoT also makes it questionable
whether all devices in a network can even run a blockchain protocol. Rabbani
et al. tackles a similar problem in SHeLA [34], by introducing an edge layer
to oﬄoad resource-constrained IoT devices and creating a hierarchical network.
A similar approach can help IoT devices when incorporating blockchain, e.g.
by having fog nodes to handle the storage and blockchain protocol for very
constrained devices.
The multitude of diverse IoT networks with conﬂicting goals and requirements
means that a degree of tailor-made solutions will always be necessary in regards
to RA. After reviewing the protocols presented in this chapter, it became ap-
parent that modern RA still has shortcomings, which can be summarized by the
following challenges:
==PAGE:37==
3.7 Discussion
29
• Challenge one: Many RA protocols today are unable to detect the cas-
cading eﬀects that a compromised device can have on a network. When
devices react to data from compromised devices, they become compro-
mised themselves; even without the presence of a malicious agent on the
device. An example of this is presented in Figure 3.1.
• Challenge two: The current state-of-the-art protocols that actively tar-
get challenge number one, SARA and ARCADIS, does not supported in-
formation ﬂows with multiple dependencies, which limits the protocols’
use cases.
• Challenge three: Centralization and, in particular, central trusted veri-
ﬁers are single points of failures for protocols and limits their robustness.
It can also be a potential bottleneck to scalability.
• Challenge four: Large IoT networks today may have multiple owners,
users, device manufactures, or otherwise involved parties and protocols
need to consider the issues of multi-party trust to be applicable in such
settings, which many does not.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4
Protocol Design
This chapter presents the design of DReADS. First it outlines the scope of the
project in section 4.1 which describes the system model, the target adversary,
and minimum hardware requirements. Then section 4.2 will ﬁrst give a high-
level overview of the DReADS protocol, followed by a detailed description of
each component of the protocol. Lastly the chapter will analyze the protocols
design, use of blockchain, and security in section 4.3.
4.1
Project scope
As IoT continues to develop, so must the state-of-the-art in IoT security. This
thesis proposes a new hybrid RA protocol called DReADS (Decentralized Remote
Attestation of Distributed Services) that is designed to improve security and
trust in modern distributed services by solving the challenges identiﬁed in sec-
tion 3.7. This includes ﬁnding a method to support all types of information
ﬂows in distributed services and be suite for use in multi-party networks, which
are research question two and three (see section 1.2).
DReADS is an asynchronous swarm attestation protocol that builds on the idea
of attesting not only the health of a network, but also the collaboration and
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Project scope
31
data shared between devices. It is designed for use in e.g., smart factories, smart
cities, environmental control systems, and various sensor networks. DReADS
incorporates a blockchain system and can be viewed as a RA scheme with two
collaborating parts, a remote attestation protocol and a blockchain system. The
blockchain system is used to store attested data shared between devices. Every
time a device shares information with another device, it performs self-attestation
and publishes the information to the blockchain as well. The idea is that received
messages’ integrity can be veriﬁed by checking the data against the blockchain.
4.1.1
System model
The system considered in DReADS is a network of heterogeneous devices collab-
orating in an event-driven IoT system to form distributed services. The devices
communicate via a fully decentralized and asynchronous publisher/subscriber
system. This means that there are no centralized or partially distributed mes-
sage brokers between publishers and subscribers. The publishers act as their
own brokers and perform ﬁltering, managing subscriptions, and notify sub-
scribers. How publishers handle ﬁltering and managing subscriptions are outside
the scope of this project. Brokers are typically responsible for decoupling pub-
lishers and subscribers in time, but with no brokers, publishers and subscribers
must be available at the same time.
There are three types of agents in DReADS: IoT devices, network operators,
and network auditors.
The IoT devices (D), are the entities that make up
the network.
Each device is a single physical device, but can host multiple
functionalities. Each functionality is referenced to as a service and has a unique
Service ID. A device can to act as both publisher and subscriber and a service
with no subscribers is referenced to as an end-service. Publishers and subscribers
communicate with each other through events, and an event consists of a device
receiving an input on which it performs a service to produce an output.
Network operators (NO) are responsible for setting up devices, deployment,
and maintenance of devices. This includes setting up public key infrastructure
on devices, writing the hashes of trusted conﬁgurations used in self-attestation
into devices’ ROM, and handling compromised devices. How these tasks are
achieved is beyond the scope of this project.
Network auditors (NA) are meant to allow non-contributing parties to monitor
and/or verify events in the network. Network auditors have no responsibilities
in the network and are merely agents with knowledge of all devices’ public keys
and who have access the blockchain, but cannot write to it.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Project scope
32
The network is connected and has a static size. It is also dynamic, i.e., devices
can move around, but they cannot move in such a way that it segments the
network and breaks its connectivity. The message passing between devices is
reliable and send messages will eventually arrive, but it is not necessarily secure.
It is assumed that devices are resourceful enough to perform their services and
participate in the DReADS protocol.
4.1.2
Adversary
DReADS secures against a remote software adversary who is also capable of
controlling the network like the adversary in the Dolev–Yao model [42] and
the non-intrusive hardware adversary. Although, any side-channel attacks are
beyond the scope of this project. This means that an adversary can exploit
existing vulnerabilities in the software of a device.
This includes modifying
unprotected software or injecting and executing malware. The adversary can
also capture and deliver all messages in the network and alter them in any way
possible that does not break encryption. E.g., forge messages, compose arbitrary
messages, replay attacks, or man-in-the-middle attacks. It does not mean that
an adversary can drop messages and thereby instigate a denial-of-service (DOS)
attack, as the network is assumed reliable. DOS attacks of any type are also
out of scope for this project.
4.1.3
Minimum hardware requirements
State-of-the-art hybrid attestation protocols (e.g., SMART, SEED [16, 25]) re-
quires devices to have specialized hardware to establish a root of trust on the
device. Following these device requirements, DReADS requires devices to have
read-only memory (ROM) used to store the protocol code, keys, and the list of
trusted hashes used in self-attestation. Devices must also have a memory pro-
tection unit (MPU) to restricts access to the ROM and other parts of memory
used to store the dynamic local state of devices. The local state includes pseudo
random number generators (PRNG), sequence numbers, and the local copy of
the blockchain.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
33
4.2
The DReADS protocol
4.2.1
High-level overview
DReADS start with a deployment phase where all devices are set up to perform
self-attestation and public key infrastructure is established such that every de-
vice can verify signed messages from all other devices (the deployment phase is
described in further details in subsection 4.2.3). For simplicity, but without loss
of generality, DReADS is describes using a network with a publisher D0 and
a single subscriber D1 and both devices only host one service (see Figure 4.1).
When D0 receives an input from its sensor(s), it performs self-attestation and
executes its service on the input. D0 then creates a testament to that event
containing a nonce, its service ID, the input, the output, an empty list, and a 1.
The empty list indicates that it is the ﬁrst service in a distributed service and
the 1 indicates that the device is trusted because self-attestation has passed.
The device then signs the event data and publishes both the signature and the
testament to the whole network for acceptance on blockchain. Afterwards, D0
publishes the same event data to its subscriber D1, but adds recipient name and
sequence number to protect against replay attacks.
Figure 4.1: The communication of DReADS in a network with a single pub-
lisher and subscriber.
If a device does not pass self-attestation, a NO is notiﬁed. No message will be
send to its subscribers and no service is performed, but a block, similar to when
attestation passes, is still published to the blockchain to log the event (the block
design and blockchain system are detailed in subsection 4.2.2).
==PAGE:42==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
34
When the subscriber D1 receives the event from D0, it checks its integrity and
authenticity by verifying its signature, recipient, and sequence number. If that
is all valid, it checks that the same event exists on the blockchain to ensure
that the rest of the network also agrees on the event. D1 then performs self-
attestation and executes its service with the output of D0 as input. A block
from this new event is then created, but the previous service ﬁeld is appended
with the block id of the previous event from D0. D1 follows the same procedures
as D0 and publishes the event to the blockchain and its subscribers. However,
as D1 is an end-service, it has no subscribers and the event is only published to
the blockchain as proof of service execution.
4.2.2
Blockchain design
DReADS is designed to work with a blockchain system that uses the PoET con-
sensus mechanism. The minimum hardware requirements (see subsection 4.1.3)
are meant to also be capable of creating a TEE for PoET. All devices in DReADS
act as PoET nodes (equivalent to what is called a miner in other protocols) and
participate in the validation of new blocks.
There are two types of accepted transactions in DReADS’ blockchain system:
one for when attestation passes and for when attestation does not pass. The
two blocks’ design can be seen in Figure 4.2. The diﬀerence between the two
is that the output is omitted in B, as it is not calculated when attestation
fails (why so is explained in subsection 4.2.4). The header is unspeciﬁed as it is
dependent on the infrastructure of the blockchain system used and DReADS has
no protocol details directly coupled with a speciﬁc blockchain’s infrastructure.
This is to allow for an easy change of blockchain implementation, without having
to redesign the protocol accordingly. Besides the standard merkle root, block id,
hash of previous block, and block creator, in PoET the header will also include
a proof of a fair election. Furthermore, since the genesis block is unimportant
in regards to DReADS, it is left unspeciﬁed as well.
The validation of blocks in PoET relies on what can be abstracted to two func-
tion, createTimer and checkTimer. Both functions must be executed within the
TEE to ensure integrity and authenticity of the election. When a newly created
block is broadcasted to the network, it is done so via a gossip protocol. When
it is received at a PoET node, it computes a fresh and unique wait time based
on the block and signs it using the createTimer function. The designated time
is then waited and afterwards the checkTimer function is used to ensure that
the timer was created correctly, ensure the device has waited the required time,
and to create a signed certiﬁcate to prove all this. The ﬁst node to ﬁnish this
process has won the right to add the block to the blockchain.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
35
Figure 4.2: A is the block design for when attestation passes and B is when
it does not.
The block is then added to the local blockchain and the signed certiﬁcate and
block is broadcasted to the network in order for the rest of the nodes add it to
their blockchain also. If a node receives a veriﬁed block and certiﬁcate while
verifying another block, it must interrupt what it is doing, add the block to
its blockchain, and start the validation over. The wait times are drawn for an
exponential distribution in eﬀorts to prevent race conditions and limit forks in
the chain [11, 23].
4.2.3
Deployment
Network operators are responsible for setting up and deploying the devices to
the network. Devices are loaded with a list of hashes in its ROM. Each hash
corresponds to a trusted conﬁguration of a device’s software and ﬁrmware. Each
device has a public and private key pair that is used to sign messages, but the
speciﬁc digital signature algorithm is left unspeciﬁed.
However, it must be
secure and the same across all devices.
The private key is stored in secure
storage and can only be accessed by the DReADS protocol. Certiﬁcates to link
the public key of each device to the services that device hosts is stored in every
device. This enables every device to verify signatures from all other devices.
The certiﬁcates are signed by a certiﬁcation authority. The network operators
are also responsible for setting up the blockchain, which requires creating and
publishing the genesis block, but this block holds no value or functionality in
DReADS.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
36
4.2.4
Attestation
To explain the attestation phase of DReADS, consider the same case of a single
IoT device with a sensor that publishes to a single subscriber as in Figure 4.1.
This is the simplest case with no loops, forks, joins, or multiple dependencies
in the information ﬂow, but without loss of generality. The pseudo code for
the publisher and subscriber is available in algorithm 1 and algorithm 2. A
description of the diﬀerent procedures, variables, and constants in the pseudo
code is available in Table 4.1.
Publisher pseudo code (algorithm 1)
Initially the publisher waits for an
input from its sensor. If it is from a real-time sensor then the input, deﬁned on
line 1, is after a data ﬁltering step, such that input is only data that needs to be
published to subscribers and the protocol is not run more times than necessary.
The local attestation on line 4 hashes the trusted computing base (TCB), which
is composed of the DReADS protocol code, the blockchain protocol code, any
software dependencies the two protocols may have, hosted services’ code, and
the ﬁrmware and software in the OS related to establishing the TEE. The hash
is then checked against the list of trusted conﬁgurations in LegalHashes. Only
if the attestation report matches one of the trusted conﬁgurations will the device
perform its service, as executing a service may have side eﬀects, either physically
such as actuator or internally on the device’s memory. Therefore it is not enough
disregard the output if attestation fails and it may not be possible to do so.
Additionally, it is wasted energy to compute something and not use it. In both
algorithm 1 and algorithm 2, if self-attestation fails, the device will notify a NO,
but the fail event is also logged on the blockchain such that rest of the network
can see that the attestation has failed and the device is compromised.
Upon passing self-attestation, the service is then executed on line 6 and the event
information is assigned to transaction (it is called transaction to align with
common blockchain terminology). The nonce included in transaction is used
to uniquely identify the event and ensure that the merkle root of every block
is diﬀerent. The previousService ﬁeld is a list of block ids from all previous
events, but as D0 has no previous services, it is initially an empty list.
As
both previousService and nonce are used in both branches, their declarations
are moved up before the if-statement. The 1 in transaction indicates that
attestation has passed.
The body of a block consists of transaction signed by its creator. The signature
ensures the authenticity, integrity, and non-repudiation of the event. The block
is created on line 10 and broadcasted to the rest of the network for validation
by the non-blocking procedure call submitToBC(block) on line 11. The signed
==PAGE:45==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
37
Statements
and
vari-
ables
nonce ←{0, 1}n
creates a n long random bit string.
hash(TCB)
Attestation of the trusted computing base.
LegalHashes
A securely stored list of hashes that each represents
a trusted state of the device
seqNumber
An array the length of all devices in the network that
holds the most recently sequence number send to a
device.
clock
An array the length of all devices in the network that
holds the most recently sequence number received
from a device.
TTL
A constant tuned to represent the delays speciﬁc to
a given network.
Procedures
waitForInput()
Abstract procedure that represents how a devices
wait for an input to one of its local services.
exec(ServiceID, Input)
Execute a given service on a given input.
sign(m, sk)
Sign message m using private key sk
createBlock(b)
Creates the header and ﬁnal block given body b.
submitToBC(b)
Broadcasts the block b to the network for validation
and admission to the blockchain.
getSubscriber()
Returns the relevant subscriber of the service.
send(r, m)
Send message m to r.
notifyNetworkOperator()
Alert a network operator that something is wrong.
reQueue(i)
Place input i back in the queue of incoming messages
to handle the input at a later time.
match(b, b′)
Matches two inputs on their shared parameters.
queryBC(p, ttl)
Tries to retrieve a block from the blockchain that has
p in its body. ttl is a time-to-live parameter for the
search, as the desired block may not be validated yet.
verifySignature(m, s, pk)
Veriﬁes that signature s over message m was created
with the private key related to public key pk. If the
signature is part of the m it may be called with only
m and pk.
Table 4.1: A description of the diﬀerent procedures and statements in
DReADS
==PAGE:46==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
38
Algorithm 1: Publiser d0
1 input ←waitForInput();
2 nonce ←{0, 1}n;
3 previousService ←[];
4 localAttestaion ←hash(TCB);
5 if (localAttestaion ∈LegalHashes) then
6
output ←exec(ServiceIDd0, input);
7
transaction ←nonce|ServiceIDd0|input|output|previousService|1;
8
signature ←sign(transaction, PrivateKeyd0);
9
body ←(signature, transaction);
10
block ←createBlock(body);
11
submitToBC(block);
12
subscribers ←getSubscriber();
13
foreach s ∈subscribers do
14
seqNumber[s] ←seqNumber[s] + 1;
15
message ←transaction|s|(seqNumber[s]);
16
signature′ ←sign(message, PrivateKeyd0);
17
send(s, (signature′, message));
18 else
19
transaction ←nonce|ServiceIDd0|input|previousService|0;
20
signature ←sign(transaction, PrivateKeyd0);
21
body ←(signature, transaction);
22
block ←createBlock(body);
23
submitToBC(block);
24
notifyNetworkOperator();
==PAGE:47==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
39
Algorithm 2: Subscriber d1 with M dependencies
1 syncCounter ←0;
2 blocks ←[];
3 while (syncCounter < M) do
4
(signatureInput, input) ←waitForInput();
5
publisherPubKey ←getPK(input.serviceID);
6
if (verifySignature(signatureInput, input, publisherPubKey)) then
7
if (input.seqNo <= clock[input.serviceID]) then
8
notifyNetworkOperator() ;
// Replay attack
9
else if (input.seqNo > clock[input.serviceID] + 1) then
10
reQueue((signatureInput, input));
11
else
12
block′ ←queryBC(input.nonce, timeToLive ←TTL);
13
if (block′ = NotFound) then
14
notifyNetworkOperator();
15
else
16
if (!match(block′, input)) then
17
notifyNetworkOperator();
18
else
19
if (verifySignature(block′, publisherPubKey)) then
20
clock[input.serviceID] ←input.seqNo;
21
blocks.append(block′);
22
syncCounter ←syncCounter + 1;
23
else
24
notifyNetworkOperator();
25
else
26
notifyNetworkOperator();
27 nonce ←{0, 1}n;
28 preSer ←[];
29 inputs ←[];
30 foreach b ∈blocks do
31
preSer.append((b.previousService).append(getBlockID(b)));
32
inputs.append(b.output);
33 preSer ←unique(preSer);
34 localAttestaion ←hash(TCB);
35 if (localAttestaion ∈LegalHashes) then
36
output ←exec(ServiceIDd1, inputs);
37
transaction ←nonce|ServiceIDd1|inputs|output|preSer|1;
38
signature ←sign(transaction, PrivateKeyd1);
39
body ←(signature, transaction);
40
block ←createBlock(body);
41
submitToBC(block);
42
subscribers ←getSubscriber();
43
foreach s ∈subscribers do
44
seqNumber[s] ←seqNumber[s] + 1;
45
message ←transaction|s|(seqNumber[s]);
46
signature′ ←sign(message, PrivateKeyd1);
47
send(s, (signature′, message));
48 else
49
transaction ←nonce|ServiceIDd1|input′|preSer|1;
50
signature ←sign(transaction, PrivateKeyd1);
51
body ←(signature, transaction);
52
block ←CreateBlock(body);
53
submitToBC(block);
54
notifyNetworkOperator();
==PAGE:48==
4.2 The DReADS protocol
40
transaction is also send to each of the publisher’s subscribers on line 13-17,
but appended with a current sequence number and the recipient of the message
to fend oﬀreplay attacks. All sequence numbers in seqNumber are initially set
to zero. Every time publisher D0 publishes a message to subscriber D1, D0 will
increment the sequence number for D1. This is done on line 14 and to ensure
that D1 can expect exactly which sequence number it will receive next. All calls
to send are also non-blocking.
Subscriber pseudo code (algorithm 2)
The subscriber D1 is only depen-
dent on the input form publisher D0, but the subscriber pseudo code is capable
of handling arbitrary many dependent inputs. A while-loop is used to synchro-
nize the inputs, as service execution cannot start before they have all arrived.
The while condition, syncCounter, denotes how many inputs have arrived and
blocks is used as an accumulator.
When D1 receives the extended transaction and signature from D0 on line 4,
the integrity and authenticity of the input is checked on line 6 by verifying the
signature. Afterwards the freshness of the input is check on line 7-10 by com-
paring the sequence number of the input to the last received sequence number
from the publisher. If the sequence number is less than or equal to the last re-
ceived sequence number, a replay attack is detected and a NO is notiﬁed. If the
sequence number is greater than the last received plus one, the subscriber knows
that another input in pending and it should handle that beforehand. This is
done by place the current input back in an input queue on line 10. If the input
is authentic and fresh, the subscriber queries the blockchain to ensure that the
network agrees on the event. The queryBC procedure on line 12 will go through
the locally stored version of the blockchain to ﬁnd a block that has the same
nonce. This is a blocking procedure and the TTL parameter is to ensure the call
does not hold up the device for longer than what can be expected. It is assumed
that newly published blocks will be added to local blockchains within this TTL
parameter. If a block matches the nonce, the shared data points of input and
the block are compared on line 16. The inner-most if-statement on line 19-24
veriﬁes the signature of the block, updates the sequence number, appends the
found block to the accumulator, and increment syncCounter.
From line 27 and onwards, all dependent inputs have been received and are as-
sumed trusted. Line 27-34 computes data that is shared between both branches
of the self-attestation if-statement on line 35 and this is essentially the same
process as in the publisher and so is the remainder of the code. The subscriber
performs self-attestation and publishes the event data to the blockchain and to
its subscribers. Since D1 is an end-service, there are no subscribers and the
foreach-loop on line 43 is never executed.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Analysis
41
The list of block ids from previous services is ﬁltered to remove duplicates on
line 33.
Duplicate block ids can otherwise occur in situations with multiple
dependencies, for instance in case displayed in Figure 4.3, where the blocks
from D0, D1, and D2 are present in the previous services of both D3 and D4.
Figure 4.3: Example of a distributed service with a multiple dependency
4.3
Analysis
DReADS is designed to address the four challenges found in section 3.7 and
provide an answer to research question two and three in section 1.2. The four
challenges are:
• The ﬁrst challenge is the cascading eﬀect a compromised device can have
in a network.
• The second challenge is the missing accommodation of information ﬂows
with multiple dependencies.
• The third challenge is the single point of failure and bottleneck central-
ization and central trusted veriﬁers pose.
• The fourth challenge is the missing consideration of trust for multi-party
network settings.
Research question two and challenge two overlap, so a solution for one is a
solution to both. The third research question:
“How can I design a remote attestation protocol that it is secure and resilient
against common adversary types in IoT and is suitable for use in multi-party
networks”,
has an overlap with challenge four, but is broader than just solving challenge
four. All of DReADS’ design is essentially an answer to this research question.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Analysis
42
DReADS solves the ﬁrst challenge by ensuring both the integrity of the data
and the devices at each step in a distributed service execution. The devices
are ensured through self-attestation of their TCB and the inputs are ensured
to steam from a secure execution inside the previous service’s TEE by use of
digital signature. DReADS stops further communication and propagation of
potentially compromised data when a device fails self-attestation. This means
that, in contrast to the SARA and ARCADIS protocols, DReADS does not
identify devices inﬂuenced by a compromised device, as such inﬂuences are no
longer possible as the distributed service is halted. This also means that the
example in Figure 3.1 can no longer happen. However, any distributed service
execution is easily traced through the blockchain if an agent wants to examine
the origin or eﬀect of some data.
The solution to the second challenge is also the answer to research question
two. All events in the network are stored on the blockchain and every event
on the blockchain has a data ﬁeld with block ids of its previous service. This
means there is no information loss regrading a distributed service’s execution
and makes it possible to to accommodate any information ﬂow; also multiple
dependencies. The resulting blockchain for the example in Figure 3.3 can be
seen in Figure 4.4. The same can be accomplished with any type of database
that all devices have access to, but a centralized database will contribute to the
issues of challenge 3 and 4
Figure 4.4: What the resulting blockchain of example Figure 3.3 can look like
with DReADS.
The third challenge is centralization and DReADS is completely decentralized.
Devices self-attest and the design has no other form of centralization. A central
veriﬁer may be resourceful enough to not become a bottleneck and to have
appropriate security measures, but assuming that it is impossible to break that
security is a naive assumption.
From a security standpoint, it is better to
eliminate any single point of failure and introduce redundancies.
DReADS solves challenge four by being a trustless system.
Trusted entities
are problematic in multi-party settings and, especially, centralized trust. The
blockchain design in DReADS has no trusted entities and all devices can equally
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Analysis
43
add to the shared blockchain. The blockchain also provides public veriﬁability
of all events, which means every claimed event can be veriﬁed. This removes
the incentive to lie as it can easily be disproved. There is no conﬁdentiality
build into DReADS either. The protocol fosters openness and transparency to
aid trust between parties, but it is also possible to incorporate network-wide
conﬁdentiality or device-to-device conﬁdentiality into DReADS if needed. How
so is discussed in section 6.3.
4.3.1
Choice of blockchain system
DReADS is designed to work with a blockchain system that uses the PoET
consensus mechanism. This consensus mechanism is chosen because it is de-
signed for permissioned networks and due to its relatively good performance in
regards to communication and computational overhead [5, pp. 20-25]. Instead
of wasting energy on cryptographic puzzles like PoW, PoET uses a secure timer
to mimic the lottery-style election of a consensus leader in PoW. This means
that there is essentially no computational overhead as no computation is wasted.
The communication overhead is low since it is a Nakamoto-style consensus and
not a voting based consensus like PBFT. When there are no or few forks in the
chain, the communication in PoET is O(n) compared to PBFT’s O(n2), where
n is the number of devices [11].
PoET is originally designed by Intel with an abstract TEE in mind to provide
a root of trust and ensure BFT [23]. There are two freely available implemen-
tations of PoET on the Hyperledger Sawtooth framework, but only the imple-
mentation that build on Intel’s SGX1 is BFT, while the other implementation
is a simulation and only CFT [23, 20]. However, there is ongoing work to make
the protocol independent of SGX while maintaining BFT [21]. DReADS can be
implemented without the use of Hyperledger Sawtooth, as it is entirely possible
to implement PoET and the infrastructure around it yourself. Hyperledger Saw-
tooth is a permissioned/private blockchain [26], which makes it a good ﬁt for
the system model of DReADS. In a public blockchain system, anyone can take
part of the protocol, but DReADS requires a static sized network of devices with
speciﬁc hardware requirements and software setup. In addition to the diﬀerent
types of actors in DReADS (D, NO, and NA), this makes public blockchains
unsuitable.
1https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/
software-guard-extensions-enhanced-data-protection.html
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Analysis
44
4.3.2
Security
The TEE provides the root of trust of for that enables secure self-attestation and
a secure PoET consensus mechanism. Its security is founded in the hardware
requirements and fortiﬁed with digital signature. Digital signatures are heavily
used in DReADS to ensure the integrity, authenticity, and non-repudiation of
messages. Both between devices but also in the blockchain to provide tamper-
resistant.
The consensus mechanism code, algorithm 1, and algorithm 2 are designed to be
executed inside the TEE along with their auxiliary functions. Procedure calls to
locally hosted services can potentially be executed outside the TEE, as devices
are (assumed) secure at the point of service execution, but should be executed
inside the TEE to increase security. Procedures to wait for input messages can
potentially also be execute outside the TEE, as the input will later be checked
inside the TEE, but should again be held inside the TEE.
Messages singed with a device’s private key are expected to stem a secure ex-
ecution inside the TEE. This is another reason way all procedures should be
executed inside the TEE. The key pair is comparable to those used by a Trusted
Platform Module (TPM) and should not be used to sign other messages or data,
as breaking this assumption can lead to falsely assuming messages steam from
a secure execution. If another signature is needed, a two key pair design can
be implemented as done in the PoET implementation by Hyperledger Sawtooth
that build on Intel’s SGX. One set is related to the SGX and the other set
relates to the device. This makes it possible to distinguish between the origins
of singed messages.
The public key infrastructure is designed to limit the number of key pairs associ-
ated with each device and to be easily implemented using the X.509 standard2.
It is also a possibility to have a distinct key pair for each service, but this can
lead to a huge number of certiﬁcates needed to be stored and maintained at
each device, as devices may host multiple services.
As with any blockchain system, forks, double spending, and the 51% attack
are also possibilities with PoET. The longest chain rule takes care of the forks
and double spending, but the 51% attack is a circumstance of blockchain sys-
tems. The 51% attack may be a real risk in some system where it only requires
compromising a couple of nodes, but the risk of a 51% attack decreases with
the size of the network. How severe this underlying vulnerability is very much
depends on the particular system, but it is not possible to eliminate completely.
Hyperledger Sawtooth claims to be a “enterprise grade” solution. It is the in-
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X.509
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Analysis
45
terpretation that “enterprise grade” means that it is safe and secure for use in
enterprises. The security of PoET is complex to reason about, and made even
more diﬃcult as there is no formal speciﬁcation of the consensus mechanism in
the documentation of Hyperledger Sawtooth or elsewhere [11]. Bowman et al.
proves the security of a protocol made to represent PoET in [11], assuming a
majority of trustworthy nodes and static size. They cannot directly conclude
that PoET is secure, as the they cannot decisively say that the two protocols are
the same due to the lacking speciﬁcation of PoET. Analyzing and evaluating the
works and results of [11] is beyond the scope of this project and it is assumed
to be valid. Their results and the claims of Hyperledger Sawtooth is this thesis’
basic for assuming PoET is suﬃciently secure.
4.3.2.1
Replay attacks and invocation semantics
The sequence numbers in DReADS are used to prevent replay attacks and en-
force an exactly-once remote invocation semantic. The challenge is to ensure
that an adversary cannot invoke a service multiple times with the same mes-
sage/event or with a message meant for another recipient. It is acceptable that
an adversary invokes a service once with an authentic message, but if the same
message arrives from the publisher afterwards it must then be drop and labeled
a replay. Replays are an inherently stateful problem and is commonly resolved
by the use of sequence numbers, timestamps, or sessions in other systems.
DReADS’ usages of sequence numbers is very similar to vector clocks in other
distributed system. Devices in DReADS have 2N counters, two for each device
in the network.
One counter stores the last received sequence number form
a device and the other stores that last send sequence number to that device.
This is to ensure that subscribers can expect what sequence number it will
receive from a given publisher next. If the exact sequence number cannot be
expected, but it can only be checked that it is larger than the last received
from that publisher, then a re-order attack is possible.
E.g., if a publisher
sends three messages to a subscriber, it is possible that messages arrive out of
order due to asynchronicity or malicious reordering. If the last message arrives
ﬁrst, the other two messages are dropped as their sequence numbers are lower
than the last received message. If a subscriber in DReADS receives a message
with a higher than expected sequence number, it simply put the message back
in the queue of incoming messages to deal with it at a later time. Another
replay countermeasure is having the receivers’ names in messages send directly
to subscribers. This piece of information, secured with the digital signature,
enables a subscriber to verify that the message is meant for that subscriber. If
omitted it is possible to replay a message meant for another subscriber, as long
as its sequence number is what the subscriber expects. While such an attack
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Analysis
46
may be diﬃcult in practice, it is a real vulnerability.
The reliability of message passing in the network and re-queuing of out of or-
der messages ensure an at-least-once remote invocation semantic. While the
dropping of any replayed messages ensures at-most-once. Together they ensure
DReADS’ have an exactly-one remote invocation semantic.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Implementation
A proof of concept implementation of DReADS using the Hyperledger Saw-
tooth framework was intended, but unfortunately not satisfactorily completed
due to diﬃculties with the framework.
This chapter gives a quick overview
of the Hyperledger Sawtooth framework and the problems that occurred dur-
ing implementation, before explaining how a DReADS implementation in the
framework would be done if it had been working suﬃciently.
5.1
Hyperledger sawtooth
Hyperledger Sawtooth is a freely available framework to develop and deploy
blockchain systems. It separates the infrastructure and core system from the
application domain, which allows users to design blockchain systems with little
to no knowledges of the underlaying system. It includes a variety of consensus
mechanism that are meant to be plug and place, including PBFT and PoET.
The project aims to be enterprise-grade and is claimed to be in active production
[19].
A node in Hyperledger Sawtooth consists of multiple components/modules: a
validator module, a REST API, a consensus engine, a client application, and
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Hyperledger sawtooth
48
some transaction processors. The framework has diﬀerent deployment options,
but docker is the primary method. Each of the listed components are deployed
as separate containers on a device and communicate with each other via local-
host, except for the client which communicated through the API. A network
of nodes can be simulated by deploying multiple copies of the containers. The
validator, REST API, and consensus engine are already developed by Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth, but the clients and transaction processors are not. Hyperledger
Sawtooth has multiple SDK available in diﬀerent languages to develop custom
applications, but the most stable and complete SDKs are Python and GO [22].
An application is made up by a client, a data model, and a transaction processor.
The client is the application users interact with and the transaction processor
describes how the network is suppose to handle incoming transactions. The data
model is used for applications that need a distributed state besides the ledger
and describes how to encode and address such a state. It is possible to have
multiple clients for one transaction processor and vice versa.
5.1.1
Issues encountered
During the time available for implementing DReADS, several issues were en-
countered with the framework that ultimately meant there was no time left to
ﬁnish the implementation. The development seems largely dormant when look-
ing at community activity and commits on the public Github repositories. This
may be due to external circumstances like Covid-19, which still causes restriction
in many countries, but this is unknown. Attempts to reach project members
about the issues on the projects community page has been unsuccessful.
The documentation contains an application developer’s guide that is meant to
teach new users how to setup, test, and develop applications in the framework.
This includes a tutorial on setting up a single Sawtooth node that contains some
example applications and a tutorial of how to set up a network of these nodes.
The singe node tutorial works ﬁne, but the issues start to occur when setting
up a network of nodes. There are syntax errors in the docker compose ﬁles used
to deploy the containers. It appears that the syntax errors are not typos as the
errors are repeat multiple times and across multiple unrelated docker compose
ﬁles. The errors causes containers to not run the correct commands and no
errors indicate this. It is a diﬃcult problem to ﬁx as the dockerﬁles are are not
document, nor is it evident why containers run speciﬁc command and how their
networking it setup besides a simple port diagram. After correcting the syntax
error, verifying that containers are running the commands listed in the docker-
ﬁle, and enabling container to container communication in accordance with the
port diagram, the networking between nodes still does not work properly.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 DReADS implementation
49
Building and installing the correct docker images also incur problems. The pro-
vided command to build a full set of images with the run-time dependencies and
Sawtooth installed does not work. The automated build uses an undocumented
setup ﬁle, which makes the issue diﬃcult to resolve. It is possible to circumvent
the problem and build the images by referencing newer versions of their docker
images, but as a result, the test suite they have set up does not work and it
is not possible to verify a correct build. The reason for the problems seem to
be versioning issues and an unmaintained tutorial that has not been properly
updated to match new developments.
There are other issues that make the framework diﬃcult to work with. Transac-
tion IDs, block IDs, and batch IDs are essential for building clients and working
with API, which is how to interact with nodes and query the blockchain, but
there is no documentation on how they are created. Through testing and by
digging though auxiliary functions, it was discovered that IDs are are equal to
the signature of the their header, i.e., the transaction ID is the signature of the
transaction header and the block ID is the signature of the block header. This is
a design decision that is non-intuitive, not explained, and may be problematic,
as IDs cannot be reproduced by others because the key and thereby the function
is private. A more intuitive ID scheme can be to use a hash function instead
of the signature. For DReADS it means that a subscriber cannot compute the
transaction ID of a block , which could optimize the query to the blockchain on
line 12 in algorithm 2. Originally the query was done with an ID as search pa-
rameter, but it was later changed to the current version with the nonce, because
it clearly conveys the intend and is directly implementable in the framework.
The optimization is still possible, as the transaction ID can be included in the
message send to a subscriber, but it will complicate the pseudo code and is
therefor omitted.
The current state of the framework is so unkept that it makes development very
diﬃcult and debugging even more so. Their oﬃcial website is full of dead links
to documentation and issues are reported to their Github but not resolved. At-
tempts to contact community members via the community forum about speciﬁc
problems and the general state of the documentations has been unsuccessful and
getting the networking between nodes up and running has not been possible.
5.2
DReADS implementation
When the Hyperledger Sawtooth framework has resolved its issues, a DReADS
implementation is fairly simple as it does not require a distributed state besides
the ledger and essentially no processing is needed at the nodes.
==PAGE:58==
5.2 DReADS implementation
50
To implement an application in Sawtooth, a transaction family must be cre-
ated which consists of a client, a data model, and a transaction processor. As
DReADS does not require any distributed state besides the ledger, the data
model is not needed. When a transaction is published, it is the transaction pro-
cessors that are responsible for actions, such as updates to the distributed state
or bundling. The only action DReADS requires, besides adding the transaction
to the blockchain, is validating the structure/type of the transactions and that
the signature in body was created by with the public key belonging to the
serviceID in transaction.
There are two types of transactions in DReADS (see Figure 4.2) and both can
be accommodated by the same transaction processor. The transaction proces-
sor is implemented by extending the TransactionHandler class available in the
Python SDK. The class’ main method is called apply and takes the two pa-
rameters: Transaction and Context. The Context relates to the shared state
of the network and can be ignored. The Transaction is equivalent to what is
called a block in Figure 4.2.
The two type of transactions in DReADS can be distinguished by the value of
their local attestation. Assuming the Transaction input to apply is a JSON
object of a DReADS block, the pseudo code for apply may look like this:
1 Function apply(transaction, context):
2
signature ←transaction.body.signature;
3
pubKey ←getPubKey(transaction.body.serviceID);
4
if (verify(signature, transaction.body, PubKey)) then
5
if (transaction.body.localAttestation = 0) then
6
typeCheckFailBody(transaction.body);
7
else
8
typeCheckPassBody(transaction.body);
9
else
10
raiseInvalidTransaction;
The client code is also straight forward as it is essentially algorithm 1 and
algorithm 2 converted to use the SDK’s methods to publish transactions to the
blockchain chain and search the locally stored blockchain for particular blocks.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Hyperledger Sawtooth update
51
5.3
Hyperledger Sawtooth update
After the unsuccessful attempt to get the Hyperledger Sawtooth framework to
function properly, it seems that activity and development on Hyperledger Saw-
tooth has started again. Hyperledger Sawtooth is in the middle of a migration
from the old documentation to a newer version [18]. Time has not permitted to
research if the documentation, tutorial, examples, and docker images are now
in working order, but the migration is causing even more dead links to oﬃcial
pages and documentation, but hopefully it will be ﬁxed with time.
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter presents an analytical discussion of how DReADS compares with
other protocols and a discussion of some of the design choices and issues with
DReADS.
6.1
Comparative analysis of DReADS
Related works (see chapter 3) categorizes protocols into six categories, but as
seen Table 6.1, DReADS is the only protocol to falls under all six categorizes.
This is not a validation of DReADS by itself, but it shows that DReADS does
something diﬀerent than the other protocols. The most interesting compassions
are to the protocols under the Attesting device interaction category and to PER-
MANENT, as they share a sense of domain or utilizes a blockchain system with
the same consensus mechanism as DReADS.
As DReADS takes inspiration from SARA’s way of tracing previous services,
it is natural that the two protocols have many similarities.
They both tar-
get the same domain of asynchronous distributed services communicating via
publisher/subscriber, and they are both hybrid attestation protocols with sim-
ilar specialized hardware requirements.
Albeit, DReADS has higher storage
requirements due to the blockchain element and a more involved protocol. The
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Comparative analysis of DReADS
53
adversary capabilities they protect against are also the same, but there is one
small diﬀerence regarding replay attacks. Messages between publishers and sub-
scribers in SARA does not contain the participating parties’ names/identiﬁers.
This opens the possibility for a replay attack where a message meant for one
subscriber is replayed to another, as the correct recipient cannot be veriﬁed. It
is straight forward to mitigate without any real design changes to SARA and
is therefore not a big concern. A bigger issue with SARA is its incapability
of correctly accommodating information ﬂows with multiple dependencies, as
previously mentioned, while this is not an issue in DReADS.
The major design diﬀerences between the two protocols is that DReADS is a
trustless system as opposed to SARA. SARA has a central trusted veriﬁer that
devices must trust for the system function. Devices self-attest in DReADS and
thereby removes the trusted party; this also removes the single point of failure it
poses. The public veriﬁability in DReADS means that devices cannot lie about
the occurrence of an event and the consensus means all devices agree on the
network state. This all helps make DReADS be trustless and a better ﬁt for
multi-party systems than SARA.
It is diﬃcult to say anything concrete about the performs of DReADS in re-
lation to SARA, as there are no available metrics or observations of DReADS’
performance. However, DReADS will run attestation more times than SARA,
as devices are attested each time they perform a service, whereas attestation is
only periodically triggered in SARA. How often to attest devices is a trade oﬀ
between security and performance and which is the better choice is dependent
on the individual system. SARA has a slight performance issue regarding the
growing payload size of messages though a distributed service execution, as the
number of packets required to transmit messages will increase with the number
of services executed in a distributed service [15, p.
3134].
It is unknown if
messages in DReADS will require multiple packets, but the payload size is not
increasing as opposed to in SARA. How big of a performance issue this poses is
also dependent on the individual system, but it is nowhere close to the overhead
of a blockchain system.
The blockchain system in DReADS will of course add a signiﬁcant overhead
to DReADS that is not present in SARA. The communication overhead com-
pared to SARA is substantially larger due to the consensus mechanism, the
computational overhead will also be greater as there are more cryptographic
computations needed due to the blockchain, and the storage requirements are
vastly greater in DReADS as well. If the storage of the blockchain is disre-
garded, the local state of devices in DReADS will still be larger than in SARA,
but complexity wise they are likely equal. The two protocols both use vector
clocks. SARA keeps one counter pr. device while DReADS keeps two. Since
the diﬀerence is a constant factor they are both O(n), where n is the number
==PAGE:62==
6.1 Comparative analysis of DReADS
54
of devices in the network. DReADS also keeps key certiﬁcates for every device,
which adds a O(n) term, but O(2n) = O(n). The protocols both have to store
the protocol code, a few keys, and PRNGs, but these are constant terms and can
therefore be neglected. The signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two complexity
wise, is that DReADS devices’ need to store hashes of trusted software states.
It is diﬃcult to bound the possible states and this will vary from devices to de-
vices, but in very small networks it seems likely that the m ≥n, where m is the
max possible states of all devices in the network and, as such, SARA devices’
local state has a lower space complexity. However, it seems equally likely that
in larger networks m ≤n and means an equal complexity.
Since ARCADIS and SARA are so closely related, their comparisons to DReADS
are as well. The main diﬀerence between ARCADIS and SARA is ARCADIS’
dynamic method of attestation, which means that ARCADIS secures devices
against control ﬂow attacks and return-oriented programming (ROP) and this
type of attacks are not considered in DReADS.
SERALDEB is less focused on the collaboration between devices and more fo-
cused on their communication method than DReADS. Its domain is topic-based
publisher/subscriber architectures and it essentially clusters devices based on
data topics and attests the network a cluster at the time. DReADS has no lim-
itations on the categorization of data and the network is attested continuously
as services are executed. However, the attestation is fairly similar with regards
to interruption of services. Before a service is executed in DReADS, the devices
must ﬁrst self-attest which incurs a slight interruption/delay. When a device
makes contact with a broker in SERALDEB and the device is related to the
currently attested data topic, it is attested which also incurs a slight interrup-
tion/delay. This means that both protocols may be a poor ﬁt if the system
requires extremely quick service executions upon their invocation.
Their adversary type is also the same, but SERALDEB additionally claims to
be secure against a mobile software adversary in the form of migratory malware.
This is based on the assumption that this type of adversary only spreads via
the legitimate communication ways of the devices and the communication in
publisher/subscriber is one-way. So when a publisher is detected as compro-
mised, its subscribers are automatically ﬂagged as compromised as well, and
migratory malware can therefore spread no further. By this logic, DReADS is
also secure against migratory malware. Whether this assumption is realistic or
not is beyond the scope of this project, but seems questionable as then mal-
ware is required to piggyback on the legitimate messages and this seems easily
detectable.
The topology of the protocols are also diﬀerent. SERALDEB is a three-tier sys-
tem with resourceful fog/edge nodes above the IoT devices and a central trusted
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Comparative analysis of DReADS
55
veriﬁer at the top. While this topology does provide some decentralization, it
is still has a centralized trusted veriﬁer with all the issues that brings.
DIAT employs dynamic attestation which means that it secures against control
ﬂow attacks and ROP, unlike DReADS. They are both hybrid attestation and
they both employ distributed attestation. The targeted communication method
and how DIAT distributes attestation is a little diﬀerent from DReADS though.
DIAT targets request/respond type communication and the requester veriﬁes
the attestation report of the responder. At least two devices are involved in an
attestation, as opposed to the self-attestation of DReADS. However, the two
protocols both attest devices each time data is shared and DIAT also supports
information ﬂows with multiple dependencies.
As DReADS also takes inspiration from PERMANENT, the two protocols
have a lot of similarities. They are both distribute attestation through self-
attestation, publicly veriﬁable, decentralized, and they incorporate a blockchain
system with the same consensus mechanism.
The trustless characteristic of
both protocols means that PERMANENT is also well suited for multi-party
networks. It is not clear what adversary capabilities PERMANENT aims to be
secure against, but both protocols consider an intrusive hardware adversary out
of scope.
The attestation in PERMANENT is self-triggering at random times, which
means less frequent attestations than in DReADS. This may give it a small
performance advantage at the cost of some security, but since the two protocols
share so many key design characteristics they will share many issues and per-
formance similarities as well. Both protocols employ PoET due to performance
considerations. The blockchain and consensus element of the protocols is still
an overhead that most other state-of-the-art protocols do not have, but both
protocols should have better performance than BARRET and TM-COIN, which
uses the extremely computationally heavy PoW. Since there is no ﬁnished pro-
totype of DReADS it is not possible to do an actual performance comparison to
see if DReADS performs better than BARRET or TM-COIN. Nor is there one
between PERMANENT and BARRET/TM-COIN that can be reﬂected on.
==PAGE:64==
6.1 Comparative analysis of DReADS
56
Protocol
Distributed
attestation
Self-
attestation
Publicly ver-
iﬁable attes-
tation
Attestation
with network
consensus
Attesting de-
vice interac-
tion
Attestation
with
blockchain
TM-COIN
è
○
○
○
○
○
DAN
○
○
○
○
○
○
BARRET
○
○
○
○
○
○
PERMANENT
○
○
○
○
○
○
DReADS
○
○
○
○
○
○
Table 6.1: Overview of the compared protocols’ characteristics
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Optimizations
57
A big diﬀerences between PERMANENT and DReADS is when devices are per-
ceived to be compromised. In DReADS, devices are trusted or not depending on
if they pass self-attestation. PERMANENT uses the stored attestation results
on the blockchain to produce a trust score for each device. This granularity may
be practical in some domains, but it does not capture the ripple eﬀect described
in challenge number one in section 3.7. As such, this is a potential attack vector
on PERMANENT that is not possible in DReADS.
6.2
Optimizations
As IoT is a resource constrained environment, it is preferable to limit heavy
computations such as cryptographic functions. The body of blocks in DReADS
is is designed to be as small as possible to avoid having to hash it during signing
and to limit the size of the blockchain. However, if the inputs or outputs are
very large, it may be optimal to hash them and then hash the whole transaction
before signing it, while still sending the real data to subscribers. This design
still allows other devices to verify that the output of a publisher is the input
to its subscriber. If the inputs and outputs sizes are very diverse in a system,
it is also possible to incorporate a ﬂag in the block design to indicate whether
inputs and/or outputs are hashed or not. This allows for the best possible opti-
mization no matter the system, but this is not incorporated in the speciﬁcation
of DReADS in order to keep it simple. While hashing the inputs and outputs
obfuscates the data, it does not make it conﬁdential and should not be used for
such. It may also be possible to reduce the local state of devices, but this has
not been a design concern as the blockchain storage is by far the biggest issue
in this regard.
6.3
Conﬁdentiality
DReADS does not encrypt any data send between devices or stored on the
blockchain. This is by design to create transparency and aid trust in the network.
If device-to-device or system wide conﬁdentiality is needed in some domains, it is
possible to implement it, but it may aﬀect the transparency or public veriﬁability
of the protocol.
To implement system wide conﬁdentiality in DReADS, a shared secret symmet-
ric key can be stored in all devices, network operators, and network auditors
during deployment, and all messages send are encrypted with this key. As the
==PAGE:66==
6.4 Self-attestation
58
key, and thereby the decryption, is available to all parties, the public veriﬁability
and transparency of the system is intact but limited to its users.
Device-to-device conﬁdentiality can be implemented in two ways, with symmet-
ric or asymmetric encryption. The diﬀerence is that either does both devices
have access to the decryption or only one device has. For the symmetric ver-
sion, a session key can be establish between communicating devices, e.g. by the
Diﬃe–Hellman key exchange, and then used to encrypt the devices’ communi-
cation. The data published to the blockchain will have the input and output
encrypted with the same key, but the remaining data ﬁelds should be left in
plain-text. This enables devices to sort through the blockchain for a speciﬁc
event without having to decrypt every block. The transparency in the protocol
will decrease, but every event is still publicly veriﬁable in the sense that its
existence and order can be veriﬁed.
As every devices knows the public key of every other, device-to-device conﬁ-
dentiality is easy to introduce asymmetrically. The publisher simply encrypts
the messages with the receivers’ public keys. As for the data published to the
blockchain, it can be encrypted in a similar manner to the symmetric version
and with the same consequences.
6.4
Self-attestation
One of the key design features of DReADS is its use of distributed attestation.
This is done via self-attestation, but there are other alternatives such as a one-
to-many scheme where neighboring devices attest each other, as in US-AID
[24]. However, such schemes causes a potentially much larger local state at each
devices, as it will have to store the hashes of legal conﬁgurations of many devices
instead of just its own. While this larger local state may still not be an issue
compared to storing the blockchain, it also adds more communication between
devices and complicates matters more than necessary. Self-attestation is also
chosen because it keeps the hashes secret. Knowing how many trusted hashes
a device has can indicate the complexity of a device. Such knowledge may be
exploited to target simpler devices as they may be easier to compromise.
6.5
Concerns with DReADS
Blockchain systems can have scalability concerns as they incur large overheads.
This is not only true in the IoT context and even Bitcoin has lightweight nodes,
==PAGE:67==
6.5 Concerns with DReADS
59
as running full nodes may be too resource demanding. The Bitcoin blockchain
takes up over 400 GB [44] and Ethereum took up 1185.93 GB at its peak on
January 25th, 2022 [46].
Such sizes are not suitable for IoT, but they are
also the results of years of high transaction frequency. The highest number of
transactions pr. day for Bitcoin is 490, 644 on December 14, 2017 [45] and such
daily transaction volumes may not be infeasible in IoT. To put that number
into perspective, a network with a 1000 devices will have to publish ≈20.5
transactions pr. hour each to reach that volume. In the context of IoT, the
increasing storage demands as the chain grows is by far the most dominant
concern. While the attempts to limit the size of blocks in DReADS can help
reduce the growth rate slightly, it does not solve the issue. The severity of the
storage problem will have to be evaluated for each system and must consider
the frequency of transactions in the network and the longevity of the system.
A high transaction frequency can also pose other problems for DReADS. The
communication overhead incurred by the consensus mechanism may be so big
that it can interrupt normal services in some devices, if a device is not capable
of concurrently running its services and functioning as a node in the consen-
sus mechanism. The constant message forwarding and adding new blocks to
the local blockchain can also cause problems for battery powered devices that
are designed to be idle and charging in between service execution, as it wakes
the devices too often. A high frequency can also be a problem for the PoET
consensus mechanism, as the trade oﬀfor its relatively low computational and
communications overhead is a low throughput. Whether the throughput is too
low will also have to be an individual assessment when considering to employ
DReADS.
The static size of the protocol can be a problem for networks with a very dynamic
nature, such as smart cities, smart infrastructure, etc., where many devices can
move in and out of range and leave and join the network. The system model of
DReADS does not allow devices to leave or join the network. The requirement
to know all devices at deployment greatly restrict the practical applications of
DReADS. One method for opening the protocol is to run the deployment phase
again every time a device wants to leave or join. This may be every ineﬃcient if
done to often. A more eﬃcient way of doing it can be to allow two new types of
transactions in the blockchain system: a leave and a join transaction. A leave
transaction should tell all devices in the network to remove the certiﬁcate of the
device from their memory and the join transaction should contain the signed
certiﬁcate that all devices should add. While the latter method seems simple
and straight forward, it does add to the transaction frequency of the network.
This may pose problems if devices constantly leave and join the network in great
quantities and, thus, further adds to the throughput concerns.
==PAGE:68==
6.6 Oﬄoading
60
6.6
Oﬄoading
It is assumed that devices are resourceful enough performs their services and
participate in the DReADS protocol. This includes functioning as a node in the
blockchain system and managing the overhead that comes with it. Considering
that the SHeLA protocol ﬁnds it unrealistic to assume IoT devices can function
as both prover and veriﬁer [34], this may be too strong of an assumption. A
possible remedy can be to oﬄoad the blockchain responsibilities to fog nodes
with more storage capabilities and resources in general.
A simple way to implement the oﬄoading is to have a fog node, F, functioning
as an alias to the very resource contained device D. Instead of D receiving
the input from a publisher, F will receive it instead and verify its signature,
check the sequence numbers, and check it against the blockchain. Essentially
executing line 1-33 of the subscriber code in algorithm 2. F then sends the input
to D, who performs self-attestation and sends back the output. Finally, F then
executes line 37-54.
The subscriber code is essentially split between two devices and the same is
the case if D is only a publisher. The communication between device and fog
node needs to be secured via digital signature and sequence number to ensure
its integrity, authenticity, and freshness, just as the communication between a
publisher and a subscriber.
This proposal resembles the solution in SHeLA that also oﬄoads to a fog layer
[34], but unlike SHeLA, it should not introduce a tiered network or a super-
peer logical topology. One fog node can potentially service multiple IoT devices
without breaking the security DReADS, but it must not result in too much
centralization. As the communication between devices and fog node is secure
(albeit, not conﬁdential), it does not allow an adversary to suddenly inject
forged events, trigger illegitimate service executions, or instigate replay and
MITM attacks.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Conclusion & Future Work
7.1
Conclusion
The continued growth of IoT [14] will embed more and more devices into our
daily lives, whether we are aware of them or not. They have the potential to
optimize many parts of society with concepts like smart factories, smart infras-
tructure, and smart cities, but the small computers can pose serious security
risks if implemented mindlessly. Their simple and resource constrained nature
makes inherently insecure, but the ﬁeld of remote attestation has been coming
up with clever and eﬃcient ways to detect compromised devices for years now.
The ﬁrst research question of this thesis was to research and analyze the cur-
rent state-of-the-art of RA protocols that deal with attesting the interaction
between devices, trust, and blockchain. Four challenges were discovered during
the research that new protocol designs should address.
The ﬁrst is that many protocols do not consider the interactions between devices
and this can cause eﬃciency issues, but also security problems in networks like
distributed services or other networks where devices collaborate. When a device
receives information from a compromised source, the state of the devices should
no longer be trusted and the devices should be considered compromised. This
can cause a ripple eﬀect that cannot be detected if protocols are only focusing
==PAGE:70==
7.1 Conclusion
62
on the individual state of devices. In swarm attestation protocols it can lead to
overestimations about the eﬀects of a compromised device.
The second challenge is that the current protocols which aim to solve the ﬁst
challenge, does not support information ﬂows with multiple dependencies. This
is problematic as it is a simple type of information ﬂow used in many IoT
settings and not supporting it can have a big eﬀect on the possible use cases of
the protocols. This challenge also overlaps the second research question.
Thirdly it was discovered that while many of the researched protocols use dis-
tributed attestation, it was not the case for the protocols that targets distributed
services or other collaborating networks. With the exception of DIAT, they all
rely on a central trusted veriﬁer and this makes the protocols trust based and
centralized. The centralization is challenge as it decreases the robustness of pro-
tocols by introducing a single point of failure. It can also hurt the scalability,
as it can become a bottleneck.
The fourth challenge discovered was the lacking consideration for multi-party
systems. Multi-party IoT networks already exists today and, with the continued
growth and development of IoT and smart cities, will likely be more prevalent in
the future. Distributiveness/decentralization and public veriﬁability are char-
acteristics that some RA protocols already use to increase trust, but entirely
trustless designs, like many cryptocurrencies also employ, are even better ﬁts
for multi-party settings.
In response to the challenges and to answer research question two and three,
this thesis proposes a new hybrid RA protocol called DReADS (Decentralized
Remote Attestation of Distributed Services). DReADS is designed to improve
the security and trust in asynchronous distributed services communicating via
publisher/subscriber architecture. The protocol is entirely trustless with the
exception of the use of certiﬁcates, which relies on a certiﬁcation authority.
Devices employ self-attestation, which is secured by the trusted execution envi-
ronment (TEE) on the devices. The protocol protects against a remote software
adversary with full control of the network. As such, it is secure against com-
mon attacks like replay attacks, reorder attacks, and man-in-the-middle attacks.
DReADS incorporates a blockchain system that uses the Proof of Elapsed Time
(PoET) consensus mechanism. This consensus mechanism is chosen due to it
performance in an IoT context. The blockchain system provides a distributed
database that stores all events in the network and provides public veriﬁability of
all events. Each event references all its previous services by storing a list of their
block IDs in the body. This enables DReADS to attest and accommodate any
information ﬂows, including multiple dependencies, and answer research ques-
tion two. The trustless design and security of DReADS makes it suitable for
use in multi-party networks and makes DReADS an answer to research question
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Conclusion
63
three.
A proof of concept implementation of DReADS was attempted in the Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth framework, but was not ﬁnished as the framework was not
ripe for development at the time. The documentation, tutorials, examples, and
docker images contained issues that are due to ill upkeep during development.
Attempts to contact community members about the problems were unsuccessful.
The proof of concept implementation of DReADS was abandoned after contin-
uous failed attempt to ﬁx the networking between devices. Instead the imple-
mentation chapter (see chapter 5) describes how the pseudo code of DReADS
should be implemented and in which modules of the Sawtooth framework.
Of all the protocols researched in thesis, DReADS is the only one that has all six
characteristics used to categorize the protocols in chapter 3. The comparative
analysis (see section 6.1) revealed many similarities between DReADS and the
other protocols, but in particularly with SARA and PERMANENT. The two
have also been a source of inspiration for the design of DReADS, so this unsur-
prising. It also made it apparent that DReADS is a well ﬁtting RA protocol for
a multi-party distributed service, but that DReADS is more complex and likely
to exhibit poorer performance than many other protocols.
The blockchain element of DReADS is the main source of performance issues
and the increasing storage requirements are particularly troublesome consider-
ing the IoT domain. Oﬄoading the blockchain responsibilities to fog nodes has
been proposed in section 6.6 as a way to remedy the issues, but the storage
problem has potential to become an issue in the fog layer also. The relatively
low throughput of the consensus mechanism may also be an issue in very large
networks with a high frequency of service executions. However, these issues are
diﬃcult to judge the size of without a working proof-of-concept implementation
to provide some actual performance metrics.
The static size of the network
in DReADS is another issue and may restrict the usability of DreADS in net-
works where devices frequently joins and leaves. Ideas to adapt DReADS for
dynamically sized networks has been presented in section 6.5.
==PAGE:72==
7.2 Future work
64
7.2
Future work
• The ﬁrst priority of future work is to reassess the state of the Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth framework and do a proof-of-concept implementation if
the framework is ready. As stated in section 5.3, there has been recent
updates to the framework’s documentation, but it has not been tested
whether the problems persist. A proof-of-concept implementation can pro-
vide some much needed performance metrics to properly analyze DReADS’
performance and to help evaluate the severity of the issues found.
• An implementation of the fog node oﬄoading proposal should also be
attempted to prove the concept and to evaluate how eﬀective of a remedy
is it.
• The static size of the network in DReADS is an issue that limits the use
cases of the protocols.
Two possible methods of opening the protocol
are proposed in section 6.5, but the method of managing the leaving and
joining devices via the blockchain seems like the best option. In future
development, this method should be tested and properly analyzed. Both
performance and security wise.
• Testing DReADS on real IoT devices will provide valuable information
about the device capabilities assumptions and the growth rate of the
blockchain.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1] Tigist Abera, N. Asokan, Lucas Davi, Jan-Erik Ekberg, Thomas Nyman,
Andrew Paverd, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. C-ﬂat: Control-
ﬂow attestation for embedded systems software. 2016.
[2] Tigist Abera, Raad Bahmani, Ferdinand Brasser, Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-
Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter. Diat: Data integrity attestation for
resilient collaboration of autonomous systems. In NDSS, 2019.
[3] Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Ahmad Ibrahim, Gregory Neven, Ah-
mad Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter.
Sana: Secure and scalable
aggregate network attestation. Proceedings of the Acm Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security, 24-28-:731–742, 2016.
[4] Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Md Masoom Rab-
bani, and Silvio Ranise. Pads: Practical attestation for highly dynamic
swarm topologies. In 2018 International Workshop on Secure Internet of
Things (SIoT), pages 18–27, 2018.
[5] Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård. Blockchain in remote self attestation
for making trust decisions in iot peer-to-peer networks, blockchain i selv
fjernattestering til at tage tillidsbeslutninger i iot peer-to-peer netværk.
Master’s thesis, 2021.
[6] Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Dragoni.
Permanent: Publicly veriﬁable remote attestation for internet of things
through blockchain. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium
on Foundations and Practice of Security. Springer, 2022. Conference date:
07-12-2021 Through 10-12-2021. URL: https://www.fps-2021.com/.
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
66
[7] Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matt Bernhard, Elie
Bursztein, Jaime Cochran, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex Halderman, Luca In-
vernizzi, Michalis Kallitsis, Deepak Kumar, Chaz Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua
Mason, Damian Menscher, Chad Seaman, Nick Sullivan, Kurt Thomas, and
Yi Zhou. Understanding the mirai botnet. In 26th USENIX Security Sym-
posium (USENIX Security 17), Vancouver, BC, aug 2017. USENIX Associ-
ation. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/
technical-sessions/presentation/antonakakis.
[8] Michail Bampatsikos, Christoforos Ntantogian, Christos Xenakis, and Ste-
lios C.A. Tomopoulos.
Barrett blockchain regulated remote attestation.
Proceedings - 2019 Ieee/wic/acm International Conference on Web Intelli-
gence Workshops, Wi 2019 Companion, pages 256–262, 2019.
[9] Alexander Sprogø Banks, Marek Kisiel, and Philip Korsholm.
Remote
attestation: A literature review [arxiv]. Arxiv, page 34 pp., 2021.
[10] J.
Christopher
Bare.
Attestation
and
trusted
computing.
https://courses.cs.washington.edu/courses/csep590/06wi/ﬁnalprojects/bare.pdf,
3 2006. [Online; accessed 7-June-2022].
[11] Mic Bowman, Debajyoti Das, Avradip Mandal, and Hart Montgomery. On
elapsed time consensus protocols. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (in-
cluding Subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics), 13143:559–583, 2021.
[12] Xavier Carpent, Gene Tsudik, and Norrathep Rattanavipanon. Erasmus:
Eﬃcient remote attestation via self-measurement for unattended settings.
Proceedings of the 2018 Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference
and Exhibition, Date 2018, 2018-:1191–1194, 2018.
[13] Cloudﬂare. Famous DDoS attacks | Biggest DDoS attacks | Cloudﬂare.
[Online; accessed 27-September-2021]. URL: https://www.cloudflare.
com/learning/ddos/famous-ddos-attacks/.
[14] Michele De Donno, Koen Pieter Tange, and Nicola Dragoni. Foundations
and evolution of modern computing paradigms: Cloud, iot, edge, and fog.
Ieee Access, 7:150936–150948, 2019.
[15] Edlira Dushku, Md Masoom Rabbani, Mauro Conti, Luigi V. Mancini, and
Silvio Ranise. Sara: Secure asynchronous remote attestation for iot systems.
Ieee Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 15(1):3123–3136,
2020.
[16] Karim El Defrawy, Daniele Perito, and Gene Tsudik. Smart: Secure and
minimal architecture for (establishing dynamic) root of trust. 2016.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[17] Ragnar Mikael Halldorsson, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Dragoni. Arcadis:
Asynchronous remote control-ﬂow attestation of distributed iot services.
Ieee Access, 9:144880–144894, 2021.
[18] Hyperledger.
Conversion status.
[Online; accessed 9-June-2022].
URL:
https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/conversion_status.
html.
[19] Hyperledger.
Hyperledger sawtooth - hyperledger foundation.
[Online;
accessed 17-May-2022]. URL: https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/
sawtooth/Hyperledger+Sawtooth.
[20] Hyperledger. Introduction. [Online; accessed 9-June-2022]. URL: https:
//sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/.
[21] Hyperledger.
Proof
of
elapsed
time
2.
[Online;
accessed
06-
April-2022].
URL: https://labs.hyperledger.org/labs/archived/
sawtooth-poet2.html.
[22] Hyperledger.
Using
the
sawtooth
sdks.
[Online;
accessed
9-
June-2022]. URL: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/app_
developers_guide/using_the_sdks.html.
[23] Hyperledger.
Sawtooth-core/poet.rst at main · hyperledger/sawtooth-
core,
Jul 2020.
[Online;
accessed 06-April-2022].
URL: https:
//github.com/hyperledger/sawtooth-core/blob/main/docs/source/
architecture/poet.rst.
[24] Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad Reza Sadeghi, and Gene Tsudik. Us-aid: Unat-
tended scalable attestation of iot devices. Proceedings of the Ieee Symposium
on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2019-:21–30, 2019.
[25] Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni. Seed: Secure
non-interactive attestation for embedded devices. Proceedings of the 10th
Acm Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks,
Wisec 2017, pages 64–74, 2017.
[26] Leila Ismail and Huned Materwala. A review of blockchain architecture
and consensus protocols: Use cases, challenges, and solutions. Symmetry,
11(10):1198, 2019.
[27] Ira Ray Jenkins and Sean W. Smith.
Distributed iot attestation via
blockchain. Proceedings - 20th Ieee/acm International Symposium on Clus-
ter, Cloud and Internet Computing, Ccgrid 2020, pages 798–801, 2020.
[28] Florian Kohnhauser, Niklas Buscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser. A practical
attestation protocol for autonomous embedded systems. Proceedings - 4th
Ieee European Symposium on Security and Privacy, Euro S and P 2019,
pages 263–278, 2019.
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
[29] Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser. Salad: Se-
cure and lightweight attestation of highly dynamic and disruptive networks.
Asiaccs 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Acm Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 329–342, 2018.
[30] Boyu Kuang, Anmin Fu, Shui Yu, Guomin Yang, Mang Su, and Yuqing
Zhang.
Esdra:
An eﬃcient and secure distributed remote attestation
scheme for iot swarms. Ieee Internet of Things Journal, 6(5):8372–8383,
2019.
[31] Mitar Milutinovic, Warren He, Howard Wu, and Maxinder Kanwal. Proof
of luck:
An eﬃcient blockchain consensus protocol.
Systex 2016 - 1st
Workshop on System Software for Trusted Execution, Colocated With
Acm/iﬁp/usenix Middleware 2016, page a2, 2016.
[32] R. Olfati-Saber and J.S. Shamma. Consensus ﬁlters for sensor networks
and distributed sensor fusion. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control, pages 6698–6703, 2005.
[33] Jaemin Park and Kwangjo Kim. Tm-coin: Trustworthy management of
tcb measurements in iot. 2017 Ieee International Conference on Perva-
sive Computing and Communications Workshops, Percom Workshops 2017,
pages 654–659, 2017.
[34] Md Masoom Rabbani, Jo Vliegen, Jori Winderickx, Mauro Conti, and Nele
Mentens. Shela: Scalable heterogeneous layered attestation. Ieee Internet
of Things Journal, 6(6):10240–10250, 2019.
[35] Andrei Sabau. Scalable remote attestation for iot swarms. Master’s thesis,
2021.
[36] A Seshadri, A Perrig, L van Doorn, and P Khosla. Swatt: Software-based
attestation for embedded devices. Proceedings - Ieee Symposium on Security
and Privacy, pages 272–282, 2004.
[37] Haiying Shen. Content-based publish/subscribe systems. 2010.
[38] Alessandro Visintin, Flavio Toﬀalini, Mauro Conti, and Jianying Zhou.
Safed: Self-attestation for networks of heterogeneous embedded devices.
page 12, 2019.
[39] Wikipedia. Consensus (computer science) - wikipedia. [Online; accessed
09-February-2022]. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_
(computer_science)#cite_note-fischer_impossibility-5.
[40] Wikipedia.
Advanced message queuing protocol - wikipedia, Nov 2021.
[Online; accessed 22-February-2022]. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Advanced_Message_Queuing_Protocol.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[41] Wikipedia. Data distribution service - wikipedia, Dec 2021. [Online; ac-
cessed 22-February-2022]. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_
Distribution_Service.
[42] Wikipedia.
Dolev–yao model - wikipedia, Jan 2022.
[Online; accessed
30-March-2022]. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dolev%E2%80%
93Yao_model.
[43] Wikipedia. Mqtt - wikipedia, Feb 2022. [Online; accessed 22-February-
2022]. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MQTT.
[44] YCHARTS. Bitcoin blockchain size. [Online; accessed 23-February-2022].
URL: https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_blockchain_size.
[45] YCHARTS. Bitcoin transactions pr. day. [Online; accessed 9-June-2022].
URL: https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_transactions_per_
day.
[46] YCHARTS.
Ethereum chain full sync data size.
[Online; accessed
23-February-2022]. URL: https://ycharts.com/indicators/ethereum_
chain_full_sync_data_size.
[47] Kim Zetter.
An unprecedented look at stuxnet,
the world’s ﬁrst
digital weapon, Nov 2014.
URL: https://www.wired.com/2014/11/
countdown-to-zero-day-stuxnet/.
[48] Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard. Memory oﬄoading for remote attestation
on iot devices, oﬄoading af hukommelse til remote attestation på iot ap-
parater. Master’s thesis, 2021.
