==PAGE:1==
Research and development of a performance
campaign methodology in the social real es-
tate sector
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social
real estate sector
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Matthieu Buy
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the IKOS Agency, C-TECH department,
at Sopra Steria Limonest, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Industrial
Engineering and Management, MSc Eng.
Matthieu Buy - s202925
Signature
Date: June 30, 2022
ii
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Many software today must be able to support thousands of users, placing their requests
in parallel on the same single server. In particular, resource management software (ERP)
are at the forefront, because they are central to the daily work routines of thousands of
professionals.
Among these professionals, social landlords represent a niche market that has long been
reluctant to invest in quality assurance and performance testing of their software. The
general market trend for ERP as well as the degraded performance observed on their
own management tools has recently prompted them to take a closer interest in it, though.
However, a number of research questions remain to be answered. In particular, how
this offer should be constructed to be accepted by social landlords has to be definied.
Moreover, the components and the architecture adopted so that it is valid for a wide range
of applications within the social housing sector have to be determined.
To address these different problems, a study of the testing software market was carried
out in order to select the one best suited for the task. Following this selection made by
AHP, an entire procedure could be developed, built on both the Apache JMeter testing
tool and the Microsoft Power BI reporting tool.
The procedure conceptualized during this exploratory research was applied at one of the
social landlords, and its adaptability to different software was proven within the Sopra
Steria structure. However, the context of the study did not make it possible to establish
whether this elaborate procedure was the most effective, in particular due to a lack of
comparison with recent turnkey tools.
This report covers the various stages of research and development that led to the creation
and implementation of procedures for a client offer. It presents how it was possible to
create a customer-oriented offer adapted to this sector and its needs, capable of adapting
to the case study but also to other software useful to social landlords.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kathrin Kirchner, Supervisor, DTU Management
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Mrs. Kathrin Kirchner for taking me on as
one of her supervised students. I especially want to thank Mrs. Kirchner for our interac-
tions that helped me greatly in structuring this paper, for organizing peer-review sessions
that improved the quality of my document, and for the kindness with which she handled
all our discussions.
Guillaume Long, Team Manager IKOS, Sopra Steria (SRES)
I am extremely grateful to Mr. Guillaume Long for giving me a chance to complete my Mas-
ter Thesis project at Sopra Steria, for accompanying me throughout the different stages,
and for always being present to help me and open doors for me inside the company.
Loïc Dubois, Supervisor at the company, Sopra Steria (SRES)
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Mr. Loïc Dubois for his continuous care for my
well-being inside the company, his continuous help on technical issues and for the easi-
ness with witch he integrated me into his team. By extension, I would like to acknowledge
the entire C-TECH team which I worked in during my master thesis.
Arielle Bakatubia, Human Resources, Sopra Steria (SRES)
I also want to thank Mrs. Arielle Bakatubia who helped me greatly accommodate my
arrival at Sopra Steria and ensure my academic success within the company.
Vincent Daburon, Performance testing expert, Sopra Steria (SB)
I would be remiss in not mentioning Mr. Vincent Daburon for his constant support on JMe-
ter and other technical matters. By extension, I want to thank all the experts interviewed
during the data collection process for their generosity and openness.
Loyse Colette
Lastly, I’d like to acknowledge Mrs. Loyse Colette for her constant moral support before
and during the Master Thesis process.
iv
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
viii
Glossary
ix
Acronyms
x
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
QA industrial context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Social housing and social landlords in France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Performance testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Methodology of the design research process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Selection of research informants and participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Data collection and practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Data analysis procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.6
Reliability and validity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.7
Ethical concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Data collection and analysis
17
4.1
Problem and Motivation Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Derive Objectives of the solution and evaluate possibilities . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Design and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Findings
41
5.1
Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.3
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Discussion and evaluation
47
6.1
Comparison of the literature review with the observations
. . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
JMeter’s Response to Technical Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.3
Prevalence of financial issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.4
Questioning what it would have been like in another financial context . . . . 49
6.5
Limited confrontation to the industrial context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
v
==PAGE:8==
A Final GANTT for the Master Thesis
57
B AHP Benchmark
58
C Modus Operandi of the solution
60
C.1 Modus Operandi 0 - Setting up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
C.2 Modus Operandi 1 - Create IKOS tests on JMeter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
C.3 Modus Operandi 2 - Clean up a JMeter script for IKOS . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
C.4 Modus Operandi 3 - Launch a JMeter shot for IKOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
C.5 Modus Operandi 4 - Analyzing and reporting results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
D Reporting examples
71
E
Questions and Interview Transcripts
75
E.1 Questions for interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
E.2 Interview Number 1 (English version) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
E.3 Interview Number 2 (English version) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
E.4 Interview Number 3 (English version) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
vi
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Information technology (IT) spending on enterprise software worldwide,
from 2009 to 2023 (in billion U.S. dollars) [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Proportion of budget allocated to quality assurance and testing as a per-
centage of IT spending from 2012 to 2019 [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Focus areas for testing mobile applications from 2013 to 2017 [3] . . . . . .
5
2.4
Distribution of social housing landlords in France [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) model [5]
. . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Methodology for decision-making analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
Criteria ranked in order of appearance in testing tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Weight of each criterion according to the AHP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Normalized vector for each criterion (Price, Time to Value & User friendliness) 28
4.4
Final weighted scores for each category in Price, Time to Value, User Friend-
liness & Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
diagram of HTTP communication process by IONOS [6] . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6
HTTP(S) Test Script Recorder capturing the http Request [6]
. . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Spans taken into account in a JMeter test [6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.8
Spans taken into account in a Selenium WebDriver test [6]
. . . . . . . . . 32
4.9
Representative results of a load test in JMeter (left) and WebDriver (right)
scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.10 Results from an increasingly lower r/n ratio with WebDriver scripts . . . . . 36
5.1
Process from test shooting to reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Example of Power BI reporting delivered to the client . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
Example of reporting for a test run on the tenants extranets . . . . . . . . . 44
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1.1
Learning Objectives for the Master Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4.1
Exploratory Research Objectives [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Performance testing tools considered in the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Main features of comparison between software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Sum-up of features for each testing tool considered in the study . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Criterion or tool susceptible to be discarded in the AHP
. . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Criteria used for the AHP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.7
Obtaining the normalized vector for the criteria weights . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.8
Categories of tools for the AHP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.9
Obtaining the normalized vector for the price
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.10 Obtaining the normalized vector for the user-friendliness . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.11 Obtaining the normalized vector for the time to value . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.12 JMeter scripts vs Selenium WebDriver [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.13 Scenarios used for the tests in IKOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.14 Differences in approach between Microsoft Excel and Power BI . . . . . . . 40
5.1
Explanation of elements and processes of the Performance Testing Cam-
paign
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
B.1 Benchmark for the testing tools considered in the AHP . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
viii
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
Apache JMeter™Open-source testing software designed by the Apache Fundation for
all sorts of performance testing. 20, 21, 29–34, 36–41, 43, 47–49, 51, 52
client-server architecture a computing model in which the server hosts, delivers and
manages most of the resources and services to be consumed by the client. 4
DevOps Work practices focused on collaboration between deloppers and computer op-
erations. 4
IKOS ERP developped by Sopra Steria for social housing landlords. 9, 10, 12, 14, 17–19,
21, 22, 25, 29, 31, 33, 36–40, 44, 45
Micro Focus LoadRunner® Paying Software, bought by Micro Focus from HP. Leader
in Testing tools. 19, 20
performance testing a testing measure that evaluates the speed, responsiveness and
stability of a computer, network, software program or device under a workload. 4,
5, 7
Pipeline a pipeline consists of a chain of processing elements (processes, threads, corou-
tines, functions, etc.) arranged so that the output of each element is the input of the
next; the name is by analogy of the physical pipeline. 17
Power BI Power BI is an interactive data visualization software product developed by
Microsoft with a primary focus on business intelligence. 12, 40, 51
Selenium WebDriver Open-source coding language, designed to run tests from web
browsers. vii, viii, 20, 31–34, 36, 37
Sopra Steria Information System & Consultancy Company. 9–15, 17–19, 21, 22, 31, 37,
38, 41–45, 47–51
vuser Virtual user activated by a performance testing software to simulate load on a
target server. 7, 32–36
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
ix
==PAGE:12==
Acronyms
AHP Analytical Hierarchy Procedure. vii, viii, 11, 13, 14, 21, 23–29, 51
BPM Business Process Management. 3
CRM Customer Relationship Management. 3
DSRM Design Science Research Methodology. 50
ERP Enterprise Ressource Planning. 1, 3, 5, 9, 12, 19, 21, 33, 37, 44, 51
ESH Entreprise Sociale pour l’Habitat. 6, 7, 17, 47, 49, 50
HLM Habitation à Loyer Modéré. 5
ISCC Information System & Consultancy Company. 9, 17
OPH Office Public de l’Habitat. 6, 7, 17
PTE Performance Testing Expert. 12, 17–20, 22, 32, 33, 36, 39, 40, 48
QA Quality Assurance. 1, 2, 4, 17, 47, 51, 52
SRES Sopra Real Estate Software. 1, 9, 10, 17
TM Team Manager. 17–19, 22, 23, 25, 31, 33, 37–40
TMA Team Manager Assistant. 18, 22
VM Virtual Machine. 32, 37
x
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
The sector of social landlords in France is a niche market, that is relatively old and quite
slow-moving. Indeed, this market experienced a strong expansion in the middle of the
twentieth century, following the second world war. However, it is a sector in perpetual
evolution because it is constrained by the numerous legislative developments that punc-
tuate the practice of its actors. In addition to this, the companies responsible for the
management are often in charge of gigantic real estate stocks, which can reach up to
348,000 housing units. The “Loi Elan”, a new piece of legislation adopted in 2018 forcing
small structures to merge together, only accentuated this truth [8].
These organizations are above all real estate management organizations. With the digiti-
zation of all services, like most other sectors, they have been forced to digitize their man-
agement tools, without necessarily having the necessary knowledge in this area. This is
why almost all of these social landlords outsource the creation and maintenance of their
management software - Enterprise Ressource Planning (ERP) - to companies specializ-
ing in the development and sale of digital services.
Sopra Real Estate Software (SRES) is almost the sole subcontractor for these French
social landlords. SRES is one of the three business branches of the Sopra Steria group,
the other two being focused on banking (Sopra Banking Software) and human resources
(Sopra HR Software). For the three divisions, the central activities are strictly identical:
development of digital solutions to assist in the management of the activity, and consult-
ing activities for the implementation of these solutions for customers.
As far as SRES is concerned, the clients are therefore largely social landlords, the other
part being private owners. Sopra has a quasi-monopoly on this rather special social hous-
ing market. It is special because the customers are often public actors, handling public
money, and carrying out management activities on behalf of local authorities or big cor-
porations. Their ability to invest in new technologies and their willingness to adapt inno-
vative approaches may consequently be limited. This least-cost policy can lead to two
major consequences. First, their management tool is regularly undersized because too
few resources are allocated to make it powerful. Secondly, the performance monitoring
of the ERP is clearly undersized compared to the new standards of the current market.
Faced with this observation, the need to analyze the quality of their main working tool has
become urgent for social landlords. Being a few years behind market trends in terms of
performance, it seems that they are finally ready to invest in Quality Assurance (QA) and
solutions allowing them to better monitor and anticipate the shortcomings of their ERP.
This desire raises a number of research questions, though. How should a viable offer
be put together for social landlords? What technical components need to be included for
the methodology to be accepted by customers? What are the financial, technological,
and data discretion constraints that should be taken into account when designing the
methodology? How to create a guideline adaptable to a wider range of software than the
case study?
The purpose of the study will therefore be twofold: How to best implement performance
testing for a social housing ERP and how to structure those tests into a commercial offer
with both internal and external use?
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
1
==PAGE:14==
To answer these questions, several learning objectives were defined to structure the learn-
ing outcomes of the project. They are presented in Table 1.1.
Objective nb
Description
1
Collect data to evaluate the market need and constraints
relative to performance testing.
2
Stage the project based on an estimation of the scope, complexity
and desired result of the task.
3
Dynamically adjust staging in relation to current project status
and obtained results
4
Uncover and analyse existing performance testing solutions.
This can be done through a specific methodology
5
Interpret results of need-, market-, business- and technology
analyses and formulate an overall objective for the task.
6
Elaborate ideas and concept suggestions for an overall client offer
in phase with the context previously analysed.
7
Evaluate the potential and realizability of solution concepts.
8
Create a complete solution with the combination of systematic
and innovative techniques.
9
Create a comprehensive and integrated solution that fits not only
the case studied but that are applicable in a broader spectrum.
10
Deliver a complete procedure for the analysis that helps the company
after the study is completed is completed.
Table 1.1: Learning Objectives for the Master Thesis
This paper will adopt the following structure. A review of the existing literature will be
carried out in Chapter 2 on the general context of Quality Assurance (QA) issues, as
well as on the context of social landlords in France. Then the methodology adopted to
conduct the exploratory study will be presented in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 is devoted to
data retrieval and analysis, as well as certain results concerning the different procedural
steps implemented for performance tests. It is followed by Chapter 5 where the findings
of the exploratory study are presented. Finally, a discussion of the results obtained and
their adequacy with the learning questions and objectives will take place in Chapter 6,
and Chapter 7 will conclude.
2
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature Review
2.1
QA industrial context
In 2022, more and more production activities as well as communication devices are being
digitized. According to a recent survey carried out for the website Statista (Gartner, Jan-
uary 2022), Vailshery shows that the investment in ”Information Technology (IT) spending
on enterprise software is expected to amount to around 672 billion USD worldwide” by
the end of 2022 [1]. This represents an annual growth of 11% from the previous year
and an estimated tripling of investment between 2010 and 2023 (see Figure 2.1) [1]. This
is the direct consequence of enterprise oriented software becoming more preeminent in
the day-to-day activity of most companies, and especially Enterprise Ressource Planning
(ERP) [9, 10]. Indeed as more actions, interactions and data are dealt with online, man-
agement software have to be adapted accordingly, which often means more complexity
to face more complex demands. To back that up, Vailshery states in his analysis that
the enterprise software industry is ”the fastest growing segment” in the overarching IT
industry, with a year-on year growth of 10% or more. For instance, ERP account for 95
billion USD in revenue worldwide in 2022, which make them a massive industry inside the
growing enterprise software segment [1].
Figure 2.1: Information technology (IT) spending on enterprise software worldwide, from
2009 to 2023 (in billion U.S. dollars) [1]
A second trend linked to the first is that customers in general tend to increase their use of
enterprise software (BPM, CRM or ERP) in their working habits [1]. Requests or interac-
tions that could have been made face to face or on the phone are now increasingly dealt
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
3
==PAGE:16==
with through dedicated digital tools [11]. Consequently, a successful website is expected
to see its internet traffic increase exponentially. If it is not designed to sustain such traffic,
the risk of it crashing increases accordingly [12, 13], which is a situation that any software
company wants to absolutely avoid.
Adding to these two, a third trend is that overall, consumers request higher performance
from the software their are using [11, 14]. In a client-server architecture, performance can
simply be translated into the response time between the moment a request is placed on
the web server and when the answer comes back to the client from that web server [15].
Consumers have less and less tolerance the delays en lagging produced by inefficient
websites. Having a poor performing website can therefore lead to a loss of customers to
more performing competitors and a loss of market share as a result [11, 14].
Those three trends make a poor performing website look even worst than it already is by
adding on top of one-another. Indeed if a website is not designed to support more than a
certain amount of users, but faces a traffic well above this threshold, it will ultimately per-
form worse than it already does [12, 13]. Poor performance will in turn lead to customer
loss or dissatisfaction [14] and increased backup and maintenance costs to maintain sev-
ers and infrastructures that are constantly under stress [16].
This is why in the last decade, Quality Assurance (QA) and DevOps teams inside big soft-
ware companies have put way more interests and resources into performance testing to
try and anticipate the actual performance of their software architecture once in production.
This is best exemplified by another statistical study carried out by Vailshery for Statista
(Statista, 2022), where figures show that the budget allocated to QA testing (including
performance testing) has been hoovering around 25% of IT budgets, between 2013 and
2019 (see Figure 2.2) [2].
Figure 2.2: Proportion of budget allocated to quality assurance and testing as a percent-
age of IT spending from 2012 to 2019 [2]
4
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Focus areas for testing mobile applications from 2013 to 2017 [3]
Performance testing is nowadays well established in the testing habits of more than half of
software providers. Two more studies led by [3] highlight this fact. Indeed in 20217, 53%
of a 1,660 respondents pool (including executives of Capgemini, Hewlett-Packard, and
Micro Focus) stating that performance/efficiency is a focus area in their testing process
(see Figure 2.3). These figures have stayed constant over the four years prior to 2017,
reaching as high as 59% in 2013 [3].
2.2
Social housing and social landlords in France
One of the sector that has moved over to ERP as part of their day-to-day operation is
the sector of social housing companies in France. According to a report from Salomond
for the French Ministry of Ecological Transition, social housing or HLM housing as it is
known in France made up for around 16% of the total french housing stock in the begin-
ning of 2021 [17]. According to Le Blanc and Laferrère, HLM stands for Habitation à Loyer
Modéré, which can be translated into low-income housing [18]. According to the French
Ministry for Housing, in 2021 this accounted for 4.7 million social housing, and 10 millions
renters [4]. To manage this stock, 720 organisms, public or private, are scattered across
the french territory, mostly managing the stock in their local geographical area [4, 19].
According to Scanlon and Whitehead, those organisms are either public or private [19].
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
5
==PAGE:18==
OPH, standing for Office Public de l’Habitat in french, are public corporations established
by local or regional authorities [19]. They were managing in 2020 around 2.28 million
dwellings [4]. ESH, standing for Entreprise Sociale pour l’Habitat, are private non-profit
organizations established by large companies with a lot of employees (like the railway
providers SNCF in France, and RATP in Paris) [19]. They can also be set-up by financial
groups or charities, and they manage altogether around 2.33 million dwellings [4]. Their
distribution across the french territory is presented in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Distribution of social housing landlords in France [4]
Both types of organisms achieve the same tasks [19, 20, 21]. Namely they have three
core activities which are the following. First they manage the building of new housing
units and the renovation of old ones. Second, they manage the day-to-day activities of
the social housing. That entails welcoming new tenants eligible for social housing, man-
aging the housing stock, collecting rents, and managing the overall renting and financial
activities. Finally, they have a mission to help tenants become landlords of their own, by
buying the dwelling they live in. This third activity has been recently reinforced by the
so-called “Loi Elan”, a piece of legislation dating from the end of 2018 [8].
To help them accomplish their missions, both ESH and OPH rely on external software
developers to provide them with the tool they need to manage the construction of new
housing, the management of existing stock, the renting and financial activities, and re-
cently the increased need to sell some of the stock [8].
Social housing rents do not follow the fluctuation of the market. They are fixed by the
French law, depending on the location of the social housing [19]. Once again, these or-
ganisms are non-profit institutions. They exist because there is a need to manage this
huge housing stock either by the state, region and department authorities, or big cor-
porations. According to Scanlon and Whitehead, the rents are based on “the basis of
formulae that reflect the initial cost of construction and the means of funding” [19]. Con-
cretely, these rents are much lower than the average rent in the private sector (30 to 40%
difference on average in 2011, but closer to 60% in big cities like Paris) [18, 19].
6
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:19==
According to a report commissioned by the French Ministry for Housing and delivered
by Wendling et al. in 2019, “In recent years, the rise in the cost of these operations, the
smaller part public subsidies in financing plans and the solidarity rent reduction have led to
the distortion of this economic model. The financial equilibrium of new operations is thus
more difficult to find, including in the long term. Under these conditions, the social land-
lords are looking for additional financial leeway”. As a consequence, the ESH and OPH
organisms have struggled over the last few years to finance projects both in infrastructure
building and software management.
2.3
Performance testing
Software testing as always been an integral part of the software development process
[23]. Ideally, developers have to script through various tests to ensure that their programs
perform the required actions before making it accessible to users [23].
Regarding the testing of websites, there are three main categories of testing [24, 25].
Apart from checking if every graphic element appears, the two most essential categories
are functional and non-functional testing [16, 24].
Functional testing encompasses all the tests designed to check if the software performs
the required actions. These actions are both located at the client level (Browser-Page
Tests), meaning that there is no requests made to the server, and at the client-server
level (Transaction Tests), where the HTTP protocol is invoked [24].
Non-functional testing on the other hand focuses on less critical aspects. In functional test-
ing, either the program works or it does not. In non-functional testing, the tester checks
how the program works, how it performs and how this translate to overall usability by
the end user [16]. Among other specific tests, the most important sub-category of non-
functional testing is performance testing [14, 25].
In the case of web-oriented apps or software, performance is mainly calculated in re-
sponse time between the sending of a request and the corresponding answer return [26].
According to Decker and Sarojadevi, performance ”refers to the system’s ability to com-
plete transactions and to furnish information rapidly and accurately despite high multi-user
interaction or constrained hardware resources” [27]. Many steps along the way can cause
delay to occur and response time can be counted in minutes for heavy requests when the
servers are under stress. In short, performance testing is nothing more than testing the
stability and response time of a software or an application by applying load on it. This kind
of testing has seen a rapid growth of interest in the last two decades, both on the indus-
trial field [28, 29, 30] and the research field [28]. This is specifically the case because it
delivers answers to the three bottlenecks mentioned in Section 2.1: more complex tasks
handled by websites, more users, and less leniency for wait-time [14, 27]. There are five
sub-categories to performance testing that will be presented subsequently.
Load testing
During this test, a number of virtual users (vusers) is generated as the load in order to
validate if the software performs as expected. The load must be equivalent to the number
of users expected in real life, in order to make sure that the entire technical architecture
is well suited for production use [26].
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
7
==PAGE:20==
Stress testing
During this test, a load over the maximal activity expected will be generated in order to
check if the software can sustain a high load pressure without to much degradation for a
definite number of minutes/hours [31].
Scalability testing
During this test, the load will increase progressively until it reaches a breaking point for
the website. It is designed to determine under what load the software and the entire
architecture will crash [32].
Volume testing
During this test, the objective is to evaluate how the software handles a huge transfer of
data. It is not so much about applying a big load but more about sending requests that
demand a huge data transfer from the data base (DB) [33].
Endurance testing
During this test, the load is normal but more importantly, it is applied on the software for
a long period of time. This is aimed at finding cracks and bugs in the software as it runs
for hours at a time without any stops [33].
Despite the growing importance that performance has for the end-user [14, 24], according
to many papers most developing teams either struggle to implement performance man-
agement [24, 27] or implement it too late [34].
8
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
3.1
Case Study
This study was mainly carried out on a specific software developed by the company Sopra
Steria. It is important to set the boundaries of the thesis, to understand the context of the
company in which the project was carried out and the limitations or implications it can have
on overarching conclusions. In order to provide an answer to the research questions, the
phenomenon will be considered in a very specific industrial context. The case study is
limited to that of IKOS, an integrated management software package intended for social
housing professionals. To properly situate the context of the study, IKOS must be placed
within the broader Sopra Steria spectrum.
Sopra Steria is an Information System & Consultancy Company (ISCC). It is responsible
for both the development of its products (software and web applications) and their dis-
tribution to its customers via the consultancy teams, according to a product manager at
Sopra Steria. The company is divided into 3 sub-branches: Sopra HR Software, Sopra
Banking Software, Sopra Real Estate Software. IKOS is one of the software developed
by Sopra Real Estate Software (SRES), and it is used to assist social landlords in the
management of their daily operations (see Section 2.2 for further details).
The objective of the consulting teams is the implementation of the various IKOS modules
at Sopra Steria’s customers. It is in this context that the need for performance was char-
acterized. The first motivation of the study is to deal with customer dissatisfaction with
the IKOS user experience. The second is to develop a new commercial offer focused on
performance testing. The case study of IKOS therefore has a dual component, technical
and strategic. Developing such a solution in the specific context of IKOS seems to be
a necessary first step in the study. Defining the extent to which this journey towards a
solution is adaptable to a broader context will be the second part of the study.
IKOS was selected as the case study because it is the largest ERP developed by Sopra
Real Estate Software. According to the director of IKOS, it is the largest in terms of vol-
ume of data managed (1.5 million social housing managed, a third of France’s market),
dependent customers (62 clients), and staff working on the software at Sopra Steria (207
employees). He also states that IKOS alone is responsible for a yearly turnover of 23.2M€
in 2021. According to an R&D director at IKOS, it is also the oldest of the ERP run by
SRES, with a complex architecture to consider. The software is currently developed in
its FullWeb 1 and 3 version for most customers. However, a new Fullweb 4 version was
finalized in 2021 and currently 9 customers have already switched to it. According to a
managing director at IKOS, the objective of this upgrade is to improve a rather weak user
experience for greater customer satisfaction. IKOS is therefore both a critical case for
Sopra Steria and also an example capable of legitimizing the performance approach.
This is a critical case given its central place in SRES revenue. The poor performance of
the ERP in 2021 and the poor feedbacks from clients even forced the group’s manage-
ment to make the recovery of IKOS a priority objective for the years to come (Division
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
9
==PAGE:22==
Manager, 2022). Moreover, according to one of the Maintenance Support Manager, be-
ing able to make commitments in terms of quality of service to customers is a priority with
this FullWeb 4 version. It is also an example on which to build a real model because it is a
complete and complex software. Succeeding in analyzing critical facets of IKOS FullWeb
4 and building an offer for social landlords based on this software package could lead to
the creation of similar offers for less complex software packages. This particular setting
therefore exemplifies a concrete case of a software company putting more effort into cus-
tomer analysis through performance testing (see Chapter 2). Exploring the applicability
of automatic performance testing to IKOS can create a precedent on which to build other
such types of studies, inside Sopra Steria or elsewhere.
3.2
Methodology of the design research process
The study carried out is separated into two distinct stages. The first consists in determin-
ing which test tool is best suited in 2022 to the performance study within the framework of
SRES. The second part is devoted to the development of a test campaign launch process
for IKOS as well as the generalization of this process to other web software.
Therefore, this study will largely rely on the principles of design research. It follows an
abductive approach, in which the search for new industrial processes is based on the
analysis of past behaviors, as well as on the analysis of present possibilities (learning ob-
jective number 8).This study mainly follows the principles of the Design Science Research
Methodology model described by Peffers & al in 2006 [5]. The key steps of this model
are presented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) model [5]
This methodology is especially suited to research that focuses on the development of so
called artifacts, which include computer programs, human/computer interfaces and other
application with the engineering and computer science fields [5]. Designing a systematic
approach to performance testing for IKOS exactly falls into this type of methodology.
The conclusions of the first two points result from a deductive approach to the data col-
lected. The identification of the problem as well as the objectives will be based on past
10
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:23==
interviews with the protagonists of the project. During the design & development phase,
the first step will be devoted to evaluating the options available to Sopra Steria and their
customers, and selecting the solution most in line with their needs. This analysis will be
based on Dennis Baker’s decision-making methodology which is presented in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Methodology for decision-making analysis
The first 3 stages of Baker’s model repeat the conclusions of the first two stages of Pef-
fers’ model. Step 4 consists of acquiring data, either during interviews or during personal
research in order to identify the alternatives and their characteristics (Objective 4, Table
1.1). Step 6 is to select a methodology to make the decision. Finally, step 7 consists in
applying this methodology to derive a unique solution, representing the best compromise
for the case studied (Objective 7, Table 1.1).
The first 5 steps are based on the qualitative analysis of the data collected, and the conclu-
sions that they were able to produce. Step 6 will be conducted by performing an Analytical
Hierarchy Procedure (AHP) for reasons explained in section 3.5.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
11
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Selection of research informants and participants
To lead this exploratory study, specialists inside Sopra Steria have been interviewed. They
have been selected for numerous and various reasons based on their position, relevance
for the project, technical knowledge, market knowledge and interest in the success of the
project. Here is the list of respondents to interviews within Sopra Steria and why they
were specifically solicited:
• The Team Manager inside IKOS client services (IKOS TM): This TM was solicited for
two main reasons. Firstly, he provided the case study that could match the research
field. Secondly, he himself had similar experience with a similar case, led more on
an industrial level on IKOS. Retrieving his insight and scoping the research project
were the two main objectives of the interviews.
• The Team Manager Assistant inside IKOS client services (IKOS TMA): The TMA
has brought knowledge about functional matters, centered around the product
• The Head of the Outsourcing Department (Outsourcing HD): The outsourcing de-
partment is a service provider that hosts and maintains client servers instead of the
client’s IT System Department. He therefore has a great interest in defining the per-
formance of the IKOS ERP in order to better scope the server requirements for a
client. The interviews led with the HOD where designed to understand the indus-
trial context, the industrial need and coordinate validating studies for the model at a
client’s place.
• IT architects and Performance Testing Expert (PTE) : The interviews led with the
PTE were meant to gather insight on their practice, the software they used for per-
formance testing and why they use them, their applicability to the methodology being
designed and the hurdles that could be found along the process of scripting. Their
long experience in performance testing and knowledge about the pieces of software
were critical in the technical advancements of the study.
• A software developer and Selenium expert (SE): The interviews led with the SE were
meant to gather insight on a specific software, Selenium WebDriver, its applicability
to the methodology being designed and the hurdles that could be found along the
process of scripting. His long experience in performance testing and knowledge
about the WebDriver software were critical in the technical advancements of the
study.
• A second Team Manager, specialised in financial management (MGF): informal in-
terview and training on graph production through Power BI based on log data. They
helped define the importance of result rendering in an industrial context, in order for
the process to be both appealing and understandable.
Considering the general lack of availability of skilled employees within the organisation,
the number of respondents that made themselves available for a research project is quite
high. Factoring in the fact that few people had knowledge about the field of study, and
that among those many held high positions within the organisation, it was quite difficult to
get precise and relevant information about the subject.
3.4
Data collection and practices
The study following an abductive approach, it was necessary to build knowledge through
qualitative data before going into exploratory study. This qualitative data was gathered
12
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:25==
through semi-structured interviews with experts within their own fields at the company.
Those experts were not necessarily directly involved in the case study, but they give a
greater perspective on the overall context of performance testing.
To carry out these interviews, a standard questionnaire was established. More specif-
ically, two types of questionnaires were established. One focuses on the case study,
understanding the context in which the study is being conducted and the challenges for
Sopra Steria. The other is used to technically understand the performance testing pro-
cess, in a broader context.
In both cases, a list of questions was drawn up before conducting the interviews. The
questions retained in the two types of questionnaires come from templates found online.
To edit each type of questionnaire, several templates were crossed in order to find the
most relevant questions to ask.
Regularly, the cross-referenced templates contained part of the associated responses.
Although these answers may seem interesting at first glance, they do not replace the
work of the researcher, consisting in conducting his own interviews. On the other hand,
these answers could be used to validate those given by the interviewees, or to bounce
back in the event of contradictions.
The standard questionnaires are presented in Appendix E as well as the transcript of the
recorded interviews. Again, the interviews were ultimately more semi-structured than fully
structured. The objective was to absorb as much of the experiences of the interviewees
as possible, in order to obtain greater richness in the data to be analyzed.
3.5
Data analysis procedure
To analyse the data, the interviews have been parsed in order to extract the important
information it contains. The idea is that on the most important matters, at least two or
three experts can be interviewed so that information can be cross-checked. The data
being mostly qualitative, it is up to the researcher to create links between the different
answers given by respondents and come up with an effective conclusion, mainly on the
way to conduct a proper campaign in the social housing ecosystem.
Additional data gathered through internet research, mainly to compare testing software
alternatives, will be compared through a preliminary benchmark and ranked through the
Analytical Hierarchy Procedure (AHP). The benchmark is necessary to gather information
about the potential testing tools, list their features, and regroup the different websites into
sub-categories of choice. The AHP will be applied on those sub-categories based on the
most relevant features for the company.
It should be noted that the outcome of the AHP is designed to choose the best tool to
select for the entire process. Undergoing this systematic approach is therefore essen-
tial because the rest of the design research will depend on this outcome. It should also
be noted that the weight on each categories were validated on multiple aspects that are
specific to the case study, and that one specific category can encompass many points of
importance. Those will be detailed in Chapter 4.2.3.
According to professorLusby from DTU, the AHP is a Multiple Criteria Evaluation Method,
that helps the researcher select among a finite set of known alternatives [35]. The first
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
13
==PAGE:26==
step of the analysis is to find all pareto optimal solutions. A solution is pareto optimal
if no other solution is better with respect to all objective functions (R Lusby, 2020). The
second step of the analysis is to apply a structured method for choosing from a set of
pareto optimal solutions, which is called the AHP.
In the AHP method, the pareto optimal solutions are compared pairwise on their different
selection criteria. Following this pairwise comparison of the solutions, a square matrix of
comparison of the solutions similar to the one below is obtained. It is particularly suited
to a situation where several criteria are taken into account in decision-making. It allows
for transparent and systematic decision-making.
It is possible to create normalized preference vectors on each criterion from this com-
parison matrix. This normalization for each criterion is done by undergoing the following
steps.
1. Sum the columns
2. Divide each element of the matrix with the sum of its column
3. Sum the rows
4. Divide these sums of the elements of a row by the size of the matrix
The normalized vector is thus obtained for each criterion considered in the AHP. The
same goes for the relative importance between the criteria themselves. The weight of
each criterion in decision-making is determined in the same way, by developing a criteria
comparison matrix followed by vector normalization. The arguments leading up to each
weight come from interviews with Sopra Steria stakeholders and will be detailed in Chapter
4.
3.6
Reliability and validity
To ensure a sufficient reliability in the data collected, multiple steps have been put in place.
Concerning the validity of the findings in the interviews, they were cross-confirmed either
by other respondents or by documentation. This documentation originated both from So-
pra Steria and online research.
The use of the AHP method has been approved by the IKOS TM and Team Manager
Assistant (TMA). The selection of the categories and their relative importance was made
following the interviews and the understanding of the context of IKOS. The choice of cate-
gories and their relative importance was submitted to the approval of the IKOS TM and the
IKOS TMA before carrying out the analysis. Since the conclusions of the AHP method are
intrinsically linked to the weights of each category, these have been modified and adjusted
several times before the study. The study was carried out only when all the stakehold-
ers reached a consensus on the relative importance accorded to the different categories
chosen. The result of the AHP method was considered valid by all project stakeholders
before including the performance testing tool in the pipeline.
3.7
Ethical concerns
Leading a research project inside a software company raises some ethical concerns, es-
pecially regarding data collection and data use. Data is a private property and as such,
it is not possible to test on any data set. To make sure that the study did not infringe on
the privacy on Sopra Steria customers, most of the research work was carried out on an
internal environment devoted to testing. This meant that the data set utilized were not
14
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:27==
real, and the consequence of utilizing them where harmless. Consequently, the perfor-
mances were not representative of those in a real industrial context, since the internal
environment where not as powerful and the data sets not as important. However, the
learning objectives of the thesis are rather focused on exploring the general applicability
of performance testing in the Sopra Steria context, and not running several campaigns
for several clients. Therefore it was possible to accommodate for the most part.
To access real client data, the client’s consent was required. This was done once to val-
idate the model at the end of the study, together with a client which agreed to serve as
guinea pig to gain performance insight on their software (see Chapter 5).
Another concern came from the fact that the software utilized to launch the tests contained
set-up files that could be a threat to Sopra’s cyber-security. Those where not a problem
in the end, but they raise a concern about the durability of the solution chosen. Building
a model based on a new software inside a big company can put the company at risk
of potential breaches. Keeping that into consideration is essential during the research
process, even if it can infringe on potential progress.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
15
==PAGE:28==
16
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:29==
4
Data collection and analysis
4.1
Problem and Motivation Identification
Sopra Steria is an Information System & Consultancy Company, and like all similar com-
panies, it must meet the needs of its customers. For IKOS TM, present in the entity for
more than 12 years, customer ESH and OPH began to take a closer interest in perfor-
mance and security issues five to seven years ago. This is when the budgets allocated to
Quality Assurance (QA) and testing peaked (see Figure 2.2). This is also when the total
budgets allocated to enterprise software took off (see Figure 2.1), which means that they
were already late on the trend. Sopra Steria covers many different activities, including
banking, human resources and real estate. This makes it a great company to study, in
order to analyse how it has adapted to this trend in its different sectors of activities. Ac-
cording to the Sopra Steria PTE interviewed, who work on performance issues in fields
as varied as on-board electronics, banking, or the Ministry of the Interior, these afore-
mentioned QA activities have been integrated into the Pipeline of Sopra Steria in their
respective branches.
In line with this trend, the IKOS entity of Sopra Real Estate Software began working on
improving its quality services in 2015. The policy focused on strengthening the security
of their software and improving their performances [36].
However, the IKOS sector of activity is quite special for two reasons (see Section 3.1):
it is a niche market with big budget but limited resources, and Sopra Steria exercises a
quasi-monopoly on this market. For IKOS TM, this has two implications:
• IKOS customers are dependent on the performance of the software provided to them
by Sopra. If the software is inefficient, it is almost impossible for them to switch to a
competitor.
• The IKOS entity is dependent on the wishes and budget allocation of its customers.
If these customers decide that investing in performance is too expensive, it is unlikely
that IKOS will develop skills on the matter.
Due to lack of resources allocated to the search for performance after 2018, the offer fell
into disuse and was not continued. This is despite the promises left by the work realised
on performance matters at the time. For IKOS TM, this is due to the particular nature of
the social landlord market, who “always lag behind what is being done in terms of inno-
vation. They are good followers, but they are not vanguards”. Not being at the forefront
of technological advances would therefore be an core tendency in social real estate. This
is easily explained for the TM of IKOS by their activity, which impacts tens of thousands
of social homes, for which they must perpetually be accountable to the government. Not
venturing into a new trend or new technologies before they have proven themselves would
in this case be a guarantee of wisdom inherent in their activity.
At least five years after the start of the trend, this sector of activity is now ready to invest
in solutions that are not only functional, but also efficient. From now on, “three-quarters
of Sopra Steria’s offers include commitments in terms of performance and response time”
(IKOS TM, 2022). These are very recent commitments, which require the implementation
or re-implementation of an offer dedicated to performance within IKOS. It is therefore an
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
17
==PAGE:30==
excellent subject of study, which makes it possible to take advantage of the timing of the
social landlord market, while relying on knowledge already built up over at least five years
in other sectors of Sopra Steria’s activity (Banking and Human Resources).
For IKOS, there is now a market in the performance sector that did not exist three to
five years ago. This need is all the more significant as the satellite services around the
IKOS Fullweb basic software are also being deployed, with sometimes notable under-
performance. The diversification of the portfolio as well as the growing pressure from its
customers for more transparency on performance mean that this is the right time to build
a real service offer, dedicated to performance testing.
4.2
Derive Objectives of the solution and evaluate
possibilities
4.2.1
Objectives of the solution
Based on the motivations collected, several objectives were raised in accordance with the
TM and the TMA of IKOS. These objectives are mostly aligned with the learning objectives.
Since IKOS is a web application, it exchanges with application servers using the HTTP(S)
protocol (IKOS TM, 2022) [15]. The first essential objective of the solution is therefore that
the technical solution selected makes it possible to carry out tests in this protocol. Accord-
ing to the performance and business experts interviewed, the http protocol is currently the
most widely used and all performance testing tools on the market have the ability to per-
form tests in this protocol. Ideally, however, according to some of the PTE interviewed,
it is to have a maximum of supported protocols in case the tested application uses more
specific protocols.
The second objective is that the solution must be easily implementable. According to IKOS
TM and TMA, it is to expect that the potential users of the solution are neither code experts
nor necessarily performance testing experts. The solution designed must be adapted to
the population that will use it. In other words, it must meet the needs of the client without
being overly complicated. According to the experts interviewed, the simplicity also comes
from the acquirement of the software. For example, open-source software will always be
easier to implement than paying software, where the purchase of licenses can infringe on
innovation. The solution developed must meet the specifications of the case study, but
also be general enough to apply to other web applications, particularly in the social real
estate sector.
The process developed must be streamlined and packaged as much as possible. Learn-
ing objective 9 focuses on studying the feasibility of simplifying business testing processes
(see Table 1.1, Chapter 1). Even now, testers are subject matter experts. The solution
developed must allow a standard consultant to develop performance tests at an industrial
level, without necessarily being an expert in the field.
Another objective according to Outsourcing HD is to be able to size the infrastructures
hosted for the customers much more precisely than what is currently done. Sopra Steria,
like other similar companies, hosts and maintains its customers’ servers. However, for
the moment, no procedure exists to quantify a client’s server needs, in relation to the load
he plans to impose on these servers. The load tests in this case must be designed to
18
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:31==
meet this need for infrastructure sizing.
All the objectives for the research process [5] are summarized in Table 4.1.
Objective
Description
Objective 1
The solution must able to test more than the HTTP(S) protocol
Objective 2
The solution must be quickly accessible and implementable
Objective 3
The solution must be user friendly for none testing experts
Objective 4
The solution must help anticipate customer needs and requirements
Objective 5
The solution developped can be expanded outside of the case studied
Objective 6
The solution must be streamlined and packaged
Table 4.1: Exploratory Research Objectives [5]
4.2.2
Insight into the testing tool possibilities
As presented in the methodology section (see Chapter 3), the selection of the best tool to
conduct the performance tests will be done according to the principles set out by Baker
and al. [37] (see Figure 3.2). The first step was detailed in Section 4.1. In short, the per-
formance offer for social real estate is lagging behind other markets, and the former are
ready to invest more in this field to catch up. It is therefore necessary to set up an offer
centered on performance to meet this growing demand. To respond to Steps 2 and 3 of
Baker and al.’s methodology [37], a series of interviews was conducted with Sopra Steria
Performance Testing Expert (PTE) as well as with business experts familiar with the IKOS
ERP and social landlords.
According to all the people interviewed, there is a multitude of software available on the
market to run performance tests. However, these software do not all have the same char-
acteristics, and therefore do not meet the needs in the same way.
In its study carried out in 2018 [36], the TM of IKOS had for example used the tool Load-
Runner®, developed by the company Micro Focus. According to all the PTE interviewed,
Micro Focus LoadRunner® is considered by industry experts to be the most powerful soft-
ware for testing very complex protocols. In the case of the study conducted by the TM of
IKOS [36], a preliminary study had been carried out to compare ”6 or 7 testing software”
with each other, and Micro Focus LoadRunner® had been selected and purchased pre-
cisely because it was the the only one to have an essential functionality (operating with
Citrix protocols). On the one hand, it has features that are not present on some other
testing software, especially if they are free. On the other hand, it is an expensive soft-
ware, and according to the PTE as well as the TM of IKOS, this can create several major
problems.
First of all, Micro Focus LoadRunner® income model is based on licenses: one has to buy
increasingly expensive licenses to access increasingly high functionalities and numbers
of virtual users. According to one of the PTE, “in large companies, with somewhat com-
plicated purchasing processes, if you want to set up tests very quickly, buying licenses
can be complicated”.
Another major issue is license portability. According to the experts interviewed, Micro
Focus LoadRunner® licenses only work on the local network of whoever paid for them.
Building LoadRunner tests therefore requires the customer to also purchase Micro Focus
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
19
==PAGE:32==
LoadRunner® licenses, which is not always in their budget; otherwise it will be impossible
to run the tests at this client. In conclusion, according to one of the experts, “LoadRunner
can bring a real gain to industrialize the tests. But it has to be evaluated, you really have
to see according to the use-case”.
Another particularly highlighted tool is the competitor Apache JMeter™. It is a tool used
by at least 3 Sopra Banking experts, open-source and which has advantages and disad-
vantages different from Micro Focus LoadRunner® and similar solutions on the market.
Due to its open-source aspect, Apache JMeter™does not imply the purchase of licenses.
This gives it an advantage not only in the purchase, but also in terms of portability of the
tests among the different customers. They do not need to pay anything to implement the
tool on their own network. One of the PTE interviewed explains that this greatly stream-
lines the ability to get started with the tool, because there are no delays imposed by the
validation of the purchase of the software.
According to two of the interviewed PTE, Apache JMeter™has fewer features than Micro
Focus LoadRunner®. This can be a disadvantage as well as an advantage according to
them. If the desire is to test very advanced protocols, Apache JMeter™may find itself
limited. On the other hand, it is easier to learn than a more complete tool like Micro
Focus LoadRunner®. In addition, it has many extensions published as plugins that are
also open-source. One of the experts interviewed is even behind some of these plugins,
which bring high-end software features to an open-source software.
Compared to most of the market, Apache JMeter™distinguishes itself by a difference
in conceptualisation mindset according to all these experts. If the majority of the avail-
able tools are more oriented for web developers, with scripted scenarios in code (Java,
JavaScript, NodeJS, Python), Apache JMeter™adopts a more user-friendly mentality. In
other words, less technical people are able to appropriate the tool more easily, because
it requires less knowledge on programming. It presents the tests more in a hierarchical
format which can be confusing for pure developers. According to one of the performance
experts, this disruption comes from the fact that developer testers are used to testing in
more linear lines of code.
Finally, it was possible to compare these two software with a third yet different alterna-
tive. This testing software is called Selenium WebDriver. According to the Selenium (SE)
expert approached, Selenium WebDriver is a testing software based on scripts in code,
with a more developers-friendly approach to coding. It is a software that allows its user to
view the tests directly in a web browser, a feature that software like Apache JMeter™for
example do not have. On the other hand, other PTE note that this software is very little
intended for carrying out load tests, because it is far too resource-intensive.
The analysis of all this data did not only make it possible to compare the software pre-
sented. Above all, this has made it possible to observe that there are many alternatives.
These numerous alternatives have their own characteristics, which must be compared
with the objectives and characteristics of the case study, established in Step 1 (see sec-
tion 4.1). It is important to mention that the experts interviewed sometimes limited them-
selves to technologies that they already knew, or that were imposed on them by their
company. Their knowledge of certain emerging tools is therefore not complete and re-
quired in-depth work to confront them with older, more traditional solutions. It is therefore
important to study the emerging solutions, on which the experts interviewed have little
20
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:33==
knowledge, in order to answer several sub-questions. What are these new solutions?
What are their advantages and disadvantages compared to the solutions detailed by the
experts?
To do that, a study of complementary data found in consultancy reports as well as on the
internet (company websites, videos, reports) has been carried out. To lead this analysis
methodically, the optimal solution for the exploratory study has been selected through an
Analytical Hierarchy Procedure presented in Section 4.2.3.
4.2.3
Comparing different software
Performance tests are meant to be representative replica of a real life usage of a server.
Concretely it means sending as many requests on a server as it is designed to handle.
For example, in 2016, Google server had to answer more than 2 trillions requests, which
account for at least 63,000 requests per second [38]. Of course the infrastructure and
especially the server set-up will not be the same for an app that only needs to manage
100 requests a day. All in all, the infrastructure set-up will be designed to suit the expected
load it is supposed to sustain.
In a performance test, the goal is to generate load automatically in order to put the servers
under the expected pressure they were set up for. IKOS being a multi-user ERP, it is im-
possible to stress the servers by only playing the scenarios on different computers by
hand. To conduct a relevant study, a specific software is needed to generate the load
and trigger all the shots at once as well as gather the results afterwards. Several options
exist, paying or open source.
The first step of the study was therefore to select the software best suited for the study.
As presented in the methodology section (see Chapter 3), an AHP has been conducted
to compare different pieces of software on multiple criteria and select the best compro-
mise. In his study carried out in 2018, G. Long used HP LoadRunner [36], which is a
standard in the industry and is now owned by Micro Focus®. However the licenses to
use it are expensive, and it is an expensive to use tool, meaning that a lot of learning is
required to master it (see Section 4.1). The software choices made by G. Long and other
experts come under constraints that no longer necessarily apply to the current context.
Some technical constraints relating to the object of study no longer exist (TM, 2022) and
it is therefore possible to consider other more user-friendly ways of generating the tests.
Other experts inside Sopra Steria have switched to Apache JMeter™for reasons devel-
oped in Section 4.1. In order to generalize the study and try to see the bigger picture, it
is necessary to set aside the specific context of Sopra Steria. To do that, it is important to
consider other options present on the market.
The software options considered in this benchmark come from a consultancy study led by
Delzer in 2021 [39]. Likewise, the study led by Sharma and Subramanian in 2016 added to
the pool of tools considered [23]. All things considered, a dozen software were considered
in this study. To rank and select one of them, a list of features has been established.
The elements provided in these documents have been supplemented by a study of each
case by consulting their website or by browsing through forums. The data collected and
the results returned below are therefore partly the result of self-promotion by these web-
sites. On the one hand, it is important to keep a distance from any outstanding promises
made by these testing tool providers. On the other hand, the comparison of their websites
remains interesting from a ”systematic research” standpoint, because the comparison of
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
21
==PAGE:34==
the features put forward by one or the other of these tools makes it possible to compare
them against one-another. This list of features was set while browsing through the soft-
ware providers website was validated by IKOS TM and TMA, as well as PTE experts
inside the company.
The software considered in the study are the one presented in Table 4.2.
Code
Testing tool
T1
Apache JMeter
T2
Apica LoadTest
T3
IBM Rational Performance Test
T4
K6 Cloud
T5
Loadster
T6
Micro Focus LoadRunner Professional
T7
Radview Webload
T8
Selenium WebDriver
T9
SmartBear LaodNinja
T10
SmartBear ReadyAPI
T11
Tricentis NeoLoad
Table 4.2: Performance testing tools considered in the study
Following data collection from software websites [40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48], con-
sultancy reports [29, 30, 39], interviews within Sopra Steria and other literature, a list of
most relevant features for a performance testing tool could be drawn. This list is presented
in Table 4.3.
Code
Criteria
C1
Open source
C2
SaaS
C3
On Premises
C4
Userfriendly
C5
Root cause analysis tools
C6
Automated recording
C7
Part of an ecosystem
C8
Scalable
C9
Third party app connectability
C10
in-expensive to use
C11
Ability to use existing scripts
C12
Ability to run tests from actual browsers
Table 4.3: Main features of comparison between software
These features don’t necessarily appear in every software considered in the study. The
pivot table presented in Appendix B sums it up for each tool. A summarized version only
checking the presence of said feature in binary format (1 = present, 0 = not present) is
presented in Table 4.4.
22
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:35==
Testing tool
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
Total
Apache Jmeter
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
9
Apica LoadTest
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
7
IBM Rational Performance Test
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
7
K6 Cloud
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
Loadster
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
7
Micro Focus LoadRunner Professional
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
7
Radview Webload
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
6
Selenium WebDriver
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
7
SmartBear LaodNinja
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
10
SmartBear ReadyAPI
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
7
Tricentis NeoLoad
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
7
Total
2
8
9
8
7
11
5
10
3
5
6
4
78
Table 4.4: Sum-up of features for each testing tool considered in the study
Once these features had been identified, it was possible to rank them in decreasing order
of appearance. The objective is to get a preliminary idea of popular features, and by
extension unpopular ones. The resulting graph is presented in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Criteria ranked in order of appearance in testing tools
In order to perform the AHP, the data analysis was conducted as follows. On the one
hand, a selection of criteria relevant for the case study was performed. This was done in
agreement with the TM in charge of the performance project but also based on the infor-
mation gathered during the interviews. On the other hand, a selection of the interesting
test tools to consider in the AHP was also carried out.
Based on the outcome of Figure 4.1, several situation of irrelevance were identified. This
irrelevance could either apply to a criterion or to a tool. These situations are presented in
Table 4.5.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
23
==PAGE:36==
Situation
Description
Outcome
1
criterion generally present,
but not possessed by tool X
tool X discarded in the AHP
2
tool X possessing not
enough criteria overall
tool X discarded in the AHP
3
criterion Y present too many
times, ie not a good criterion
of selection
criterion Y discarded in the AHP
Table 4.5: Criterion or tool susceptible to be discarded in the AHP
A criterion ”generally” present is a criterion that is present in all or all but one tool. Accord-
ing to Table 4.5, two criteria match this definition: scalable (C8) and automated recording
(C6). These two criteria are primordial in relation with the study and the learning objec-
tives. One of the main axes is to simplify the process of creating tests as much as possible
in order to be able to have it executed by as many people as possible, and not only profes-
sional developers (objective 8). Automatic Test Recording helps in that regard, recording
tests faster without extensive code knowledge. Scalable is also an extremely important
element, since the tool must be part of a broader context than the case study (objective
9). The tool selected through the AHP should remain relevant when elevating the solution
to an industrial level. These are therefore two essential objectives of the research subject.
Situation 1 does not apply to any of the tools considered in the study. Indeed, neither of
these two criteria seem to be missing in the tools considered. Looking at it the other way
around, these two criteria are present in all the tools considered. It is therefore possible
to leave them aside in the AHP (Situation 3).
Situation 2 applies to one tool in particular: K6 Cloud (T4). Not enough information could
be collected on this tool, leading to it being discarded for the rest of the study.
Following the application of these three filters, too many criteria and software remain to
be considered to carry out the AHP efficiently. For the next stage of data preparation, two
more filters were applied:
• Regarding the criteria: similar criteria have been concatenated, and only the 3
most discriminating criteria following this concatenation have been retained. The
outcome is presented in Table 4.6
• Regarding the tools: they have been grouped into families of similarities. Some of
these tools have very similar characteristics in their offer. Their strategic placement
relative to the market is therefore similar as well. The outcome is presented in Table
4.8
The purpose of this concatenation is to streamline the analysis. Indeed, let us assume the
case where family of software ”X” is selected following the AHP. If this family X is com-
posed of more than one software, there will always be time to carry out a more detailed
analysis of the constituent elements. If this family has exactly one software, the analysis
stops there and the software is selected.
Table 4.6 presents how the criteria for the AHP where selected and what they entail :
24
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:37==
Category
Criteria
Description
Price
Licensing fees vs open source,
part of an ecosystem
Learning curve cost
bottleneck of the licensing
terms, that should not be
underestimated when launching
such a project
User friendliness
Ability to launch tests
from real browsers,
in- expensive to use,
third party app connectability,
user friendly GUI
Everything that relates
to the ease of use once
the software is downloaded,
the features that make it
accessible and workable
for the wider range
Time to value
Automated recording,
Ability to use existing scripts,
On premise and SaaS,
Accessible Knowledge
Everything that helps get
the test up and running
in the shortest and most
efficient way possible.
Table 4.6: Criteria used for the AHP
Once the AHP criteria have been determined, it is a question of determining their weights,
i.e. their relative importance to each other. The relative importance of the selection cri-
teria was achieved following observations within the study company, interviews carried
out with the experts called upon and the results were validated by the IKOS TM. The two
tables presented in Table 4.7 present the process of obtaining the normalized vector of
weights for each category.
Price
User
friend-
liness
Time to
Value
Price
1
3
5
User
friend-
liness
1/3
1
3
Time to
Value
1/5
1/3
1
Sum
1 1/2
4 1/3
9
Price
User
friend-
liness
Time to
Value
Sum
Price
0,65
0,69
0,56
0,63
User
friend-
liness
0,22
0,23
0,33
0,26
Time to
Value
0,13
0,08
0,11
0,11
Table 4.7: Obtaining the normalized vector for the criteria weights
The normalized vector obtained is V =
(
Price
User−friendliness
Time−to−value
)
=
( 0,63
0,26
0,11
)
.
A graphic version of this vector V is presented in Figure 4.2.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
25
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: Weight of each criterion according to the AHP
Table 4.8 presents the categories of testing tools that have been selected for the AHP,
the tool they represent, and why these tools have been grouped that way for the AHP.
Category
Testing Tools
Description
Cat1
Micro Focus
LoadRunner,
IBM Rationnal
Performance Test,
SmartBear LoadNinja
Quite expensive to use, very expensive
licensing fees, these software are top of the
line in terms of possibilities and data rendition.
They are better suited for big companies
with dedicated performance departments
that can maximise the steep learning curve
Cat2
Apache JMeter
Open-source software, steep learning curve
but highly scalable and adaptable.
Possess all the features of a paying software
but less professional and more technical
Cat3
Radview WebLOAD
Software close in performance with LoadRunner
but less expensive to use, better time to
value, but less functionalities in the analysis
Cat4
Tricentis NeoLoad
Great time to value [39], good scalability, paying
software but not very common which increases
tool sprawl
Cat5
Loadster,
SmartBear ReadyAPI,
Apica LoadTest
Newer solutions that also present all in one
package, root cause analysis. Still paying
option, with a more ”all included” approach.
Inconvenient : less knowledge about the
process, so in case of a bug, very difficult to
address by oneself
Table 4.8: Categories of tools for the AHP
26
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:39==
This step undertaken in Table 4.8 can be considered as finding the pareto optima for the
AHP [35, 37]. In other words, all of these categories of tools are better than the other four
in at least one of the criteria presented in Table 4.6.
Once those categories have been set up, the next step of the AHP is to compare them
against one-another in each of the three categories of Table 4.6. After some normalizing
calculation, we obtain a normalized vector of each category of tools for each criterion.
These small operations are summed-up in the Tables 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11.
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Cat1
1
1/5
5
3
5
Cat2
5
1
9
7
9
Cat3
1/5
1/9
1
1/3
1
Cat4
1/3
1/7
3
1
3
Cat5
1/5
1/9
1
1/3
1
Sum
6 3/4
1 4/7
19
11 2/3
19
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Vect
Cat1
0,15
0,13
0,26
0,26
0,26
0,21
Cat2
0,74
0,64
0,47
0,60
0,47
0,59
Cat3
0,03
0,07
0,05
0,03
0,05
0,05
Cat4
0,05
0,09
0,16
0,09
0,16
0,11
Cat5
0,03
0,07
0,05
0,03
0,05
0,05
Table 4.9: Obtaining the normalized vector for the price
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Cat1
1
1/3
1/3
1/5
1/7
Cat2
3
1
1
1/3
1/5
Cat3
3
1
1
1/3
1/5
Cat4
5
3
3
1
1/3
Cat5
7
5
5
3
1
Sum
19
10 1/3
10 1/3
4 7/8
1 7/8
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Vect
Cat1
0,05
0,03
0,03
0,04
0,08
0,05
Cat2
0,16
0,10
0,10
0,07
0,11
0,11
Cat3
0,16
0,10
0,10
0,07
0,11
0,11
Cat4
0,26
0,29
0,29
0,21
0,18
0,25
Cat5
0,37
0,48
0,48
0,62
0,53
0,50
Table 4.10: Obtaining the normalized vector for the user-friendliness
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Cat1
1
1/3
1/5
1/7
1/5
Cat2
3
1
1/3
1/5
1/3
Cat3
5
3
1
1/3
1
Cat4
7
5
3
1
3
Cat5
5
3
1
1/3
1
Sum
21
12 1/3
5 1/2
2
5 1/2
Cat1
Cat2
Cat3
Cat4
Cat5
Vect
Cat1
0,05
0,03
0,04
0,07
0,04
0,04
Cat2
0,14
0,08
0,06
0,10
0,06
0,09
Cat3
0,24
0,24
0,18
0,17
0,18
0,20
Cat4
0,33
0,41
0,54
0,50
0,54
0,46
Cat5
0,24
0,24
0,18
0,17
0,18
0,20
Table 4.11: Obtaining the normalized vector for the time to value
In the end, the following matrix A is obtained :
A =






a1,1
a1,2
a1,3
a2,1
a2,2
a2,3
a3,1
a3,2
a3,3
a4,1
a4,2
a4,3
a5,1
a5,2
a5,3






=






0, 21
0, 05
0, 04
0, 59
0, 11
0, 09
0, 05
0, 11
0, 20
0, 11
0, 25
0, 46
0, 05
0, 50
0, 20






where ai,j is the normalized coefficient for the software of Cati relative to criterion j. A
graphic version of this matrix A is presented in the three donut charts of Figure 4.3.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Normalized vector for each criterion (Price, Time to Value & User friendliness)
The final step of this AHP is to multiply this matrix A by the normalized vector V , in order
to obtain the end result for each category of software.
A ∗V =






0, 21
0, 05
0, 04
0, 59
0, 11
0, 09
0, 05
0, 11
0, 20
0, 11
0, 25
0, 46
0, 05
0, 50
0, 20






∗


0, 63
0, 26
0, 11

=






0, 15107957
0, 40785754
0, 07855532
0, 18188597
0, 1806216






A graphic version of the three weighted vectors for each criterion as well as the repre-
sentation of the final score for each category are presented in the donut charts of Figure
4.4.
Figure 4.4: Final weighted scores for each category in Price, Time to Value, User Friend-
liness & Total
According to the AHP, the best tools to carry out this exploratory study in this industrial
28
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:41==
setting are those of Category 2, with a coefficient of approximately 0, 408. Since this
category is only composed of Apache JMeter™, the AHP needs to be detailed no further.
The testing software selected for the study is therefore Apache JMeter™.
4.3
Design and Development
4.3.1
How to run the tests : selection of the scripting language
Apache JMeter™is an open-source JAVA application designed to measure the perfor-
mance of web applications [7]. It is maintained by the Apache Foundation [39]. According
to Antonio Gomes Rodrigues, Apache JMeter™was in 2019 the most popular testing tool
and may very well still be today thanks to its open source aspect [49]. Apache JMeter™
offers a GUI mode in which tests can easily be recorded, set-up and launched [49]. It can
generate unlimited load (i.e. virtual users) to put the server hosting the application under
the conditions of a real life usage [40]. Since it is open source, it requires more technical
knowledge than a paying option [39] but it is filled with functionalities and plug-in options
to expand its abilities.
Since IKOS is a web application, it interacts as a client with a web server using the HTTP
protocol [15]. To better understand the way information and data are conveyed through
the HTTP protocol, Figure 4.5 below summarises the different steps undertaken during
the process.
Figure 4.5: diagram of HTTP communication process by IONOS [6]
The information is sent via an URL to the browser (1.), which in turns translates it into an
HTTP request, which it sends (2.) to the web server. The web server can be connected
to an application server and/or a database server. Altogether, this architecture of servers
is able to come up with a response that it sends back to the browser (3.). The final step
consists in the browser rendering the information in a webpage (4.) for the actual end-user.
Among other features, Apache JMeter™possesses an HTTP(S) Test Script Recorder.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
29
==PAGE:42==
This script recorder is the feature that permits an instantaneous scripting of the tests by
recording real actions undertaken in a web application. More precisely, HTTP(S) Test
Script Recorder plays the role of a proxy server, a middleman between the client and the
server [50]. For more detailed information, refer to Appendix C.
Acting as such, the HTTP(S) Test Script Recorder is able to retrieve the HTTP requests
that are being placed on the web server (in the middle of connection 2. in Figure 4.5)
as well as the answer that comes back to the client (in the middle of connection 3. in
Figure 4.5). The ensuing test script is henceforth a succession of http requests. This very
specific placement of the HTTP(S) Test script recorder is presented in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: HTTP(S) Test Script Recorder capturing the http Request [6]
Launching the test inside Apache JMeter™will trigger all these prerecorded HTTP re-
quests, one after the other. The time calculated corresponds to the span between the
HTTP request being placed and the response coming back, i.e. 2+3 on Figure 4.7.
30
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.7: Spans taken into account in a JMeter test [6]
Together with IKOS TM and Selenium Expert at Sopra Steria, as well as discussing it with
other performance experts, it has been identified that it might not be the most accurate
way to run the tests, and thus for two main reasons:
• By recording only the HTTP part of the process, the spans taken for the URL to be
emitted (connection 1. in Figure 4.5) and the webpage to show up on screen (con-
nection 4. in Figure 4.5) are not taken into account. Yet they are integral part of the
full span being felt by the end user, and as such a component of how performance
should be evaluated. That is if user experience is the center of the study.
• Once the script are recorded, cleaned and ready to be run, they do not need to go
through a web browsers to test the server. As seen above, Apache JMeter™is
placed between the browser and the web server. That means that it does not need
a web browser to place a request, nor does it need it to gather the HTTP response
time. Consequently, it is impossible to see the actions being run and completed in
real time inside the web page, which is the easiest way to detect bugs.
To counter those two factors, it is possible to add plugins to Apache JMeter™. Namely,
it is possible to add Selenium WebDriver, a plugin that records and scripts the actions at
the web browser level. Contrary to Apache JMeter™, which records HTTP requests, Se-
lenium WebDriver records user interactions with a webpage, i.e. clicks on buttons, fill-in
of text boxes and other such actions. The ensuing tests therefore replay those actions
inside the webpage, as a real user would.
A direct consequence of this philosophy is that the tests capture spans that are similar to
the ones experimented by real users. Indeed Selenium WebDriver will capture a time that
is equivalent to 1+2+3+4 in Figure 4.8.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
31
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.8: Spans taken into account in a Selenium WebDriver test [6]
However, running a test in Selenium WebDriver also has its drawbacks. According to
some PTE and the Outsourcing HD, it is extremely difficult to put load on an application
trough a Selenium WebDriver test. This is due to the fact that running a real browser
requires a lot more resources on the client side (CPU and RAM) than sending pure HTTP
requests. By extension in a load test, several browsers would have to be opened, run
and closed at once which is likely to put a lot of pressure on the client desktop, and po-
tentially maxing out its memory (RAM). According to one performance expert interviewed,
this could lead to rapid crashes in the tests and distorted test results [7].
More specifically, Selenium WebDriver requires 50 to 100 times more resources to run
than the classic Apache JMeter™tests, with just HTTP requests [7]. That can be a bot-
tleneck for load testing, and by extension stress testing. Taking this metrics in consid-
eration, this same performance expert estimates that a powerful desktop can handle 20
to 30 browsers (i.e. 20 to 30 vusers at the same time) to run selenium tests. The same
desktop could potentially handle up to 3000 HTTP requests at the same time, which is a
considerable difference. In order to pick the best alternative, an analysis has been set up
in 2 phases.
First the following KPIs have been selected to chose which programming language is the
most relevant
• resources requirement: in terms of RAM and CPU
• load capacity on one virtual machine (VM)
• number of VM that can be run in parallel (to share the load)
• possibility to visualize the graphic elements (HTML graphic content) of a HTTP re-
quest: yes or no
• possibility to see the web browsing in real time: yes or no
32
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:45==
• possibility to extract and save the time of a HTTP request: yes or no
• possibility to extract the load time experienced by a real user: yes or no
• margin of error on the times returned
After identifying those metrics and KPIs, each option has been ranked in comparison with
the other. Results are shown in Table 4.12. These data have been gathered through
interviews with PTE with knowledge in both Selenium and Apache JMeter™, as well as a
webinar realised by one of said PTE [7].
Jmeter
WebDriver
resources requirements
- based on 1 Jmeter
1
50 to 100x
load capacity on 1 virtual machine (VM)
- based on 1 Jmeter (in number of threads)
1000 to 3000
20 to 30
amount of VM that can be run in parallel
10
10
visualize webpage (HTML) elements results
yes
yes
visualize webpage in real time
no
yes
save time of an HTTP request (2+3)
yes
no
save time experienced by a real user (1+2+3+4)
no
yes
margin of error in the times returned (in s)
0
0,5
Table 4.12: JMeter scripts vs Selenium WebDriver [7]
Secondly, in a more hands on approach, 6 basic tests have been scripted again, both in
Selenium WebDriver and Apache JMeter™. Those 6 tests originated in the study con-
ducted in 2018 by IKOS TM [36] and tend to cover the most used scenarios undertaken
in IKOS. They each consist in a precise chain of commands, which lead up to a specific
goal inside the ERP. This goal can be the consultation of a client, of a command, of a
financial situation or the creation of commands inside the data base. Both in Selenium
WebDriver and Apache JMeter™, the test measures the spans for each step along that
chain of commands.
To understand the performance of the two ways of scripting the tests, each scenario was
scripted in both Selenium and Apache JMeter™. Then, these tests were played under
the same conditions several times to eliminate the chance factor as much as possible.
The chance in this type of situation comes mostly from the fact that the tester does not
completely control what is happening at the server level. If the tests are run on a server
not prioritized for the test, it is possible that other requests are processed by the target
server in parallel with those from the test, which causes a disturbance in the results.
To overcome this random problem, here are the conditions under which the Selenium
WebDriver/Apache JMeter™comparison tests were performed:
• Same target server: server dedicated to performance tests, and privatized for com-
parison shots
• Same number of vusers: 3 vusers successively sent requests to the target server
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
33
==PAGE:46==
• Same ramp-up: the ramp-up is the duration over which the vusers launch their first
request. It was set at 20 seconds, or one vuser launch every 6.67 seconds.
• Same total test time: Total time set to 300 seconds. The 3 vusers used were able
to replay their scenarios until these 300 seconds had elapsed
As a representative example, here are the results obtained for the scenario ”P004: Busi-
ness Search” in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Representative results of a load test in JMeter (left) and WebDriver (right)
scripts
Several things should be noted from Figure 4.9. First, some requests take a lot of time to
be performed by Apache JMeter™(more than a minute for the second P02_DMD_LOGIN
action), but the non-response rate (server errors) remains at zero. In other words, the tar-
get server is able to provide a response, even with great latency, to all the requests it
receives.
Regarding the Selenium tests, some actions take even longer and above all, the error
rate is very high. This means that the webpage somehow fails to be displayed, which
prevents the following actions from taking place. This can come from several things, but
not from the server since the Apache JMeter™version works without errors. Even with a
very small load (3 vusers), Selenium WebDriver is already reaching some limitations.
To confirm this, another experiment was conducted, exclusively on Selenium WebDriver
codes. This time, instead of comparing Selenium WebDriver with Apache JMeter™, the
modus operandi was as follows. It was noted in the previous experiment that errors tended
to accumulate when two browsers were open at the same time, i.e. the vuser i does not
have time to complete its scenario before the vuser i + 1 starts its own. The objective
of the present experiment is to confirm or infirm this intuition. The essential parameter is
therefore the ratio (nb vuser)/(ramp-up). The greater the ramp-up relative to the number
of vusers, the greater the time between two successive vuser launches. By compressing
this time more and more, the probability that the vuser i has not reached the end of its
scenario before the vuser i + 1 starts its own increases. Two browsers will be opened
34
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:47==
at the same time. The objective of this experiment is to see what happens when this
happens, and to confirm or deny that this leads to an increase in the number of errors
observed.
Here is the set-up of one of these experiments:
• Test: P004 – Case search
• Number of loops: 1 – The objective is to launch each vuser only once
• Duration of the ramp-up: r = 300 seconds
• Number of vuser: n increasing from 8 to 14
With each shot, a number n of vusers is therefore triggered over the duration r of the
ramp-up. A new vuser i ∈[1; n] is therefore triggered every r/n seconds. The results are
presented in Figure 4.10.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
35
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.10: Results from an increasingly lower r/n ratio with WebDriver scripts
All hatched bars in the bar charts of Figure 4.10 mean that the browser has been willingly
closed by the tester in order to try and help the test go through for the remaining vusers.
The conclusion of those test are as follows:
• Practically speaking, it is very difficult to run even 2 vusers at the same time in Se-
lenium WebDriver language, at least when testing IKOS. The browsers either crash
or take unrepresentative amounts of times to render a response. It is very clear from
experience that a test in Selenium WebDriver can only manage one browser at a
time, which is an irreversible bottleneck for load testing.
• It has been made clear by a PTE that the problem with load lies on Selenium Web-
Driver and not the server being overcrowded. This is also confirmed by the server
handeling tens of requests at a time in the case of a Apache JMeter™test.
• Selenium cannot be considered as a viable solution for load testing IKOS or other
software. The IKOS application is too complex and Selenium is too ill suited to
sustain load.
36
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:49==
Despite its numerous advantages over Apache JMeter™, it has been decided to give up
on Selenium WebDriver and focus solely on Apache JMeter™tests.
Upon reflection with the company, it has been decided that even though Selenium Web-
Driver presents some major advantages (including the automation of web browsers), the
scripting language selected should be Apache JMeter™alone. Some examples of com-
parable scripts have been edited to prove that Selenium is incapable of sustaining the load
and that even 20 users per VM is a high bar to reach for this language, as it consumes
way to much resources on the VM. This limiting factor has proven to be the decisive factor,
since load generation is one of the primary objective in the research process.
4.3.2
Selection of scenarios
Load tests measure performance under real conditions, on real browsing habits [26]. It is
impossible to draw general conclusions from a single shot because the context in which
the shot was made will necessarily influence the result. That is why setting up a precise
action plan is necessary, because one has to be able to repeat it in the specific application
context of the client.
Moreover it is impossible to test the performance of the entire ERP, which contains more
than ten thousands different screens, according to IKOS architects. Testing the perfor-
mance of IKOS means limiting oneself to a limited pool of scenarios. It is therefore es-
sential to define which scenarios are the most representative for customers.
According to the Outsourcing HD, the criteria for identifying such scenarios are as follows:
• Frequency of execution of the scenario by a real user: if a command or a sequence
of commands is frequently activated during a day, it is relevant to test its perfor-
mance.
• The response time to a specific request: if a request is identified as particularly
resource-intensive, or slow to respond, it is also relevant to test its performance
• Select scenarios covering all types of orders:
– Consulting
– Search
– Reloading the database
– Database update
Scenarios that meet one or more of these criteria result from the user experience. It
is Sopra Steria’s customers who know best which scenarios are problematic, because
they use the ERP every day. In order to best define these scenarios for customers, it is
necessary to have their feedback on their actual working habits. This work was carried
out by IKOS TM together with an IKOS architect in 2018, and 6 typical scenarios emerged
for a test campaign. These scenarios are presented in Table 4.13.
These scenarios originate from campaigns carried out in 2018. They were edited in collab-
oration with Sopra Steria’s customers, where the test campaigns were carried out. Their
names are not mentioned in this document for reasons of discretion.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
37
==PAGE:50==
Code of the scenario
Description of the scenario in IKOS
P001
Order creation
P002
Command search
P003
Invoice Search
P004
Business Search
P005
Business creation
P006
Customer management
Table 4.13: Scenarios used for the tests in IKOS
The scenarios were taken as such in the thesis work for different reasons. Firstly, the
working habits of social landlords (Sopra Steria customers) have not changed since 2018,
according to the IKOS TM and the Outsourcing HD. Therefore the resulting operational
scenarios have remained the same. This was also confirmed by the client that tried out
the process toward the end of the thesis.
Secondly, the objective of the thesis is to ascertain the general feasibility of the process
and to issue guidelines for carrying out any type of scenario. Using time on a particu-
lar software (that of the case study) to co-define scenarios with IKOS customers did not
make sense in the research logic. The objective is to define a general framework, that is
applicable to several software, and therefore a multitude of scenarios (objective 6,7 and
9). A better use of the research time was to reuse scenarios whose validity was no longer
to be proven.
As expected, these scenarios cover a wide range of actions performed in IKOS. Thus,
through these standard scenarios, it is possible to establish in Apache JMeter™what
actions to perform so that the test is replayed as in a real context.
4.3.3
Production of the tests
In order to write the tests in Apache JMeter™, a training was necessary. The data and
the necessary know-how were collected online [49, 51], or through in-house training with
Sopra Steria performance experts [7].
This resulted in the production of technical operating procedures detailing the different
knowledge and know-how to be mastered in order to carry out a whole campaign with so-
cial landlords. These detail all the steps, from downloading Apache JMeter™to rendering
the results, through the production of scripts and the different ways to run the tests.
All these procedures encapsulate all the knowledge and know-how learned during the
master thesis work, and necessary for the successful implementation of a customer-
oriented campaign via the Apache JMeter™tool. They can be found in Appendix C.
4.3.4
Choice of reporting
The second part of performance testing is the results communication/reporting part. Ac-
cording to the TM of IKOS interviewed, this part is ”just as important or even more impor-
tant than the creation and the game of the tests”. According to one of the performance
experts interviewed, who is also a performance project coordinator, ”we do not communi-
cate in the same way towards managers, towards decision-makers, towards people in the
business, towards developers, towards infrastructure managers who want to know how to
size the machines and so on and so on... all this communication aspect is important and
it must be managed, organized and piloted”. It is therefore essential for a viable solution
38
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:51==
to analyze the target audience, as well as the different possible solutions for rendering
results, in order to reconcile one with the other.
The intended target
In performance tests, the tester may have to deal with various interlocutors. As men-
tioned by one of the PTE interviewed, the people needing visibility on the results can
be rather technical (developers, IT architects, infrastructure managers, CTOs), functional
(managers, consultants) or decision-makers (department directors, CEOs, CFOs).
More technical profiles will expect more factual than aesthetic renderings. Those ren-
derings should show an increased knowledge of the technical issues in order to propose
concrete solutions to the problems identified. More strategic profiles will expect more
general renderings, less specific on the technical aspect but allowing to obtain a global
analysis of the problems and offer longer-term solutions.
According to one of the PTE interviewed on the subject, clearly identifying the target of
the test campaign is therefore essential before deciding how the results will be delivered.
It is a question of reducing the analysis to the case study considered, without worrying
about other contexts, certainly valid, but unrelated to the case studied.
According to the IKOS TM, the target considered is at the crossroads between technical
and strategic profiles. It is at the level of managers/consultants who have a global tech-
nical understanding of performance issues, but are not developers capable of solving the
problems raised by the results. For IKOS TM, it is therefore essential that the results be
communicated in an understandable way for a non-expert, so that the interlocutor (man-
ager/consultant) can appropriate the results and analyze them easily.
Choice of rendering
Once the target has been identified, it is necessary to consider the available ways of
reporting the results. Several options were identified during interviews conducted inside
the company. It was observed that the answer given depended heavily on the type of
interlocutor interviewed. Two types of solutions were identified during these interviews:
• First solution: use the testing software (Apache JMeter™) to also report the results.
• Second solution: Export the raw test results in CSV format, and use an external
software to report the results.
For all interlocutors, there is a need to export the results in both cases. This is for the
simple reason that a tester needs to keep a trace of the test, in the eventuality it needs to
come back to it specifically.
The first solution consists in carrying out the analysis of the results on Apache JMeter™.
According to the two experts interviewed, Apache JMeter™has been quite capable of
performing results analysis for a few years now. For one of them, it was a bit complicated
to consider Apache JMeter™as a credible industrial solution 10 years ago, in particu-
lar because it lacked a certain number of graphs to produce reports. These limitations
no longer really exist today, in particular thanks to the appearance of the jmeter-plugins
website (https://jmeter-plugins.org/), which allows a tester to add functionalities to the
basic Apache JMeter™software. According to this expert, who himself creates plugins
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
39
==PAGE:52==
for jmeter-plugins, these functionalities make it possible for the tool to become perfectly
industrial, because the analysis can now be carried out directly, as the firing of tests takes
place.
The second solution is to rely on external software. This is the path chosen by other PTE
interviewed as well as the TM of IKOS during his campaign in 2018. At the time, he used
Microsoft Excel to analyze the export CSVs containing the raw test results. An Excel
report has 2 advantages over a Apache JMeter™report according to the IKOS TM:
• First, Excel is a democratized tool. All IKOS customers, and more broadly most
large groups, have Microsoft licenses, which makes it easy to transfer reports.
• Second, Excel is a malleable tool. It is easier to obtain the cross-referencing of
information that one wishes in Excel than in Apache JMeter™, where the operator
is limited to the design of the plugins. Apache JMeter™plugins are not as malleable
as Excel formulas, which does not allow such fine cross-referencing of information.
In 2022 however, for several TM interviewed at IKOS as well as various articles [52, 53],
Excel is starting to show some limitations. It is a powerful tool, but not very dynamic. In
other words, once the values are fixed, it is difficult to adapt the spreadsheets to new data
without advanced knowledge of code (VBA, formulas).
The alternative in the Microsoft ecosystem is called Power BI according to the MGF in-
terviewed. It is a tool that aims to go beyond Excel, especially in the creation of dynamic
reports, thanks to a much better adapted calculation engine. According to the MGF, Mi-
crosoft Power BI eliminates the need to learn to code in Excel, or even the need to make
relationships between tables or results dynamically. The only prerequisite is to inject
”unpivoted” data into the software, and let the Power BI engine do all the data cross-
referencing. According to the MGF, unpivoted data is raw data, which has not been sub-
ject to prior crossing or filtering. In a table, unpivoting columns means creating rows from
columns.
According to the MGF, as well as a certain number of articles [52, 53], Power BI and Excel
stand out in particular on the following levels presented in Table 4.14:
Power BI
Excel
Graphics can be used
as interactive filters
yes
no
Runs Power Query
and Power Pivot
yes
yes
Aesthetic reports
yes
only with deep knowledge of the tool
Dynamic dashboards
yes
yes, but requires more skills
Code used for
automation
M and DAX
M and VBA
Filtering of data
advanced and easy
limited
Strong points
report & present
explore data & known interface
Table 4.14: Differences in approach between Microsoft Excel and Power BI
40
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:53==
5
Findings
5.1
Demonstration
Based on all the data studies carried out in Chapter 4, the results for the design of a
customer-oriented offer, in the context of social landlords (see Chapter 1 and 2), are as
follows.
Regarding the software to adopt, the financial and technical context led to the selection
of Apache JMeter™(see Section 4.2.3). In accordance with the results of the AHP, this
is the best compromise allowing a rapid implementation of the tests, without functional
limitations, while being relatively user-friendly.
Secondly, it was decided to stick to the test script methodology offered by Apache JMe-
ter™, consisting of a succession of HTTP requests (see Section 4.3.1). This way of doing
the tests moves away from the performance experienced by a real user, as a computer
language like Selenium for example could provide (see section 4.3.1, Figures 4.5, 4.7 and
4.8). However, the Apache JMeter™tests make it possible to capture very precise times
on the response of the server itself, which delivers to the supplier (Sopra Steria) more
in-depths insights into their own tools. In addition to it, it is a more viable approach to load
testing, since Selenium is very limited on the matter.
Finally, following the analysis of the target of these load tests, it was decided to report the
results using a dynamic tool, in the presence of Power BI (see Section 4.3.4). Choosing
Power BI made it easier to cross-compare the different performance shots in order to
obtain insights into the causes of degraded performances and how to fix them. In addition,
it is a tool that can be fully configured by the software provider and whose dynamic results
are accessible free of charge to customers. This double advantage convinced all the
stakeholders.
In the end, the service offer developed follows the process presented in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Process from test shooting to reporting
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
41
==PAGE:54==
The captions for Figure 5.1 are presented in Table 5.1.
Caption
Description
1
Controller with JMeter installed, executing a script.
This can also be a controller/worker node configuration
2
Target server with the application under test installed
3
logs / raw results of the test. Exported in CSV format
4
Folder receiving all the logs
5
Source folder used to import data in Power BI
6
Data being pre-analysed in Power Query
7
Analysis and Reporting in Power BI
a
Test running on the target server
b
Export of a CSV file containing the log after the end of the test run
c
Filtering of the tests files worthy of analysis
d
Import of data in Power BI through PowerQuery
Table 5.1: Explanation of elements and processes of the Performance Testing Campaign
A demonstration was organized with a client of Sopra Steria, who will remain anonymous
for discretion purposes. The project platform started on June 2, 2022. On this occasion,
the entire process could be implemented directly on the client’s environments in order to
report on both the efficiency of the process and the performance of their software. This
also made it possible to break in the theoretical process and adapt it to the reality on the
ground. An example of the types of reporting dashboard implemented and communicated
to the client is presented in Figure 5.2 and Appendix D.
The campaign consisted in several stages. First, a meeting to present the background,
the context and the methodology took place with the customer. Following a discussion
phase, servers were allocated to apply the methodology in real conditions, on a customer
test environment. The 6 tests proposed to the client have been approved by the latter
(see Table 4.13, Section 4.3.2).
As part of this practice, the JMeter software was installed on a client machine. A test
environment from the customer was used as the target for a week, with one shot per
hour, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Following this week of execution of the shots, a fully dynamic the Power BI report was
delivered to the client. A small sample is presented in Figure 5.2.
42
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.2: Example of Power BI reporting delivered to the client
The success of this operation made it possible to answer several questions for Sopra
Steria:
• First, Apache JMeter™is indeed portable. It was enough to create a Windows folder
containing all the tests, the software installation files and some parameter files, to
zip the file, and to import it on the client machine to be able to run the tests. It was
therefore possible to validate the extreme portability of this solution, which does not
require specific licenses to operate on another network.
• Second, the scripts had to be rewritten to adapt to the customer’s test environment.
This made it possible to validate the operating procedures written for Sopra Steria
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
43
==PAGE:56==
by putting them into practice. Re-recording and rewriting the scripts therefore took
less than a day, which was considered fairly quick by the client.
• The tests once adjusted worked perfectly and returned the results expected by the
client.
However, this demonstration at a customer is only a first step. It made it possible to
validate all the above-mentioned points and increase the client’s confidence in the proce-
dure. However, Sopra Steria still has several points to pursue to make the process fully
industrial.
5.2
Recommendations
First, this campaign focused on unit tests, on a test environment. The data obtained is
therefore not representative of the actual performance of the client’s ERP. This will require
either carrying out a load test campaign on this same test environment, or carrying out a
unit test campaign on an environment already loaded by production commands. Only the
methodology developed was therefore validated by this campaign.
Moreover, other Sopra Steria software have been tested at the end of the project. Soft-
ware such as tenant extranets or electronic signature platforms have been tested using
this same methodology, in order to prove its proper functioning outside of the IKOS case
study. A sample of reporting from these non-IKOS software is presented in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Example of reporting for a test run on the tenants extranets
It is therefore recommended that the company digs deeper into this initiating work based
on customer requests and includes a larger panel of software in the customer offer.
5.3
Communication
Communication is the sixth step of Pfeffer’s methodology for exploratory research (see
Figure 3.1, Section 3.2). In the case of this master thesis, communication is two-sided :
academic and professional.
44
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:57==
Academic communication is carried out through this document, retracing the research
process that led to the achievement of learning objectives.
Professional communication is more diverse. A first part, in line with learning objective
number 10, consisted in creating a complete guideline, composed of procedures pre-
sented in Appendix C. These modus operandi present in detail the different actions to
be undertaken to carry out a complete campaign of performance tests. They are based
on the case studied (IKOS), but are applicable to any other software. This partly meets
learning objective number 9 (see Table 1.1, section 1). Explanatory videos putting these
procedures into practice have also been recorded to facilitate the transfer of knowledge.
In addition, three professional presentations took place within the duration of this work.
These presentations were intended to communicate on the progress of the process and
its usefulness, both for the internal analysis of Sopra Steria processes and for customers.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
45
==PAGE:58==
46
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion and evaluation
6.1
Comparison of the literature review with the observations
In accordance with what has been observed in the literature review (see Section 2.1 and
2.2), customers are increasingly demanding guarantees in terms of security and especially
performance. The real difference between the specific segment of social landlords and
the rest of the global market for IT solutions is the delay with which they have tackled
these performance issues. Indeed, as can be seen in Figure 2.1 of the literature review
(see Section 2.1), the peak of investment in QA and testing occurred almost 7 years ago,
in 2015, with 35% of the total IT budget allocated to QA. Since then, this proportion has
slowly declined in the years that followed. In the case of social landlords, the peak does
not seem to have been reached yet. This conclusion is based on several observations
made during the data collection work.
Pioneering work was initiated in performance testing within Sopra Steria in 2015, when
investments peaked in most other sectors. As a reminder, Sopra Steria has a quasi-
monopoly on the social housing market in France with regard to their IT solutions. Ob-
serving the services requested from Sopra Steria by its customers is therefore represen-
tative of the trend in the social housing market on a global scale. However, this project for
performance initiated with a single client in 2015, then relaunched in 2018, did not follow
suit precisely because the rest of the social housing market was not ready to invest in it.
Then, discussions with certain Sopra Steria clients as well as with IKOS managers tend
to prove that a segment focused on performance is finally becoming attractive for social
landlords. The latter feel that the technology they are provided with no longer meets
current efficiency standards, and they are consequently ready to invest in performance
monitoring solutions. This is what triggered the analysis of the IKOS case study in the
first place, and helps envision a broader application of the methodology in the long run.
6.2
JMeter’s Response to Technical Objectives
Build a coherent and reliable offer
The Apache JMeter™tool promoted by Sopra Steria experts has been deemed the most
relevant option for conducting performance tests in a digital company like Sopra Steria. It
fits into the innovation process of a large group like Sopra Steria with a minimal entry point
allowing rapid appropriation of the tool, and a capacity to increase its use on an industrial
scale.
Adding to it, JMeter’s ability to fit into an industrial process has been demonstrated. Ob-
jective 9 being to develop an industrial process, applicable to several web software, it
was necessary to be able to include Apache JMeter™in a client offer. This has been val-
idated together with a client ESH that allowed the procedure to be tested on its servers.
The transportability of the software conferred by its open-source aspect also made it pos-
sible to carry out customer tests, which was an initial prerequisite.
Once apprehended and correctly configured, Apache JMeter™is therefore a tool that has
answered the research questions and the need for a customer-oriented offer.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
47
==PAGE:60==
Build a simple skills transfer offer
The software, despite its open-source aspect, is very powerful. However, very few things
are already pre-built in JMeter. This freedom comes at a cost. It takes time to set up a
clear and structured methodology, adaptable to several software and configurations. This
was felt in the work provided to understand the software and make it work in accordance
with the expectations of Sopra Steria.
The knowledge growth for Apache JMeter™is particularly steep, since it is not a pre-built,
turnkey service. Any new acquisition of knowledge takes time, and therefore represents a
cost for the company. Structuring this knowledge around a single software therefore takes
less time than scattering over several options for the simple reason that the prior analysis
of these options was truncated. This ability to limit the loss of time on the acquisition of
knowledge has also resulted in a real effort of documentation in the form of procedures
(see Appendix C), example files and videos produced for the transmission of knowledge
within the company.
As mentioned by one of the PTE interviewed, JMeter has its very own approach to perfor-
mance testing. This approach is in a way a benefit for a non-code expert. Indeed most of
the software available record scripts in lines of code. As presented in the modus operandi
(see Appendices C) as well as in the data analysis chapter (see Section 4.2.2), JMeter
presents a hierarchical approach, where HTTP requests follow one another without using
any code. For anyone other than a developer, this can be a benefit since the script of the
scenario is more readable and understandable. This corresponds to learning objective 8,
which focuses on making a solution that is easy to use.
All in all, the solution developed in the end only partially meets objective 8, which pursued
an easy-to-use solution. On the one hand, the encoding philosophy of the script makes
this software affordable for everyone. On the other hand, fully mastering the functionalities
of this software requires a certain amount of learning time. It is certainly less obvious than
an all-in-one solution like K6 Cloud or Loadster. However, it allows a real understanding
of what is happening in the test, and once the learning work is done, it is a relatively easy
to use software.
6.3
Prevalence of financial issues
The weak financial leverage of social landlords, anticipated during the literature review
(see Section 2.2), have also been observed and felt.
For the customers, choosing a software necessarily represents a cost. If the choice of
their subcontractor (Sopra Steria in the case study) falls on a paying solution, they will
be forced to pay for the software licenses or else to miss out on the service. Imagining
Sopra Steria changing test software several times is therefore simply not an option for
the social landlords (customers), who would themselves have to buy new licenses with
each change. On top of that, the image showcased by Sopra Steria is negative because
a software change involves rewriting the scripts, which therefore represent an unstable
offer over time.
Paying for the drafting of the tests, the implementation of the test tools, the general orga-
nization of the campaign already represents a major cost for the social landlords. This is
counted in days of consulting services, sold by Sopra Steria. Paying for software licenses
would therefore represent a significant additional cost that could discourage some cus-
tomers from subscribing to the offer.
48
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:61==
The financial brake was also felt within the Sopra Steria structure itself. Given the inno-
vative aspect of the study, paying for software licenses for a project in development is
a decision that could have taken months to settle on. The financial pressure emanating
from the context of social landlords but also from Sopra Steria is what explains the great
weight of the price in the AHP (see Figure 4.2, Section 4.2.3), and therefore the final result
being Apache JMeter™.
6.4
Questioning what it would have been like in another
financial context
Despite the final choice of JMeter, there are all-in-one solutions, highlighted during the
study, capable of providing satisfactory results much faster than the methodology put in
place. One can wonder how the result would have been different if the user experience
had been prioritized, or if the time-to-value (i.e. needing a solution extremely quickly) had
been much more preeminent. Obviously the result of the AHP would have been different.
It is almost certain, having spoken with experts, that new paying software such as K6
Cloud or Loadster are more agile in their approach to performance testing. The elabora-
tion of a methodology to create the offer would surely have taken much less time, if one
of these two software had been used. However, this was not the priority (see Figure 4.4,
section 4.2.3).
Admittedly, Sopra Steria has many experts and many resources able to facilitate the learn-
ing of a slightly complex software like JMeter and it is therefore not absolutely necessary
to pay for pre-processed work. However, it would have been interesting to be able to
compare these performances with those of a paying tool. It is interesting to see that even
in a large company, budget allocation for small innovative projects remains a long and
tedious process. In the limited time of the study, the price necessary to buy licenses took
on a very significant weight in the AHP analysis, which would not necessarily have been
so much the case elsewhere. This strong weighting on the price made sense in the case
study, but it would be interesting to check whether this weighting is still valid in a similar
company elsewhere.
6.5
Limited confrontation to the industrial context
Choice of tests
With more time, the study could have switched to updating business needs. Concretely,
this would have required a parallel study with customers in order to collect their main
needs in the software tested. This would have resulted in an update of the scenarios
presented in Table 4.13, Section 4.3.2.
However, the study entry point was not this one. An identical study was conducted in 2015,
resulting in the 6 scenarios presented. The habits of social landlords having changed very
little in their use of the tool according to the IKOS managers, priority was not given to it.
With more time, the study could have refocused on customer needs and the implemen-
tation of additional scenarios. At the end of the study, the ESH client approached for the
campaign expressed the wish to use the set of scenarios presented in Table 4.13, which
suited his work habits as expected. However, he also expressed the wish to diversify the
tests in the long run, by changing the parameters, in order to compare the impact of small
variations on the user experience in its own personal context.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
49
==PAGE:62==
Difficulty of implementation in an industrial context
While the procedure put in place could be validated in a test environment at a major Sopra
ESH customer, this could not be done in a production context or by carrying out real load
tests. This was due to the difficulty of obtaining the access to server machines in a context
of shortage of servers. As presented throughout the study, customer interest has always
been present, and the approval was quickly obtained once the procedure was finalized.
However, the technical constraints considerably delayed the fifth step of the DSRM (see
Figure 3.1, Section 3.2) and we had to be content with a campaign on a test environment.
The procedure developed therefore remains to be validated in a real industrial context in
order to affirm the validity of the choices made.
No confrontation with production servers
All of the tests were carried out either on environments dedicated to internal Sopra Steria
tests, or on a customer ESH test environment. In both cases, the production environ-
ments, those actually used by customers, were not requested. This made it possible to
obtain greater flexibility on the data handled, because the tests thus had no impact on
the production databases. The process of developing the methodology was in that sense
simplified.
On the other hand, the company’s final objective is to eventually test environments actually
used in production. To do so, it will be necessary to ensure that the tests carried out do
not permanently affect the databases. This would mean, for example, placing orders that
should not be placed, or entering information that would pollute the databases. This last
step was taken into account in the way the tests were written, but it was not possible to
test it on a production environment before the end of the study.
50
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
In accordance with what the literature review has revealed, social housing landlords, con-
strained by their financial policies, have been slow to take on performance issues. Their
recent dissatisfaction with their management software (ERP) attests to this. It is more a
consequence of their reluctance to invest in QA in the first place than a cause of their new
interest in performance testing. The methodology put in place therefore tried to meet two
objectives. The first concerns the software provider, the second concerns the constraints
imposed by the particular context of social landlords.
Regarding the provider, a methodology based on the combination of the Apache JMeter™
testing tool, selected by Analytical Hierarchy Procedure (AHP), and the Power BI reporting
tool has been developed. The choice of these two tools proved to be the most satisfactory
given the context in which the study was conducted. It also allows an applicability of the
process well beyond the strict case study. The scenarios have been developed in order to
reflect the performance of the application as faithfully as possible. At the functional level,
this meant choosing a coding language to overcome network issues by focusing on pure
HTTP requests. At the business level, this materialized through the choice of scenarios
adapted to the actual use of the ERP by social landlords. In accordance with objective 8,
the solution developed is intended to be comprehensive for non-expert technicians and
this has been validated by objective 10 and the transfer of knowledge within the company.
Regarding social landlords, the interpretation of the market they represent and the con-
straints imposed (objective 1) made it possible to frame the subject of study. Due to their
budgetary constraints, the choice of procedure was oriented towards the use of open-
source tools, to be configured internally, rather than all-in-one solutions. Moreover, all
the reporting have been designed with the customers’ needs in mind. Analyzing this tar-
get allowed us to conclude on the type of reporting to adopt, adapted to consultants and
mangers, and formatted in Power BI. This reporting gives the clients clear insight on where
the problems are and where to focus the attention for performance improvements. Finally,
the validation of the procedure at a client made it possible to confirm the correct response
to all the above-mentioned issues.
This methodology could be set up despite certain precautions and restrictions on the use
of data. Most of the tests having been carried out on test environments, including the
final campaign at the ESH client, this issue was less preeminent than initially expected.
However, it will be important for the future to keep in mind the real impact of these tests
on the databases, especially in a production context.
Eventually, the study led to a complete solution, providing a detailed analysis of the op-
tions for conducting the performance tests as well as justifications on the decisions that
were ultimately made. This solution was partially validated in a customer context, ap-
proved by the Sopra Steria teams and transmitted within the company with the aim of
sustainability.
In accordance with the research objectives, it was possible to co-create an offer adapted to
an emerging market, to adapt to the financial and organizational context of social landlords
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
51
==PAGE:64==
in order to bring them one day to the same QA standards as other sectors.
Further research based on the study presented in this document is possible. As mentioned
in the discussion part, it would be interesting to compare the implementation of a well-
chosen paying tool with that made with Apache JMeter™. In addition, the procedure put
in place was built on the case study of IKOS, without being exclusively dedicated to it.
The logical development is to extend the procedure set up to other software and other
scenarios according to the recommendations and the needs of the customers.
52
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] Lionel Sujay Vailshery. Information technology (IT) spending on enterprise software
worldwide, from 2009 to 2023 (in billion U.S. dollars).
Technical report, Gartner,
1 2022.
URL https://www.statista.com/statistics/203428/total-enterprise-software-
revenue-forecast/gartner.com.
[2] Lionel Sujay Vailshery. Proportion of budget allocated to quality assurance and test-
ing as a percentage of IT spend from 2012 to 2019. Technical report, Statista, 2
2022.
[3] Lionel Sujay Vailshery. Focus areas of testing mobile applications from 2013 to 2017.
Technical report, Statista, 2 2022. URL https://www.statista.com/statistics/500605/
worldwide-mobile-applicati...
[4] L’Union Sociale pour l’Habitat. Les HLM en chiffres - L’essentiel, 2020. URL https:
//www.union-habitat.org/union-data/l-essentiel.
[5] Ken Peffers, Tuure Tuunanen, Charles E Gengler, Matti Rossi, Wendy Hui, Ville
Virtanen, and Johanna Bragge. Design Science Research Process: A Model for
Producing and Presenting Information Systems Research. Academia, 2006.
[6] IONOS.
L’Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) expliqué de façon simple et
exh, 7 2020. URL https://www.ionos.fr/digitalguide/hebergement/aspects-techniques/
definition-protocole-http/.
[7] Vincent Daburon. Apache JMeter Webdriver et Selenium. In Sopra Steria, pages
18–19, 10 2021.
[8] Groupe Habitat En Region. Loi Elan : 5 mesures clés pour les acteurs du logement
social, 3 2019.
URL https://www.habitat-en-region.fr/actualites/loi-elan-5-mesures-
cles-pour-les-acteurs-du-logement-social/.
[9] R Addo-Tenkorang and P Helo.
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP): A Review
Literature Report. Technical report, World Congress on Engineering and Computer
Science, San Francisco, 10 2011.
[10] Christos Lemonakis, Nikolaos Sariannidis, Alexandros Garefalakis, and Anastasia
Adamou. Visualizing operational effects of ERP systems through graphical repre-
sentations: current trends and perspectives. Annals of Operations Research, 294
(1-2):401–418, 11 2020. ISSN 15729338. doi: 10.1007/s10479-018-2851-x.
[11] Monideepa Tarafdar and Jie Zhang. Determinants of reach and loyalty - A study of
website performance and implications for website design. Journal of Computer Infor-
mation Systems, 48(2):16–24, 12 2007. ISSN 08874417. doi: 10.1080/08874417.
2008.11646005.
[12] Louis Davidson. Determining Hardware Requirements. In Pro SQL Server 2000
Database Design:
Building Quality OLTP Databases, pages 459–509. Apress,
Berkeley, CA, 2004. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4302-0708-5{\_}14.
[13] Raza Abbas Syed, Brian Robinson, and Laurie Williams. Does hardware config-
uration and processor load impact software fault observability?
In ICST 2010 -
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
53
==PAGE:66==
3rd International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation, pages
285–294, 2010. ISBN 9780769539904. doi: 10.1109/ICST.2010.55.
[14] Rijwan Khan and Mohd Amjad. Performance testing (load) of web applications based
on test case management.
Perspectives in Science, 8:355–357, 9 2016.
ISSN
22130209. doi: 10.1016/j.pisc.2016.04.073.
[15] René Chalon and Daniel Muller.
Ecole Centrale de Lyon UE INF tc3 Projet
d’Application Web Applications web, contexte, principes et architecture. Technical
report, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Lyon, 2018.
[16] Manish P Tembhurkar, Ashlesha S Nagdive, and R M Dr.Tugnayat. Overview on Per-
formance Testing Approach in Big Data. International Journal of Advanced Research
in Computer Science, 5(8), 11 2014. ISSN 0976-5697. URL www.ijarcs.info.
[17] Jean-Bernard Salomond. Le parc locatif social au 1er janvier 2021. Technical report,
Statistique Publique, 12 2021.
[18] David Le Blanc and Anne Laferrère. The effect of public social housing on house-
holds’ consumption in France. Journal of Housing Economics, 10(4):429–455, 2001.
ISSN 10511377. doi: 10.1006/jhec.2001.0300.
[19] Kathleen Scanlon and Christine Whitehead. French Social Housing in an Interna-
tional Context. OECD Economics Department, pages 1–31, 2011. doi: 10.1787/
5kgcd9s0q8f8-en. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgcd9s0q8f8-en.
[20] Propriétaire Maintenant. Les entreprise Sociales de l’Habitat (ESH), 2022. URL
https://www.proprietairemaintenant.fr/les-entreprises-sociales-de-lhabitat-esh.
[21] Propriétaire Maintenant. Les Offices Publics de l’Habitat (OPH), 2022. URL https:
//www.proprietairemaintenant.fr/les-offices-publics-de-lhabitat-oph.
[22] Claude Wendling, Hadrien Haddak, Julien Chartier, Vivien Guérin, Catherine Aubey-
Berthelot, and Alain Weber. La diversification des sources de financement du secteur
du logement locatif social. Technical report, Inspection générale des finances, 2019.
[23] Monika Sharma and Sugandhi Subramanian. A Comparative Study on Load Testing
Tools. International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and Communication
Engineering, 4(2), 2 2016. ISSN 2320-9798. doi: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2016.
[24] Glenn A Stout. Testing a Website: Best Practices. Technical report, The Revere
Group, 2001. URL www.reveregroup.com.
[25] Paul Gerrard and Neil Thompson. Risk-Based E-Business Besting. Artech House
Publishers, 8 2002.
[26] Daniel A. Menascé. Load testing of Web sites. IEEE Internet Computing, 6(4):70–74,
7 2002. ISSN 10897801. doi: 10.1109/MIC.2002.1020328.
[27] Alexander Decker and H Sarojadevi.
1.Performance Testing Methodologies and
Tools Related papers Performance Test ing Met hodologies and Tools A Survey of
Most Common Referred Aut omat ed Performance Test ing Tools Muhammad S H A
H I D Iqbal 11.SLA Driven Load Balancing For Web Applicat ions in Cloud Comput ing
Environment Performance Testing: Methodologies and Tools. Journal of Information
Engineering and Applications, 1(5), 2011. ISSN 2224-5758. URL www.iiste.org.
[28] Filippos I Vokolos and Elaine J Weyuker. Performance Testing of Software Systems.
Technical report, AT&T Labs, 1996.
54
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:67==
[29] Micro Focus. OrangeCrest
}Consulting: Case Study, 3 2020. URL www.microfocus.com.
[30] RadView. AVG Technologies: Case Study. Technical report, RadView, 2013. URL
https://www.radview.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/AVG-CS.pdf.
[31] Mohamad S. Bayan and João W. Cangussu. Automatic stress and load testing for
embedded systems.
In Proceedings - International Computer Software and Ap-
plications Conference, volume 2, pages 229–233, 2006. ISBN 0769526551. doi:
10.1109/COMPSAC.2006.119.
[32] Paulo Moura and Fabio Kon. Automated scalability testing of software as a service.
In 2013 8th International Workshop on Automation of Software Test, AST 2013 -
Proceedings, pages 8–14, 2013. ISBN 9781467361613. doi: 10.1109/IWAST.2013.
6595784.
[33] D. J. Berndt and A. Watkins. High volume software testing using genetic algorithms.
In Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
page 318, 2005. doi: 10.1109/hicss.2005.296.
[34] Mike Jacobs and Ed Kaim.
Shift left to make testing fast and reliable - Azure
DevOps.
Microsoft DevOps,
5 2021.
URL https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/devops/develop/shift-left-make-testing-fast-reliable#write-once-run-anywhere-
including-the-production-system.
[35] Richard M Lusby. Making Decisions with Conflicting Objectives. Technical report,
DTU Department of Management Engineering, 2020.
[36] Guillaume Long and Charles-Henri Duchon. IKOS - Tests de performances. Sopra
Steria, 12 2018.
[37] Dennis Baker and al.
Guidebook to Decision-Making Methods.
Technical re-
port, United States of America Department of Energy, 2001.
URL https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/255621095.
[38] Olivier Duffez. Chiffres-clés de Google : l’entreprise, ses produits, ses salariés, 2
2022.
[39] Michael Delzer. GigaOm Radar for Performance Testing Tools. Technical report, Gi-
gaOm, 4 2021. URL https://www.microfocus.com/media/analyst-paper/gigaom-radar-
for-performance-testing-tools-analyst-paper.pdf.
[40] The Apache Software Foundation. Apache JMeter Overview, 2022. URL https://
jmeter.apache.org/index.html.
[41] Apica.
Enterprise-Grade Load Testing, 2022.
URL https://www.apica.io/load-
testing/.
[42] IBM. What is IBM® Rational® Performance Tester?, 2022. URL https://www.ibm.
com/products/ibm-rational-performance-tester.
[43] K6 Cloud. K6 Cloud, 2022. URL https://k6.io/cloud/.
[44] Loadster. Loadster Manual, 2022. URL https://loadster.app/manual/.
[45] MicroFocus. LoadRunner Performance, 2022. URL https://www.microfocus.com/fr-
fr/products/loadrunner-professional/overview.
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
55
==PAGE:68==
[46] Radview. WebLOAD – Performance and Load Testing, 2022. URL https://www.
radview.com/webload-overview/.
[47] SmartBear. Performance Testing, 2022. URL https://smartbear.com/?utm_source=
aw&utm_medium=ppcg&utm_campaign=SEM_SmartBearCoreTerm_BR_EMEA_
ENG_EXT_Prospecting&utm_term=smartbear&utm_content=518273908799&
gclid=Cj0KCQjw-JyUBhCuARIsANUqQ_JIt48aBv_VHEx40DryRa1YXzzj-
xkQSB1unQm7P5PP6tXZsWUQuQ4aAjMVEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds.
[48] Tricentis. Tricentis NeoLoad - Tests de performance pour l’entreprise, 2022. URL
https://www.tricentis.com/fr/produits/test-de-performance-neoload/.
[49] Antonio Gomes Rodrigues, Bruno Demion, and Philippe Mouawad.
Master
Apache JMeter - From Load Testing to DevOps:
Master performance testing
with JMeter.
Packt Publishing Ltd, packt publishing ltd edition, 8 2019.
ISBN
1839218207, 9781839218200. URL https://books.google.fr/books?hl=en&lr=&id=
D_amDwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=the+importance+of+load+testing+your+
application&ots=iUlyFyQC1A&sig=FIVJaEOVLaqpB55j7CASA9699iM#v=onepage&
q=the%20importance%20of%20load%20testing%20your%20application&f=false.
[50] Ari Luotonen and Kevin Altis. World-Wide Web Proxies. PhD thesis, CERN, 1994.
[51] Raghav Pal. JMeter 2021 Masterclass | Step by Step for Beginners, 2 2021.
[52] Adrien R. Excel Power BI : quelle est la différence et quel est le meilleur. Technical
report, datascientest, 3 2022. URL https://datascientest.com/excel-power-bi.
[53] Louis T. Becker and Elyssa M. Gould. Microsoft Power BI: Extending Excel to Manip-
ulate, Analyze, and Visualize Diverse Data. Serials Review, 45(3):184–188, 7 2019.
ISSN 00987913. doi: 10.1080/00987913.2019.1644891.
56
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:69==
No fill
Blue
Grey
Start1
duration
end
Background of the thesis
0
7
7
Introduction to the Company Sopra Steria
6
7
5
2
7
Investigation of the market context and company needs
2
7
1
6
Investigation of existing web testing tools and techniques
1
4
0
4
4
Project definition
2
3
5
Project plan writing 
3
4
2
2
4
Project plan approval 
Validation of the specification for the model
4
5
3
2
5
Performance testing actvities
1
20
21
Jmeter/Selenium Webdriver training
2
10
1
9
10
Definition of a standard guideline for load testing activities
6
17
5
12
17
Setting-up the test campaign(s) objectives 
7
8
6
2
8
Elaboration of the test scripts scenarios for the campaign(s)
7
7
6
1
7
Scripting and recording of test scenarios for the campaigns
19
19
18
1
19
Launch of full scale performance testing campaigns for clients and/or Sopra Steria
18
21
17
4
21
Optimization of the standard guidelines and basic scripts (performance-wise and timewise)
21
21
20
1
21
Results Analysis
6
16
22
Gather data for validation of test plans (experimental and/or simulated)
7
8
6
2
8
Comparison with empirical data and assessement of the aspects to improve
8
18
7
11
18
Final assessment of the model
21
22
20
2
22
Thesis Writing
0
22
22
Introduction
21
22
20
2
22
Literature review
1
8
0
8
8
Modelling method and Overall Methodology description
6
14
5
9
14
Data collection and Analysis of the results
8
19
7
12
19
Findings
17
20
16
4
20
Discussion and Conclusion
20
21
19
2
21
Wrap up thesis writing (Abstract, Acknowledgments…)
22
22
21
1
22
Proofreading
22
22
21
1
22
Hand-in master's thesis
Presentation 
20
3
23
Structure definition
21
21
20
1
21
Slides
23
23
22
1
23
Rehearsals
23
23
22
1
23
Master's thesis presentation
Start 
week
End 
week
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Legend:       DTU Milestones
#C2 – Usage restreint
A
Final GANTT for the Master Thesis
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
57
==PAGE:70==
B
AHP Benchmark
Micro Focus
LoadRunner Professional
Apache Jmeter
Selenium
Webdriver
Paying/Open Source
Paying
Open Source
Open Source
On Premises/SaaS
Both
On Premises
On Premises
Userfriendly
yes
somewhat
no
Root cause analysis tools
yes
yes
no
Automated recording
yes
yes
yes
Part of an ecosystem
/ stand alone
Stand alone
To use with
Selenium
To use with Jmeter
Scalability
Great
great
Limited
Third party app
connectability
Limited (because everything
is in the software)
but still SAP, Oracle
and Salesforce
jmeter-plugins
Best-of-breed
/ expensive to use
expensive to use
Strategic placement
Big company
(several temas and projects)
smaller businesses
and deparments
smaller businesses
and deparments
Ability to use existing
stricps from…
Jmeter and Selenium
Ability to run tests
from actual browsers
and not just synthetic
load generators
yes
Yes through Webdriver
extension
yes
Radview Webload
IBM Rational
Performance Test
Loadster
Tricentis NeoLoad
Paying/Open Source
Paying
Paying
Paying
Paying
On Premises/SaaS
Both
Both
SaaS
Both but no pure
SaaS option
Userfriendly
yes
yes
yes
Root cause analysis tools
No
Yes
yes
yes
Automated recording
Yes
yes
yes
yes
Part of an ecosystem
/ stand alone
Stand alone
Part of an
ecosystem
stand alone
stand alone (can increase
tool sprawl)
Scalability
Great notably with
Oracle and SAP apps
+ third party connectors
(AppDynamics…)
Great within the
IBM ecosystem
smartbe
Great
Third party app
connectability
yes, especially for
root-cause analysis
Limited (because everything
is in the software)
Best-of-breed
/ expensive to use
expensive to use
Best-of-breed
Strategic placement
smaller businesses
and deparments
all around
Ability to use existing
stricps from…
Selenium Scripts
Javascript Code Blocks
for better definition
of tests
no
Ability to run tests
from actual browsers
and not just synthetic
load generators
no
Chrome browsers
no
58
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:71==
K6 Cloud
Apica LoadTest
SmartBear
LaodNinja
SmartBear
ReadyAPI
Paying/Open Source
Paying but not that steep
Paying
Paying
Paying but not
that steep
On Premises/SaaS
SaaS
Both
Both
on premise
Userfriendly
yes
yes
yes
yes
Root cause analysis tools
No
Yes
yes
no
Automated recording
yes
Yes
limited
limited
Part of an ecosystem
/ stand alone
Stand alone
Stand alone
Part of an
ecosystem
Part of an
ecosystem
Scalability
Limited
Great
great
great
Third party app
connectability
no
Great (especially for
root-cause analysis)
no
no
Best-of-breed
/ expensive to use
best-of breed
expensive to use
best-of-breed
best-of-breed
Strategic placement
Smaller department
big company
Ability to use existing
stricps from…
no
no
Selenium scripts
no
Ability to run tests
from actual browsers
and not just synthetic
load generators
no
no
yes
no
Table B.1: Benchmark for the testing tools considered in the AHP
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
59
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
1/8 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Modus Operandi 0 
 
 
 
JMeter - Setting up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
Modus Operandi of the solution
C.1
Modus Operandi 0 - Setting up
60
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:73==
Mode Opératoire 0 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
2/8 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Context 
3 
2. 
Installing Java 
3 
3. 
JMeter set-up 
3 
3.1. 
Downloading JMeter 
4 
3.2. 
Tree and items in the JMeter folder 
5 
4. 
Jmeter plugins-manager 
5 
4.1. 
Installing JMeter Plugins Manager 
5 
4.2. 
Installing plugins 
6 
5. 
Selenium Webdriver set-up in JMeter 
6 
5.1. 
Selenium Webdriver set-up in JMeter 
6 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
1/22 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Modus Operandi 1 
 
 
 
JMeter - Create IKOS tests on JMeter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.2
Modus Operandi 1 - Create IKOS tests on JMeter
62
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:75==
Mode Opératoire 1 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
2/22 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 
2 
1. 
Context 
3 
2. 
Prepare the template 
3 
3. 
Set-up of the "User Defined Variables" for the Thread Group 
4 
4. 
Set-up of the "User defined Variables" for Flow Control Actions 
5 
5. 
The Summary Report and the title of the export CSV 
6 
6. 
The HTTP Cache Manager 
8 
7. 
The HTTP Cookie Manager 
9 
8. 
The Thread group 
9 
9. 
The HTTP(S) Test Script Recorder and test recording in Firefox 
11 
9.1. 
Set-up of the Recorder 
11 
9.2. 
Set-up du Proxy Firefox 
12 
9.3. 
Start recording 
13 
9.4. 
Clean up the recording 
15 
10. Version Selenium Webdriver 
16 
10.1. Selenium Webdriver set-up in JMeter 
16 
10.2. Set-up of the JSR223 Sampler 
17 
10.3. Recording a test 
17 
10.4. Consideration of Frames and cleaning 
20 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
1/18 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Modus Operandi 2 
 
 
 
JMeter - Clean up a JMeter script for 
IKOS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.3
Modus Operandi 2 - Clean up a JMeter script for IKOS
64
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:77==
Mode Opératoire 2 
 
 
Le 22 avril 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
2/18 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 
2 
1. 
Context 
3 
2. 
Initial set-up 
3 
3. 
The Listeners 
3 
3.1. 
The "View Results Tree" listener 
4 
3.2. 
The "Summary Report" 
6 
4. 
Thread Group TEST 
6 
4.1. 
Set-up 
6 
4.2. 
Usage 
7 
4.3. 
Les Post-Processors 
9 
5. 
Variableization of queries/samplers 
12 
5.1. 
Variegation from an external document (CSV type) 
12 
5.2. 
Internal variability thanks to post-processors (RegEx) 
13 
6. 
Adding Flow Control Action 
14 
6.1. 
Set-up 
15 
6.2. 
Best practices 
16 
6.3. 
Usage 
17 
7. 
At the end of the cleaning 
17 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
 
Le 9 mai 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
1/12 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Modus operandi 3 
 
 
 
JMeter - Launch a JMeter shot for IKOS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.4
Modus Operandi 3 - Launch a JMeter shot for IKOS
66
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:79==
Mode Opératoire 3 
 
 
Le 9 mai 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
2/12 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Table of Contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
2 
1. 
CONTEXT 
3 
2. 
GUI MODE 
3 
2.1. 
Make a shot in GUI mode 
3 
2.2. 
View results in GUI mode 
4 
3. 
NON-GUI / CLI MODE 
4 
4. 
DISTRIBUTED MODE TESTING 
6 
4.1. 
General set-up 
6 
4.2. 
The Keystore 
7 
4.3. 
Controller set-up 
7 
4.4. 
Set-up of worker nodes 
9 
4.5. 
Selenium Webdriver set-up in Jmeter 
9 
4.6. 
Launch a distributed shot 
9 
4.6.1. 
Important note in the case of a shot spread over several workers 
10 
4.6.2. 
GUI mode 
10 
4.6.1. 
CLI mode 
11 
5. 
SHOOTING RESULTS 
12 
6. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
12 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
 
Le 1 juin 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
1/13 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Modus operandi 4 
 
 
 
Power BI - Analyzing and reporting results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.5
Modus Operandi 4 - Analyzing and reporting results
68
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:81==
Mode Opératoire 4 
 
 
Le 1 juin 2022 
 
© Sopra Steria Group, 2022 / Ref. : 20220422-160406-BM 
2/13 
               C2 – Usage restreint 
Table of Contents 
1. 
CONTEXT .................................................................................................................................................... 3 
2. 
RETRIEVING SHOOTING RESULTS ..................................................................................................... 3 
3. 
IMPORT INTO POWER BI ...................................................................................................................... 5 
4. 
POWER BI DASHBOARDS EXPLANATION ....................................................................................... 9 
4.1. 
Interaction between tables ..................................................................................................................................... 9 
4.1.1. 
Creation of new tables by "Group By", from the Tirs table ..................................................................................... 9 
4.1.2. 
Inserts of side tables, from excel add-ons ............................................................................................................. 10 
4.1.3. 
Inserting side tables, not connected to other data ............................................................................................... 12 
4.1.4. 
Interaction between tables in Power BI ................................................................................................................ 12 
4.2. 
Creating dashboards.............................................................................................................................................. 12 
4.2.1. 
Prerequisite ............................................................................................................................................................ 12 
4.2.2. 
Possible extensions ................................................................................................................................................ 13 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
’
70
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:83==
C2 – Usage restreint 
D
Reporting examples
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
71
==PAGE:84==
C2 – Usage restreint 
C2 – Usage restreint 
==PAGE:85==
C2 – Usage restreint 
C2 – Usage restreint 
==PAGE:86==
C2 – Usage restreint 
C2 – Usage restreint 
==PAGE:87==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
Questions for interviews 
 
 
Questionnaire for performance testing experts (technical point of 
view) 
 
What is the point of performance tests?  As part of Sopra Steria? 
 
What software have you ever used? 
 
Why you chose this software 
 
Has the budget been a hindrance to take other paid software? 
 
What interests do testing have in your internal processes? 
 
And for your customers, what interest? 
 
How long on average for a campaign?  
 
Do you have standardized testing processes? 
 
What types of clients do you work with?  
 
What kind of reporting do you offer your customers? 
 
Why don't your customers themselves increase their skills on the subject to test the 
evolutions of the software? 
 
Interest in performance and security, since when? 
 
Do you have an opinion on the new software? 
 
Questionnaire for team managers (context) 
 
Where is the ERP provided by Sopra Steria? what level of customer satisfaction? 
 
Was performance testing a customer need or a basic sopra need? 
 
 
How long on average for a campaign?  
 
What kind of reports did you make at the time of the first tests? 
 
What type of interlocutor were you accountable to? technique? functional? direction? 
 
What were the problematic points encountered at the time during the campaigns? 
 
Was one of those problematic points that stopped the campaigns at the time? 
 
How did you get into perf testing at the time? what resources had been used to build your 
offer  
 
How did LoadRunner work? 
 
How did you define the 6 tests at the time?  
o Did you have a larger pool that you eventually reduced? 
 
Why launch a performance-centric business so late? 
E
Questions and Interview Transcripts
E.1
Questions for interviews
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
75
==PAGE:88==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
 
Interview IKOS TM 
 
 
MB : What motivated you to do performance tests at the time? 
GL: Basically, there is CDC Habitat in 2015 that had a problem.  Ils had an extremely dispatched fleet 
in the France - well roughly they have I know more than 70 agencies a thing like that - and they had 
disparities in performance from one agency to another and so in fact what they did is that they 
wondered - because you know the speeds performances it's hyper subjective. 
In fact there are people who will find there is no problem and there are other people who will say it 
is a disaster the fact that it lasts more than 2 seconds it rows too much and so it depends on the 
feeling of each one in fact. And CDC Habitat is an EIG, basically it is an Economic Interest Group for 
AT THE IT level that manages all the habitat companies so that is to say that it is a separate entity 
that was created to oversee the IT department of X entities of CDC habitat. So they are accountable. 
Theparent company CDC had said that it is not normal that we have feedback from the different 
businesses in relation to the different offers and so they told  us "what we need is to have factual 
response times to actually compare all the remote sites to see if it is true what they say:  do we 
actually have really rotten times in a place where all the time correct" and so on and so on. 
 
That's what motivated them. So roughly we spent about 200/250 days of campaign so in a whole 
panel of remote sites so we had sent a lot of machines to many places we control them remotely we 
used the famous LoadRunner tool and in fact it allowed us to have a global summary table of average 
performance times. Besides that, they actually asked us to compare IKOS 2009.2 which was an old 
version before the fullweb. 
 
 
MB: You weren't on fullweb 1 yet? 
GL : Not yet we had not yet switched to Fullweb and so precisely they what they wanted was to 
compare the 2 and say it is Sopra it was finally it is these information systems had committed to its 
customers to say that not the longer than IKOS 2009. 2 because 3/4 of the people precisely that's 
what they said they were afraid that it would be much slower and so suddenly the campaigns they 
took place over several years 3 years or so so the performance times were improved little by little 
between the first test version that had been made in 2009 / Fullweb  1 first version and then little by 
little we have no we put SPKs, we put stuff and so you see that in time there is an improvement in 
performance at the level of fullweb 1, and we also had diagnostics that were made by Gilbert 
[Rebillard] and allowed to see that on some environments it was missing some logics (indexes  
database).  So Gilbert  added them.   Thetransaction time has gone from 15/20 seconds to less than  
1/10 seconds with its indexes. Donc so it still allowed us to do that and behind it we had a global time 
reference on all companies and all remote sites.  On did not do the 80 remote sites we did it anyway 
E.2
Interview Number 1 (English version)
76
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:89==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
a package we had to make about thirty and each time we sent a user computer unplug on the 
network is that we piloted it remotely via the tool. 
 
So we had a time returned user for each of the remote sites  so that was really the goal. There was a 
network variable that came into play, there was the server power variable and so on. After what we 
must not forget is that we did the campaigns in different moments. Sometimes it was during the 
school holidays sometimes it was full load during the day sometimes it was another moment. We 
have always done the batteries from 9h 11h 15h 17h to always have the same time references. On 
the other hand at different times since anyway we did not have a battery of 70 machines to control: 
behind it was not a controller that was needed, but rather it was a server (gas factory).  Voilà so it 
was done little by little we replayed all the time the same tests that we adapted environment 
environment with the adjustments. 
 
 
MB: It was really a request from CDC, aka a customer need? 
it was really a request a customer need. On actually thought about setting up a kind of performance 
cell  kind of cell. It's a bit of a technical subject but you had to know Excel. Enfin it's a bit of a weird 
subject because anyway no one had dealt with today and Charles-henry at the time had actually 
asked me to work on it since the extranet activity was completely in free fall.  Et this is where we 
started to set up the whole offer  from which, by inquiring with the performance cell  of Rennes.  So 
it will be Rennes and after us did the first campaign they saw that it was hyper complicated with 
Citrix with the LoadRunner.   It is a license management tool that virtual yes context here and so 
suddenly it was very tedious they said no but what we do is that we train you and you manage with 
your tool.  Theydid a campaign and then we managed.  Par against they trained us correctly so that 
we can intervene independently with our tool 
 
 
MB: Okay, why did you choose LoadRunner?  what was the motivation at the time? 
GL: So there was only one tool that worked with Citrix plus Java was LoadRunner. JMeter does not 
work  
 
 
MB: You were aware of these other tools? 
GL: we have you know in thedocs that I had to provide you normally there is a thing called feasibility 
test yes in fact they tested 6 or 7 tools on the market because he knew all the tools.  They tested 
everything: the only one that worked was LoadRunner with a method called TSE.  he took the 
screenshots the image on the screen according to the pixels of the things they manage to replay to 
say to the location number XY and so on thing they managed to detect like that and it was the only 
way for it to work because it was because of the site that was embedded and that made it not work 
so suddenly we had no choice in fact we had this tool and it had to be LoadRunner.  Sauf that 
==PAGE:90==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
LoadRunner, to useer, was very complex, hyper tedious because it is a big gas plant which is very 
powerful but on the other hand of learning it takes a very long time and in terms of license you had 
them then no we did not have a Sopra license finally so maybe the team of Vincent DABURON they 
may have reales license s I think so.  The perf cell of  Rennes had licenses that were rented according 
to the customers. Wewere not interested in load tests we did not want at the time we just wanted to 
know the reference times on unit times by making a transaction in the prod server. On happened it 
was an exchange among the hundreds that was running and we just wanted to see: "Ah Ben there 
our response time is that this is this is this" and so on depending on the hours.  
 
 
MB: What type of interlocutor were you talking to?  rather technical?  rather functional? 
GL: So there's everything going on. The order was made by a person named Christine Arnaud so she 
was in charge of the whole field of application he poses so it was she the chief just before DG side 
CDC.  La head of the info system huh that's it.  Et in fact it was she who had ordered all of these days 
and so after in parallel bah I had a dedicated project manager there who finally project manager who 
managed the logistics to be able to send the machines and so on I had prepared them at the time so I 
had made installations of load Runner thin  clients for each of the servers.  IfI had the IT teams to be 
able to take the graph curves of the curves that we saw there - you know in some cases we had done 
server analyses and everything, that's because we talked just now to manage - bah the different 
campaigns each time there was a whole panel of trades in fact that we had to put in the loop;  users 
also to say here we launch a campaign in what context and so on do as usual where do not do as 
usual where to stop for a while. Enfin here arethe contexts we will manage people in a certain way.  
Therewas a real cell and when we made restitutions we were a good fifteen people in fact on the 
client side and we on the sopra side, we were either alone, or there was a project director but it 
stopped there what. 
 
 
MB: Had you already done performance tests? 
GL: I really started from scratch already done perfs tests you left you really are not no I started from 
scratch.  yeah I put a little blood anyway that the knowledge all the knowledge so I actually he had 
asked me if the subject interests me and I tell him bah yes frankly the subject is interesting on the 
other hand I remember I have a memory of when I went there very first time so to see a little bit 
what was able to do and all that when I saw the amount of development that it was necessary to do 
me I am not at all a profile of developer and who showed me the it was necessary to disassemble 
Excel of the things with which you see if you want and then after little by little adjust the pass at the 
beginning we were a little bit at the load test we saw that it was not possible because of our context 
since we had to do stuff at the end you see there was still a lot of complexity otherwise we load test 
it's good but you do them in demo but it's useless in fact you didn't make it real and so in fact I 
remember being alone at the airport for 2 hours waiting for the plane you know how I can say yeah 
how I can treat this problem there how I move forward and I am all alone in so it's hard what in fact 
there you say bah OK there are guys who succeeded cadors but they tell us take the baby and we in 
our context we do to institute the added value what for the customer it costs us 200 50 days to 1000 
between 1002 and 1320 of the day here it cost me 300000 balls what for return so the who has 
==PAGE:91==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
something in front of the side of the fault of what to give him to eat what and after bah little by little 
it was built the Excel file is what was a little the base and after the analyzes they were enriched little 
by little according to the needs of the context and so on and then little by little we managed to 
mount something clean what. 
 
 
MB:  you  said that basically you wanted to do load tests in any case it was in the reflection and 
then finally it was not feasible or not it made no sense because it was that on demo environments 
so they had done unit tests yes that is what made you come back bah today when you made me 2 
internships to start again on the load yes knowing that we were going to retest on demo yes what 
has changed in the idea in the approach it has an interest now? 
GL : in fact there was an interest at the time it's just that technically we were we could not do it in 
our context at habitat why because there were the stories of the already the load there are stories of 
number of licenses for the load so it costs a fortune uh the user on what is called on LoadRunner it 
was very expensive so suddenly already it is the test they had says good bah we pay Sopra thingee 
but here we are when we started to give them the costs of the licenses they said no but it's too 
expensive and all this we had technical constraints because of the Java applet  the servers we can not 
launch load on servers in Prades because we will collapse the environment and Second uh  we will 
write as Gilbert says in lines inside a customer production behind your management control and so 
suddenly when you have the auditors on the accounting side or the management control that arrives 
and who says what are these hundreds of thousands of claims when normally we had I do not know 
2000 per year or something like that good you see it's all these stuff there in fact or then it does after 
it was necessary to make SQL in database to clean it but it is a gas factory a claim it goes in 50 
different tables thingee so always one you make database inconsistencies there was no test 
environment here there were test environments but the interest of doing the load tests on the test 
environment which is not sized like Laprade and which is not loaded like a Prades it is useless while 
there in fact for example in an extranet I know that the breaking point of an extranet is extremely 
low in fact you see you have already seen 2 users the thingee it is it is explode already in our contexts 
to us but roughly so suddenly we reach a lot more easily I think the load part to see a little how our 
solutions react than big database with the s 400 or it's still a little more loaded so doing the load tests 
is interesting in a general way but we do it really in a very punctual way and here we at CDC what he 
wanted was to have reference times to be able to compare a whole panel of environments distance 
it was not necessarily to have breaking points he didn't care . 
 
 
MB: Therenderings you were doing were Excel? 
GL: Excel and PPT. All the environnement response time in full web and then we really had a very 
macro vision of all the results that we had been able to obtain 
 
 
MB: Do you have a memory of the strong points you encounteredin the development of the offer? 
==PAGE:92==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
GL : Bah actually the really blocking stuff is it was the it was a tool that was so complicated to use 
that even the developers in fact it really had to have their head well made to be able to use it it was 
not a thing anyone could take there were shows in the meantime so we had people who were 
trained who were really good who are barred so suddenly we had to already manage it was 
necessary because we wanted to continue the offer every time so it was resources R and d we were 
customer service we had to ask for resources on the R side and so suddenly it is not the same chefs it 
was not like today or for example if I have someone in the team I know that I can solicit him because 
I manage his schedule and I take care of it then that before I was a consultant what so if you want it 
was necessary to pass for the chefs of chef and cetera it was more complicated after in the 
elaboration of the offer bah is that this starting from a the site really caused us a lot of problems the 
fact that it is on this fixed if they had not been on this brawl it would have been much easier and the 
worst of all it was there if we had not had the plain Java it would have been cream as you do for the 
extranet wholesale in 3 clicks as the thingee here you record your actions as you do for web echo 4 
except that you see as soon as there is the applet it fucks a bazaar 
 
 
MB: Considering the offer that was a success, why was the project not continued? The company 
did not want to continue? why did it get a little lost and that it is now reviving? 
GL: The answer is very simple: no way; it's a question of cost.  En makes a campaign for the 
implementation a complete campaign with the experience starting from 0 with the experience we it 
is between 30 and 40 days remains basically for you to give you an idea.  Whenlaunching a campaign, 
you need someone who is full-time behind the PC to prepare the scripts. Tu has the setting up of 
servers, the installations the machines.  Tout is time-consuming and a customer paid 30 to 50000 € 
roughly to do performance tests, he finds it too expensive.  Donc so actually that's why  the thing it 
worked for one or 2 customers. Theyhave trained employees at home and the employees have in the 
meantime blocked themselves to tell you everything.  Sohere it  cost them a fortune and they lost all 
the competence.  Whenwe the objective is that we make him increase in competence on it came 
from Lille to Lyon for a few days he came with our developer a guy from Vilogia to be trained an 
architect and so he left with all this knowledge you see and so suddenly the idea is to relaunch 
because already before we had a little less subjects around the tests of performance we had made 
one of the premises with Xavier Simon's team and especially on the extranets and it had gone badly 
in the sense that we were doing tests with 2 users, there was nothing that worked.  Et all this so 
maybe it will be the step on the environments here it is possible here and in fact in all the offers 
today we have more and more customer requests that tell us "we need to have restitutions,  
performance audits and so on.  Et in fact it was not too much before at the time we were a little 
initiator of the thing but today in 3/4 of the offers we have commitments of response time and so on 
and so on and no one is the measures and so suddenly it is true there is a real customer demand 
today and now you see the security aspect the aspect what is called the performance aspect and all 
this is something that is much more in the mores than at the time in 2015 or 2016 we were a little at 
the beginning of all this.  On is in social real estate and client CIOs they always have a little train of 
delay compared to what is done in terms of innovation. They are good followers but on the other 
hand it is not the avant-garde here it is not the avant-garde you see so it takes a little more time and 
so today Ben we may have what was done in other companies or other sectors a few years ago. 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
MB: By inquiring on the internet, we have the impression that it has been a few years since the 
trend was launched? 
GL: Yes, that's why I tell you that we clearly have a train of delay.  Wefeel about it but after good it 
gives us time to prepare but it's true that the it is a subject that was very interesting. 
 
 
MB: Asked the question of how you arrived at the 6 famous tests that I run since the beginning? 
We still asked ourselves the question at the beginning of the internship is what it's worth changing 
them and in the end no. Can you explain the process that led to 6? why these precisely? 
GL: When  we put together the offer with Charles Henri, we thought we need a business vision. Parce 
that we did not have the business vision to know "is it legitimate to say if we should test this or that 
thing in IKOS?".  We went to see a whole panel of management in fact with the different CDC 
entities, we interviewed them by saying "you for you what are the most used transactionsin IKOS?" .   
We went to see Daft, we went to see rental management managers, we went to see many types of 
profile. We did we did some regions I remember more but we had to see at least a dozen people to 
question them and we told them "well tell us what do you think?" 
 
And in fact so we made a kind of painting and battery 110 years good bah here he told us about it he 
told us about it he told us about his search my client business creation looking to do research invoice 
and so on and so on finally you see all this and then we asked the client once it was done to make us 
an example of scenario we recovered a general consultant by consulting GM we asked him in fact to 
detail us all of these scenarios screen by screen and so on this is where you saw the captures of the 
processes and the different would have passed and after we have how to say we always reuse these 
tests there because vilogia he said if it is they are already asked the question I make them trust is the 
biggest social landlord box of France guys they still know what they do here we still questioned a lot 
of people so suddenly no one questioned in fact all these scenarios that had been written and that 
we asked again for other gifts performance test they all told us Ah yes no frankly it's nickel me it suits 
me well it there is no problem you see on these tests there I think that today I will always be the guy 
yes I think it does not move since anyway it is the transactions core business in fact it is really the 
thing what there is really the most basic thing is that it used by thousands and thousands and 
thousands of users the activity of social landlords change not strong but no we are looking for the 
customer you are looking for information on your customer account the business bah it is claims that 
you will make the invoices it is when you place orders for an order bah it is when you need a service 
provider for the work we are in the social real estate it evolves you have some small tinkers but in 
fact what we want it is an 80 in fact we what we want is to measure the 80% of the biggest 
transactions we know that finally the eighty for 100 of all transactions we don't care to know that 
there is  a transaction that lasts 10 minutes from time to time because there is a bug or I do not know 
what and for something that is used once a year it is the control of the Messier that is not there.  We 
want the main 80% that are used regularly and once we have that only after that time we get to have 
a time of one of the times that are legitimate. 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
               C2 – Usage restreint
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
Interview Performance Testing Expert 1 
 
 
 
 
MB: Introduce yourself, how did you get to the perfs tests, and tell me about your overall 
experience 
 
VD:  I quickly studied for a bachelor's degree in  computer science. Before I had done mechanics and 
production so here and after in the years I would say 91 92 I started computer science.  I did 5 years 
of development it's under Unix and then after I did I did Java in 96 knowing that it came out in 95.  I 
closed 96 and there in fact in 1999 I developed the APEC website  the agency for the employment of 
executives in Java it is Java servlet of 0 and JSP did not exist. 
When we opened it to the general public (because it was at the beginning it was on internet access) 
we immediately had performance problems.  And so there the customer and use a tool from Mercury 
that allowed to do regression tests for the time being for the year 2000 and in fact in the Mercury 
range there was also another tool that allowed to do performance tests called LoadRunner.   Et Ben I 
was led to use LoadRunner to do the performance tests I would say to check the performance of the 
APEC  site that and improve things so that's how I was led in 1999 to do the first performance tests. 
After I continued uh a lot both Java development and performance tests I was at the société générale 
as a service provider I did in 2004 I did architecture files of et cetera and performance tests and after 
I was hired in 2004 by an architect it is known at Sopra Steria but you did not know so Pierre Laurent 
it is he who initialized I would say all the formations the academy, which created the first the first 
groups of architects and so on at sopra. 
and so I was hired by him and my role was to do performance tests and security also the 2 caps since 
I in my career I will arrive a lot of security sites here and so that's how I was led to do the tests so I 
started with Sopra Steria at the time by doing performance tests around  the tool mainly what was 
this tool there of Mercury was bought by HP which is itself sold me this software to micro focus more 
exactly the micro focus editor which is quite known for a Cobol compiler  what is on used at home 
development everything that is everything that is cobol in fact most of the time there are micro focus 
compilers but he bought several borland software to do the performance tests (he is called 
performer micro focus bought that he bought a computer tool for Computer associates which was 
called QALoad). 
here and they are mostly bought the other what plus the differents tools so I did a lot of mainly due 
and then there was also another open source tool called openQA that I had also seen when I worked 
at Société Générale because there were downright colleagues from this company there who worked 
next to me and this tool in fact after they made a version professionalthe which was called QLoad by 
the company Cotium so I also made a lot of this tool there I even followed a training at the publisher. 
And then at some point I know more in which year can be good after I was in the industrial direction 
around 2005 until 2018 and we had the tool mainly there the tools from  HP whether it is to the 
E.3
Interview Number 2 (English version)
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
83
==PAGE:96==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
hemu that it is pro and so on finally the whole range of HP and at some point there were discussions 
quite important to find a alternative solution to the because it cost quite cher so we had looked at a 
Cossium side  but finally we did not we were not and good after now this solution Cossium it lives but 
it is more really on the market what is more really used. 
 
When I was in the industrial management I had the cap of performance expertise and I also played a 
role of formator and evangelizer.  So in fact I was going a lot especially I was on practically all the 
agencies in France of Sopra to carry out performance tests on projects, do test campaigns, train 
people or train them in JAVA it was a lot around the LoadRunner tool.  On even has an academic 
training that I gave from 2006 until 2018 around the tool.  What I had to do was train people to use 
the tool, to carry out performance tests, but rather for internal projects so my clients were rather 
internal projects or editors who did customer tests but quite little I would say performance tests for a 
client in which we had not developed an application.  Thatwas not my role.  My role was the idea of 
internal projects or the or the publishing part whether it is the banking part the human resources 
part (the real estate part has carried out performance tests in customers) or to do tests on 
developments with us on whom with tools on the intranet Sopra Steria and that's it and for that we 
had put we had licenses that we generated I would say by a generator of key and its license we 
generated them so for 2/3 months gave to the project and either legitimize themselves or we 
legitimacy them so we managed like that who used the tool. 
 
Therewas a minimum of know-how before providing the license that is to say that we are not 
providing him with that someone who did not know at all the performance tests had to have a 
minimum of knowledge to have his license there.  that was in our contract with HP. 
And then after that it's a little stop and we did after we made a shared platform that is to say we 
have 3/4 pretty strong servers on which we house licenses to make the web in the broad sense of the 
term and licenses to make Citrix so to make remote desktop connections it is mainly. This is where 
we still have today that we still pay on shared environments that are now managed by Indians, who 
are more managed by us there is not really follow-up of these tools there is to say that you do not 
even know when there is a new version Ben while they have access to support uh I would say micro 
focus that is to say if you need of a particular version or a patch apparently you have to go through 
them to recover it to access this shared platform also you have to go through I had set up a whole 
reservation system as you reserve a meeting room says bah me I booked them one to do tests such 
day to such day so that I would say it is the LoadRunner part  and that historical huh that's also why 
I'm also a specialist I had also done a lot on quite important tests on the tele tax return on the pay of 
the military we still used a lot the LoadRunner. 
And then what happened is towards I think it's 2007 or 2008 by there I used JMeter but I would say 
the order of training by saying bah here you can this tool there to do tests in environments but not in 
customers.  Why because it was mainly missing a lot of graphs for example use several vusers on 
time, response time on time, network speeds .... All this did not exist in fact there was a kind of curve 
quite ugly it was not very useful and so as long as there was that I did not fit what I could not I could 
not recommend JMeter  
And then there is a site that appeared jmeter-plugins. At the time it was not jmeter-plugins.org as 
now it is and they developed plugins with a lot of additional graphs  
==PAGE:97==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
And so it's the fact of having these additional graphs that were missing that allowed me to say bah 
there I can go to customers so there first was the MAIF.  I did performance tests with JMeter  
because I had curves and taboos especially curves that I did not have with standard and with this 
plugins there were couples that I missed mainly to do analysis. 
And then following that I also had a lot of ideas because I knew LoadRunner well  and I saw that 
there were a lot of things that were missing side j transmitter at the level of the filters for example in 
the Brother you can filter quite easily on the le on certain periods or you can change you can filter 
along the pages or transactions enough you could not do it in  JMeter so me what I proposed is an 
intern a colleague to develop for Apache JMeter additional plugins. 
It is mainly that is given the my need and this trainee in fact he added plugins that we published after 
published and so they are plugins a lot to make filters of the results of the filters on names of the 
temporal filters that is to say remove the beginning to remove their scalability and remove the 
woman to have just the value of the tray if you have several trays recover only one tray then after 
the 2nd tray then the 3rd tray keep that the pages and not all the urls that constitute the pages so 
that's the filters we also made a tool that allows results so it's to be able to uh put several files of 
results from 2 to 4 and after to recalculate the date of shooting compared to January 1, 2000 so as to 
have that all the curves in fact they start at the same point the first point in fact it is the it is the in 
fact we calculate the date of the third compared to January 1, 2000 and after we remove it is top 7 
for all the other durations which makes that we manage to have the curves that start at the same 
point in fact at the same value and so we could do like that merge tools we could also add everything 
that is filter on the on the graphs so the temporal filters with the offsets and the and the labels so in 
inclusive regular expression where exclusive here and then another tool also that I had developed for 
the performance tests of the remote declaration of taxes in fact there were data files that contained 
1000000 lines who corresponding teledeclarant and we had developed an application finally web 
archive a java web application so as to store I would say the dataset in a volume and then after with 
an http request ask him bah give me the next line and so on she retrieve me the next lines and why 
because when for example when you made one- that you failed slam it was not necessary to reload 
the whole file of data it was necessary to continue finally we had consumed a small part for example 
10% and we wanted to restart after it is 10% to 11 percent you see and restart like that so we could 
make several shots without reloading the whole data file and especially you feel resetting the 
database for because it easily took 1 hour to reset the database and so what so this tool to have 111 
centralized system because that I had 11 injectors centralize to have liberals of information all this of 
of teledeclarant to be able to do my tests and Ben in fact I took up this idea to redo a tool called h 
TTP simple table server so it is a it is a blog that allows to manage the CS files will either 
autonomously that is to say that this tool starts on its own and then you can call it in a way external 
or either when I put it starts the HTTP it is a good server table starts also and after behind can 
retrieve values in a data file so that is main I would say addition we did. 
 
MB: Why did you switch to JMeter?  Why did you switch from LoadRunner to JMeter? 
 
Why I do JMeter and I do at the moment, it is because they are the main reason is that I work for the 
Ministry of Justice and the Prefecture of Police 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
Bah actually what happens is that I work a lot 2019 mainly for the Ministry of Justice and the 
Prefecture of Police.  But the Ministry of Justice the prefecture of police they have 
recommendations, it is to use JMeter to carry out the tests of perfs. Donc they do not have the 
LoadRunner license because LoadRunner license  is quite expensive and so bah That's why I do 
JMeter I would say almost full-time quoi. 
 Okay if I had another in fact I would use LoadRunner today maybe on particular protocols that is to 
say that if I have to test SAP from the pe to the client e I would say species of the javascript 
equivalent there at my side SAP side GUI I think I will use JMeter since it is well made for that it has it 
has a module on purpose to recognize all this if I have to do tests with heavy client with or remote 
desktop Protocol Windows I think I will use because it is well made for that you see if I have to do 
tests on the same fresh side ie terminal screen you know the grandmothers or 400 to the I would use 
either lot or because you also have features like that that exist a transmitter if I have to do tests of of 
streaming video streams and so on I think I will even use with a paid one that comes from the public 
company which is a French company that is at and the guy he developed finally it's not a beginner 
huh it's a it's a guy who evolves mainly and he has he created a whole sophisticated management 
plugin quite representative of streaming stream management so so you see if you have to do oracle 
forms and cetera bah it depends and there are there the other it is not bad after you have paid but it 
is technos that are a little old today but you did not finally it was so complicated to do it I would say 
by JMeter that it was better another tool. 
 
if you had for example GWT of Google web technology or something like that bah either I will use 
more derülo or maybe LoadRunner finally there are some techno there are less and less there was 
for example also Microsoft which has a graphic display a little particular bah it will see the tool that 
support you what so  you also choose the tool in relation to the techno that you will test because 
there are some who are more or less strong or who understand the protocol better or if it is not only 
a binary sequence where fieldsso complex that you will not arrive.  Well, there's what then there's 
that side too you choose the tool bah compared to the techno in front after. 
I will say the technos today it is more and more web interfaces in the broad sense finally of the term 
it happens that it is to buy ml of XML in exchanges and so on but there is less and less stuff a little 
exhaustive exotic with binary streams that you do not understand finally you do not understand what 
is cetera it may still be the case at IKOS  that and so on but there is still stuff yeah bah when I called 
for help sometimes there were things a little amazing uh a little exotic as you say and suddenly for  
MB: Are you aware of other solutions, other tools, that are not in your work mechanics? And if so, 
why not choose them? 
 
VD : NeoLoad en fait it is at the beginning it is a French company  in Aix en Provence and they were 
strong I would say in everything that was http protocol in the broad sense of the term. 
that is to say it can also be web socket it can be this kind of thing huh.  Donc it's http exchanges they 
had an interesting solution but as we have licenses at Sopra Steria we had not yet bought NeoLoad 
licenses  to do the same things what. Et so that's why finally I looked several times I was interested 
and so on .... 
And what is also interesting in these tools is also the monitoring part. Because we haven't talked 
about it yet but it has a whole connection monitoring tool to recover the CPU of the different 
==PAGE:99==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
machines this kind of thing.  With LoadRunner you have natively. You have some in LoadRunner you 
can  natively for example connect to a machine, retrieve counters with Windows instrumentation W 
or at the time it was from this stage to retrieve the values. 
 
And after if you had more complex monitorings you installed another tool called size scope which is a 
tool rather to monitor depraz that is to say that it will connect we will SSH it will launch commands 
type doc type to go the memory Huston it is for the inputs outputs a small table it is for the CPUs and 
it leaves that and after you have done the courses and the difference between princess cut of 
protection and a scope dedicated to the performance and which is the frequencies are much faster 
that is to say that you will perhaps make a recovery every minute in it would rather take every 4 or 5 
seconds. 
 
And when you actually have when you buy the right you can have one with 25 machines to monitor 
in parallel there you have to have meters but sometimes we were limit example on basement in 25 
had happened what OK so here it already seems a lot bah yes sometimes it is not enough it is not 
enough so you have these paid tools they also have all the monitoring part which is enough well 
done most of the time so it's also to a real plus of these paid tools whether neoLoad  or LoadRunner. 
 
MB: On an open source tool like JMeter, is there also this monitoring? 
 
VD: Yes. Here we have I make them a webconference it's all the monitoring with so an agent I will go 
to see what you have that you install on so due an agent I would go see what you have that you 
install on the different machines to monitor so it's a small program huh and then it's called do and 
after besides you question as a typical connection and you read bah "give me the CPU of the machine 
and that's it gives me the network use and then gives you the inputs outputs". Tu do it in a way so 
you do that you put an agent like that on different machines and after periodically we take every 5 
seconds you will recover the authors and after you will make big that is what is quite fortiche also is 
that you can even launch commands type I do not know for example a net stat- to Aisne flu and it 
gives you how much there is has connections in a state here and it actually sends you your call your 
Linux command wait we see a value a numerical value called the digital time that will create curves 
with so you can be that to PerfMon it's not bad. 
 
MB: Any other software? 
 
VD: So I like NeoLoad I like LoadRunner 
And after the other very small I know less well.  There is a new tool called K6 that has been bought by 
the box that makes grafana cortana. It's graph generation tools and so on so it's programming mainly 
in Javascript with modules. 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
After you have Gatling also yeah there are a lot of colleagues who talk about Gatling. I have a little 
trouble anyway. Already historically they have angered us a little. In fact when Gatling was out, they 
said it was 10 times faster than JMeter and so on .... 
Athen after when people they looked at what was happening they already saw that a few lines it was 
running on a machine 2 times more powerful than the one where there was already that and 
especially and especially they used  url cache in gatling and not in the JMeter.  Donc every time we 
asked so yeah it's so they say yeah it works no faster yeah necessarily you put yourself cache yeah 
you don't put it in the other so they did several salons of all this and it's binary by saying "Ah it's 
much better than JMeter" and so on then in fact when someone redid the tests there was no 
difference what 
 
MB: What is the point of having a perfs testing software that goes faster if in the end if it distorts 
one of the results? 
 
VD : if you make Belgians you will not activate all the caches or then I will see the interest what it is 
so good so here is so that's why there was a cold I would say between people but they are a little 
calmed down anyway good they do more after gatling it's especially ADSL so it's a specific domain 
language so it's a programming language at the beginning it was Scala and now you have a version in 
Java to describe your tests then there the writing part reading the script management of the dataset 
and plugins for BC web socket and so on and not on the other hand me what I reproach especially is 
bah it is the part kisses point what you test your flugit zone to make an extraction how you check 
that your page it is not good in no error so you see the old sorting that allows you to see what 
happens in no error and so on and there you do not have them in the others not in the same way 
what and so in practice yeah when it shit how you do what when that how you do how you do to test 
your regular expressions you are not you are xm it passes your and so on what so Ben here I say that 
to develop the sorting it is still exceptional with the what 
 
In my work routine yeah and so you have the free part that still does a lot of things but there is not 
the network flow in the free part if you want to have the network flow you have to have the paid 
part study French company okay so it's not bad huh because you have someone who is French 
company you have auto perf which is a French company O ctoperf then to finish trying to buy by a 
big American box OK I think that's it but I'm me it's what I saw it's big boxes in it's big big publishers 
ouai October Octoperf it's a performance test solution based on script j issuer or in any case a logic j 
transmitter in the cloud they have redone the whole interface they have a web interface and not a 
Java interface like they have others do other features and so on but I would say the heart is really so 
it's to have JMeter so you have an interface to manage groups to manage versions of scripts size 
generation of graph reports and so on during the shot or after  so it's not bad what but hey I would 
say you have a little trouble doing the same thing with a web interface as with a client why the stolen 
copies uh of a script j programming in another bah it you have trouble to make it replace them en 
masse in an interface it is still more effective than when HTML so if there is stuff well there are things 
that I'm sorry I'm in heavy it's still better than an interface buy after it's after it's not too bad so me 
what I say about the best even if you make mole train you to j transmitter because it's 80% it's the 
same reflection it's the same finally it's inside I think it's the engine j transmitters on which they 
made some changes but it's from the issuer 
==PAGE:101==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
 
MB: What are the differences in the way the scripts are typed in all this software? 
 
VD: I would say even pass a hand I would say or other tools where blackcurrant and so on has 
oriented it is yourself their greatness the honor writes you in finally the greatness your writings in 
language c but you still have a lot of graphic tools that help you and so on after I issue I would say it is 
necessary to train what because even if it is a tool that is quite easy to finally there is not a lot of 
personality there at the beginning and sometimes you when you start the thing you do not know 
how to do what to record it to develop and so on so it's like everything it takes a I still need a training 
to be able to use the tools well it's even more true for happiness at the beginning happiness we have 
trainings of 5 days and after we transformed in 3 days but to tell you that it is a complete and 
complex tool so you can not give that say guy go do tests with happiness without having trained him 
what because he will miss a lot of things what the project is a little less a minus the step you see in 23 
days you still manage to have the main features and all that but uh if you are if you are not a 
developer yeah finally there may be after you talk to me about Celine Dion it is still a protocol apart I 
mean I have a difference tools so that exists in the right to waste a lot of time it is called the TER rue 
crayonne thing that uh in fact the same it is my opinion to buy a box that did that so it has an 
interface you work in a browser and you record the events of your browser and it can create a script 
of in a javascript logic but finally still it is very visual and you have a system of recognition of the 
different elements by x goes through Heidi by the thing and that is a thing adapted for or if you talk 
about selenium or Catalan or stuff like that I talk about you too flashes in the Runner OK which is like 
selenium in the okay but with a fairly advanced graphical interface and quite easy to access in any 
case for simple things and which is quite different from the classic h TTP what and so you have a bit 
of an intermediate thing with the JMeter and the obligated web of selenium in the what but you do 
not have the registration system you do not have the system of good after you have to use the 
cellular of and so on what but and it is not the tool that really integrated but it is another way of 
doing the tests another way of doing the tests in fact I was talking to you about selenium selenium as 
a language because it was the only one I touched with real code to run the tests as I did not do it was 
not but then you have to then has us at the level of the industrial management we do not 
recommend to make selenium my direct we recommend to make an overlay in natural language 
bunker King air King it is a test description language that after will pilot a browser via the API and we 
do not recommend to make code directly selenium to pilot a browser to do the tests why because 
the result obtained it is much more telling for the customer As proof of tests that simple to say that 
the script add documents it is OKOKO there you really have a description in natural language of all 
the of everything you have done and it is much more understandable in fact in fact the idea of the it 
is for me I said you put yourself next to a colleague who knows a little bit about the application and 
you explain to him how to test in natural language that's the level that you have to have and you go 
on such page you fill with such luck you validate you look it is such thing device and so on finally it is 
this level that you have to have and after when you have a description of in language and in fact 
when I am your test you see all the lines bah I was on such a screen I was it was the webinar on it 
good I had done a lot huh because 
 
MB: Perf testing and security, from when? 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
VD: the perfs tests I would say it depends a lot on the customers. You have customers who have 
been doing it since the 2000s.  You had the general society and whatI was doing with it, you had 
crossroads that made it....  Finally applications of people who were aware and often besides they 
bought the LoadRunner software  which is also not 36 editor at the time to do tests so it depends on 
the customers it  
 
 
Security tools were a little bit different actually.  The era of security it was rather about LDAP, 
certificate x 509,  firewal you see it's rather that okay after we would have spent recent but initially 
that was what. 
After it came bah the following to the injection forge rockets to try to sting so cookies where to 
replay the stuff and so on so the security has changed a lot in the sense that it is a little it is also more 
in the application that is to say that it can put firewalls and so on if in a search field you manage to 
put to a part of SQL queries and that sends you values bah you will be able I will go pass the flight 
because you stay to buy in HTTPS on the application what so it is by attacking the application by 
attacking some ocket of the application that you manage to reach data that is at the bottom what 
main it is stuff and so on what 
 
So security has changed a little in the sense that it and it is no longer that it is not only hardware 
certificate to firewall and so on it is much more in the way of coding or protecting itself from 
malicious code or adding javascript in pages that were not intended for that today what 
 
MB: Why is the desire to move towards performance/safety so late among social landlords? 
 
VD: It's a little different. There are the editors, it's also Ben we make questions it's not we do not do 
tests upstream to try to find the right setting.  Nwe ce that we do is that we install it at the customers 
and then we  say to ourselves "thin we will have problems of performance we will have to make 
shots". 
And then citizens of the right configuration then once we have the right configuration bah we try to 
report it to the teams of research and development or May it is not always the case always the case 
of course 
on the HR part there was finally practically all the tests were in customers they were not done 
upstream by the developers or by the dev team or by a team dedicated to that so it changes a little 
bit. 
 
OK that's because we arrive on volumes so large that from the beginning we say to ourselves "the 
perfs are important". They put the means what. Iused to now it was tests and sometimes a little 
snatched. 
==PAGE:103==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
Finally is what I reproached is that sometimes the right setting or modifications did not actually come 
back. It remained on the integrator consultant service side. it didn't go back to R&D that's still a 
shame what. 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
Interview Performance Testing Expert 2 
 
 
 
 
MB: How long have you been working on performance testing? 
 
SK: So well, Ben I've been working on performance tests for a long time, but unlike Vincent, I'm first 
and foremost an architect. On will say that the performance activity is not the essence of the activity. 
It is an activity that I have regularly but punctually.  Sometimesit can be a year or 2 in which I only do 
performance but it can happen that I do not work on subjects of performance tests for several 
months.  Rare several years but several months it is possible.  Vincent only does performance and in 
particular performance tests.  Moi I have other activities and I when I work on the performance it is 
not necessarily only to do tests it can be broader than that I can have other subjects around the 
game so I will maybe an experience less variedthan Vincent. 
 
After it's still a very long time that I've been doing performance since I was already working on these 
subjects before arriving at Sopra Steria so it's still more than 20 years so it's been yes I would say 25 
years about that I did performance but different acts we will say focus on performance tests I have 
been doing for twenty years yes twenty years no more. 
 
MB: What are the other aspects of performance if it's not in the form of tests? 
 
SK: Icome from the initial development. Like many, I did the developer career, then what is called 
technical development manager and then software architect then system architect solution 
architect.  Donc today it goes a lot on my architecture so I did performance bah at the beginning 
more on the algorithmic aspect coding problem solving not necessarily by doing tests but by finding 
by rereading code and trying to find solutions to test problems observed.  
 
Then the architecture part was rather an analysis of architectures to understand the performance 
risks, find solutions to improve performance in terms of architecture hein it can be balancing 
solutions such as network optimization solutions optimization via cache systems and so on. Donc is 
more of an approach to performance through architecture and thus finding solutions to solve 
anticipated problems of performance problems. In parallel I had testing activities but there it 
happened to me to work on performance campaigns but not necessarily as a tester more as either an 
architect, or expert for the analysis of problems or as a project manager since I was also project 
manager for a while.  Pilot we will say the teams of testers because in the performance or even the 
performance tests there are not only testers there are people who develop the tests but also people 
who will think about thex scenarios, so rather business analyst profiles on who know the job well 
E.4
Interview Number 3 (English version)
92
Research and development of a performance campaign methodology in the social real estate sector
==PAGE:105==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
who know the functional well and they will specify somewhere what will go  develops the testers.  
Donc me I intervene it is often also on the steering part that to finally put around a table the 
representatives of the profession, the functional experts, the people who will test concretely, who 
will develop the tests and run the tests, the various and varied experts on the development 
languages  on the infrastructures on the software the software packages that we have been 
eliminated and so on and so on. ... Donc I have a bit of this role of coordinator somewhere to make 
all these people work in time and in time so that everything goes well. 
 
We also do reporting because there is a communication part that is importantand on performance.  
The whole formatting aspect of the results communication because we do not communicate in the 
same way to managers, to decision-makers, to people in the trade, to developers, to infrastructure 
managers who want to know how to size machines and so on and so on all this communication 
aspect it is important and it must be managed the organize the pilot and so on and so on so it is a 
little bit my job in general of de to manage all this, all these facets finally. 
 
MB: What tools do you use and why? 
SK: not thought of everything there because I did not prepare a mays quote the main 
So why JMeter?  already it is true that for load tests hein I focus on load tests or we attack in 
quotation marks an application server with many users so on load tests JMeter is quite well suited to 
my opinion.  Avec Vincent we are in phase. 
So it is well adapted because on the one hand it is a tool that has existed for a relatively long time 
and therefore has been well stabilized even if it still sometimes has some small bugs but overall it is 
quite reliable.  Itis stabilized it is complete functionally that is to say that they cover a lot of 
protocols.  Almost everyone does HTTP/HTTPS and in fact by digging we realize very quickly that 
there are cases where we always need a protocol a little exotic. We are very happy to have it I take 
an example I worked at a client it was Airbus in this case in the part IAM management so I was 
responsible for the implementation of a new business directory and bah necessarily we had 
problems on the ability of the directory to hold hundreds or even thousands of requests in a very 
short time and so we wanted to do tests of load on the directory.  Forthat we wanted to inject LDAP 
protocol, protocol of access to standard directories. And many LDAP injectors  we do not have so 
many in the charging tools and in particular on the free tools bah it is not so common so the fact of 
knowing and having an LDAP injector JMeter that is native it allowed me to do the load tests very 
quickly very easily because I know LDAP well,  I know JMeter well  so the scripts were relatively 
simple. 
But in reality we do not have very complex things what we wanted especially was to scale up easily. 
The interest of JMeter is that it is still quite open as it is open source access because sometimes we 
need to go see certain things, check the behavior.  It is free so it is not so much the financial aspect 
that I will highlight but in companies a little large we will say that are with purchasing processes a 
little complicated if we want to set up tests very quickly buy licenses it can be complicated. 
So it can be painful in terms of cost so necessarily there will be a fairly high level of decision it will 
take time I am not even talking about the coup itself I am talking about the implementation time and 
so seeing a free tool it avoids all these delays which are quite complicated to reduce and when we 
are very hurried that we want to go fast and do simple things,  even limited, bah between delay 
==PAGE:106==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
because you have to buy a product and sometimes the shot, it also impacts the company even if the 
blow it is very reduced.  Thefact that it takes time to buy the product bah it can be a concern. This is 
quite often a concern. A free software that is an advantage. 
 
So there is another disadvantagealso that when you buy licenses of a product for cost reasons you 
will restrict the ability to use the product to your own network. Typiquement a much more powerful 
competitor to JMeter which is called LoadRunner MicroFocus and a very good very powerful tool. But 
we have licenses that are limited in terms of use. So for example at Sopra Steria we have group-level 
licenses on LoadRunner, which is very good, except that we can conduct the tests only on the Sopra 
network.  So it means that if I prepare a test on my Sopra Steria network that I run it and then I want 
to transport all my test to run it at my client, the customer must have bought LoadRunner.  Chas 
arrived, on the other hand it means that when I go to the customer I must prepare the arrival of my 
LoadRunner test  at the customer by checking that we will have mobilized the existence at the 
customer for my test.  Et that's complicated it takes time it's very complicated for reasons of license 
organization and so on and it often causes problems. 
If I do the same thing with a free tool as it is very easy because as the tool is free I can prepare at 
Sopra Steria and then carry all, including the tool since there is no license in the sense there is like an 
Apache license and so on....  But it's not a binding license in terms of networks so I can carry all my 
test with the tools and that's what we're doing right now on an operation at Airbus and basically to 
simplify I make a big zip that contains Java, JMeter, my scripts, my data and so on and so on.....  I 
dezip I rotate and it's good it turns right away. 
So it's very flexible yes.  JMeter has other advantages.  he has been on the circuit for a long time.  On 
still has a lot of support forums. Thereare also sites that provide a lot of help. 
The newer more powerful tools supposedly we default that they are not yet completely stabilizeds 
and when we have problems, bah we have trouble finding support.  We have access to sources that's 
true, but sometimes it's written in languages that we don't master. JMeter is written in Java: after 
you are pro or not pro Java that's another debate.  Mais in general we are able to manage in Java 
about so if there is a need to fix a bug in an emergency we can always fix it ourselves.  In JMeter it is 
not necessarily the recommended method but there is always this solution so there are still facilities, 
there is an installed base, there is a support network. On will say that there is a support community 
that is well supplied.  On has experts including at Sopra Steria quite easily which is not the step in 
other tools as it begins to be put in place. Mais there is not yet the same hindsight as JMeter and 
contrary to what is said a lot in the forums from right to left it is still a fairly powerful tool.  It is a 
fairly malleable tool  because it can be donewith other tools to do HMI testing.  Contrairement to 
what we voit right to left we can do the REST/SOAP API quite easily even if it is true that it is not 
made for natively.  So we can make languages there we can do a lot of things it is not necessarily the 
ideal tool for each of these use cases but it is a tool that knows how to do almost everything even if it 
is not the ideal tool to do each case it knows how to do almost everything and that is still quite 
practical. 
On the other hand what is true is that I JMeter is a little confusing term of  but of handling and that is 
true but the goal was to have a kind of low-code tools  we will say maybe no no-c ode but the ow-
code, hence this HMI interface a little disturbing. 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
MB: In what sense is this interface disturbing? 
 
SK: It's disturbing because it's hierarchical. Yes but this hierarchical vision of the tree-shaped test it 
disturbs a lot of people in fact. 
 
MB: In tool plus standards, how are the scripts of the neck p presented? if it is not in tree structure 
as in JMeter? 
 
SK: In a tool like LoadRunner it's much more linear in the coding way. Atthis point we are in a coder-
oriented vision, for traditional developers. Donc it pleases some, it pleases no other.  For example, 
putting LoadRunner in the paws of a business manager will be complicated because it is very 
programming oriented. So there are some who like to code huh but it's just to say that in general it 
(LoadRunner) is for people who are rather with mindset development what. 
On the other hand, JMeter is disruptive for developers, who expect to write the test script in code. 
 
MB: Do you use software other than JMeter? 
 
SK: So here we have LoadRunner which is still the Rolls in quotation marks. Isit historically there for a 
long time, it is quite powerful.  On the other hand, it is expensive.  That's the problem, it's relatively 
expensive so sometimes it's not justified, youalways have to ask yourself the question.  Awhen 
theuse-case or we will use LoadRunner it is typically use-cases or we will see very large config, or 
complex protocols for example we may sometimes need to do load tests with Citrix, display offset 
systems, complex protocols,  SAP protocols SAPGUI protocol  which is SAP's heavy client tool. Donc 
these are protocols that we will not find in free tools like JMeter or Gatling or other and so there you 
really need paid tools to be able to address your protocols there. Donc là LoadRunner has this kind of 
advantage.  
Then LoadRunner has things that are still more automated/industrial. For example for everything 
that is captures, scripting capabilities and so on. After a need, we do not need it, it depends on the 
case. Whenyou want to do industrial things, heavier it's true that LoadRunner can bring a real gain to 
industrialize the tests. But it is evaluated, you really have to see according to the use-case. It is 
evaluated because sometimes the cost of licenses costs more than the contribution that we will have 
with the tool.  So you have to look carefully: in some cases it is justified in others it is not. So you 
have to look at it on a case-by-case basis.  
 
Another tool that can be used is Selenium. Mais Selenium is more unit test oriented, and so in this 
case what we do is we use a couplage.  Un coupling to call a hybrid mode where we will do both load 
testing with for example a tool like JMeter in load test and next to that we will run some virtual users 
on des thousands of virtualization -  to run some of them in selenium the purpose being to put in 
charge the server is to see under this load how a rich client behaves.  That's another mode. 
 
==PAGE:108==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
MB: It's smart to load with another more suitable tool and do the unit test with Selenium so as not 
to overload the rich client.... 
 
SK: Yes, so it's a cost issue, it's always the same.   It is that if we test for example the other Runner 
has a mode that is called too client that allows to make test and measure the RESPONSE TIMES CHM. 
Theonly problem is that as we launch a browser instance for each virtual user we turn to 5 or 6000 
virtual users we can not instantiate all this because it costs very expensive in injector. 
Somecustomers do it some customers do it but not on thousands or tens of thousands of users it is 
not possible they are limited to a few hundred which is already very expensive. 
 
I sometimes use some tools but which are not necessarily tools of how to say load test one is a bit 
like selenium these tools that we will use by coupling them with load tools for example selenium 
works very well in the web context but not necessarily suitable for other things so in other cases we 
will use tools so I use them from time to time I calls it the tool the last chance it is a tool called cicu 
10X the tool in fact that will drive the HMIs not by doing the analysis of the web dogma as the fact 
selenium but he the work by doing an analysis of the screen so it is a bitmap type analysis so that is 
really a tool used as a last resort but sometimes we have no choice it is the only tool that we can use 
easily so it will analyze the screen in the form of bitmap and it will find patterns for example buttons 
it will have defined it and it is able to locate buttons by making an analysis of the image that 
corresponds to the screen so it is really analysis of image and when it finds patterns in the screen it is 
able to say it I found it yes no to locate so it corresponds for example to the verification of the results 
when we have a screen in return of the server to check that we have on the screen that we expect it 
is a problem of use and the type of use bah it is when we want to click on a button it can be a web 
button or a Windows button or a button what we want you click on buttons on links on click on 
menus and so on and so on we are able to recognize pieces of screen in the form of bitmap and when 
he has recognized them he can click on them so I will shorten it is more complicated than that and it 
can it allow to do a lot of things and so it is really the tool that is able to work in all contexts but on 
the other hand it is very sensitive because from that we change the colors on the screen so the 
theme of Windows for example it completely disturbed the tool because it has trouble to recalibrate 
yes here is how we change the resolution of the screen so it is very fragile and suddenly it must be 
used really sparingly but the advantage is that it works in all cases and in particular bah I was talking 
about Citrix tests we can very well do tests yes RDP or display ports or whatever the techno with if 
you read x because he in fact he does not just look at the screen the image and analyzes the image in 
fact he has no knowledge of the structure that has behind the image whether it is of the web that it 
is of Windows because when it is Windows we can use tools like UFT MicroFocus one that is the new 
name of pro a functional tool that we use from time to time and that can also serve a little like 
selenium to make a complement to the load test to make complex 10H and M measurements and 
there we talk rather Windows so this is the said that will only work in certain steps while if you say x 
him it works in all contexts what is that the advantage and very fragile is really to limit 
 
MB: What types of clients do you work with? And what types of reporting do they request? 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
              C2 – Usage restreint
SK: So for the type of customer clearly for me there is no limitation. It happened to me to work on 
very varied subjects of perf really very varied, and sometimes even where we think that we will not 
be able to work. Itgoes in areas I think of embarkation, I think of different areas in which we can 
make perf. We will not do it in the same way but we can do perf and today I have never had a case 
(even when I was working on technologies that I knew) or the approach, the methods - maybe not 
the tools but the approach the methods - remain applicable in all contexts.   Donc it can be any type 
of customer, whatever the sector, whatever the techno, even on software packages and so on we 
always find the same approaches the same draw that is always true. 
On the types of reporting it is more complicated to detail. Instead, we will mainly work on the 
populations and the type of information they are looking for.  Thereporting format is not necessarily 
very important: it can be web format, it can be PPT, Excel or other.  But what is important is the 
content. It's really checking that the content matches the target population. That's really the most 
important thing. Et in general it goes through small workshops that we do with the people who will 
analyze these reports can you not want to expand too much because I am a little complicated and it 
is true that we have practices that are really specific for each population there is really a definition 
for example there is a definition of the love of what he wants what wants say yes then a composition 
always comes a proposal but actually we with the client and then we work with him often we make a 
first version and then we let turn 2/3 loops and then we take stock with him. Enfin is a bit like 
devops. 
 
MB: Have Sopra Steria's customers ever had the will to develop their own skills on performance 
issues? 
 
SK: It happens and sometimes we put someone on board our teams who is part of the client's team, 
so that we  can increase their skills. Donc that we know how to transfer skills so that he acquires 
good practices, that he understands why we do it like this and then he will be completely 
autonomous to make live what we have put in place. SopraSteria is   present but having understood 
why we did it like this. En having participated in the decisions and thex choice hein because he is also 
there to understand why we do it, what is the logique. 
So it's done. There is this advantage for the client that we do this transfer of knowledge and skills but 
there is also another advantage sometimes for the client.  As he puts a person from his teams in our 
performance team, finally the service costs him less because there is a person who is his teams.  So 
he's not going to pay one of the people on the team, so it reduces costs too.  In any case if the will is 
to increase in competence, it is an interesting way  
 
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
