==PAGE:1==
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
An analysis of essentiality and safe and sustainable­by­design
Master Thesis
Freja Lund Paulsen
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface and acknowledgements
This master thesis has been written by Freja Lund Paulsen for the period of January 3rd to June
26th 2022 at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), department of environmental engineer­
ing. The thesis is equal 35 ECTS and constitutes the final work of my MSc in Environmental
Engineering.
I would like to thank my supervisor, associate professor Steffen Foss Hansen, for giving me this
opportunity and guiding me along the way. Thank you for your feedback, perspective, and exciting
discussions. I would also like to thank my other supervisor, professor Anders Baun, for giving his
view and feedback.
I would like to thank Xenia Trier from the European Environment Agency for taking her time to
talk with me and letting me interview her about the CSS, and for sharing inside knowledge and
perspectives, I otherwise would not have been able to know. I would also like to thank Anna
Lennquist from ChemSec, for talking with me and explaining how she and ChemSec perceive the
CSS.
The past half­year would not have been as fun without my co­students, Phillip, Elise, Oliver,
Magnus, Mathias, Vinh, and my friend Sanne. Thank you all for our recreational conversations
and academic discussions.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for their emotional support this last half­year, especially
my partner in life Søren Helle Boesen for being encouraging and supportive when needed.
Freja Lund Paulsen ­ s164291
Signature
Date
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, Towards a Toxic­Free Environment (the CSS) is a white pa­
per on chemicals legislation communicated by the European Commission in October 2020. The proposals
of implementing essentiality criteria for the uses of the most harmful chemical substances and safe and
sustainable­by­design as an assessment for evaluating chemical substances have been examined using the
chemical substance group of PFAS as a case study. Workshops have been used as a research method, as
workshops can be used as a resource and a means to retrieve information, in this case, information on the
CSS from the authorities and various stakeholders. Expert interviews were conducted with Xenia Trier from
the EEA and Anna Lennquist from ChemSec. Various definitions for essential uses of PFAS were examined,
and it was found that a high level of expertise knowledge was needed to evaluate the technical function of
use. Attention should therefore be put on defining the few uses that are truly essential for the health, safety
or functioning of society. Safe and sustainable­by­design is a lifecycle tool to evaluate chemical substances.
Several suggestions for the definition of safe and sustainable­by­design were looked into, and the framework
presented by JRC was applied to PFAS. The framework was found to require a large amount of data, and it
was impossible to perform a full assessment of PFAS. The CSS is to be implemented throughout the next
five years, and the results of this thesis are therefore to be seen as an evaluation of the work and discussions
so far.
iv
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:5==
List of abbreviations
CARACAL
Competent Authorities for REACH and CLP
CLP
Regulation on the Classification, Labelling and Packaging of Substances and Mixtures
CMR
Carcinogenic, Mutagenic, or Reprotoxic
CSS
Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
EC
European Commission
EDC
Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals
EU
European Union
FAIR
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (data)
GRA
Generic Risk Approach
JRC
Joint Research Centre of the European Commission
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
NGO
Non­Governmental Organisation
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development
PBM
Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Mobile
PBT
Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic
PFAS
Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
REACH
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
SSbD
Safe and Sustainably­by­Design
SOC
Substances Of Concern
SVHC
Substances of Very High Concern
VEP
Voluntary Environmental Programme
vPvB
Very Persistent and Very Bioaccumulative
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface and acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of abbreviations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Literature study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Interviews with experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Participation in workshops and webinars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The use of PFAS as a case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Determining essentiality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Assessing safe and sustainable­by­design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Introduction to PFAS as an environmental concern
6
3.1
What is PFAS?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
The chemistry of PFAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Scientists call for action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
PFAS in the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
10
4.1
A historical perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
The European Green Deal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
The aim of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Generic approach to risk management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
The concept of essential use
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.6
Safe and sustainable­by­design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.7
Involvement of stakeholders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
The Concept of Essentiality
18
5.1
Origin of the essentiality criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
Considerations for implementing essentiality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Current debate on the criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Comparison of different suggestions of the essentiality criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Essentiality applied to PFAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Safe and sustainable­by­design
25
6.1
Origin of safe and sustainable­by­design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Framework proposed by the Joint Research Centre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3
Alternative suggestions for safe and sustainable­by­design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4
Safe and sustainable­by­design criteria applied for PFAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.5
Implementation of a voluntary environmental programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
vi
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:7==
7
Discussion
35
7.1
Essential use in European chemicals legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Safe and sustainable­by­design, an immense task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.3
Implementation of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.4
Discussion of methodological decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.5
Avenue for future investigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
Appendices:
51
A Interview Guide
51
B
Overview of webinars and workshops I have participated in
52
C ChemSec’s questions for essential use
53
D Essentiality definitions applied to Glüge et al (2020)
54
E
Safe and Sustainable­by­Design criteria by JCR
66
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Chemical substances are used in a broad variety of consumer products. For decades chemicals have made
our lives more convenient by being central components in everything from rainproof outerwear to lifesaving
fire extinguishers. Many of the products we have gotten used to in our everyday life will be challenging
to live without, but citizens across the globe are increasingly worried about how these chemicals present
in everyday products affect the ecosystem. Recent studies show that 84% of European citizens are worried
about how chemicals impact their health while 90 % are worried about the effect on the environment (EC
and DG­ENV 2020). Various policy measures have been introduced to limit the negative effects of chemi­
cals throughout the years. Nevertheless, the European Environment Agency (EEA) has proven that neither
chemical pollution, the impact on eco­systems, nor the risk it poses to human health and well­being is on
track regarding meeting policy objectives and targets set in the European Union (EU) (Reichel et al. 2019).
The continuous more restrictive European chemicals legislation throughout the last 50 years (EC 2019a)
have resulted in improvements in both the environment and human health. Still, chemical pollution is of
great concern as the risk for irreversible harm is increasing (Reichel et al. 2019). Recently, it has been
discovered that the hazardous chemical substance group PFAS is present in the human blood of the most of
the world’s population (Fenton et al. 2021). PFAS are known to be carcinogenic and affect the fertility, and
the discovery has therefore received large amounts of media attention together with calls for a change in the
regulation of chemical substances.
The current chemicals legislation in the EU, REACH, had its final registration deadline in 2018, marking
the implementation period of more than a decade (ECHA 2022c). Under REACH, chemical substances are
evaluated and assessed substance­by­substance, and the information requirements are based on the volume
used. As 80% of the chemicals registered are still to be assessed, the method has been found to be extensive
(EC 2020e; Persson et al. 2022).
When a chemical substance is regulated, it does not necessarily cause a decrease in the total amount of
chemical substances produced. Instead, alternatives are developed and produced, and sometimes in higher
amounts than the original chemical substance as more chemicals are needed to ensure the same effect (Pers­
son et al. 2022). Due to the great number and variety of chemicals used in Europe, it is impossible to carry
out robust risk assessments for each individual chemical and to monitor their presence in both the environ­
ment and individuals (Reichel et al. 2019). Persson et al. (2022) have proven that the planetary boundary
for novel entities (meaning: new substances, new forms of existing substances, and modified life forms) has
been exceeded. Therefore, it is urgent to agree on common rules on how to develop chemical substances in
the future, in a way that ensures it is done both safely and sustainably.
To accommodate this, the European Commission (EC) published the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
Toward a Toxic­Free Environment (CSS) in 2020. The CSS is in line with the 7th Environmental Action
Programme (EAP) that sets the goal of the EU living within the planet’s ecological limits by 2050. The
purpose of the CSS is to establish a framework for a more preventive chemicals legislation that builds the
road towards a circular economy (EC 2020b). This will be done by minimising the use of the most harmful
chemicals and supporting the safe and sustainable development of new ones.
Two of the most significant proposals in the CSS are the criteria for essentiality, and the safe and sustainable­
by­design (SSbD) approach, as they both have a consistent appearance in the strategy and have been widely
debated by scientists and stakeholders. The proposals are still under development, and none of them have
been implemented yet.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Aim and research questions
This thesis aims to investigate the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, especially the criteria for essential
use and the safe and sustainable­by­design approach. This will be done from a (socio)­technical perspective.
Therefore, the research question to be answered is:
What are the main challenges when implementing some of the most significant suggestions in the Chemicals
Strategy for Sustainability, seen from a technological perspective, and how can these be addressed in regards
to the definition and technical requirements using PFAS as a case study?
The research question will be answered by:
1. Investigating and communicating the main concepts of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
2. Analysing of the concept of essentiality in the strategy
3. Analysing of the concept of safe and sustainable­by­design in the strategy
4. Evaluation of how the essentiality and safe and sustainable­by­design concepts could be applied for
the chemical substances group of PFAS
1.3
Structure of the report
The methodology for this work is found in chapter 2, and includes a description of the literature study,
participation in workshops, interviews performed, and other considerations. An introduction to the chemical
substance group of PFAS is presented in chapter 3 and includes the chemistry, toxicity, and scientists’ call
for action. Afterward, in chapter 4, the CSS is presented, starting with a historical perspective and the
European Green Deal, followed by a presentation of the different aspects of the strategy itself. Next is the
concept of essentiality described in chapter 5, including the concept’s origin, EU legislation today, current
ongoing discussions, various formulations, and the essentiality concept applied to PFAS. The concept of
safe and SSbD is found in chapter 6, containing the origin of the concept, JRC framework, stakeholders’
suggestions, PFAS assessed through SSbD, and an analysis of the implementation of a voluntary tool. The
discussion and the conclusion is found in chapter 7 and chapter 8 respectively.
2
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:11==
2
Methodology
2.1
Literature study
The CSS was published in October 2020, and a limited number of scientific articles regarding this topic
are available. Scientific literature has mainly been found through Web of Science, with some of the search
terms shown in Table 2.1. Therefore, a large part of this report is based on grey literature: reports, statistics,
and books published by authorities, and other non­academics, especially from the EC, EU’s Agencies, and
European chemical industry sector and NGOs.
Because the published literature has been limited, snowballing and backwards snowballing methods have
been of high use. In the snowballing method, a database (in this case Web of Science) is used to find articles
that cite the targeted paper, while backwards snowballing is looking at whom the paper cites itself in the
references and thereby finding more relevant articles and information (Webster and Watson 2002; Jalali and
Wohlin 2012).
Table 2.1: Examples of search words and hits, found though Web of Science.
Search word
Hits
”Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability”
17
Chemicals AND ”essential use”
9
Chemicals AND ”safe and sustainable by design”
10
When reading grey literature, it has been important to keep in mind that all stakeholders have an agenda.
This means that they often work towards a specific goal, which may influence the conclusions they reach.
It is true both for industry sector organisations like Cefic and environmental NGOs like ChemSec.
2.2
Interviews with experts
During this thesis, two interviews were conducted. Both interviews have been qualitative, informal inter­
views with open­ended and conversational questions, as described by Finkbeiner (2016).
Informal interviews are also known as in­depth interviews and can be seen as a conversation with a clear
purpose in mind; in this case, to get expert knowledge and perspective on the CSS. This kind of interview
has a limited amount of pre­defined questions. The interviewer can thereby approach the interviewed in any
manner in order to receive as much information as possible (QuestionPro.com 2022).
The interviews were conducted with two experts in the field. The first interview was conducted on the
22nd of April 2022 with Xenia Trier, expert on chemicals, environment and human health at the EEA. The
interview was done in person at the EEA headquarters in Copenhagen, Denmark. Trier is co­author in the
majority of the scientific articles describing essentiality and the phase­out of non­essential uses and was the
first to refer to the concept (DTU Food 2014). The second interview was conducted on the 17th of May
2022 with Anna Lennquist, senior toxicologist at the ChemSec, at the Society of Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry, SETAC, Europe Conference in Copenhagen, Denmark. The interview guide used for both
interviews can be found in Appendix A.
Both interviews were done in person to get the proper settings for a natural conversation. The purpose of
the interviews was to attain knowledge and perspective from the experts in a way that is impossible to get
from literature.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
3
==PAGE:12==
The interview with Xenia Trier has been recorded. In order to work most efficiently, the interview has not
been transcribed. Instead, I have listened to the interview several times and written down everything of
importance. The interview with Anna Lennquist was shorter and was not recorded due to the conference
setting of our surroundings. Instead, notes were written during the conversation and right after.
2.3
Participation in workshops and webinars
Throughout the period of the thesis, from the beginning of January until the end of June, I have participated
in several online workshops and webinars concerning the CSS ­ and the different aspects of the strategy.
The workshops have been located by the snowballing technique. Information about workshops and we­
binars have been found through the EC’s webpage for the CSS, through newsletters from different NGOs
and industries, active search for webinars on google, and finally, through various workshops and webinars
referring to one another.
A workshop can be used as a resource and a means to get something ­ in this case, information from the
host(s) to the participants of the workshop about the CSS and the changes that will be implemented in
the future EC (2022a). A workshop can also be used as a research methodology, where the participants
are enlightened on a topic ­ but with the hosts also receiving information from the participants about their
opinion on the topic (Ørngreen and Levinsen 2017). The workshops I have participated in have been both
of the information­giving and information­seeking kind.
Not much literature is found about how data from a workshop can be collected and processed (Ørngreen
and Levinsen 2017). Thoring et al. 2020 presented a guideline for research methodologies to evaluate a
workshop. Although their focus was on evaluations of design and artefact workshops, some of the methods
are still relevant. Most of the evaluation methods are reserved for the organisers. However, it was still
possible for me to do observations, take notes, and consult video recordings when these were made available
online. The data collected from these workshops have been processed as secondary data, meaning that notes
have been taken during the workshop and then processed afterwards to sum up the discussions and look at
them retrospectively (Darsø 2001).
The aim of participating in the workshops has not been to analyse the behaviours and interactions between
participants. Instead, it has been to figure out the different positions in ongoing discussions and follow the
development of the CSS’s implementations. Therefore, only viewpoints and results of the workshops are
reported. The EC and stakeholders (e.g., industry or NGOs) have conducted the workshops, and some of
the information found through the workshops can therefore be biased.
2.4
The use of PFAS as a case study
In order to evaluate how the proposals in the CSS (the essentiality concept and SSbD) can be implemented,
a case study is used. The purpose of the case study is to investigate where the work is now in terms of
developing essentiality and safe and sustainable­by­design criteria and what might be missing.
The chemical substance group of PFAS is chosen as the case study in this project, as PFAS are the only
chemical group mentioned by name in the CSS. The strategy states that the EC will ban all PFAS unless
the use is proven essential for the society (EC 2020b). PFAS counts more than 4700 individual chemical
substances, all man­made as the Carbon­Fluorine bond is not found in nature ­ more about PFAS can be
found in chapter 3.
Retailers are voluntarily committing to limit the use of PFAS in products and packaging (Future 2022).
With a large focus on PFAS from society and regulators, many initiatives are already being taken to limit its
use. This significant focus on PFAS means that substitutes are already being found and developed. PFAS
are, however, still of great use in many different products and process categories, and it is therefore still
interesting to investigate.
4
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:13==
2.5
Determining essentiality
A key aspect of the CSS evolves around defining and determining what essential uses of a given chemical
substance are. The phrases essential use, essentiality, criteria for essentiality and the concept of essentiality
will be used interchangeably. For PFAS, uses have been found through Glüge et al. (2020) and have been
evaluated trough different definitions of essentiality, defined by the Montreal Protocol (UNEP 2022e), by
Cousins et al. (2019) and ChemSec (2021a).
In order to evaluate the different uses of PFAS, it can be necessary to know the specific technical function
of use. This knowledge is partially given by Glüge et al. (2020), but expert knowledge is often needed
to understand the use truly. Therefore, I have been obliged to make an informed guess in some cases. In
those cases where it have been impossible to determine whether the use is essential or not, the use has been
labelled ”unsure”.
2.6
Assessing safe and sustainable­by­design
When assessing PFAS for SSbD, the specific uses have not been considered. Instead, PFAS have been
grouped as one chemical substance group. The grouping is possible because all PFAS have the same C­F
backbone, which will be further elaborated in chapter 3. When evaluating the data for PFAS, it is worth
considering that PFAS have been produced and used for decades. This means a large amount of data exists
from experiments, medical trials, and monitoring programs worldwide. These data have made it easier to
do assessments with PFAS compared to chemical substances that are still being developed.
The assessment is based on a draft framework proposed by the Joint Research Centre of the European
Commission (JRC). In step 4 of the framework, where the different environmental sustainability impacts
are assessed, the conclusions are made by searching both Google and Web of Science to collect information
from different sources.
The evaluation of SSbD as a voluntary environmental programme (VEP) is based on leassons learned from
Hansen and Tickner (2007). SSbD are going to be implemented in Europe, but Hansen and Tickner (2007)
have investigated at VEPs in the USA. It is assumed that the same motivational powers are at play.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Introduction to PFAS as an environmental
concern
In this chapter, the chemical substance group of PFAS is introduced. PFAS are one of the most currently crit­
icised chemicals groups in public, and the following chapter will explain why. First, the chemistry of PFAS
is explained, followed by an explanation of what this means for humans and the environment’s interaction
with the chemical substances, including toxicity and (bio)­accumulation. The second part summarises how
the scientific community has called for action and as will be described, scientists have warned about the
risks of PFAS for almost a decade through public statements. These statements have, among other things,
focused on the need for substitution for safer alternatives. The CSS’s focus on PFAS will be presented at
the end of the chapter. As the CSS prepares the ground for an almost total ban of all uses of PFAS, it will
be explained how this is planned to be conducted.
3.1
What is PFAS?
PFAS stands for per­ and polyfluoroalkyl substances and is a large group of chemical substances, defined
byOECD (2021) as chemical substances that contain perfluorinated carbons; either a
C2
F2
∙or a
C2
F3 group. The bond between carbon (C) and fluorine (F) is very strong, making PFAS persistent,
and PFAS are therefore often referred to as ”Forever Chemicals” (ChemTrust 2022; Garnett and Van Cal­
ster 2021). There are 4730 individual PFAS CAS numbers (year 2018), and more than 3000 PFAS are on
the global market for use today (EC 2020d; OECD 2018).
PFAS can occur as both liquids and gases and have an extensive range of attractive properties for industry
and household uses. They are hydrophobic and oleophobic, meaning that PFAS are both water and oil/grease
repelling. They are also very resistant from a physical and chemical perspective and at very high temper­
atures. Furthermore, they can reduce the surface tension and thereby increase the wettability of water (EC
2020d; Glüge et al. 2020).
These properties have caused PFAS to be used in all kinds of products today. Glüge et al. (2020) have iden­
tified about 300 uses, of which 87 were within the industry, while the other uses are in consumer products.
Glüge et al. (2020) also found that a large number of PFAS are patented for the same uses, and some groups
of uses counted more than 100 different PFAS.
PFAS are used in a wide range of industries, including the production of lithium batteries, mining, the
production of pharmaceuticals, metal­ and electroplating, fire­fighting foams, air conditioning systems, and
many others. PFAS are also used in a large range of consumer products, including (outdoor) textiles, food
packaging, paint, cosmetics, and non­stick coating for kitchen equipment (e.g., Teflon) due to its grease­
repelling properties and high­temperature resistance. (Glüge et al. 2020; EEA 2022b).
3.2
The chemistry of PFAS
The carbon­fluorine (C­F) bond is synthetic, and the PFAS structure is therefore not found naturally occur­
ring. It is one of the strongest bonds known, and degradation is therefore not happening in the environment.
No natural degradation pathways exist, making PFAS very persistent. If degradation occurs for, e.g., func­
tional groups attached to PFAS, the degradation will stop at the carbon­fluorine bonds (Blum et al. 2015).
PFAS are present in all environmental matrices, including the ocean, drinking water, wastewater, soil, biota,
aerosols, and air (EEA 2022b). The persistent and hydrophilic properties of PFAS mean that it bioaccumu­
lates and biomagnifies in humans and animals (Buck et al. 2011; Cousins et al. 2019). Almost all humans
6
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:15==
have PFAS in their body and body liquids, e.g., breast milk (Nordic Council of Ministers 2019; ATSDR
2020).
The group of PFAS is often divided into long­ and short­chain PFAS. The long­chain PFAS are all perfluo­
roalkyl carboxylic acids with 7 or more perfluorinated carbons and all perfluoroalkane sulfonates with 6 or
more perfluorinated carbons as seen in Figure 3.1 (Buck et al. 2011). The short­chain PFAS was introduced
as a less harmful replacement for the long­chain PFAS after these were found too problematic (DEPA 2015;
EEA 2022b). Long­chain PFAS are more bioaccumulative than short­chain PFAS. Most of the short­chain
PFAS are, however, less efficient, meaning that a higher amount of the chemical substance is needed to get
the same performance, resulting in higher emissions of PFAS. Short­chain PFAS are still not able to undergo
total mineralization, as they still contain the carbon­fluorine bond.
(a) CAS no. 335­67­1
(b) CAS no. 355­46­4
Figure 3.1: The structure of PFAS. Figure (a) shows a perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids with 7 perfluorinated
carbons, while (b) shows a perfluoroalkane sulfonates with 6 perfluorinated carbons. These are the shortest
in the group of long­chain PFAS.
Long­chain PFAS are known to bioaccumulate in humans, animals, and soil/sediment (Brown et al. 2020).
While the short­chain PFAS are known to accumulate in the environment, air and water, and they have,
due to their high mobility and long­distance travelling in air, been measured even at remote places on earth
(EEA 2022b; EC 2020d). However, long­chain PFAS are still found to be ubiquitously distributed in the
environment, and short­chain PFAS are also bioaccumulative. The short­chain PFAS have lower persis­
tency but higher mobility compared to long­chain PFAS. In general, it can be said that long­chain PFAS
bioaccumulative in humans and animals or stay in the soil while short­chain PFAS stays in the water and air
(EEA 2022b). It was earlier believed that the sea was a sink for PFAS, but a recent study has shown that the
sea is also a source for atmospheric PFAS. This means that PFAS constantly cycles between ground, water,
and air (Sha et al. 2022).
Toxicity of PFAS
Many PFAS are toxic and known to be carcinogenic, affecting fertility and the immune system and causing
mental disturbances like concentration difficulty in children. This is especially true for the development in
fetal development, where delayed mammary gland development and lower birth weight are known effects.
Vulnerable groups in the population, the children and elderly, are also at higher risk for the effects of PFAS
(EEA 2022b). A more detailed picture of the effect on the human body is seen in Figure 3.2. In 2020
the European Food Safety Authority, EFSA, set a safety threshold on 4.4 ng/kg bw/week (EFSA 2020).
The restricted PFAS ”PFOS” and ”PFOA” are furthermore associated with decreased antibody response to
vaccination (EC 2020d). The Nordic Council of Ministers (2019) have found that a conservative estimate
of the total health­related cost of exposure to PFAS in Europe (EEA countries) is between 52 and 84 billion
(1012) euro € per year.
In the environment, PFAS are also a threat to the eco­systems. It has been found to decrease the microbial
activity in soil and affect the development of larvae by mussels at concentrations of 0.1 µg/L. No observed
effect concentration (NOEC) values have been found for marine invertebrates in the order of 0.0001 ­ 0.049
mg/L. However, much is still unknown due to the very high number of PFASs and the fact that human
toxicity has had a higher focus in science (Abunada et al. 2020; Ankley et al. 2021).
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: Toxic effects on humans by PFAS. Figure by EEA (2022b).
3.3
Scientists call for action
Because of the aforementioned adverse effects of PFAS, the use of the substances has been eagerly debated
in society, and several scientists have called for action for several years. Scientists working with PFAS have
published three statements that have gained high public attention. The first, the Helsingør Statement on
Poly­ and Perfluorinated alkyl Substances (PFASs), was published in 2014 by seven scientists who expressed
concern about the substitution of long­chain PFAS for shorter­chain PFAS. The concern was mainly focused
on the fact that substitution was conducted with less investigated alternatives (Scheringer et al. 2014).
The second statement came in 2015, the Madrid Statement on Poly­ and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs),
and was signed by more than 250 scientists (Blum et al. 2015; Green Science Policy Institute 2022). This
statement proposes a total of 22 actions to be taken by scientists, governments, chemical manufacturers,
product manufacturers, purchasing organisations, retailers, and individual consumers on how we as a society
can regulate and phase out PFAS. The actions proposed in the Madrid Statement involve the need for data
on functionality, toxicity, and degradation products, clear legislation that only allows PFAS for essential
uses, transparency from the industries about supply chains, cooperation between industry, governments,
and scientists, and labelling of products containing PFAS (Blum et al. 2015).
The third statement, the Zürich Statement on Future Actions on Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances, pub­
lished in 2018 by 32 scientists and proposed several future actions that need to happen to regulate PFAS
properly (Ritscher et al. 2018). The Zürich Statement emphasises the need for coordinated scientific and
regulatory efforts and suggests a grouping approach for regulating PFAS, the phase­out of all non­essential
uses, and puts focus on the development and switch to safer alternatives. Ritscher et al. (2018) also under­
lines the need for public awareness of PFAS.
These statements have been imperative for the public debate about the substances and the subsequent legal
actions taken against the use of PFAS. The content of the statements is reflected in the CSS, as will be
discussed in section 5.2. Two of the most harmful PFAS are already restricted by the Stockholm Convention
8
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:17==
on Persistent Organic Pollutants: PFOA are in Annex A for elimination, and PFOS are in Annex B for
restriction (UNEP 2022a).
3.4
PFAS in the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
PFAS are the only group of chemical substances mentioned by name in the CSS. The strategy aims to ensure
that the use of PFAS is banned in the EU unless the use is proven essential for the society (EC 2020b). The
idea of an essentiality concept will be further clarified in chapter 5. This high focus on PFAS has also further
increased due to the public awareness of PFAS throughout the last years. The media has, as an example,
covered the stories of how the extensive use of PFAS that have resulted in contaminated meat and water
drillings ­ and thereby polluted citizens in the areas (DR 2021; Perkins 2022).
In the CSS, the EC will ban all PFAS, also in fire­fighting foam, and all other uses found to be non­essential
for society. This will be done by addressing PFAS with a group approach for legislation, addressing the
concerns with PFAS on an international level, providing financial support for innovative methodologies for
remediating PFAS contamination, and providing funding for the development of safe substitutes for PFAS
(EC 2020b).
These objectives align with the proposed actions in the Madrid and Zürich Statement (Blum et al. 2015;
Ritscher et al. 2018). They are also in continuance with the actions proposed in ”Elements for an EU­strategy
for PFASs” (Regjeringen.no 2019), a report submitted to the EC by ministers in Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
and Luxembourg and supported by Germany, Austria, Finland, and Italy in 2019 (Lerner 2019). This report,
like the scientific statements, suggest a group­wise approach and an implementation of an essential­use
concept.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
9
==PAGE:18==
4
Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
The different aspects of the CSS are explained in this chapter. The chapter starts with a historical revision of
previous chemicals legislation in order to get the bigger picture that the new strategy will be a part of. The
European Green Deal is then presented for the reader, in order to create an overview of the many different
sections in which the EU is working towards a more sustainable future. Next the CSS is introduced. First
through an overview, and then through selected focus areas; one substance, one assessment, essential uses,
and SSbD. Lastly, the involvement of stakeholders is presented, including a list of workshops that have been
a part of this project.
4.1
A historical perspective
The first prelude to a chemical regulation in the EU was the Dangerous Substances Directive 67/518/EEC
in 1967, which purpose was to harmonise the rules for classification, labelling, and packaging for chemical
substances (EC 2019a). In 1976 the Marketing and Use Directive 76/769/EEC came, which put restric­
tions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (IEEP 2012). Then, in
1993 the Existing Substances Regulation 793/93/EEC came, in which existing chemical substances would
be registered, while new chemical substances would be put under regulation (ECHA 2022b). In 1998 the
Dangerous Preparations Directive 88/379/EEC was implemented, which provided harmonised rules for the
classification, packaging, and labelling of dangerous mixtures (EC 1998). Then the Strategy for a Future
Chemicals Policy was published in 2001, the white paper which in 2006 was implemented as the REACH
regulation (EC)1907/2006; the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Restriction of Chemicals. The
European chemicals legislation that today applies to all chemical substances, by replacing the Existing Sub­
stances Regulation (EC 2019a; ECHA 2022d). In 2008 the regulation on the classification, labelling, and
packaging of substances and mixtures (EC)1272/2008 was implemented, also known as the CLP regulation.
This regulation repealed the Dangerous Substances and Dangerous Preparations Regulations (EC 2019a)
from 1967 and 1976. The newest addition to the chemical legislation is the white paper Chemicals Strategy
for Sustainability COM(2020)667, published in 2020. The strategy is, as described, known as the CSS and
sets the framework for developing the chemicals legislation in the future (EC 2022a). A timeline of the
presented regulations can be found in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The regulations and directives involving chemicals in EU.
In addition to EU regulations and directives, several international protocols and conventions are also in force:
The Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer since 1989 (UNEP 2022d), the Basel
Convention, which sets global control, reduction, or elimination targets for Trans boundary Movements of
10
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:19==
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal since 1992 (UNEP 2022b), the Rotterdam Convention on Shared Re­
sponsibilities in Relation to Importation of Hazardous Chemicals since 2004 (UNEP 2022f), the Stockholm
Convention on Priority Organic Pollutants since 2004 (UNEP 2022g), and the Minamata Convention on
Mercury since 2017 (UNEP 2022c).
4.2
The European Green Deal
The European Green Deal was communicated by the EC in 2019 and is the new growth strategy for the EU.
It is built on the vision of zero net emissions from 2050, when economic growth should be decoupled from
resource use (EC 2019b). The Green Deal is also a part of the EC’s work to implement the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals.
The Green Deal is separated into several focus areas, as seen in Figure 4.2, with the left side focusing on
achieving a circular economy and a climate­neutral society and the right side focusing on the restoring the
environment and securing biodiversity. The European Green Deal also decalares a green oath to ”do no
harm”. This oath aims to ensure that all objectives are fulfilled in the most effective and least burdensome
way. The Green Deal also focuses on chemical substances and products imported to Europe, which states
that these must also fully comply with EU regulations and standards.
Figure 4.2: The different elements of The European Green Deal. ”A zero pollution ambition for a toxic­free
environment” is seen in the upper right corner (EC 2019b).
One of the elements in The Green Deal is ”a zero pollution ambition for a toxic­free environment” to reme­
diate pollution already created and prevent future pollution from being created. In order to fulfil the zero
pollution ambition, the EC has communicated the white paper ”The Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability,
Towards a Toxic­free Environment” on the 14th of October 2020. A white paper is a document ”containing
proposals for European Union (EU) actions in a specific area”, and the purpose of a white paper is to find
consensus on a topic through debate between the European Parliament, the European Council, the public
and stakeholders (EUR­lex 2022).
The CSS is, as the name implies, a proposal for how chemical legislation in the EU should be developed
in the future. It is a long­term vision for developing a more preventive approach to regulating chemical
substances and should be read like that ­ and not as a direct replacement for REACH.
4.3
The aim of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
The overall objectives of the CSS are to i) better protect citizens and the environment and ii) boost innovation
for safe and sustainable chemicals (EC 2022a). This is accomplished through 88 proposals divided into 16
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
11
==PAGE:20==
focus boxes, as seen in the overview in Table 4.1. The actions are devoted to a wide range of activities,
including the development of new criteria, future legislation proposals, initiatives for stakeholder networks,
and suggestions for change, e.g., new risk assessment methods (EC 2020b).
The actions are to be fulfilled through fitness checks of the current legislation, involvement of stakeholders,
and other methods. These tools are a part of the Better Regulation Guideline in the EU that secure that new
legislation is both effective and easy to comply with at the same time (EC 2021).
Table 4.1: Focus boxes in the CSS and their number of proposals
Focus box
Number of proposals
Safe and Sustainable by Design
6
Non­toxic Material Cycles
5
Innovating Industrial Production
7
Strengthening EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy
5
Protection Against Most Harmful Chemicals
6
Endocrine Disruptors
5
Chemical Mixtures
3
Chemical Pollution in Natural Environment
6
PFAS
5
Coordinate and Simplify Actions Across EU
Chemical Legislation
6
Methodologies and Data
8
Zero Tolerance for Non­Compliance
9
Information Requirements
4
Science­Policy Interface
5
International Leadership
5
Cooperation with Third Countries
3
Total number of proposals
88
A toxic­free hierarchy is introduced at the beginning of the strategy. It is a new hierarchy in chemicals
management, intending to prioritise the development of safe and sustainable chemicals above minimisation
and elimination of substances of concern (SOC), as seen in Figure 4.3. At the top is ”safe and sustainable
chemicals”, in the middle ”minimise and control”, and at the bottom ”eliminate and remediate”. Each of the
three steps has a statement on how to ”protect health and the environment” and ”encourage innovation”.
Figure 4.3: The toxic free hierarchy, as proposed in the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability (EC 2020b).
The CSS has an annex that contains the Strategy Action Plan, listing all key actions to be taken by the EC,
the involved EU legislation, and an indicative timing for each action (EC 2020c). All actions are to be
started in the period from 2020 to 2024, with a wide range of legislation involved, including REACH, Toy
Safety Directive, Cosmetics Products Regulation, and General Product Safety Directive, among others (EC
2020c).
12
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:21==
4.4
Generic approach to risk management
The CSS proposes a generic approach to risk management (GRA) as the default method for the most harmful
chemicals in consumer products (EC 2020b). This is in line with the way REACH is today, where substances
of very high concern (SVHC) are regulated. GRA is a hazard­based approach that assesses the chemical
substances based on whether or not they contain unwanted inherent properties (EC 2019a). Using GRA
makes it possible to perform risk assessments based on a set of principles, meaning that the risk assessment
can be done without large amounts of data (Trier, pers. com. 2022). GRA is already used in current EU
legislation where carcinogenic substances have been banned from most consumer products (EC 2020b).
Two of the GRA initiatives in the CSS are the essential­use and SSbD, both concepts that will be further
investigated in the following chapters. Other GRA initiatives in CSS are the one substance, one assessment,
and the group approach, which will be introduced below.
One substance, one assessment
The EC wish to make the chemical legislation more ”coherent, simple and predictable for all actors” (EC
2020b). This is done by introducing the concept of one substance, one assessment, where all chemical
substances are to have one assessment in total, and not one assessment for each authority, as it is today. One
substance, one assessment, is introduced as part of the ”simplifying and consolidating the legal framework”
section, which also states a zero­tolerance for non­compliance.
With the current legislation the chemical substances are assessed for different uses, by different EU bodies,
under different legislation, and at different times (ECHA and EFSA 2020).Therefore, a discrepancy can be
found between the conclusions for the same substance, as seen for, e.g., bisphenol A (Beronius et al. 2010).
The function of one substance, one assessment is therefore to standardise the assessments and ensure that
all bodies in the EU have the same information about all chemical substances.
Group approach to assessing chemicals
Until the suggested GRA methods are developed, a group approach is suggested for assessing chemical
substances instead of the current substance­by­substance approach. The group approach is to be used for
the most harmful chemical substances (EC 2020b). The purpose of the group assessments is for the process
to be faster, more transparent, and for regrettable substitution to be avoided (EC 2020b). Chemical substance
groups can be based on structural or functional similarities. An example of the grouping approach is the
suggested regulation of all PFAS, which does not consider the variations of the individual CAS numbers’
properties.
4.5
The concept of essential use
The idea of an essential use concept is investigated in chapter 5. One of the aims of the CSS is the devel­
opment of criteria for essential use. According to the CSS the criteria must ensure ”that the most harmful
chemicals are only allowed if their use is necessary for health, safety or is critical for the functioning of
society and if there are no alternatives that are acceptable from the standpoint of environment and health”
(EC 2020b). In the strategy, it is proposed to take the definition of essentiality from the Montreal Protocol
into account, more specifically, to evaluate whether a specific chemical use is essential, which is further
elaborated in section 5.1. The CSS states that all chemical substances must be used more safely and sustain­
ably. The use of SOC should be minimised, and substitutions should be implemented when possible. The
most harmful chemicals should be phased out for all non­essential uses, especially in consumer products.
The essential­use does not have its own focus box in the CSS, as seen in Table 4.1. Instead, it is to be
used as a tool throughout the whole strategy as a way to define which chemical substances and applications
which should be restricted. The essential­use criteria are not yet defined, but discussions and stakeholder
workshops are ongoing, and the EC plans to present ”the horizontal concept” of essential uses by the end of
2022 (EC 2022e).
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
13
==PAGE:22==
The concept of essentiality is especially important for protection against the most harmful chemicals. The
CSS has a specific mentioning of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDC), which are going to be banned from
consumer products, and only allowed for uses proved essential for the function of society and of PFAS,
where a ban should be implemented for all uses unless it is proved essential for health, safety or function of
society. It has however not been specified exactly which chemical substances that furthermore are going to
be regulated with the essential use concept.
A focus is also on securing access to chemical substances that has an essential function in our society.
Therefore, it is a priority for the EC to secure the supply chains for these chemical substances to protect
human and planetary health should a new crisis like the COVID­19 pandemic occur.
4.6
Safe and sustainable­by­design
Another aim of the CSS is the development of SSbD criteria, which will be further investigated in chapter 6.
This approach aims to assess chemical substances and materials from production to end of life, thereby
ensuring that they are inherently safe and sustainable. The purpose is to speed up the phase­out of, e.g.,
harmful chemicals in consumer products and, in general, secure that chemical substances and materials are
designed in the most efficient way. The criteria are not yet developed, but a working definition is given in
the CSS:
”At this stage, safe and sustainable­by­design can be defined as a pre­market approach to
chemicals that focuses on providing a function (or service) while avoiding volumes and chem­
icals properties that may be harmful to human health or the environment, in particular groups
of chemicals likely to be (eco) toxic, persistent, bio­accumulative or mobile. Overall sustain­
ability should be ensured by minimising the environmental footprint of chemicals in particular
on climate change, resource use, ecosystems and biodiversity from a lifecycle perspective.”
(EC 2020b)
The SSbD has its own focus box in the CSS, a seen in Table 4.1, where the EC lists several actions that
will be taken. This includes the development of the SSbD criteria, establishing an EU­wide SSbD support
network, suggestions for the financing of the development, mapping of competence gaps, the establishment
of key performance indicators, and promotion of safer chemicals.
The focus is on chemical substances that provide a function or service according to the working definition
seen above. This is a circular economy approach, more specifically a functional economy approach (also
known as performance economy) (CIRAIG 2015). Shifting to new, shared business models will require
large changes in society. Therefore, the EC plans to establish a support network to help with the transition
by promoting cooperation, information sharing across the sectors and value chains, and providing technical
expertise when needed.
4.7
Involvement of stakeholders
Stakeholders are involved in the ongoing discussions of the CSS, as required by the Better Regulation Guide­
lines (EC 2021). Stakeholders can be involved through public consultations on the web page for the CSS
(EC 2022a). In these consultations, feedback and input can be given on the proposals in the CSS, and the
changes it will result in for the current legislation. For the feedback to the roadmap for the CSS, a total of
418 valid comments were made by the industry and business associations (104), NGOs (42), academic and
research (10), authorities (18), private persons (226) and other (17) (EC 2022d).
A high­level roundtable for the CSS has been established and consists of leaders from member states, indus­
try, NGOs, international organisations, and scientists. It is chaired by the Commissioner of the Environment,
Oceans and Fisheries, and the Commissioner for Internal Market. This high­level roundtable aims to facili­
tate conversations with concerned stakeholders and for the participants to act as role models in the transition
14
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:23==
to a green economy. The high­level roundtable has had three meetings; in May 2021, October 2021, and
May 2022.
Stakeholders are also involved through workshops held by the EC. Four official workshops have been held,
two on SSbD, one on the concept of essential uses, and an information session about one substance, one
assessment. Other stakeholders, e.g., collaborators on the CSS, have also held workshops.
I have participated in nine workshops throughout the period of this project. An overview of the workshops
and webinars, a short description, and an assigned theme are found in Table 4.2, a full list of workshops and
webinars are found in Appendix B.
Table 4.2: Participation in online workshops and webinars from January till June 2022.
Workshop
Description
Theme
19/1 2022: ERIF: Legal
Dimensions of the
Essentiality Test
Discussion between Jean­Philippe Montfort and
Kathleen Garnett. Montfort called for
proportionality in the legislation and focused on
how (hazardous) chemicals are needed for the
green transition, while Garnett stated that
essentiality is already used as a tool in the EU and
stated that common sense judgement should be
applied in the legislation.
Essentiality
22/2 2022: ChemSec: How
chemical legislation can
move the industry with the
help of economic incentives
Presentations by Thea Sletten from Eftec, and
Theresa Kjell and Frida Hök from ChemSec.
Sletten presented how economic incentives can
be used to support an early transition to safe
chemicals. It was stated that if alternatives are
available, then proportionality is no longer
relevant ­ substitution must occur.
Economics,
Substitution
23/2 2022 DEKRA and
EPPA: CSS Webinar Series
­ Part 1: REACH Revision
Presentations by Meglene Mihova and Parvoleta
Luleva from EPPA, and Jochen Dettke from
DEKRA. A presentation by Dettke suggested that
new kinds of chemical groups are needed, e.g.,
vPvM (very persistent, very mobile). A special
focus was put on mixture toxicity and its rare
occurrence. In the presentation by Mihova and
Luleva, emphasis was put on the fact that in CSS,
enforcement of ”no data, no market” and ”the
polluter pays principle” was made.
REACH
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
15
==PAGE:24==
22/3 2022: The European
Commission: DG ENV, DG
R&I, and JRC: 2nd Safe and
Sustainable by Design
Stakeholder Workshop
This workshop presented the JRC framework on
the concept of SSbD, a more preventive approach
that will look at the whole life cycle of chemicals,
materials and especially consumer products. The
framework for the criteria definition and work
procedure was introduced, focusing on the whole
life cycle. The framework consists of five steps
evaluating the safety of workers, consumers, and
environment and environmental sustainability.
Lastly, the evaluation method was presented with
the possibility of different weightings of the steps.
Safe and
Sustainable­
by­Design
23/3 2022: DEKRA and
EPPA: CSS Webinar Series
­ Part 2: CLP Revision
Presentations by Meglena Mihova, Parvoleta
Luleva and Lucas Mayer from EPPA with
comments from Jochen Dettke from DEKRA.
Introduction to the new hazard classes, including
the mobility criteria, then initiatives to secure the
newest data from the industry was reported, the
relevant authorities introduced, and afterwards a
discussion of new rules for labelling and the
effect the ”one substance, one assessment
initiative” will have on these.
CLP, New Hazard
Groups, ”One
Substance, One
Assessment”
20/4 2022: DEKRA and
EPPA: CSS Webinar Series
­ Part 3: SSbD
Presentations by Isabel de Castro and Carlos
Sokol­Szahin from EPPA with comments from
Jochen Dettke from DEKRA. Introduction to the
Sustainable Products Initiative and the digital
product passport. The results from the workshop
22/3 were presented, and it was underlined that
regulations that hinder circularity would be
restricted. Then a discussion of the env.
sustainability targets and how they can be
evaluated.
Safe and
Sustainable­
by­Design
3/4 2022 Wood on behalf of
the EU Commission:
Stakeholder workshop on
the concept of ”Essential
uses”, participation in the
plenary sessions
The workshop presented the methodology of
defining an essentiality concept that should be
applied for the most harmful chemicals. Then,
lessons learned from other uses of the concept
were presented, focusing on Montreal Protocol,
BPR, and REACH. An introduction then
followed about the criteria that should be made
for the Essential Use Concept. Other legislation
that potentially could benefit from a horizontal
introduction of the essentiality concept was
covered, and lastly, different implementation
options for essentiality in REACH were
presented.
Essentiality
16
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:25==
2/5 2022: The European
Commission: DG R&I: 2nd
Safe and Sustainable by
Design Stakeholder
Workshop, part 2: Feedback
to Stakeholders
JRC presented the results from the first
workshop. The main focus is on R&D as research
output is needed for further development. Several
stakeholders had suggested removing the cut­off
criteria, but they will remain part of the concept.
In the end, it was stressed that the SSbD initiative
is a voluntary instrument and that the EC has no
intentions of making it mandatory.
Safe and
Sustainable­
by­Design
17/5 2022: Society of
Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry, SETAC
Europe 32nd annual
meeting: Towards a reduced
pollution society
Session on The European Green Deal and CSS
moderated by Michelle Bloor, Annegaaike
Leopold, Ksenia Groh, Leo Posthuma, Hans
Sanderson, and Paul Thomas with a presentation
by Christina de Avila from the EC, followed by
presentations and plenary discussion with Watze
de Wulf (ECHA), Xenia Trier (EEA), Anna
Lennquist (ChemSec), Annamarie van Wezel
(academia), Thomas Backhaus (academia),
Erwan Saouter (Net­Zero Impact (SAS), Dragan
Jevtić (Bayer Crop Science), and Diederik
Schowanek (Proctor and Gamble). Presentations
on ”safe and sustainable by design for chemicals,
materials and products”, conducted by Caldeira,
Guido Sonnemann, Peter Fantke, and Leo
Posthuma.
Safe and
Sustainable­
by­Design
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
17
==PAGE:26==
5
The Concept of Essentiality
This chapter will analyse the concept of essentiality, as presented in the CSS. First, the origin of the concept is
presented, followed by some considerations for implementing essentiality, including background knowledge
on how EU legislation is today. Afterwards, the ongoing debate about essentiality is reviewed, including
advantages and disadvantages of the concept. Lastly, an introduction and comparison on three suggestions
for defining essentiality are presented. These are then applied for PFAS, to investigate their similarities and
differences.
5.1
Origin of the essentiality criteria
The idea of regulating chemical substances based on the essentiality of its use is recurring in the CSS.
The concept is suggested as a method for phasing out the most harmful chemical substances especially in
consumer products (EC 2020b). In the focus box ”protection against most harmful chemicals” in the CSS,
it is stated that the EC will:
”Define criteria for essential uses to ensure that the most harmful chemicals are only allowed
if their use is necessary for health, safety or is critical for the functioning of society and if
there are no alternatives that are acceptable from the standpoint of environment and health.
These criteria will guide the application of essential uses in all relevant EU legislation for
both generic and specific risk assessments” (EC 2020b)
The criteria for essentiality are yet to be defined. However, in the Strategy Action Plan, the Annex to the
CSS, it is listed that the criteria will be defined in 2021­2022 (EC 2020b; EC 2020c). The essentiality criteria
are expected to be a key tool in EU legislation in the future (EC 2020b; Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
The Montreal Protocol is mentioned as a guideline for the development of the essential use criteria (EC
2020b).The protocol banned all production and consumption of substances proven to deplete the ozone
layer unless their use is proven essential. It was the first multilateral agreement to include the aspect of
essentiality (UNEP 2022d; EC 2020a). In the Montreal Protocol, ”essentiality” is defined as substances that
are: ”necessary for the health, safety or is critical for the functioning of society (encompassing cultural and
intellectual aspects), and there are no available technically and economically feasible alternatives or sub­
stitutes that are acceptable from the standpoint of environment and health” (UNEP 2022e). The substances
are only allowed until safer alternatives have been developed (EC 2020a).
When the use of a chemical substance is to be evaluated as essential by the Montreal Protocol, a corre­
sponding application must be submitted. This application will be assessed by experts in the Technology and
Economic Assessment Panel, who will consult with the Technical and Economics Options Committee and
provide a report on their findings and a recommendation. The results of the report will then be discussed by
The Meeting of the Parties, who have the authority to decide whether the use should be approved essential.
This is all done on a case­by­case basis (EC 2020a). More than thirty Meetings of the Parties have been
held by 2019, and in 2018 a total of 65 metric tonnes of banned chemicals were allowed for essential uses
(Ozone Secretariat 2019). The Montreal Protocol will be further explained in section 5.4.
Essentiality criteria in scientific statements
The concept of essentiality has been discussed among scientists for several years, as described in section 3.3,
and the idea of phasing out all non­essential uses of PFAS has been suggested several times.
In the Madrid Statement of Poly­ and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) in 2015, the authors suggested
that governments should apply legislation for essential uses of PFAS and that product manufacturers should
18
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:27==
stop the use of PFAS where the use is not essential or when safer alternatives exist (Blum et al. 2015). Later,
in the Zürich Statement on Future Actions on Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in 2018, the concept of
essentiality was also presented. That statement stresses the need to define essentiality to phase out all non­
essential uses of PFAS and develop safe alternatives (Ritscher et al. 2018). These actions are all reflected
in the CSS, either in the suggested criteria for essentiality or in the focus box specified for PFAS.
5.2
Considerations for implementing essentiality
Introducing criteria for essential uses will be one of the most significant changes in chemical legislation
in the EU. In the current legislation, harmful chemical substances are evaluated based on their potential
hazardous properties and risk. With the implementation of essentiality, harmful chemical substances will be
evaluated on whether their function is essential. The assessment will go from evaluating whether a chemical
substance is ”safe enough” to evaluating if the function is essential with no available alternatives (Garnett
and Van Calster 2021).
One of the arguments for implementing the essential use concept is that it will be a more preventive ap­
proach to chemical substances and that legislation will be simpler than the current system (EC 2020e). As it
is today, EU legislation and, in particular, REACH includes the regulation of chemical substances contain­
ing unwanted, inherent properties, the SVHCs. SVHCs are defined as chemical substances that are either
”persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic” (PBT), ”very persistent and very bioaccumulative” (vPvB), ”car­
cinogenic, mutagenic, or reprotoxic” (CMR), or other properties that cause an equivalent level of concern,
evaluated case­by­case, as done EDCs (ECHA 2022a).
The current system is separated by different sectors, and e.g., pharmaceuticals, textiles, plant protection, food
additives, and food packaging each has their own legislation (Garnett and Van Calster 2021). This kind of
legislation is called vertical legislation, as it only involves a single sector. REACH, on the contrary, is a
horizontal legislation, meaning it is valid for all chemicals. Horizontal principles are also applied across all
legislation, including the precautionary principle, the polluter pays principle, and the principle of substitution
(Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
The suggested concept of essentiality is presented as a horizontal principle in the CSS and will therefore
be applied for all legislation, not only REACH (Trier, pers. com. 2022; EC 2020b). Applying horizontal
concepts across EU legislation is, as seen above, not a new method. It is not unthinkable to implement the
essentiality similarly ­ either with a clear definition or with room for interpretation by the relevant agencies,
such as ECHA. More than 40 pieces of legislation have been identified as potentially being affected by the
implementation of an essentiality concept, including Regulation EC 1223/2009 on cosmetics, Regulation EC
1935/2004 on food contact materials, and Regulation EC 1107/2009 on plant protection products (Garnett
and Van Calster 2021; EC 2019a). The current legislation does not include any other properties of the
chemical substance, and the evaluation is not based on their use, which means that current legislation does
not have any regulations based on the essentiality of a chemical substance. As it is today, the only use of
the word ”essentiality” in EU legislation, including REACH, is when referring to the Montreal Protocol
(Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
5.3
Current debate on the criteria
There is currently an ongoing debate about the CSS and how the essentiality criteria should be applied.
One of the most significant changes to come is the fact that chemical legislation will no longer purely be
based on risk assessment. The implementation of the essentiality criteria will induce subjective and value­
driven aspects to the assessments (Garnett and Van Calster 2021). If a concept like essentiality should be
implemented into legislation, we must discuss what we as a society see as essential. What is critical for our
health and safety? And what are conveniences that we have gotten so used to that we do not want to live
without, even though it is not essential for us?
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
19
==PAGE:28==
Many stakeholders are involved in the process and discussion on how to define essentiality. As mentioned in
section 4.7, workshops are being held to involve all interested parties, including NGOs, industry, authorities,
and academia. The criteria for essential use must be defined early in the process, otherwise the legislation
cannot be implemented, and the different actors will not know what outcome to expect (Garnett and Van
Calster 2021).
The Competent Authorities for REACH and CLP, called CARACAL, is an expert group founded in 2004
who advises the EC and ECHA on questions related to REACH and CLP. Members of CARACAL include
Member States’ competent authorities for REACH and CLP, representatives from competent authorities of
EEA­EFTA countries, observers from non­EU countries, international organisations, and other stakeholders
(EC 2022b). At the 37th CARACAL open session meeting in November 2020, essential uses were discussed,
using the Montreal Protocol definition as a point of reference. Potential advantages and disadvantages of
introducing criteria of essentiality in REACH were presented during the meeting (EC 2020a). The consid­
erations from this meeting will be introduced in the following sections, together with other points of view
from various stakeholders.
Critique of the essential use
One of the concerns is that the concept of essentiality will hinder safe use of harmful chemicals and thereby
block potential innovation. In the current legislation, a chemical substance is regulated if it causes an unac­
ceptable risk. By introducing the concept of essentiality, chemical substances would also be regulated when
they do not cause a risk ­ only because they possess inherent harmful properties (Montfort 2021; Garnett
and Van Calster 2021). At the ERIF workshop 19/1/22, Kathleen Garnett, Senior Researcher in EU Law and
Policy at Wageningen University, called for a more common sense­based regulation, instead of the current
technocratic approach, see Table 4.2. Her concern is that implementing essential­use criteria would only
increase the amount of technocracy.
The CSS states that essentiality should be applied to the ”most harmful chemicals”. The definition of the
”most harmful chemicals” is a new way of categorising chemical substances in EU legislation, and in the
CSS, it is not specified what exactly it includes (EC 2020b; Montfort 2021). A broader category of SOC
is also mentioned in the CSS and is specified as ”...those related to a circular economy, substances having
a chronic effect on human health or the environment (Candidate list in REACH and Annex VI to the CLP
Regulation) but also those which hamper recycling for safe and high quality secondary raw materials.” (EC
2020b). It is not clear how the new formulating ”most harmful chemicals” is different from the currently
used categories of SVHC in EU legislation, but it could be a broader definition. When looking at definitions
given in the CSS, ”most harmful chemicals” could be a subcategory of SOC and the definition of them could
therefore be found within the definition given above.
Critique is being given to the large number of chemical substances involved, as it raises the worry that it
is unrealistic to accomplish. The Montreal Protocol only covers ozone­depleting chemicals (< 100) while
REACH covers all regulated chemicals in EU (> 80, 000) (UNEP 2022d; ECHA 2018; Montfort 2021).
This means that an essentiality definition valid for all of REACH will need a much bigger scope than the
one given in the Montreal Protocol. This also means there could be a risk for regrettable substitutions, where
the found alternative turns out to be just as harmful as the original chemical substance (EC 2020a).
One of the public voices responding adversely to the introduction of essentiality is Jean­Philippe Montfort,
a partner at law firm Mayer Brown, who also participated as a speaker at the ERIF workshop of essentiality,
as found in Table 4.2. Montfort (2021) argues that the essentiality criteria as presented in the CSS cannot be
included in REACH. He argues that there needs to be an unacceptable risk (also for non­essential uses) for
a chemical substance to be regulated and that substances already are ”adequately controlled”. Therefore,
no argument is found for using the essentiality criteria for further restrictions. Montfort states that it is in
no way possible to ban chemical substances only because they do not contribute to the health, safety, or
functioning of society. He also claims that it will be impossible to agree on the terms for the criteria. Even
20
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:29==
though some uses are non­essential, there should be a cost­benefit analysis considering the specific risks
(posed by the continued use of the substances) compared to the loss of quality of life that a ban would cause.
Several stakeholders have expressed the worry, that the definition of ”essential use” becomes too strict and
thereby exclude any nuances of what essential uses can be, and that this can turn out to be a disadvantage for
the society in the future. Our society changes rapidly, so our requirements for what is essential can change
over a very short period. An example of this was the urgent need for hand sanitiser during the COVID­19
pandemic (EC 2020a).
A wide range of the uses of the most harmful chemical substances would most likely be defined as non­
essential, and the demand for them would decrease dramatically. Therefore, one concern is that producing
these chemical substances will no longer be profitable, and the production will stop. This would make it
impossible to continue using them where they are deemed essential, as chemical substance would either be
very expensive or impossible to get. The production would most likely be moved outside of Europe ­ where
the industrial standards are less strict, and the outcome will be a more polluting production (Montfort 2021;
EC 2020a).
At the expert group CARACAL’s meeting in November 2020, expressed was also concerns about the risk
of restrictions and banning leading to impaired competitiveness and innovation, preventing society from
benefitting from certain conveniences, the risk of transferring health and environmental impact to countries
outside the EU, and the possibility of limiting the free choice of people, when declaring some uses non­
essential (EC 2020a).
Endorsements of the essential use concept
One of the most significant advantages of implementing the concept of essentiality is the possibility of
getting a more simple and transparent legislation. The current legislation is often accused of causing ”paral­
ysis by analysis”, meaning that too much data is needed before decisions can be made. By implementing
the concept of essentiality, work procedures will be better and faster at controlling hazardous substances
(Garnett and Van Calster 2021). The concept of essentiality will also make it possible to easily distinguish
between everyday, non­essential uses in consumer products and essential uses in products and processes
that are essential for the health, safety, or functioning of society. This distinction will make it simpler for
all stakeholders to navigate the legislation (Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
The focus in the CSS is on minimising the use of the most harmful chemical substances and speeding up their
substitution. Anna Lennquist from ChemSec has pointed out that as it is today, substitutions do not happen
unless the alternative gives the exact same aesthetic quality: ”Right now there is no organisation that has
the mandate to say ‘this is not really a function we need as society’” (ChemicalWatch 2022). Implementing
essentiality will therefore improve the pace of substitution by forcing the phase­out of harmful chemicals,
even though no alternatives are available, if the function in the first place is not necessary for health, safety,
or functioning of society (EC 2020b; Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
Applying the concept of essentiality will also mean that the function of a chemical substance, and the neces­
sity of it’s function, is the only factor in place for deciding if the chemical substance should be allowed in
use. In the current legislation, if the suggested alternative is more expensive, it is reason enough to reject it
and continue using the harmful chemical. Introducing the concept of essentiality means that an economical
use no longer will be equal to an essential use, and more substitutions will therefore be implemented (Trier,
pers. com. 2022; Garnett and Van Calster 2021).
A higher encouragement for innovation is also argued as one of the advantages of implementing criteria for
essentiality (EC 2020b; Cousins et al. 2019). New and safer alternatives to harmful chemicals will have
to be invented, and the CSS supports this work through financial support. The increased innovation will
also help the transition to a circular economy, as a circular economy require non­toxic waste streams (EC
2020b).
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
21
==PAGE:30==
At the expert group CARACAL’s meeting in November 2020, it was further discussed that the advantages of
the essentiality criteria are a faster transition to a toxic­free environment, less pollution in the environment,
and a better standing point in relation to making third countries strengthen their environmental standards
(EC 2020a).
5.4
Comparison of different suggestions of the essentiality criteria
Garnett and Van Calster (2021) propose four different ways to implement the essentiality concept under
current EU legislation. The first suggestion is using comitology, where the EC is granted implementing
power for a law. This method is effective as it makes it possible to make changes in the legislation, like
applying the essentiality criteria for PFAS. However, it is not a solution in the long­term for implementing
the essentiality criteria for all legislation because the EC risks overreaching its authority, thereby diluting
the concept of essentiality as a tool. The second suggestion is through the safeguard clause under article
129 in REACH or 114 in TFEU. These articles state that new scientific information shall be considered
when presented to EC by the member states. As there is no current legislation applied for the essential use
concept, this is one of the least efficient methods according to Garnett and Van Calster (2021). The third
suggestion is to include essentiality by amending all relevant legislation. Nothing is hindering this from
being done and Garnett and Van Calster (2021) does not find this suggestion unrealistic, as the European
Green Deal sets a new direction for the EU. It would, however, be important to make the changes in a way
that does not conflict with any part of EU legislation, more specifically, the internal market harmonisation,
the right to property, and the proportionality principle. The fourth and last suggestion is to gradually include
the concept of essentiality when different legislation is being updated. This has previously been done with
the precautionary principle, but it is still too early to determine if this will be possible to do with the criteria
for essentiality, as it is not yet defined.
Suggested definitions for the essentiality criteria
Three suggestions for definitions of the essentiality criteria have been selected for this work: the Mon­
treal Protocol, an enhancement of the protocol performed by Cousins et al. (2019), and a set of questions
developed by ChemSec (2021a).
The Montreal Protocol is introduced in section 5.1. The protocol allows for some specific uses of ozone­
depleting substances when deemed essential for ”health, safety or critical for the functioning of society”.
In the Montreal Protocol, essential uses are often found in the following categories: medical uses, fire­
fighting, plant/crop protection, aerospace applications, laboratory uses, and analytical uses, and process
agent uses (UNEP 2022e; EC 2020e). When looking at the Montreal Protocol, the exemptions are of a
broader definition than what is presented in the CSS, where it is expressly stated that PFAS should be
phased out from fire­fighting uses.
Cousins et al. (2019) have suggested that the definitions in the Montreal Protocol should be split into three:
non­essential, substitutable, and essential uses. This work is a continuance of the Madrid Statement on PFAS
that suggested the implementation of essentiality (Blum et al. 2015). The non­essential uses are solely driven
by market opportunities and are not essential for health, safety, or the functioning of society, and these can
all be phased out with no consequences. The substitutable uses are uses that have become essential because
they fulfil important functions in our society, but where alternatives have been developed that perform just as
well. The essential uses are essential for the health, safety, or the functioning of society, and no alternatives
have been developed yet ­ these can be tolerated until alternatives have been developed. This is a novel
approach, suggested by Cousins et al. (2019), as it will force regulators to evaluate whole categories of
substances, materials, and products (Garnett and Van Calster 2021). Cousins et al. (2019) emphasise that
the focus should be on the service being fulfilled ­ meaning that it is the performance evaluated and not the
chemical substance in itself.
ChemSec is the International Chemical Secretariat, a Swedish NGO working for less harmful chemicals.
22
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:31==
ChemSec (2021a) suggest that we ask: ”Which products are so essential that they need to be used even
if they contain chemicals that may harm human health and the environment?” ChemSec thereby turns the
question upside down and asks us all to reflect upon when we allow the use of harmful chemical substances.
ChemSec has developed five questions to determine essentiality, and the complete list of questions can be
found in Appendix C. The first question exclude all uses that fulfils a luxury, convenience, or leisure. The
second question excludes all ubiquitous uses in our everyday life that may be essential but where harmful
chemical substances are unwanted. The third question evaluate if the chemical substance is used for medical
or military uses, energy production/storage, or transportation ­ if ”yes”, it could be essential. The fourth
question asks if the process or product itself is essential for the overall functioning of society ­ again, a
”yes” will result in a possible essential chemical substance. The fifth and last question asks if there are
any alternative chemical substances or other ways to fulfil the use (function or product) ­ if ”no”, then the
chemical substance is potentially essential and will be evaluated by an expert committee.
In all three approaches, the availability of alternatives is important. If less harmful chemical substances or a
non­chemical method exist, then a chemical substance cannot be seen as essential under any circumstances.
5.5
Essentiality applied to PFAS
The three definitions of the essentiality concept have been applied to the chemical substances group of PFAS.
An introduction to the chemistry of PFAS is found in chapter 3. The analysis is based on a wide range of
PFAS uses, which have been determined by Glüge et al. (2020), who have also identified the function of
PFAS for each specific use. A total of 300 PFAS uses have been evaluated, using the different definitions of
essential use. Many of the uses are of particular technical use, and not much public information is available
due to trade secrets. The results of the essentiality definitions applied to the PFAS uses can be seen in
Figure 5.1.
The results for the Montreal Protocol can be found in Figure 5.1a, and it is seen that 12% of the uses are
deemed essential while 28% of the uses are non­essential, and 60% can not be determined. In Figure 5.1b,
the results for the definition by Cousins et al. (2019) are presented. 1% of the uses are found essential, while
25% is found to be substitutable, 13% is non­essential, and 61% can not be determined. The results for the
definition made by ChemSec are found in Figure 5.1c, where 1% of the uses are found to be essential, 48%
is non­essential, and 51% could not be determined. A table with all uses of PFAS and the evaluation of the
three definitions can be found in Appendix D.
(a) the Montreal Protocol
(b) Cousins et al. (2019)
(c) ChemSec Criteria
Figure 5.1: A total of 300 PFAS uses have been evaluation for the essentiality criteria defined by (a) the
Montreal Protocol, (b) Cousins et al. (2019), and (c) ChemSec (2021a).
Cousins et al. (2019) and ChemSec (2021a) found two essential uses in the categories of ammunition and
medical electronic devices, e.g., pacemakers and defibrillators. When Cousins et al. (2019) and ChemSec
(2021a) found a use to be essential, the use was also found essential according to the Montreal Protocol. The
highest number of essential uses are found with the definition of the Montreal Protocol because the Montreal
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
23
==PAGE:32==
Protocol lists a wide range of uses to be determined as essential. All uses in the exceptions categories
have been evaluated as essential to get a conservative estimate, and the uses are found in the catergories
of aeroplanes, pharmaceuticals, fire­fighting foams, and laboratory uses. The actual amount of essential
uses could therefore be lower, than found in this study. The highest number of non­essential uses are found
using the definition of essentiality made by ChemSec, whose list of questions made it easy to identify all
non­essential uses.
Cousins et al. (2019) was the only with a category of substitutables, and this was also where the lowest
amount of non­essentials was found. The substitutables are, however, uses found to be non­essential, as
alternative exists. Many uses found to be non­essential by the definition from the Montreal Protocol or
ChemSec need to be substituted with alternatives, as the functions they provide are something we do not
wish to live without as a society (e.g., anti­fouling paint and printing ink). This need for substitution is made
evident by Cousins et al. (2019) with the substitutable category.
PFAS are used in a vast amount of consumer products and industries, and for very technically specified uses.
This have made it difficult to determine the essentiality for all of them, which is why a large part (51­61%)
of the uses were impossible to assess, and therefore labelled ”unsure”. In order to evaluate these kinds of
uses, expert knowledge is needed, which is addressed in the Montreal Protocol’s section on essential uses
and the definition of essentiality proposed by ChemSec.
Several categories of uses were impossible to determine, including the energy sector, mining, gas and oil
industry, and soil remediation. When considering the question of whether we accept the use of hazardous
chemicals, it could be argued that the use should not be accepted for these sections, especially soil reme­
diation, where the purpose is to remove hazardous chemicals. For some categories, none of the uses were
found to be essential. This counts for categories like food production, the photographic industry, music in­
struments, personal care products, and sports articles. Many of these categories have in common that PFAS
are used as lubricants or due to their water and oil resistance properties.
PFAS in consumer products are relatively easy to replace. At the same time, the use of PFAS in some
industrial settings are complex, and investments must be made to find the needed alternatives (Glüge et al.
2020). Attention is needed on the development of alternatives in order to ensure that they are, in fact, a better
chemical substance than the PFAS they are replacing. There is a problem today with lacking information
about physio chemical and toxicity properties of alternatives. This means that there is a risk of regrettable
substitution. These results are in line with the results from Glüge et al. (2021), who investigated seven uses
of PFAS under the essential­use concept and the information requirements. In order to accommodate these
issues, more coordination between PFAS manufacturers, manufacturers of alternatives to PFAS, users of the
materials, government authorities, and other stakeholders is needed. This could help make the phase­out
more transparent and coherent, as also discussed in section 3.3 (Cousins et al. 2019; Glüge et al. 2020; Glüge
et al. 2021).
24
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:33==
6
Safe and sustainable­by­design
This chapter analyses the SSbD concept. First, the origin of the concept is investigated in order to gain
background knowledge and perspective. The JRC framework and its suggestions for the criteria are gone
through afterwards, followed by a presentation of alternative definitions, and how they compare. The JRC
framework is then applied to the chemical substances group of PFAS using a grouping approach. Lastly, the
idea of a voluntary tool is investigated and it is investigated whether any initiatives are taken to make the
SSbD criteria a success.
6.1
Origin of safe and sustainable­by­design
The idea of designing and producing chemical substances in a better way has been proposed several times
throughout the last 25 years. OECD introduced sustainable chemistry in 1998, and since then, concepts
like green engineering, circular chemistry, and safe­by­design have been suggested as a safer and more
sustainable way to produce chemical substances compared to the current system (OECD 2022; USEPA
2021; Keijer et al. 2019; Mech et al. 2022). Safe­by­design has been used as a guideline for developing
nano­materials for more than ten years, and has been found an advantage for identifying hot spots for health
concerns in the process (Sealy 2011; Tsalidis et al. 2022). EU has also implemented initiatives for producing
products more sustainably. These initiatives include the EcoDesign, Energy labelling and the development
of a sustainable product initiative (EC and Council 2017; EC 2022c).
In order to fulfil the European Green Deal’s zero pollution ambition for a toxic­free environment, the CSS
has a focus box called ”safe and sustainable­by­design”, as seen in Table 4.1. The focus box has six actions
and proposes that chemicals and materials must be rethought and redesigned in a way that does not create
toxic pollution during the production, the use, or at the end of their lifecycle. In the Strategy Action Plan
the development of the SSbD criteria is planned to be conducted in 2022 (EC 2020c). The SSbD concept
is a holistic approach consisting of a safety assessment and a sustainability assessment. Today, many in­
terpretations are found on the words ”safe” and ”sustainable” (van der Waals et al. 2019). Therefore, the
taxonomy of the SSbD concept is very important to avoid confusion.
The first part of the concept, ”safe”, is suggested to focus on minimising unwanted inherent properties early
in the design phase, including (eco)­toxicity, (bio)­accumulation, persistency, and mobility (van der Waals
et al. 2019; Trier, pers. com. 2022). The chemical substance should be safe throughout the whole lifecycle
for both (production)­workers and users. Ensuring that the chemical substances fulfil the safe­criteria also
makes them suitable for being a part of a circular economy. ”Safe” can also be based on the risk related to the
chemical substance, meaning that risk is the probability that a hazard will result in an adverse consequence
(ACS 2022).
The second part of the concept, ”sustainable”, includes both environment, biodiversity, local environment,
climate and carbon footprint et cetera, which have to be evaluated for the whole lifecycle (van der Waals
et al. 2019; Trier, pers. com. 2022). The definition for sustainable development given in the Brundtland
Report (Our Common Future): ”development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (Brundtland 1987) is often­used and have also been
suggested to be taken into account here (Mech et al. 2022).
It is furthermore suggested by the EC in the ”mapping study for the development of Sustainable­by­Design
criteria” that there should be a mandatory minimum criterion and a possibility for a higher ambition with
voluntary criteria (EC and DG R&I 2021).
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
25
==PAGE:34==
The link to circular economy
The idea of an SSbD concept is closely linked to the EU’s ambition of a higher amount of circularity in
the economy, as presented in the European Green Deal, section 4.2. The CSS emphasises the importance of
secondary raw materials and states that the same limit values for hazardous substances should apply for both
virgin and recycled material (EC 2020b). Designing chemical substances and materials with sustainability
in mind mean that a higher amount can be recycled and reused for several lifecycles. This requires that
materials can be turned into mono­materials and that the chemical substances, e.g., additives, easily can be
removed (van der Waals et al. 2019).
Fantke et al. (2021) explain that SSbD must be designed to support the shift to circular business models.
Society needs to move away from linear systems with max profit as the end goal, and SSbD can help the
transition to circular systems that also includes minimising environmental costs.
It is important to look at the whole lifecycle perspective when chemical substance recycling processes are
being evaluated to secure an overall positive environmental and climate performance. It is also important
to focus on both upstream and downstream actions when increasing the amount of recycling. This has to
be done to find the safest and most sustainable option taking both economic and environmental costs into
account (van der Waals et al. 2019). Increasing the number of lifecycles is not always preferred compared
to prolonging of the lifetime.
6.2
Framework proposed by the Joint Research Centre
The development of the criteria for SSbD is further in the process than the criteria for essentiality. On the
behalf of the EC, the JRC has conducted a ”Framework for the definition of criteria and evaluation procedure
for chemicals and materials”, which was published as a draft report in early 2022 and is currently undergoing
consultation. The draft report suggests a holistic, hierarchical approach for the assessments, where safety is
evaluated first, followed by environmental sustainability, and afterwards, the social and economic aspects,
as seen in Figure 6.1 (Caldeira et al. 2022b). JRC has furthermore published a ”Review of safety and
sustainability dimensions, aspects, methods, indicators, and tools” to be taken into account for the SSbD
definition, which also came out in the first months of 2022 (Caldeira et al. 2022a).
The results of the JRC were presented at the first SSbD workshop (see Table 4.2, section 4.7). It was
here declared that the SSbD tool will be voluntary with the possibility of becoming legislation later. It
was also introduced that focus at current time is on research and development (R&D), to collect data, and
gain experience with evaluating the safety and sustainability through different case studies. At the second
stakeholder workshop, it was furthermore declared that chemical substances could only be labelled SSbD
for specified uses because the whole lifecycle has to be evaluated.
As described earlier, taxonomy is very important when discussing safety and sustainability. In the JRC
framework, ”chemical safety” is defined as safety ”for humans and the environment, preferably ensured by
the absence of intrinsic hazard properties of chemicals”, while ”sustainability” is defined as the ”ability of
a chemical/material/product/service to deliver its function without exceeding environmental and ecological
boundaries along its entire life cycle, while providing welfare and socio­economic benefits” (Caldeira et al.
2022b).
The JRC framework treats safety as a precursor for sustainability, as seen in Figure 6.1. The framework
account all three dimensions of sustainability: environment, social, and economical, and all three dimen­
sions must be met for something to become truly sustainable. This hierarchical approach means that the
safety requirements have to be fulfilled before the sustainability requirements are evaluated, and that the
sustainability requirements must be fulfilled for all three dimensions (Caldeira et al. 2022b).
The construction of the framework consists of two parts: the (re)design part and the sustainability assess­
ment. When performing the evaluations, the focus should be on the functionality of the chemical substances
26
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.1: The link between safety and the three dimensions of sustainability, made with inspiration from
Caldeira et al. (2022a).
rather than the chemical structure. This will make it easier to assess alternatives. Both parts of the SSbD
framework will be presented below.
The design assessment in the framework
The SSbD concept underlines that safety and sustainability should be part of the development from the
design phase. This includes the molecular design of the chemical substances and considerations for the
materials. The process design of the production and the product design of the end product is not a part of
this framework, as this is included in the sustainable products directive (Trier, pers. com. 2022; EC 2022c).
In order to ensure that safety and sustainability become part of the design process, 13 design principles
are presented, as seen in Table 6.1 together with an assessment of their effect on safety and sustainability
(Caldeira et al. 2022b).
Table 6.1: Safe and sustainable­by­design principles for the design phase (Caldeira et al. 2022b)
Principle
Safety
Sustainability
Other
1.
Atom economy: Including all materials in the
final product to eliminate waste
×
2.
Design with less hazardous chemicals
×
×
3.
Design efficiently to be more sustainable
×
×
4.
Use renewable sources
×
5.
Prevent and avoid hazardous emissions
×
×
6.
Reduce exposure to hazardous substances
×
×
7.
Design for commercial after life
×
×
8.
The E factor: Prevent natural resources by
reduction, reuse, recycle of waste
×
×
9.
Dematerialisation: sell service, not product
×
10.
Design and promote new process strategies
×
11.
Supportive policy framework
×
12.
Reduce production
×
×
13.
Consider the whole life­cycle
×
×
In total
3
10
8
Three of the principles are related to safety, ten are related to sustainability, and eight are related to other
aspects, like policy and production. Two of the 13 principles directly relate to developing chemical sub­
stances: no. 2 ”design with less hazardous chemicals” and no. 5 ”prevent and avoid hazardous emissions”.
Both principles relate to both the safety of the chemical substance. Several of the others are also related to
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
27
==PAGE:36==
chemical substances, e.g., no. 1 ”atom economy”, which is a concept of including all components during
the production into the final product in order to minimise waste, and no. 13 ”consider the whole lifecycle”,
which underlines the importance of taking all steps of production, use, and end­of­life into account.
The sustainability assessment in the framework
The sustainability assessment consists of five steps, as seen in Table 6.2. The first three steps evaluate the
safety of the chemical substances, while the fourth and fifth steps evaluate the sustainability. The first step
looks at the intrinsic hazardous properties of a chemical substance and has cut­off criteria for properties
never to be labelled SSbD. The second step looks at the health and safety of the production workers, while
the third step looks at the health and safety of users and the environment, this evaluation does not take into
account the amounts used or if exposure is likely to happen. The fourth step evaluates the environmental
sustainability of all lifecycle stages. Sustainability is evaluated for a number of areas, including (eco)­
toxicity, environmental impact (climate change, resource use), and waste production. The fifth and last step
evaluates the socio­economic impacts and is not included in the proposed framework.
Table 6.2: Safe and Sustainable by Design Sustainability assessment, as presented by JRC (Caldeira et al.
2022b)
Action
Step 1
Safety of chemical and material: Hazard­based approach (cut­off criteria)
Step 2
Chemical or material processing safety: Occupational safety and health approach
(production focus)
Step 3
Human health and environmental impacts from the use phase: Direct exposure (use
focus)
Step 4
Environmental sustainability assessment (LCA)
Step 5
Social and economic sustainability assessment (maybe voluntary)
Result:
Either a class (poor, good, very good) or a numerical score (consider weighting)
The proposed framework encompasses suggested criteria for step 1 and 2. These include different kinds of
hazards and sections of varying severity. The tables listing all unwanted inherent properties for chemical
substances to be accessed can be found in Appendix E.
Step 4 is the most comprehensive step in the assessment and includes all aspects of environmental sustain­
ability. The framework suggests that an life cycle assessment (LCA) should be carried out and include
toxicity, climate change, pollution, and resources, a full list of impacts is found in Table 6.3. LCA is a well­
known method used to evaluate, e.g., the carbon footprint over the whole lifecycle. In order to use LCA
to evaluate the full environment sustainability, further development of the method is needed to include all
the other aspects (Packroff and Marx 2022). It also needs to be considered that LCA assess the normal use
and therefore fails to evaluate extreme cases like an accident (Hauschild et al. 2022). Lastly, LCA is a very
data­heavy method, where many assumptions often have to be made. This means that more (and different)
data is needed, and there is, therefore, a need for new data­collection methods to get a useful result (Fantke
et al. 2021).
One of the biggest challenges is to assess safety early in the design phase because data is often not available
(Mech et al. 2022). Another challenge is the need for reliable data, as stakeholders need it to evaluate safety
and sustainability of their chemical substances. Accessible and open databases with hazard profiles, and
other important information, for both existing and novel chemical substances are often suggested by the
industry and would be of high use (van der Waals et al. 2019; ChemSec et al. 2022).
6.3
Alternative suggestions for safe and sustainable­by­design
Other stakeholders have presented alternative definitions of SSbD, and two of these suggestions have been
posed by the European Chemical Industry Council (Cefic) and by Hauschild et al. (2022). ChemSec has not
28
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:37==
Table 6.3: Aspects to be included in the sustainability assessment (Caldeira et al. 2022b)
Impact category
1.
Climate change
2.
Human toxicity, cancer
3.
Human toxicity, non­cancer
4.
Ecotoxicity
5.
Particulate matter
6.
Ionising radiation
7.
Ozone depletion
8.
Eutrophication, terrestrial
9.
Eutrophication, marine
10.
Eutrophication, freshwater
11.
Ozone formation
12.
Acidification
13.
Mineral and metals resource depletion
14.
Fossil resource depletion
15.
Land use
16.
Water use
developed a suggestion for an assessment but has published some considerations to be considered.
ChemSec interprets the idea of SSbD as a development guideline that can be used to determine what the
EU should invest in (Lennquist, pers. com. 2022). ChemSec underlines that hazardous chemical substances
never can be labelled SSbD, as they are neither safe nor sustainable to use (ChemSec 2021b). This is
supported by Xenia Trier from EEA, who explains that the purpose of SSbD is to support future designs of
services, which will limit future uses and developments of SOC as chemicals in materials, processes, and
products (Trier, pers. com. 2022; EEA 2022a). ChemSec explains that SSbD needs to have higher ambitions
than current legislation, otherwise it will not contribute anything new (ChemSec 2022). ChemSec has paid
attention to the amount of data needed for evaluating SSbD and stress that this must not end with ”no data
= no harm”, where a lack of data results in positive assessments. To avoid this, ChemSec suggests a simple
framework in the first years with a step­wise increase in the number of impact factors for academia and
industries to get the time needed to produce the methods and data (ChemSec 2021b).
Cefic is the largest trade association for the chemicals industry in the EU and is located in Brussels. Cefic
and its members have defined SSbD as ”chemicals, materials, products, processes and services that are safe,
and deliver environmental, societal, and/or economical value through their applications”. Cefic published
a suggestion for SSbD in spring 2022, consisting of five steps, as seen in Table 6.4. Cefic reads SSbD as an
innovation tool, just like ChemSec, and their suggestion is also an assessment method made for this. This
assessment evaluates safety based on risk. The goal of the suggested tool is to improve one of the aspects
without negatively affecting any other aspect and thereby supporting a step­wise development of safer and
more sustainable products (Cefic 2022).
The five steps proposed by Cefic focus on the design phase and suggest another method for finding the
best alternative (Cefic 2021). The definition proposed by Cefic contrasts with the JRC framework on two
important topics: the risk­based safety evaluation and the fact that ”a safe chemical” that gives economic
value is enough to be labelled SSbD under this definition.
Another approach for assessing SSbD has been proposed by Hauschild et al. (2022). The paper presents
four ways of linking safety and sustainability, and an overview of these can be found in Table 6.5. In all
four cases, the safety is evaluated through a risk assessment (RA), while the sustainability is evaluated using
an LCA. In option 1, two assessments are made, an RA and an LCA. For the two assessments, acceptable
outcomes are decided for each, which are evaluated individually. For option 2, the RA and LCA are again
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 6.4: Safe and Sustainable by Design Sustainability assessment, as proposed by Cefic (Cefic 2022)
Action
Step 1
Performance and functionality needs
Step 2
Identify scope through assessment dimensions (list of recommendations)
Step 3
Select design principles along dimensions dimensions (list of recommendations)
Step 4
Perform comparative assessments
Step 5
Select solutions after having evaluated trade­offs
made separately, but the outputs are compared using utility theory. In option 3, an LCA is performed, and
details from a RA are added to the impact assessment phase to include the safety aspect. In option 4, an
LCA is performed, and a RA is added ”selectively and iteratively” to maximise the results’ values.
Table 6.5: The four different ways of combining risk­ and sustainability assessments, as proposed by
Hauschild et al. (2022). LCA is life­cycle assessment, while RA is risk assessment.
Combination
Option 1
Make an LCA and a RA, with two independent outcomes
Option 2
Make an LCA and a RA, and evaluate and compare using utility theory
Option 3
Make an LCA, and embed details of RA into it
Option 4
Make an LCA and embed RA to maximise the value of the LCA results
The suggested approach from Hauschild et al. (2022) agrees with the JRC framework on using LCA for
evaluating sustainability, while it is in line with the risk assessment method for evaluating safety suggested
by Cefic.
The paper highlights the importance of system thinking and the need for findable, accessible, interoperable,
and reusable (FAIR) and reliable data (Hauschild et al. 2022). The authors weighed the four combinations
against a list of criteria (including feasibility, reliability, completeness, transparency, and comparability with
decision­making and value of information principles) and found option 4 to be the best method.
6.4
Safe and sustainable­by­design criteria applied for PFAS
The five­step sustainability assessment, as proposed by JRC in section 6.2, has been applied to the chemical
substances group of PFAS. PFAS will be evaluated in each of the five steps ­ even though it technically
would be restricted in an earlier step. This is done to investigate the whole SSbD framework as it is right
now. As not all of the five steps have been fully defined, it has not been possible to do a full assessment of
PFAS.
PFAS are a good example for evaluating the SSbD concept, as it is a synthetic substance. As described
in chapter 3, the C­F bond does not occur in nature, meaning that it has been designed and developed by
humans. It is therefore imaginable that if PFAS were to be invented in a few years, it would have to be
evaluated through SSbD.
Step 1: Safety of chemical and material
The indicators relevant in step 1 can be found in Appendix E, table 1. The hazardous properties related
to PFAS are in the category of human health hazards and environmental hazards, while none are physical
hazards (explosives, self­reactive or similar), as seen in Appendix E. PFAS are, as described in chapter 3,
both PBT or persistent, bioaccumulative and mobile (PBM). PFAS are also known to be carcinogenic, affect
the reproductive system, and as endocrine disruptors.
Due to these properties, it is highly unlikely that PFAS would be labelled as a SSbD substance. Since the
evaluation of the inherent properties of the chemical substances is also a cut­off criterion, it is most likely
30
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:39==
that PFAS would not be considered SSbD regardless of the results of the other steps based on a grouping
assessment.
Step 2: Chemical or material process safety
The indicators relevant in step 2 can be found in Appendix E, table 2. The safety properties related to the
process safety for PFAS are acute human health hazards, chronic human health hazards, process­related
hazards, and hazards from release behaviour, while none of them are physical properties. The acute and
chronic health hazards are of very high risk, for the same reasons as in step 1, while the process­related
hazards are of very high risk due to the large area application of PFAS. The hazards from release behaviour
are of medium­risk process and are related to the vapour pressure of PFAS often being in the range of 10­50
hPa (ITRC 2021).
Due to these properties, it is highly unlikely that PFAS would be labelled as an SSbD substance.
Step 3: Human health and environmental impacts from the use phase
The JRC framework does not present any definition or indicator table for step 3, but it is highlighted that both
human health and ecotoxicity should be considered. Caldeira et al. (2022b) suggest that this can be done
as a risk assessment considering intake and exposure fractions for human health and cumulative transfer
fraction for the environment. The use phase involves both professional and consumer uses, and the 300
uses of PFAS found by Glüge et al. (2020) could therefore be used for inspiration. The consumer use of
PFAS involves, e.g., cosmetics, where the product is applied directly on the skin, or fishing lines, where
the product is in direct contact with natural environments. Today it is known that exposure does happen to
both professional workers and consumers through migration, and higher concentrations of PFAS are found
in workers and people living near production plants (Fenton et al. 2021; Abunada et al. 2020).
Due to the missing definition of the human health and environmental safety, it has not been possible to
determine whether PFAS would pass this assessment.
Step 4: Environmental sustainability assessment
JRC has not developed any definitions or an indicator table for step 4, but the framework focuses on chemical
substances becoming absolute environmental sustainable. The impact categories presented by JRC have
been evaluated for PFAS, and the results are found in Table 6.6. The findings show that much is still
unknown. It seems like PFAS do not impact many of the categories, and the ones they impact are already
covered in step 1 and 2. From this, it could be argued that PFAS are not a concern seen from an environmental
sustainability perspective, but (eco)­toxicity is an important factor, as it prevents recycling. However, it is
important to remember that the lack of information found is not equal to no effects.
When looking at PFAS and climate change, no scientific information is found, and only one relevant newspa­
per article could be found. The Guardian published the article in 2021 and covered a report from Toxic­Free
Future. The report finds that one of America’s largest PFAS manufacturing plants is responsible for emitting
HCFC­22, a chemical substance with a global warming potential (GWP) of 5000, and phased out in 2020
under the Montreal Protocol (UNEP 2022d). Since the information is limited, it is impossible to conclude
anything from this, and it underlines the need for data when making this assessment.
It is also important to consider the persistency and bioaccumulation of PFAS, both happening in environ­
mental matrices and humans, as described in chapter 3. This is not a part of the table but is still of serious
concern.
When assessing the environmental sustainability of PFAS, it is important to consider that even though the
production does not require large amounts of, e.g., land and water, PFAS will still contaminate large land
and water areas, as it is mobile. PFAS are also found to attach to aerosols (particulate matter) and thereby
spread even further, as described in chapter 3.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 6.6: Aspects to be included in the sustainability assessment applied to PFAS (Caldeira et al. 2022b)
Impact category
Affected by PFAS?
1.
Climate change
More information
needed
2.
Human toxicity, cancer
Yes, see step 1 and 2
3.
Human toxicity, non­cancer
Yes, see step 1 and 2
4.
Ecotoxicity
Yes, see step 1 and 2
5.
Particulate matter
None found
6.
Ionising radiation
None found
7.
Ozone depletion
None found
8.
Eutrophication, terrestrial
None found
9.
Eutrophication, marine
None found
10.
Eutrophication, freshwater
None found
11.
Ozone formation
None found
12.
Acidification
None found
13.
Mineral and metals resource depletion
None found
14.
Fossil resource depletion
None found
15.
Land use
None found
16.
Water use
None found
When evaluating the environmental sustainability of alternatives to PFAS, it is important to evaluate the
service delivered/function of the chemical substance (and not the structure), as described in section 6.2. It
has been out of the scope of this thesis to perform an LCA on any use of PFAS, but Holmquist et al. (2021)
have made an LCA of alternative water repellent chemicals. The study found that non­PFAS durable water
repellents were preferable to PFAS.
Due to the missing definition of the environmental sustainability, it has not been possible to determine
whether PFAS would pass this assessment.
Step 5: Social and economic sustainability assessment
Social and economic sustainability is not a part of the framework presented by JRC. However, there are
several aspects to consider when assessing PFAS. On one side, the argument for using PFAS is found, as it
is a cheap, multi­use chemical substance that has made life more convenient for both professional workers
and consumers. On the other side, the human and environmental consequences of the uses is found, as PFAS
are both PBT and mobile, which has resulted in PFAS being present worldwide in all matrices, including
humans. Society and the EC need to take this discussion to determine to what extent we will let our need
for convenience dictate what we allow in our products. It is out of the scope of this work to investigate
whether this would affect the evaluations of SSbD, but it is the hope that the considerations above can give
a perspective on the issue.
Due to the missing definition of the social and economic sustainability, it has not been possible to determine
whether PFAS would pass this assessment.
6.5
Implementation of a voluntary environmental programme
As stated in section 6.2, SSbD is currently being developed as a VEP. A higher number of VEPs have been
introduced over the last decades, raising the need to secure the success of them (Hansen and Tickner 2007).
This is especially true when the VEPS are to be used instead of legislation, as the case is with SSbD. When
investing the time and resources into developing a VEP, it is important to look at the lessons learned from
earlier VEPs in order for it to become a success. Hansen and Tickner (2007) have developed a guideline
on how to secure that a VEP will become widely used by the intended target group. ChemSec (2022) has
expressed the need for SSbD to ”create incentives for the industry” and not only be criteria to be used to
32
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:41==
support R&D.
There exist four general ways of developing a VEP, depending on the amount of involvement from author­
ities and industry. When authorities develop the programme alone, it is called a public, voluntary scheme,
while it is called a negotiated agreement, when authorities and industries do the development together.
When only the industries and their associations are involved, it is called a unilateral agreement, and when
only industries and affected communities are involved, it is called a ”good neighbour agreement” (Hansen
and Tickner 2007). The EC and JRC have involved various stakeholders, both in the development of the
framework and in the process of defining the criteria for SSbD. Several workshops have been held and it has
been made clear how inputs have been incorporated into the work. The SSbD, therefore, will be a negotiated
agreement.
Hansen and Tickner (2007) have formulated five main lessons to be learned in what makes a VEP a success.
The first element is to ensure incentives to participate for various stakeholders. Incentives are important as
they are the reason for the companies to engage in the VEP and can be formulated as: what does the VEP
offer the companies? The second element is to provide agency guidance and technical assistance. It is a way
to show the companies what they can gain from attending the VEP. The third element is to include signed
commitments and periodical reporting. It is often the managing director who does the signing, and it is a
way for the directorate of a company to be invested in the VEP; when the director signs, they put their name
on the commitment. The fourth element is to ensure quality information. High­quality information ensures
that the companies know what is expected from them and how they deliver on it. The fifth and last element
is ensuring design, reporting, and evaluation transparency. Transparency is important, as this a way for the
companies to know what and how to deliver in order to fulfil the criteria, and how to improve their chemical
substances and materials, if necessary.
The JRC framework does not include any suggestions on how the implementation should be conducted.
Therefore, this analysis is based on the workshops presented in Table 4.2, interviews with Xenia Trier from
EAA and Anna Lennquist from ChemSec, and literature from EU and stakeholders.
JRC has from the beginning transparently communicated its work. The framework, as an example, has been
published as a draft, encouraging stakeholders to discuss it. They have also done two stakeholder workshops,
in which the second workshop explained where and how the stakeholder discussions and comments would
be implemented. The result of this is that stakeholders feel seen and heard, and they are thereby becoming
more positive towards the SSbD proposal.
Incentives for participating in a VEP can both be encouraging and threatening. An encouraging incentive is
the idea of a certification scheme, where companies pay a fee for the certification and, in exchange, receive
agency guidance and technical support, which have been suggested by Trier, pers. com. (2022) as a method
for SSbD. On the other hand, a threatening incentive is a possibility of SSbD becoming mandatory later.
Engaging early in the process will give a lead to companies participating in the development of SSbD.
The importance of agency guidance and technical assistance has been supported by Anna Lennquist and
ChemSec, who highlights the importance of transparency in the criteria for a certification (ChemSec 2022).
Lennquist also advocates for a public discussion about how to secure the quality of data and which data gaps
will be allowed. Doing as suggested by Trier and Lennquist will improve the quality of information and
transparency in reporting. This will increase the possibility for the VEP to become a success, according to
Hansen and Tickner (2007).
It has not been possible to find any suggestions or encouragement for signed commitments, even though it
is a well­known method that does not require much effort. It could be interesting to implement this for, e.g.,
universities and other R&D sectors, where a high amount of the scientific work and research is happening.
This would increase the focus on the importance of developing SSbD and ensure that SSbD is communicated
to these areas, which is very important to do according to Packroff and Marx (2022).
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
33
==PAGE:42==
At the second SSbD workshop, JRC has made an open call for all companies to participate in a case study,
where they get to test the methodology and help identify bottlenecks and solutions. This is a way of improv­
ing and securing the quality of the information requirements. The JRC review report states that documen­
tation must be provided for decisions, e.g., trade­offs in the LCAs performed (Caldeira et al. 2022a). This
shows that initiatives toward good data quality are done.
Overall, it can be concluded, that even though the JRC framework does not include any initiatives, many
suggestions are found on making SSbD a successful VEP. It is important that these suggestions, as presented
above, are implemented in the final definition of the VEP, in order to ensure that SSbD actually becomes a
useful and well­used tool.
34
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion
In this chapter the discussion is found. First the essentiality concept is discussed, and it will result in three
recommendations for future work with the concept. This is followed by a discussion of SSbD, also resulting
in three recommendations for future work. Afterwards the CSS as a complete strategy will be discussed and
evaluated. Then, the methodological considerations are presented, and the use of workshops as a research
method will be evaluated, resulting in eight aspects for considerations when participating in workshops. In
the last part of the chapter the avenue for future actions is presented.
7.1
Essential use in European chemicals legislation
Essentiality is a GRA approach with the purpose of making legislation more preventive, as essentiality does
not take into account the possibility of risk ­ but instead evaluates whether the chemical itself is too harmful
to be used in products. The criteria of essentiality are to be implemented in the EU chemicals legislation
only for the use of the most harmful chemical substances, which is important to remember when discussing
the concept. Introducing criteria for essentiality is an action towards a toxic­free future, as intended in the
CSS.
Deciding that some uses are non­essential will mean that some products will no longer be available. It
is, therefore, important to discuss what an essential use is in our society. Chemical substances fulfil an
extensive range of everyday functions that we are too convenient to live without in our modern society.
The discussion has to target the question of which specific uses are so essential that we will allow the use
of harmful chemical substances in order to fulfil them. In the CSS, consumer products are highlighted as
an area where the use of harmful chemicals should be phased out. The approach suggested by ChemSec,
that no everyday consumer products can be seen as essential, is therefore found to be in agreement with
the CSS. When discussing the definition of essentiality, is important to take into account considerations for
regional variances. Examples of this are mosquito repellent and air conditioning having different importance
in different areas of Europe ­ what some people find convenient is necessary for others.
One concern raised, is the risk of innovation being hindered. It is true, that the concept of essential use will
hinder some innovation, as non­essential use of the most harmful chemicals will be regulated. However,
innovation for safe alternatives has a high priority, as presented in the CSS. The CSS focus boxes have
several actions supporting innovation and a wide range of substitutions are still to be developed. These
have to be found as new chemicals, new uses of existing chemicals, and new technologies minimising the
use of chemicals. The CSS has repeatedly stated that this area will get financial support.
One of the strengths, seen from an environmental point of view, is the omitting of economical considerations
for alternative assessments. The working definition of essentiality in the CSS specify that the alternatives are
to be evaluated with respect for the impact on environment and health. This does not mean that economy is
of no importance but underlines the focus in the CSS on supporting the transition to a toxic­free environment.
Evaluating the technical function of use, as done with ozone­depleting chemical substances in the Montreal
Protocol, is a method that requires a high level of expertise. When this is to be done for all harmful chem­
icals (under REACH and other legislation), it will require expert knowledge in an extensive range of areas
and for very different chemical substances. It will, furthermore, require a high amount of data and many
considerations to be taken into account. This is also seen in the PFAS case study, where all three definitions
of essentiality had a high amount of ”unsure”, meaning that it was impossible to determine whether the
use was essential. All of the evaluations of PFAS have been done by looking at the technical function of
use, as suggested by Cousins et al. (2019). Another way to look at the bigger picture is to do as ChemSec
(2021a) suggested, asking when we accept that a product contains hazardous chemicals. This approach is
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
35
==PAGE:44==
supported by Xenia Trier, chemicals expert at EEA. Trier suggests that the focus should be on determining
some ”considerations for essentiality”. These considerations should become guidelines for when something
can be seen as truly essential: When is something so vital that we can allow the use of hazardous chemicals?
Even when a use is found to be essential, it is important to remember that it is only currently essential, and
alternatives have to be developed (Trier, pers. com. 2022).
In order to avoid regrettable substitution, it is crucial to evaluate the alternatives used for replacing the
harmful chemicals. Glüge et al. (2021) found that many of the alternatives suggested (or already in use) for
PFAS had limited or no publicly available information about, e.g., toxicity and physio­chemical properties.
This highlight the importance of data on the proposed definitions and the need for creating this data. The
CSS has no suggestion for the delegation of this task; therefore, it can be assumed that the industry has to
do it, as it is under the current legislation. In order to secure that new alternatives are of no risk, it can be
advantageous to develop these using the SSbD approach.
When taking all of this into account, I find that the essentiality concept will be beneficial for European
chemicals legislation. The Montreal Protocol can be used as an inspiration, underlining the focus on ”health,
safety, and functioning of society”, however there is a need for decreasing the emphasis on ”the technical
function of use”, as this would lower the immense need for data. Instead, the focus should be kept on
determining what we, as a society, find essential. The question proposed by ChemSec can be used as an
inspiration to answer which functions are of such high importance that we will continue the use, even though
it requires harmful chemical substances.
The following three recommendations are based on the key findings and reflect the work that still has to be
done before criteria for essentiality can be included in the European chemicals legislation:
• In order to avoid regrettable substitution, data on the alternative chemical substances is needed, es­
pecially about toxicity and physio­chemical properties
• To limit the need for data, less emphasis should be put on the ”technical function of use”, than is the
case in the Montreal Protocol
• Focus should be on determining what we as a society find to be so essential that we will allow the
use of harmful chemical substances to fulfil this need
7.2
Safe and sustainable­by­design, an immense task
The CSS has the aim of ”boosting innovation for safe and sustainable chemicals”, and the first focus box
to be presented in the strategy is ”safe and sustainable­by­design”. According to CSS, SSbD should be a
pre­market approach, and likewise in the essentiality criteria, the focus is on the function provided by the
chemical substance. It is an ambitious task to evaluate the chemical substances’ safety and sustainability.
Ascertaining that chemicals are developed to be safe and sustainable from the design phase will be an ex­
tensive task. The method is still being developed but if this is done correctly, it can help avoid regrettable
substitution. Introducing SSbD is an action toward a more circular society, as it will increase the possibility
for reusing and recycling.
Disagreement is found in how ”safety” should be assessed, and in whether risk should be a part of the evalu­
ation. The JRC framework (step 1+2) did not include risk, but base the assessment on whether the chemical
substances had any unwanted inherent properties. This definition is in agreement with essentiality, as de­
fined in the Montreal Protocol, and is also supported by ChemSec, who stresses that hazardous chemicals
should never be labelled SSbD. On the contrary is Cefic and Hauschild et al. (2022) who use a risk as­
sessment approach to define ”safety”. The CSS has a ”toxic­free ambition for the future”, as the overall
goal. Therefore, looking at the inherent properties of the chemical substances, is most likely to be used for
assessing safety in the future.
36
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:45==
As for the concept of essentiality, concerns have been raised that SSbD will hinder creativity in innova­
tion and limit the options for developing new chemical substances. This concern has been responded to by
Packroff and Marx (2022), who asked who would wish to be responsible for developing something danger­
ous, causing the next environmental catastrophe. With this in mind, SSbD should be read as an innovation
framework to ensure safer and more sustainable chemicals in the future. Chemical substances being labelled
SSbD should minimise the risk of them being harmful.
The JRC framework is not fully developed, and it is unclear how step 3 to 5 should be evaluated. It is,
however, clear that the suggested method requires large amounts of data. In the framework, a wide range of
considerations for safety and sustainability is included, especially for the environmental sustainability as­
sessment (step 4), which includes 16 different aspects. High data requirements increase the risk of ”death by
data” where it becomes impossible (or at least very expensive) to assess the different aspects. Furthermore,
the data is often not available, because it is too early in the process to measure.
It is not realistic to create this amount of data in a near time frame, and it is, therefore, vital to discuss how the
lack of data should be handled. The JRC framework addresses the need for some suggestions or guidelines,
but the section is still to be written (Caldeira et al. 2022b), while the JRC review (Caldeira et al. 2022a)
presents different methods for handling data gaps are presented. However, none of the methods are fit for a
direct application.
In order for the JRC framework to label a substance as SSbD, the specific use has to be taken into account.
This is incongruent with the CSS, which focuses on the chemical substances and the need for non­toxic
production and waste streams. The need for each use to be evaluated is putting attention to the end­product,
instead of the beginning of the design­phase. Evaluating each specific use will require large amounts of
data, often only available late in the design process.
The mismatch between the freedom in the design process and access to data, as highlighted in the sections
above, is often a problem in innovation and is known as the Collingridge Dilemma (Köhler and Som 2014).
At the beginning of the process total freedom of how the design shall be is found, but no data is available.
In the end, all data is available, but it is no longer possible to change the design. The dilemma is worth
considering for SSbD if it is to be used as a design tool, and a solution could be a screening method. Several
stakeholders have expressed the wish for accessible open databases with hazard profiles for both existing
and novel chemicals, which could also help minimise the issue of this dilemma. For the results of the
assessments to be useful, data must be of good quality. Mech et al. (2022) and van der Waals et al. (2019)
suggest the FAIR guideline, as presented by Wilkinson et al. (2016).
The safety and sustainability could be increased by introducing some requirements in the design process.
One approach could be the EEA early warning signs, drawn from lessons learned, which have earlier been
proven successful in assessing plastic (Paulsen et al. 2022). The warning signs screen for novelty use,
persistency, readily dispersion, bioaccumulation, and the potential for irreversible harm.
In the PFAS case study it was possible to find a large amount of safety­related information. Information
about sustainability, on the other hand, was insufficient. This is very interesting, as a large amount of
research about PFAS exist, as described in section 3.2. One reason for the lack of data could be the areas
presented in sustainability assessment not matching the concerns related to PFAS. It is known, that PFAS
are a huge concern to our health, as described in Figure 3.2, and resources have therefor been put in this
area, leaving other environmental areas uncharted.
It is important to look into who will be responsible for generating the large amount of data needed. Today, in
REACH, the industry is responsible for submitting that data. ChemSec et al. (2022) have disclosed that the
industries have trouble getting information about sustainability from their suppliers. The method introduced
by Cefic (2022) could be a solution to this. Cefic’s proposal is a ladder that step­wise increases the safety
and sustainability of a chemical substance. The drawbacks of this method is that transition periods could
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
37
==PAGE:46==
become too long, economy becomes a reason for not improving on safety or sustainability, and that focus is
on the end­product and not the design phase.
I find that the suggested JRC framework is too comprehensive. It will not be possible to evaluate the safety
of all chemicals, and the sustainability of all uses, as suggested. Instead, SSbD should be more focused on
the design and development of chemical substances, as the principles for the design phase in the framework
are. The energy should be put in developing an upstream approach, as this is where the highest amount of
flexibility is found, compared to the end of the product development. It wold also be interesting to make
SSbD more coherent with the sustainable product initiative, mentioned in section 6.1. Instead of evaluating
services or functions, it would make sense to look at the whole product.
The SSbD must include cut­off criteria, with the purpose of ensuring that harmful chemical substances
(both concerning health and environment) are not to be labelled as SSbD. If these criteria are removed,
SSbD cannot be a driver for a more sustainable future.
The following three recommendations are based on the key findings and reflect the work that still has to be
done before criteria for SSbD can be included in the European chemicals legislation:
• As the lack of data is extensive, the reliability on data needs to be limited in the assessments
• The safety assessment should be based on the inherent properties of the chemical substances and not
on the risk of exposure
• Focus should be on the design process, ensuring that new chemical substances are developed to be
non­harmful
7.3
Implementation of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
The CSS is being implemented as we speak (2020−). Therefore, this thesis’s work is prospective and not
retrospective in many aspects. This means that conclusions cannot always be drawn on ”lessons learned”.
Instead, the work here is part of a real­time prospective case­study (Darsø 2001). This kind of study makes
it possible to evaluate working definitions and draw on the discussions as they are, making it easier to find
common ground.
The CSS is the second white paper ever to be communicated about chemical legislation. The first, Strategy
for a future Chemicals Policy, was discussed for five years before being implemented as REACH. REACH
was a milestone for the regulation of chemicals, and it is therefore expected for the CSS to become the same.
When the CSS is implemented, more than 40 pieces of legislation are predicted to be affected, and it is
expected that it will introduce a solution to the areas where REACH is found to be ineffectual; one example
is ”one substance, one assessment” as a solution to the inconsistent risk assessments. Zero­tolerance for
non­compliance is to be further enforced, tightening the legislation as it is today.
The CSS’s ambition is for chemical legislation in the EU to become more simple and preventive, and to
work towards a toxic­free environment. Only allowing the use of the most harmful chemicals when the
use is essential, and making chemical substances SSbD are steps towards achieving this. The strategy calls
for radical changes in society, supporting the zero pollution by 2050­ambition in the Green Deal. Even
though the two proposals investigated in this thesis are steps in the right direction, they are not found to
meet the high expectations set in the CSS and the Green Deal. This is the case as the CSS’s proposals are
more focused on setting criteria and evaluating these, while the criteria for essentiality and the SSbD are
proposed to be evaluated on massive amounts of data.
The toxic­free hierarchy, presented in Figure 4.3, can be used to prioritise resources when transitioning
towards a more circular economy. The purpose of the hierarchy is not to belittle the importance of restoring
polluted areas but to change the focus in management, highlighting the importance of safe and sustainable
38
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:47==
chemicals to stop the problem at its origin. Going towards a circular society will be an enormous change
in how we live and consume products. For a circular economy to come in use at a larger scale, no harmful,
persistent chemicals can be allowed in materials and products. If chemicals are persistent, a build­up can
happen in the recycled materials, causing unforeseen problems in the future.
The essentiality and the SSbD criteria are to be implemented, either as legislation or in other ways, e.g., a
VEP. Therefore, it is necessary to determine how they are to interact with each other and to figure out the
order in which the different approaches should come in use. SSbD is a design­oriented tool and since the
evaluation of essential uses only are to be implemented for the most harmful chemicals, it will make sense
to start looking at the SSbD assessment. If chemical substances are found to be SSbD, it is not necessary
to look at their essentiality, they are already safe to use. If it is found that a chemical substance cannot be
labelled as SSbD, then the essentiality of its use potentially have to be evaluated. It is important to remember
that the essentiality criteria are only to be implemented for the most harmful chemicals.
The essential­use concept will result in a large number of uses of the most harmful chemicals no longer being
allowed. This means that alternative chemical substances, which can replace these, have to be developed.
This is where SSbD comes into use: By ensuring that safety and sustainability have been prioritised from
the beginning of the design phase, alternatives can easier be found.
7.4
Discussion of methodological decisions
PFAS have been used as a case study when evaluating the concepts of essentiality and SSbD. This has made
it possible to investigate the concepts and determine how they can be applied. PFAS have been produced
and used for decades, and countless studies have been made on the harmful effects on humans and the
environment, as described in chapter 3. The results presented in this thesis are therefore based on large
amounts of data, which is not yet available for chemical substances still being developed. Suppose, instead
of PFAS, other chemical substances, e.g., chlorinated fatty acids, ionic liquids, chlorinated paraffins, or
trichloroacetic acid, as suggested by Xenia Trier, were used as case studies in this thesis. In this scenario,
the results most likely would be different, because these chemical substances are less investigated. As less
data is available, more surprising results could have been uncovered in the investigations of essentiality and
SSbD ­ but on the other hand, it would be more difficult to find any information on their uses, or data on
safety and sustainability.
The use of workshops as a research method
In this thesis, I have shown that workshops can be a part of a scientific research method. Participating in
workshops has been highly relevant, and both presentation and discussion sessions have made it possible to
get perspectives and opinions from authorities and various stakeholders that would otherwise not have been
accessible to the same extent.
Workshops as a tool are interesting for organisers, the EC in the case of the CSS. There is a dual output of a
workshop, as the organisers get to inform the participants and at the same time get the participants’ opinions
on the topic. It is therefore an excellent method to use in regards to the CSS, and other white papers, because
their purpose is to facilitate discussions.
As described in section 2.3, it has not been possible to find much literature on using workshops as a research
method. Therefore it has been necessary to determine some aspects to consider for use before and during a
workshop. The considerations are presented here:
Before participating in a workshop, it was found important to consider the following:
1. What is my motivation for participating in this workshop? What do I want to obtain from this?
2. What will my role be? Am I here to participate in the discussions, learn what other stakeholders
think, or both?
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
39
==PAGE:48==
3. What is the agenda of the organisers? Why are they hosting this workshop?
4. What kind of data do I want to collect and how am I going to collect the data?
When participating in workshops, it was found important to:
5. Know the purpose of the workshop: is it for providing information or facilitating a conversation with
stakeholders?
6. Keep the headlines of the presentation in the back of one’s mind throughout the whole presentation
to follow the reasoning.
7. Clearly lists the sub­conclusions to keep an overview.
8. Keep attention to which organisation the different speakers represent, especially in discussions.
7.5
Avenue for future investigations
It will be interesting to follow the development of each of the sections of the CSS, and observe how the CSS
will be implemented in REACH and other legislation and where emphasis will be put, when the implemen­
tations are made.
• It will be interesting to investigate the proposal of one substance, one assessment, as this proposal is
one of the most significant changes presented in the CSS, in line with the criteria for essentiality and
SSbD. One substance, one assessment can be implemented in several ways, and emphasis can be put
on either the need for data sharing, or the need for collaborative assessments. It will be interesting to
look into which execution that will be most in line with the CSS.
• It will also be interesting to look into the intention of a toxic­free environment, as presented in both
the European Green Deal and the CSS. How can the proposals presented in the CSS achieve this in
the best possible way?
• It will also be interesting to look into how the proposals in the CSS will affect the EU’s cooperation
with other countries. Will a more strict legislation give any market advantages? Will EU export
greener and less harmful chemicals, thereby making it an export success? Or are chemicals produced
in Europe going to be more expensive and less efficient, thereby making them less desirable? And
how are this going to affect the import of both chemical substances and products to Europe?
• The transition to a circular economy will also be interesting to look into. How can the proposals in
the CSS help the transition in the best way possible, and what areas are the most important to pay
attention to and invest in?
• How will risk assessments be constructed under REACH, in the future? Will the concept of essen­
tiality be an addition, or will it replace some of the criteria in use today?
40
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:49==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, Towards a Toxic­Free Environment is explored. Two
of the main concepts of the strategy have been studied; essentiality and safe and sustainable­by­design. The
main challenges, from a scientific perspective, have been investigated and addressed. This have been done
by looking into the technical definitions of the concepts, using PFAS as a case study.
The Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability was published in 2020 by the European Commission, and is a
white paper with the purpose to facilitate discussion on the regulation of chemical substances. The main
goals for the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability are for chemicals legislation to i) better protect citizens
and the environment, and ii) boost innovation for safe and sustainable chemicals. The strategy presents 88
proposals, divided into 16 focus boxes, all contributing to the overall goals. The proposals are expected to be
implemented during the next five years. The Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability is not a panacea to cure
the great concern European citizens express about chemicals and the effect on humans and the environment.
However, it does contain initiatives to better protect citizens and the environment, and is an important step
towards a circular economy.
The concept of essentiality introduces a new way of assessing the most harmful chemicals, by only allowing
their use, when it is found to be essential for health, safety or the functioning of society, as inspired by the
Montreal Protocol. The concept of essentiality has potential to make the legislation more simple, as the
assessment only focuses on the use of the chemicals, and does not go into detail with the potential risk of
use. There are several ways in which the concept can be implemented, but it is not possible to determine the
best way, as the criteria are not yet defined. A discussion is still needed in our society of what constitutes
essential uses, and how to define it. As seen in the PFAS case study, no essential uses are found for everyday
consumer products, and for uses that are too convenient to be phased out a lot of alternatives are available.
It is important to have access to data on potential alternative chemical substances, as there otherwise is a risk
of substitution with chemicals that are even more dangerous for the environment and human beings, also
called regrettable substitution. As argued in the project, evaluating the essentiality based on the technical
function of use is a massive task, and requires a large amount of data and expert knowledge. Defining
some considerations for essentiality is therefore favoured, even though it is a more subjective approach.
Determining these considerations will require for various stakeholders to participate in the discussion, and
for the European Commission to decide what it finds to be essential.
Safe and sustainable­by­design is a lifecycle approach, and is to be used to assess chemical substances. Safe
and sustainable­by­design is an important initiative, as it is a statement from the European Commission and
Union that safety and sustainability needs to be considered when developing new technologies with chemical
substances, which is needed it the transition towards a circular economy. In the CSS the ground is prepared
for criteria for developing chemical substances, but in the framework prepared by the Joint Research Centre
of the European Commission, it is presented as a voluntary tool to evaluate specific uses of chemicals.
Therefore, this research shows a discrepancy between the intention for the criteria to be a design approach,
and the suggestion of evaluating specific uses; data will not be available early in the design­process, and it
will therefore be impossible to evaluate the use until the product is developed, when it will be too late to
change the chemical substance. Evaluating all (new) chemical substances will require immense amount of
data. The case study conducted in this research show, that even with PFAS, a chemical substance group that
has been heavily studied, it has not been possible to determine the sustainability. It is however clear, that the
criteria need to include a cut­off criteria, for what properties a chemical substance can posses, and still be
safe and sustainable. Safe and sustainable­by­design is still being developed, and it is important that focus
is kept at ”­by­design”, as this is where the highest potential is found.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
41
==PAGE:50==
To conclude, the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability is found to have the potential to solve some of the
areas where REACH have been found to fall short. The overall goal, stated in the European Green Deal and
also found in the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, is a goal of a toxic­free future. It is important to
keep this in mind, when the proposals from the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability is being implemented,
in order to ensure that the strategy contributes to a positive change.
42
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Abunada, Z., Alazaiza, M. Y., and Bashir, M. J. (2020). “An overview of per­and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (Pfas) in the environment: Source, fate, risk and regulations”. Water (Switzerland)
12.12, pp. 1–28.
ACS Institute, Chemistry for Life (ACS) (2022). Risk Rating & Assessment. https://institute.
acs.org/lab- safety/hazard- assessment/fundamentals/risk- assessment.html. Accessed:
26­06­2022.
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) and U.S. Department of Health &
Human Services (2020). Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) and Your Health: PFAS
Blood Testing. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/pfas/health-effects/blood-testing.html. Ac­
cessed: 30­05­2022.
Ankley, G. T., Cureton, P., Hoke, R. A., Houde, M., Kumar, A., Kurias, J., Lanno, R., McCarthy,
C., Newsted, J., Salice, C. J., Sample, B. E., Sepúlveda, M. S., Steevens, J., and Valsecchi, S.
(2021). “Assessing the Ecological Risks of Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances: Current State­
of­the Science and a Proposed Path Forward”. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 40.3,
pp. 564–605.
Beronius, A., Rudén, C., Håkansson, H., and Hanberg, A. (2010). “Risk to all or none? A com­
parative analysis of controversies in the health risk assessment of Bisphenol A”. Reproductive
Toxicology 29.2, pp. 132–146.
Blum, A., Balan, S. A., Scheringer, M., Trier, X., Goldenman, G., Cousins, I. T., Diamond, M.,
Fletcher, T., Higgins, C., Lindeman, A. E., Peaslee, G., Voogt, P. de, Wang, Z., and Weber, R.
(2015). “The Madrid Statement on Poly­ and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs)”. Environmen­
tal Health Perspectives 123.5, A107–A111.
Brown, J. B., Conder, J. M., Arblaster, J. A., and Higgins, C. P. (2020). “Assessing Human Health
Risks from Per­ And Polyfluoroalkyl Substance (PFAS)­Impacted Vegetable Consumption: A
Tiered Modeling Approach”. Environmental Science and Technology 54.23, pp. 15202–15214.
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development:
Our Common Future. United Nations General Assembly document A/42/427: Oslo, Norway.
Buck, R. C., Franklin, J., Berger, U., Conder, J. M., Cousins, I. T., Voogt, P. D., Jensen, A. A.,
Kannan, K., Mabury, S. A., and Leeuwen, S. P. van (2011). “Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances in the Environment: Terminology, Classification, and Origins”. Integrated Environ­
mental Assessment and Management 7.4, pp. 513–541.
Caldeira, C., Farcal, R., Moretti, C., Mancini, L., Rauscher, H., Rasmussen, K., Sintes, J. R., and
Sala, S. (2022a). Safe and Sustainable chemicals and materials by Design ­ Review of safety
and sustainability dimensions, aspects, methods, indicators, and tools. JRC127109. EUR 30991
EN, Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg.
Caldeira, C., Farcal, R., Tosches, D., Amelio, A., Rasmussen, K., Rauscher, H., Sintes, J. R., and
Sala, S. (2022b). Safe and Sustainable chemicals and materials by Design ­ Framework for the
definition of criteria and evaluation procedure for chemicals and materials. Draft report for
consultation. EUR 30991 EN, Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
43
==PAGE:52==
ChemicalWatch.com (2022). Exempt ‘essential uses’ to accelerate PFAS phaseout, experts say.
https://chemicalwatch.com/78942/exempt-essential-uses-to-accelerate-pfas-phaseout-
experts-say. Accessed: 26­04­2022.
ChemTrust (2022). PFAS – the ‘Forever Chemicals’. https://chemtrust.org/pfas/. Accessed:
16­02­2022.
Cousins, I. T., Goldenman, G., Herzke, D., Lohmann, R., Miller, M., Ng, C. A., Patton, S., Scherin­
ger, M., Trier, X., Vierke, L., Wang, Z., and Dewitt, J. C. (2019). “The concept of essential use
for determining when uses of PFASs can be phased out”. Environmental Science: Processes and
Impacts 21.11, pp. 1803–1815.
Danish Environmental Protection Agency (DEPA), Danish Ministry of the Environment (2015).
Short­chain Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). Tech. rep., pp. 1–105.
Danmarks Radio (DR), Madsen, A. S., and Greve, C. L. (2021). Over halvdelen af 65 vandboringer
indeholder fluor­stoffer. https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/sjaelland/over-halvdelen-af-
65-vandboringer-indeholder-fluor-stoffer. Accessed: 17­02­2022.
Darsø, L. (2001). Innovation in the Making. Samfundslitteratur: Frederiksberg, Denmark.
DTU Food (2014). Leading scientists call for a stop to non­essential use of fluorochemicals. https:
//www.food.dtu.dk/english/news/2014/08/leading-scientists-call-for-a-stop-to-non-
essential-use-of-fluorochemicals??id=d767ace3-789f-4c17-b406-f5ff51a60723. Accessed:
13­06­2022.
EUR­lex and The European Union (2022). Glossary of summaries: White Paper. https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/summary/glossary/white_paper.html. Accessed: 26­01­2022.
European Chemical Industry Council (Cefic) (2021). Safe and Sustainable­by­Design: Boosting
innovation and growth within the European chemical industry. October.
European Chemical Industry Council (Cefic) (2022). Safe and Sustainable­by­Design: A Trans­
formative Power. April.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2018). REACH registration results, All REACH Registra­
tions since 2008. https://echa.europa.eu/da/reach- registrations- since- 2008. Accessed:
28­03­2022.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2022a). Authorisation, Substances of very high concern
identidication. https://echa.europa.eu/substances-of-very-high-concern-identification-
explained. Accessed: 31­03­2022.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2022b). Information from the Existing Substances Regula­
tion (ESR). https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/information-from-existing-
substances-regulation. Accessed: 17­02­2022.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2022c). REACH registration results. https://echa.europa.
eu/reach-2018-results. Accessed: 19­06­2022.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2022d). Understanding REACH. https://echa.europa.
eu/regulations/reach/understanding-reach. Accessed: 31­01­2022.
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) and European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (2020). In
support of the EU chemicals strategy for sustainability : One substance – one assessment. Joint
position paper. https://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/21877836/efsa-echa-position-
paper-osoa_en.pdf/74b1ae31-290b-a608-85e9-05b340840b34. Accessed: 10­03­2022.
European Commission (EC) (1998). Report on the operation of Directive 67/548/EEC, Directive
88/379/EEC, Regulation (EEC) 793/93, Directive 76/769/EEC. SEC(1998) 1986 final.
44
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:53==
European Commission (EC) (2019a). Fitness check of the most relevant chemicals legislation (ex­
cluding REACH), as well as related aspects of legislation applied to downstream industries.
SWD(2019) 199.
European Commission (EC) (2019b). The European Green Deal. COM(2019) 640 final.
European Commission (EC) (2020a). 37th Meeting of Competent Authorities for REACH and CLP
(CARACAL) Open session. Doc: CA/61/2020.
European Commission (EC) (2020b). Chemical Strategy for Sustainability Towards a Toxic­free
Environment. COM(2020) 667 final.
European Commission (EC) (2020c). Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability Towards a Toxic­Free
Environment, Annex. COM(2020) 667 final.
European Commission (EC) (2020d). COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT: Poly­ and
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). SWD(2020) 249 final.
European Commission (EC) (2020e). Specific terms of reference under the framework contract.
Scientific and technical assistance for the implementation of chemicals legislations on REACH,
CLP, PIC and POPs. ENV.B.2/FRA/2020/0010 with reopening of competition.
European Commission (EC) (2021). Better Regulation Guidelines. SWD(2021) 305 final.
European Commission (EC) (2022a). Chemicals Strategy. https://ec.europa.eu/environ-ment/
strategy/chemicals-strategy_en. Accessed: 27­01­2022.
European Commission (EC) (2022b). Competent Authorities for REACH and CLP (CARACAL).
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/reach/competent_authorities_en.htm.
Accessed: 10­02­2022.
European Commission (EC) (2022c). Establishing a framework for setting ecodesign requirements
for sustainable products and repealing Directive 2009/125/EC. COM(2022) 142 final.
European Commission (EC) (2022d). Law: Have your say: Published initiatives: Chemicals ­ strat­
egy for sustainability (toxic­free EU environment): Feedback and statistics: Roadmap. https:
//ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12264-Chemicals-
strategy- for- sustainability- toxic- free- EU- environment- /feedback_en?p_id=7847244.
Accessed: 28­01­2022.
European Commission (EC) (2022e). Stakeholder workshop on the concept of ‘Essential uses’.
https : / / ec . europa . eu / environment / events / stakeholder - workshop - concept - essential -
uses_en. Accessed: 03­03­2022.
European Commission (EC) and Directorate­General for Environment (DG­ENV) (2020). Special
Eurobarometer 501: Attitudes of European citizens towards the Environment. Wave EB92.4 ­
Kantar.
European Commission (EC) and Directorate­General for Research and Innovation (2021). Map­
ping study for the Sustainable­by­Design Criteria. Publications Office of the European Union:
Luxembourg.
European Environment Agency (EEA) (2022a). Briefing: Designing safe and sustainable products
requires a new approach for chemicals. https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/designing-
safe-and-sustainable-products-1?fbclid=IwAR0zSGTBahEBqpN8NEzPT1a2sQ2B7RfwxAO-
XN8U3kFITF92aHQdgrnw46o. Accessed: 19­06­2022.
European Environment Agency (EEA) (2022b). Emerging Chemical Risks in Europe ­ ’PFAS’.
https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/emerging-chemical-risks-in-europe. Accessed:
10­03­2022.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
45
==PAGE:54==
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (2020). PFAS in food: EFSA assesses risks and sets tol­
erable intake. https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/news/pfas-food-efsa-assesses-risks-and-sets-
tolerable-intake. Accessed: 26­06­2022.
European Parliament (EP) and the Council of the European Union (Council) (2017). Setting a
framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU. Regulation (EU) 2017/1369.
Fantke, P., Cinquemani, C., Yaseneva, P., De Mello, J., Schwabe, H., Ebeling, B., and Lapkin, A. A.
(2021). “Transition to sustainable chemistry through digitalization”. Chem 7.11, pp. 2866–2882.
Fenton, S. E., Ducatman, A., Boobis, A., DeWitt, J. C., Lau, C., Ng, C., Smith, J. S., and Roberts,
S. M. (2021). “Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substance Toxicity and Human Health Review: Current
State of Knowledge and Strategies for Informing Future Research”. Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry 40.3, pp. 606–630.
Finkbeiner, P. (2016). “Qualitative Research: Semi­structured Expert Interview”. Social Media
for Knowledge Sharing in Automotive Repair. Springer International Publishing: Switzerland.
Chap. 6.
Garnett, K. and Van Calster, G. (2021). “The Concept of Essential Use: A Novel Approach to
Regulating Chemicals in the European Union”. Transnational Environmental Law 10.1, pp. 159–
187.
Glüge, J., London, R., Cousins, I. T., Dewitt, J., Goldenman, G., Herzke, D., Lohmann, R., Miller,
M., Ng, C. A., Patton, S., Trier, X., Wang, Z., and Scheringer, M. (2021). “Information Re­
quirements under the Essential­Use Concept: PFAS Case Studies”. Environmental Science and
Technology.
Glüge, J., Scheringer, M., Cousins, I. T., Dewitt, J. C., Goldenman, G., Herzke, D., Lohmann, R.,
Ng, C. A., Trier, X., and Wang, Z. (2020). “An overview of the uses of per­ And polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS)”. Environmental Science: Processes and Impacts 22.12, pp. 2345–2373.
Green Science Policy Institute (2022). The Madrid Statement. https://greensciencepolicy.org/
our-work/science-policy/madrid-statement/. Accessed: 09­03­2022.
Hansen, S. F. and Tickner, J. A. (2007). “The Challenges of Adopting Voluntary From the Past For
More Effective Adoption for Manufactured Nanomaterials: Lessons Health, Safety and Envi­
ronment Measures in the Future”. Nanotechnology Law & Business fall, pp. 341–359.
Hauschild, M. Z., McKone, T. E., Arnbjerg­Nielsen, K., Hald, T., Nielsen, B. F., Mabit, S. E., and
Fantke, P. (2022). “Risk and sustainability: trade­offs and synergies for robust decision making”.
Environmental Sciences Europe 34.1.
Holmquist, H., Roos, S., Schellenberger, S., Jönsson, C., and Peters, G. (2021). “What difference
can drop­in substitution actually make? A life cycle assessment of alternative water repellent
chemicals”. Journal of Cleaner Production 329.
Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP) (2012). Manual for European Environmental
Policy.
International Chemical Secretariat (ChemSec) (2021a). Let’s not mix apples and oranges when it
comes to essential use. https://chemsec.org/publication/chemical-strategy/when-is-it-
justified-to-use-very-hazardous-chemicals/. Accessed: 08­03­2022.
International Chemical Secretariat (ChemSec) (2021b). Our view on Safe and Sustainable by De­
sign criteria. https://chemsec.org/publication/chemical-strategy/our-view-on-safe-and-
sustainable-by-design-criteria/. Accessed: 30­05­2022.
46
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:55==
International Chemical Secretariat (ChemSec) (2022). The Big Five that can accelerate The Safe
and Sustainable by Design criteria. https://chemsec.org/the-big-five-that-can-accelerate-
the-safe-and-sustainable-by-design-criteria/. Accessed: 30­05­2022.
International Chemical Secretariat (ChemSec), H&M Group, Tarkett, Nudie Jeans co, Coop, Shaw,
Seventh generation, and EurEau (2022). Open letter to the Commission regarding transparency.
https://chemsec.org/open- letter- to- the- commission- regarding- transparency/?utm_
source=Newsletter&utm_medium=E-mail&utm_campaign=2022_04_transparency_
letter. Accessed: 21­04­2022.
International Reference Centre for the Life Cycle of Products, Processes and Services (CIRAIG)
(2015). Circular Economy: A Critical Literature Review of Consepts.
Interstate Technology & Regulatory Council (ITRC) (2021). PFAS — Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances: 4 Physical and Chemical Properties: Table 4.1. https://pfas-1.itrcweb.org/4-
physical-and-chemical-properties/. Accessed: 31­05­2022.
Jalali, S. and Wohlin, C. (2012). “Systematic Literature Studies: Database searches vs Backward
snowballing”. International Conference on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement,
ESEM (Lund, Sweden, Sept. 19–20, 2012).
Keijer, T., Bakker, V., and Slootweg, J. C. (2019). “Circular chemistry to enable a circular econ­
omy”. Nature Chemistry 11.3, pp. 190–195.
Köhler, A. R. and Som, C. (2014). “Risk preventative innovation strategies for emerging technolo­
gies the cases of nano­textiles and smart textiles”. Technovation 34.8, pp. 420–430.
Lennquist, A. (2022). Senior toxicologist at ChemSec. Personal Communication. Interview con­
ducted by Freja Lund Paulsen, May 17. SETAC Europe 32nd Annual Meeting, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
Lerner, S. (2019). European countries announce plan to phase out toxic PFAS chemicals by 2030.
https://theintercept.com/2019/12/19/pfas- chemicals- europe- phase- out/. Accessed:
01­05­2022.
Mech, A., Gottardo, S., Amenta, V., Amodio, A., Belz, S., Bøwadt, S., Drbohlavová, J., Farcal, L.,
Jantunen, P., Małyska, A., Rasmussen, K., Riego Sintes, J., and Rauscher, H. (2022). “Safe­ and
sustainable­by­design: The case of Smart Nanomaterials. A perspective based on a European
workshop”. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 128.
Montfort, J.­P. (2021). “The Concept of Essential Use to Regulate Chemicals: Legal Considera­
tions”. International Chemical Regulatory and Law Review 4 (1), pp. 9–20.
Nordic Council of Ministers (2019). the Cost of Inaction: A Socioeconomic Analysis of Environ­
mental and Health Impacts linked to the exposure to PFAS.
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD) (2018). Toward a new Com­
prehensive Global Database of Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs): Summary Report
on Updating the OECD 2007 List of Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs). ENV/JM/­
MONO(2018)7.
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD) (2021). “Reconciling Termi­
nology of the Universe of Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances : Recommendations and Practical
Guidance”. OECD Series on Risk Management 61, pp. 1–45.
Organisation for Economic Co­operation and Development (OECD) (2022). Sustainable Chem­
istry. https://www.oecd.org/env/ehs/risk-management/29361016.pdf. Accessed: 05­04­
2022.
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
47
==PAGE:56==
Ørngreen, R. and Levinsen, K. T. (2017). “Workshops as a Research Methodology”. Electronic
Journal of E­Learning 15.1, pp. 70–81.
Ozone Secretariat (2019). “Essential use exemptions”. Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer: Thirteenth edition. United Nations Environment Pro­
gramme: Kenya. Chap. 3.2.
Packroff, R. and Marx, R. (2022). “Safe and Sustainable by Design—An Interdisciplinary Chal­
lenge for Future­Proof Chemistry”. ChemPlusChem 87.3, pp. 10–11.
Paulsen, F. L., Nielsen, M. B., Shashoua, Y., Syberg, K., and Hansen, S. F. (2022). “Early warning
signs applied to plastic”. Nature Reviews Materials 7.2, pp. 68–70.
Perkins, T. (2022). Michigan beef found to contain dangerous levels of ‘forever chemicals’. In the
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/feb/11/michigan- beef-
dangerous-levels-forever-chemicals. Accessed: 17­02­2022.
Persson, L., Carney Almroth, B. M., Collins, C. D., Cornell, S., Wit, C. A. de, Diamond, M. L.,
Fantke, P., Hassellöv, M., MacLeod, M., Ryberg, M. W., Søgaard Jørgensen, P., Villarrubia­
Gómez, P., Wang, Z., and Hauschild, M. Z. (2022). “Outside the Safe Operating Space of the
Planetary Boundary for Novel Entities”. Environmental Science & Technology 56.3, pp. 1510–
1521.
QuestionPro.com (2022). Types of Interviews in Research and Methods. https://www.questionpro.
com/blog/types-of-interviews/. Accessed: 23­05­2022.
Regjeringen.no (2019). Elements for an EU­strategy for PFASs. https : / / www . regjeringen .
no/contentassets/1439a5cc9e82467385ea9f090f3c7bd7/fluor--- eu- strategy- for- pfass---
december-19.pdf. Accessed: 01­05­2022.
Reichel, A., Ganzleben, C., Maguire, C., and Trier, X. (2019). “Chemical pollution. Knowledge for
transition to a sustainable Europe”. The European environment ­ state and outlook 2020. Ed. by
A. P. Velkavrh, J. Martin, and T. Lung. European Environment Agency: Copenhagen, Denmark.
Chap. 10, pp. 230–252.
Ritscher, A., Wang, Z., Scheringer, M., Boucher, J. M., Ahrens, L., Berger, U., Bintein, S., Bopp,
S. K., Borg, D., Buser, A. M., Cousins, I., DeWitt, J., Fletcher, T., Green, C., Herzke, D., Hig­
gins, C., Huang, J., Hung, H., Knepper, T., Lau, C. S., Leinala, E., Lindstrom, A. B., Liu, J.,
Miller, M., Ohno, K., Perkola, N., Shi, Y., Haug, L. S., Trier, X., Valsecchi, S., Jagt, K. van
der, and Vierke, L. (2018). “Zürich Statement on Future Actions on Per­ and Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances”. Environmental health perspectives 126.August, pp. 1–5.
Scheringer, M., Trier, X., Cousins, I. T., Voogt, P. de, Fletcher, T., Wang, Z., and Webster, T. F.
(2014). “Helsingør Statement on poly­ and perfluorinated alkyl substances (PFASs)”. Chemo­
sphere 114, pp. 337–339.
Sealy, C. (2011). “‘Safe­by­design’ nanoparticles show reduced toxicity”. Nano Today 6.2, pp. 113–
114.
Sha, B., Johansson, J. H., Tunved, P., Bohlin­Nizzetto, P., Cousins, I. T., and Salter, M. E. (2022).
“Sea Spray Aerosol (SSA) as a Source of Perfluoroalkyl Acids (PFAAs) to the Atmosphere:
Field Evidence from Long­Term Air Monitoring”. Environmental Science and Technology 56.1,
pp. 228–238.
Thoring, K., Mueller, R. M., and Badke­Schaub, P. (2020). “Workshops as a research method:
Guidelines for designing and evaluating artifacts through workshops”. Proceedings of the An­
nual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 2020­January, pp. 5036–5045.
48
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:57==
Toxic Free Future and Safer Chemicals, Healthy Families (2022). Retailers committed to phasing
out PFAS as a class from food packaging and products. https://saferchemicals.org/retailers-
committing-to-phase-out-pfas-as-a-class-in-food-packaging-and-products/. Accessed:
07­03­2022.
Trier, X. (2022). Expert on Chemicals, Environment and Human Health at the European Environ­
ment Agency. Personal Communication. Interview conducted by Freja Lund Paulsen, April 22.
European Environment Agency, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Tsalidis, G. A., Soeteman­hern, L. G., Noorlander, C. W., Saedy, S., Ommen, J. R. V., Vijver,
M. G., and Korevaar, G. (2022). “Safe­and­Sustainable­by­Design Framework Based on a Pro­
spective Life Cycle Assessment: Lessons Learned from a Nano­Titanium Dioxide Case Study”.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19.4241, pp. 1–16.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022a). All POPs listed in the Stockholm Con­
vention. http://www.pops.int/TheConvention/ThePOPs/AllPOPs/tabid/2509/Default.
aspx. Accessed: 16­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022b). The Basel Convention. http://www.
basel.int/TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/tabid/1275/Default.aspx. Ac­
cessed: 17­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022c). The Minamata Convention. https://
www.mercuryconvention.org/en/about. Accessed: 17­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022d). The Montreal Protocol. https://www.
unep.org/ozonaction/who-we-are/about-montreal-protocol. Accessed: 09­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022e). The Montreal Protocol: Decision IV/25:
Essential Uses. https://ozone.unep.org/treaties/montreal- protocol/meetings/fourth-
meeting-parties/decisions/decision-iv25-essential-uses?source=decisions_by_issue&args%
5B0%5D=449&parent=3010&nextParent=3012. Accessed: 09­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022f). The Rotterdam Convention. http://
www.pic.int/TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/tabid/1048/language/en-
US/Default.aspx. Accessed: 17­02­2022.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2022g). The Stockholm Convention. http://
www.pops.int/TheConvention/Overview/TextoftheConvention/tabid/2232/Default.aspx.
Accessed: 17­02­2022.
United States Environment Protection Agency (USEPA) (2021). Green Engineering. https://
www.epa.gov/green-engineering/about-green-engineering. Accessed: 05­04­2022.
van der Waals, J. M. F., Falk, A., Fantke, P., Filippousi, P., Flipphi, R. C. H., Mottet, D., and Trier,
X. (2019). Safe­by­design for materials and chemicals: Towards an innovation programme in
Horizon Europe.
Webster, J. and Watson, R. T. (2002). “Analyzing the Past to Prepare for the Future: Writing a
Literature Review”. MIS Quarterly 26 (2), pp. xiii–xxiii.
Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., Blomberg,
N., Boiten, J.­W., da Silva Santos, L. B., Bourne, P. E., Bouwman, J., Brookes, A. J., Clark, T.,
Crosas, M., Dillo, I., Dumon, O., Edmunds, S., Evelo, C. T., Finkers, R., Gonzalez­Beltran,
A., Gray, A. J. G., Groth, P., Goble, C., Grethe, J. S., Heringa, J., ’t Hoen, P. A. C., Hooft, R.,
Kuhn, T., Kok, R., Kok, J., Lusher, S. J., Martone, M. E., Mons, A., Packer, A. L., Persson, B.,
Rocca­Serra, P., Roos, M., Schaik, R. van, Sansone, S.­A., Schultes, E., Sengstag, T., Slater,
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
49
==PAGE:58==
T., Strawn, G., Swertz, M. A., Thompson, M., Lei, J. van der, Mulligen, E. van, Velterop, J.,
Waagmeester, A., Wittenburg, P., Wolstencroft, K., Zhao, J., and Mons, B. (2016). “The FAIR
Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship”. Scientific Data 3.1.
50
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:59==
A
Interview Guide
Interview with Xenia Trier
• Introduction: Who I am, what my thesis is about, and what the purpose of the interview is. Is it okay
that I record the interview?
• What do you find to be the most important about the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability?
• What is safe and sustainable­by­design? Do all chemicals have to be SSbD?
• Is SSbD going to be a part of REACH?
• What can the challenges be when essentiality is to be determined?
• What is the connection between essentiality and SSbD?
• Is there anything you think I should be aware of?
• What do you see as the biggest strength of the CSS?
• What do you see as the biggest challenge for the CSS?
Interview with Anna Lennquist
• Introduction: Who I am, what my thesis is about, and what the purpose of the interview is.
• How do you and ChemSec, read the CSS? What are the most important parts?
• How do you interpret SSbD?
• What do you think of SSbD becoming a voluntary programme/tool?
• Is there anything you think I should be aware of?
• What do you see as the biggest strength of the CSS?
• What do you see as the biggest challenge for the CSS?
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Overview of webinars and workshops I have
participated in
Participated live
• Essential Use Webinar ­ a legal analysis by ERIF (19/1/22)
• ChemSec: How chemical legislation can move the industry with the help of economic incentives
(22/2/22)
• DEKRA og EPPA: CSS Webinar Series ­ Part 1: REACH Revision (23/2/22)
• The European Commission: DG ENV, DG R&I and JRC: 2nd Safe and Sustainable by Design Stake­
holder Workshop (23/3/22)
• DEKRA and EPPA: CSS Webinar Series ­ Park 2: CLP Revision (23/3/22)
• DEKRA and EPPA: CSS Webinar Series Part 3: Safe and Sustainable­by­Design (20/4/22)
• Wood on behalf of the European Commission: Stakeholder workshop on the concept of ”essential
uses”, participation in the plenary sessions (3/4/22)
• The European Commission: DG R&I: 2nd Safe and Sustainable by Design Stakeholder Workshop,
part 2: Feedback to Stakeholder (2/5/22)
• Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, SETAC Europe 32nd annual meeting: Towards
a reduced pollution society (17/5/22)
Watched on youtube, recordings
• The EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, by: Dutch Permanent Representation to the EU, the
European Environmental Bureau and Sustainable Public Affairs
• Dr Antonio Franco ­ The EU chemicals strategy for sustainability, by EcoRisk 2050
• Safer Chemicals Conference 2021, by EUChemicals (ECHA)
• APPLiA Webinar: The new EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability, by APPLiA Europe
Watched other places, online
• Stockholm University: Panel discussion on PFAS and essential use concept
• Baltic Breakfast Webinar: Essential Use and Substitution of hazardous chemicals, by Stockholm
University
• An introduction to the ”essential use” concept and its application to PFAS, by CHE EDC Strategies
Partnership
52
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:61==
C
ChemSec’s questions for essential use
ChemSec (2021a) have formulated a series of questions used to determine whether a use can be essential
for health, safety, or functioning of society. If a tested chemical compounds correspond as: no, no, yes, yes,
and no, it qualifies to be assessed by an expert committee.
1. Is the product or process in question used for...?
• Luxury
• Convenience
• Decoration or purely aesthetic purposes
• Leisure
• Play/toys
• Cosmetics
• Home gardening
2. Is the product or process in question used for...?
• Hygiene
• Cleaning
• Personal care
• Childcare
• Textile (excluding personal protective equipment)
• Clothes, apparel and shoes
• Furniture
• Food contact material
• Sport products, etc.
3. Does the product or process belong to any of the categories listed below, or a very similar category?
• Medical devices
• Medicinal products
• Products for military operations
• Energy production and storage
• Transportation
• Communication, etc.
4. Is the product or process itself essential for the overall functioning of society?
5. Are there alternative chemicals or other ways to achieve a similar end function at product level?
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
53
==PAGE:62==
D
Essentiality definitions applied to Glüge et
al (2020)
The table with all PFAS applications found by Glüge et al. (2020) is on the next pages. The three definitions
of essentiality presented in section 5.4 have been used to evaluate the functions. The Montreal Protocol (E:
essential, N: non­essential, and U:unsure), Cousins et al. (2019) (E: essential, N: non­essential, U:unsure,
and S: substitutable) and The ChemSec criteria (E: essential, N: non­essential, and U: unsure).
54
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:63==
Product category: 
Function of PFAS 
Essentiality 
according to 
Montreal 
Protocol
Essentiality 
according to Cousins 
et al (2019) 
Essentiality 
according to 
ChemSec
Industrial
﻿Aerospace
﻿Phosphate ester-based brake and 
hydraulic fluids
﻿Corrosion protection
E
U
U
Gyroscopes
Flotation fluids in gyroscopes 
E
U
U
Wire and cable
﻿High-temperature endurance, fire 
resistance, and high-stress crack 
resistance
E
U
U
Turbine engine
Use as lubricant
E
U
U
Turbine engine
Use as elastomeric seals 
E
U
U
Thermal control and radiator surfaces Reject waste heat 
E
U
U
Coating
Protect underlying polymers from 
atomic oxygen attack
E
U
U
Propellant system
Elastomers compatible to aggressive 
fuels and oxidizers
E
U
U
Jet engine/satellite instrumentation
Use as lubricant
E
U
U
Biotechnology 
Cell cultivation
Supply of oxygen and other gases to 
microbial cells 
E
S
U
Ultrafiltration and microporous 
membranes 
Prevent bacterial growth 
E
S
U
Building and contruction 
Architectural membranes e.g. in roofs 
Resistance to weathering, dirt 
repellent, light
N
N
N
Greenhouse
Transparent to beth UV and visible 
light, resistant to weathering, dirt 
repellent
N
N
N
Cement additive
Reduce of shrinkage of cement
U
U
U
Cable and wire insulation, gaskets and 
hoses 
High temperature endurance, fire 
resistance, and high stress crack 
resistance 
U
U
U
Chemical Industry 
Fluoropolymer processing aid
Emolsify the monomers, increase the 
rate of polymerization, stabilize 
fluoropolymers 
U
U
N
Production of chlorine and caustic soda 
(with asbestos diaphragms cells)
Binder for the asbestos-fibre-based 
diaphragms 
U
U
N
Production of chlorine and caustic soda 
(with  fluorinated membranes)
Stable membrane in strong oxidizing 
conditions and at high temperatures
U
U
N
Processing aids in the extrustion of 
high and liner low-density 
polyethylene film
Eliminate melt fracture and other 
flow-induced imperfections 
U
U
N
Tantalum, molybdenum, and niobium 
processing 
Cutting of drawing oil
U
U
N
Chemical reaction
Inert reaction media (especially for 
gaseous reactants) 
U
U
N
Polymer curing 
Medium for crosslinking of resins, 
elastomers and adhesives 
U
U
N
Ionic liquids 
Raw materials for ionic liquids 
U
U
N
Solvents 
Dissolve other substances 
U
U
N
﻿Glüge et al (2020)
==PAGE:64==
Electroless plating 
-
Disperses the pitch fluoride in the 
plating solution 
U
U
U
Electroplating (metal plating)
Chrome plating
Prevent the evaporation of 
chromium(vi) vapour
U
U
N
Nickel plating
Non-foaming surfactant 
U
U
N
Nickel plating
Increase the strength of the nickel 
electroplate by eliminating pinholes, 
cracks, and peeling
U
U
N
Copper plating 
Prevent thaze by regulating foam and 
improving stability 
U
U
N
Tin plating 
Help to produce a plate of uniform 
thickness 
U
U
N
Alkaline zinc and zinc alloy plating
-
U
U
U
Deposition of flouropolymer particles 
onto steel 
Supported by fluorinated surfactants 
U
U
N
Electronic industry 
Testing of electronic devices and 
equipment
Inert fluids for electronics testing 
U
U
N
Heat transfer fluids 
Cooling of electrical equipment 
U
U
N
Solvent systems and cleaning 
Form the basis of cleaning solutions 
U
U
N
Carrier fluid/lubricant deposition 
Dissolve and deposit lubricants on a 
range of substrates during the 
manufacturing of hard disk drives 
U
U
N
Etching of piezoelectric ceramic filters Etching solution 
U
U
N
Energy sector
Solar collectors and photovoltaic cells 
High vapour barrier, high 
transparency, great weatherbility 
and dirt repellency
U
U
U
Photovoltaic cells 
Adhesives with PFAS hold mesh 
cathode in place 
U
U
U
Wind mill blades 
Coating 
U
U
U
Coal-based power plants 
Polymeric PFAS filter remove fly ash 
from the hot smokey discharge 
U
U
U
Coal-based power plants 
Separation of carbon dioxide in flue 
gases 
U
U
U
Lithium batteries 
Binder of electrodes 
U
U
U
Lithium batteries 
Prevent thermal runaway reaction 
U
U
U
Lithium batteries 
Improve the oxygen transport of 
lithium-air batteries 
U
U
U
Lithium batteries 
Electrolyte solvents for lithium-sulfur 
batteries 
U
U
U
Ion exchange membrane in vanadium 
redox batteries 
Polymeric PFAS are used as 
membranes 
U
U
U
Zinc batteries 
Prevent formation of dendrites, 
hydrogen evolution and electrode 
corrosium due to adsorption onto the 
electrode surface 
U
U
U
Alkaline manganese batteries 
MnO2 cathodes containing carbon 
black are treated with a fluorinated 
surfactant 
U
U
U
Polymer electrolyte fuel cells 
Polymeric PFAS are used as 
membranes 
U
U
U
Power transformers 
Cooling liquid
U
U
U
Conversion of heat to mechanical 
energy 
Heat transfer fluids 
U
U
U
Food production 
==PAGE:65==
Wineries and dairies 
Final filtration before botteling with 
polymeric PFAS
N
N
N
Machinery and equipment 
-
? 
U
U
U
Manufacture of metal products 
Manufacture of basic metals 
Inhibit the formation of acid mist 
during the electrowinning of copper 
U
U
N
Macufacture of fabricated metal 
products 
? 
U
U
U
Pickling of steel wires 
Acid pickling promoter
U
U
N
Treatment of coating of metal surfaces 
Promove the flow of metal coatings, 
prevent cracks in the coating during 
drying
U
U
N
Treatment of coating of metal surfaces Corrosion inhibitor on steel
U
U
N
Etchnig of aluminium in alkali baths
Improving the efficient life of the 
alkali baths
U
U
N
Phosphating process for aluminium 
Fluoride-containing phosphating 
solutions help to dissolve the oxide 
layer of the aluminium 
U
U
N
Cleaning of metal surfaces 
Disperse scum, speed runoff of acid 
when metal is removed from the 
bath, increase the bath life 
U
U
N
Water removal from processed parts 
Solvent displacement 
U
U
N
Mining
Ore leaching in copper and gold mines 
Increase wetting of the sulfuric acid or 
cyanide that leaches the ore
U
U
U
Ore leaching in copper and gold mines Acid mist suppressing agents 
U
U
U
Ore floating
Create stable aqueous foams to 
separate the metal salts from soil 
U
U
U
Separation of uranium contained in 
sodium carbonate and/or sodium 
bicarbonate solutions by nitrogen 
floatating
Improve the separation 
U
U
U
Concentration of vanadium compounds 
Destruction of the mineral structure, 
increases the specific surface area and 
pore channel thus facilitating 
vanadium leaching 
U
U
U
Nuclear industry 
Lubricants for valves and 
ultracentrifuge bearings in UF6 
enrichment plants 
PFAS are used as the lubricants 
U
U
U
Oil and gas industry 
Drilling fluid 
Foaminng agent
U
U
U
Drilling, insulating material for cable 
and wire
Polymeric PFAS are used as insulating 
material 
U
U
U
Chemical driven oil production
Increase the effective permeability of 
the formation
U
U
U
Chemical driven oil production
Foaming agent for fracturing 
subterranean formations 
U
U
U
Chemical driven oil production
Heavy crude oil well polymer blocking 
remover
U
U
U
Chemical driven gas production 
Change low-permeability sandstone 
gas reservoir from strong hydrophilic 
to weak hydrophilic 
U
U
U
Chemical driven gas production 
Eliminate reservoir capillary forces, 
dissolve partial solid, dis-assemble 
clogging, increase efficiency of 
displacing water with gas 
U
U
U
==PAGE:66==
Oil and gas transport
Lining of the pipes in made out if 
polymeric PFAS
U
U
U
Oil and gas transport
Reduce the viscosity of crude oil for 
pumping form the borehole through 
crude oil-in-water emulsions 
U
U
U
Oil and gas storage 
Aqueous layer with PFAS prevents 
evaporation loss
U
U
U
Oil and gas storage 
Floating layer of cereal treated with 
PFAS 
U
U
U
Oil containment (injection a chamicl 
barrier into water) 
Prevetns spreading of oils and 
gasoline on water
U
U
U
Oil and fuel filtration 
Polymeric PFAS are used as 
membranes 
U
U
U
Pharmaceutical industry 
Reaction vessels, stirrers, and other 
components 
Use of polymeric PFAS instead of 
stainless steel
N
S
N
Ultrapure water systems 
Polymeric PFAS are used as filter
U
U
U
Packaging 
Polymeric PFAS form moisture barrier 
film
U
U
U
Manufacture of "microporous" 
particles 
Processing aid 
U
U
U
Photographic industry
Processing solutions
Antifoaming agent 
N
N
N
Processing solutions
Prevent formation of air bubbles in 
the solution
N
N
N
Photographic materials, such as films 
and papers 
Wetting agents, emulsion additives, 
stabilizers and antistatic agent
N
N
N
Photographic materials, such as films 
and papers 
Prevent spot formation and control 
edge uniformity in multilayer coatings
N
N
N
Papers and plates 
Anti-reflective agents 
N
N
N
Production of plastic and rubber
Separation of mould and moulded 
material
Mould release agent 
U
U
N
Separation of mould and moulded 
material
Reduce imperfections in the moulded 
surface
U
U
N
Foam blowing 
Foam blowing agent 
U
U
N
Polyol foams 
Foam regulator 
U
U
N
Polymer processing aid 
Increase processing efficiency and 
quality of polymeric compounds 
U
U
N
Etching of plastic 
Wetting agent 
U
U
N
Production of rubber
Antblocking agent 
U
U
N
﻿Fluoroelastomer formulation 
Additive in curatives 
U
U
N
Semiconductor industry 
Photoresist (itself)
Photoresist matrix, changes solubility 
when exposed to light
U
U
U
Photoresist (photosensitizer)
Increase the photosensitivity of the 
photoresist 
U
U
U
Photoresist (photo-acid generator) 
Generate strong acids by light 
irradiation
U
U
U
Photoresist (quencher)
Controlling the diffusion of the acid to 
unexposed region
U
U
U
Antirefective coating 
Provide low reflectivity
U
U
U
Developer
Facilitate the control of the 
development process
U
U
U
Rinsing solution 
Rinsing the photoresist to remove the 
developer
U
U
U
Etching 
Wetting agent 
U
U
U
==PAGE:67==
Etching 
Reduce the reflection of the etchnig 
solution 
U
U
U
Etching 
Etchnig agent in dry etching
U
U
U
Cleaning of silicon wafers
Etch cleaning 
U
U
N
Cleaning of integrated circuit modules Remove cured epoxy resins 
U
U
N
Cleaning vapour deposition chamber
Remove dielectric film build up
U
U
N
Water thinning
Non-stick coating composition on 
carrier wafer
U
U
N
Vacuum pumps 
Working fluid
U
U
U
Technical equipment in contact with 
process chemical or reactive plasma 
Polymeric PFAS are used in inert 
moulds, pipes and elastomers 
U
U
U
Multilayer circuit board 
Bonding ply composition 
U
U
U
Textile production 
Dyering and bleaching of textiles
Wetting agent 
N
S
N
Dyeing process using sulphur dyes
Antifoaming agent 
N
S
N
Dye transfer material
Release agent 
N
S
N
Textile treatment baths 
Antifoaming agent 
N
S
N
Fibre finishes 
Emulsifying agent 
N
S
N
Watchmaking industry 
Lubricants 
Form an oil layer and reduced wear
N
N
N
Drying as production step after 
aqueous cleaning
Solvents in solvent displacement 
drying 
N
N
N
Wood industry 
Drum filtration during bleaching 
The used coarse fabric in made out of 
molymeric PFAS
U
S
N
Coating for wood substrate
Clear coating is made out of polymeric 
PFAS
U
S
N
Wood particleboard
Part of adhensive resin
U
S
N
Other
Aerosol propellant 
-
Aerosol propellant
U
S
U
Air conditioning 
-
Working fluid
U
U
U
Antifoaming agent 
-
Prevent foaming
U
U
U
Ammunition
-
Make the final product rubbery and 
reduce the likelihood of an onplanned 
explosion due to shock; enable long-
term storage without degradation of 
the polymer
E
E
E
Apparel
Breathable membranes
Polymeric PFAS are used as 
membranes 
N
S
N
Long-lasting durable water repellent 
finish
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Automotive 
Car body
Weather resistance paint, no-wax 
brilliant top coat
N
N
N
Automotive waxes
Aid spreading, improve the resistane 
of the polish to water and oil
N
N
N
Windshield wiper fluid
Prevent icing of the wind shield 
N
N
N
Car body
Light, stable
N
N
N
==PAGE:68==
Engine and steering system
Polymeric PFAS are used as sealants 
and bearings 
U
U
U
Engine oil coolers 
Heat transfer fluids 
U
U
U
Cylinder head coatings and hoses 
Increase the fuele efficiency
U
U
U
Cylinder head coatings and hoses 
Reduce the fugitive gasoline vapor 
emissions 
U
U
U
Electronics 
Cables and wires 
U
U
U
Fuel lines, steel hydraulic brake tubes Corrosion protection
U
U
U
Interior
Dirt repellent in carpets and seats 
N
U
U
Brake pad additives 
? 
U
U
U
Cleaning compositions 
Cleaning compositions for hard 
surfaces 
Enhance wettability
N
N
N
Carpet and upholstery cleaners 
Provide stain resistance and repel soil 
N
S
N
Cleaning compositions for adhesives 
?
U
U
U
Dry cleaning fluids 
Stabilizer, improve the removal of 
hydrophilic soil
N
N
N
Cleaning of reverse osmosis 
membranes 
Remove calcium sulphate 
N
S
N
Coatings, paints and varnishes 
Paints 
Emulsifier for the binder, dispersant 
for the pigment, wetting agent
N
S
N
Paints 
Enhance the protective properties of 
antocorrosive paints 
N
S
N
Paints 
Antofouling on ships
U
S
U
Paints and coatings
Anti-crater, improved surface 
appearance, better flow and levelling, 
reduced foaming, decreased block, 
open time extension, oil and water 
repellency, dirt pickup resistance
N
S
N
Paints and coatings
Form second coat on a first coat
N
S
N
Coatings 
Antistick and anticorrosive coatings
N
S
N
Coatings 
Highly durable and weatherable 
N
S
N
Conservation of books and 
manuscripts
- 
Preserve historical manuscripts
N
S
N
Cook- and bakingware
-
Prevent food from sticking to the 
pan/baking ware
N
N
N
Dispersions 
- 
Disperse solutions 
U
S
U
Electronical devices 
Printed circuit boards
Use fibre-reinforced fluoropolymer 
layer
U
U
U
Capacitors
Separation of high voltage 
components (dielectric fluid) 
U
U
U
Acoustical equipment
Provide an electrical signal in 
response to mechanical or thermal 
signals 
U
U
U
Liquid crustal displays (LCDs)
Provide the liquid crystal with a 
dipole moment
U
U
U
Liquid crustal displays (LCDs)
Polymeric PFAS provide moisture 
sensitive coatings for displays
U
U
U
==PAGE:69==
Light management films in flat panel 
display
Reduced static electricity build-up and 
dust attraction during fabrication
U
U
U
Razors
Polymeric PFAS is used on the razor
N
N
N
Electroluminescent lamps 
Polymeric PFAS is used as coating 
N
N
N
Fingerprint development
-
Solvent
U
U
U
Fire-fighting foam
﻿Fluoroprotein (FP) foams
Fuel repellents
E
S
U
﻿Film-forming fluoroprotein (FFFP) foam Film formers, foam stabilizers
E
S
U
﻿Alcohol-resistant film forming 
fluoroprotein (AR-FFFP) foam
Film formers, foam stabilizers
E
S
U
﻿Aqueous film-forming foams (AFFF)
Film formers
E
S
U
﻿Alcohol-resistant aqueous film forming 
foam (AR-AFFF)
Foam stabilizers
E
S
U
Flame retardants 
Polycarbonate resin
Flame retardants 
U
S
N
Other plastic 
Flame retardants 
U
S
N
-
Improve wetting and levelling
N
S
N
Soil-release finishes for carpets 
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Aftermarket carpet protection
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Resilient linoleum
?
U
S
N
Laminated floor covering
?
U
S
N
Floor polish
Improve levelling and wetting 
N
S
N
Glass 
Surface treatment 
Make glass surfaces hydrophobic and 
oleophobic
N
U
U
Surface treatment 
Prevents misting of glass
N
U
U
Surface treatment 
Dirt-repellent 
N
U
U
Surface treatment 
Fire- or weather resistant 
U
U
U
Etching and polishing
Increase the speed of etching, 
imporve wetting
N
U
U
Drying as production step after glass 
finishing
Solvents in solvent displacement 
drying 
U
U
U
Household applications
Threads and joints
Polymeric PFAS is used for sealing
U
S
N
Consumable materials (vials, caps, 
tape)
Made out of polymeric PFAS
E
U
U
Personal protective equipment 
(gloves)
?
E
U
U
Particle filters
Minimize the sorption of compounds
E
U
U
Solvents 
Dissolve other substances 
E
U
U
LC instruments
Polymeric PFAS are used in the 
solvent degasser
E
U
U
LC columns
Some columns are based on polymeric 
PFAS 
E
U
U
Reverse phase LC-solvents
can contain PFAS
E
U
U
Seals and membranes in UPLCs, 
autoclaves and ovens 
are made out of PFAS
E
U
U
Oils and greases in pumps
Form a thick oil layer and reduced 
wear
E
U
U
Floor covering including carpets and floor polish 
Laboratory supplies, equipment and instrumentation
==PAGE:70==
Sterilization of an insulated vessel
Sterilization medium
E
U
U
Electro plotting
Protein-sequencing membranes are 
made out of polymeric PFAS
E
U
U
Analysing the phosphoamino content 
in proteins 
Protein-sequencing membranes are 
made out of polymeric PFAS
E
U
U
Leather
Manufacturing of genuine leather
Improve the efficiency of hydrating 
picking, degreasing and tanning
N
S
N
Repellent treatment (genuine leather)
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Manufacturing of synthetic leather
Polymer melt additives that impart 
oil and water reppelency to the 
finished fibres
N
S
N
Shoe brighteners
Improve the levelling of shoe 
brightners 
N
N
N
Impregnation spray
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Lubricants and greases 
-
Form a thick oil layer and reduced 
wear
U
S
N
Medical utensils 
Electronic devices that rely on high 
frequency signals (defribillators, 
pacemakers, cardiac resynchronization 
therapy (CRT), positron-emission 
tomography (PET) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) devices)
High dielectric insulators
E
E
E
Video endoscope
﻿Use in charge-coupled device colour 
filters
U
U
U
Microbubble-based ultrasound 
contrast agents
﻿Fluorinated gas inner core, which 
provides osmotic stabilization and 
contributes to interfacial tension 
reduction
U
U
U
X-ray imaging
Contrast enhancement agents
U
U
U
Magnetic resonance imaging
Contrast agent 
U
U
U
Proton and 19F NMR imaging
Contrast agent 
U
U
U
Computed tomography and 
sonography
Contrast agent 
U
U
U
Radio-opaque materials 
Polymeric PFAS has been used 
U
U
U
Surgical drapes and gowns 
Improve water-, oil,- and dirt-
resistance 
U
U
U
X-ray films
Wetting agents, emulsion additives, 
stabilizers and antistatic agent
U
U
U
Dispersant
Facilitate the dispersion of cell 
aggregates 
U
U
U
Contact linses
Raw material
N
S
N
Retinal detachment surgery and 
proliferative vitreoretinal
Endotamponade gases 
U
U
U
Retinal detachment surgery and 
proliferative vitreoretinal
Intraoperative tool during 
vitreoretinal surgery
U
U
U
Eye drops
Delivery agent
N
S
N
Filters, tubing, O-rings, seals and 
gaskets in dialysis machines 
Made out of polymeric PFAS
U
U
U
Dialysis membranes 
Made out of polymeric PFAS
U
U
U
Catheter, stents, and needles 
Provide low-friction and clot-resistant 
coatings
U
U
U
Surgical patches and vascular catheter Use of polymeric PFAS
U
U
U
Blood transfer and artificial blood
Oxygen carrier
E
U
U
==PAGE:71==
Organ perfusion
Oxygen carrier
E
U
U
Percutaneous transluminal coronary 
angioplasty
Oxygen carrier
U
U
U
Toothpaste
Enhances fluorapatite formation and 
inhibits caries 
N
N
N
Dental floss
Allows the narrow ribbon to sip easily 
between close pressed teeth
N
N
N
UV-hardened dental restorative 
materials 
Improve the wetting of the set 
materials 
U
U
U
Ventilation of respiratory airway
?
U
U
U
Anaestesia
Polymeric PFAS is used to dry or 
humidify breath
U
U
U
Artificial heart pump
Blood compatible and durable
U
U
U
Wound care 
Cleaning burn residues 
U
U
U
Metallic and ceramic surfaces 
-
Generates easily removeable sludge
U
S
N
Music instruments 
Guitar strings 
Prevent loss of vibratrion due to 
residue build up
N
N
N
Piano keys 
Contain polymeric PFAS
N
N
N
Piano
Eliminate squeaks in piano key
N
N
N
Optical devices 
Glass fibre optics
Able to include rare earth in glass 
fibre optics
U
U
U
Optical lenses 
Provide optical lenses with low 
refractive index and high 
transparency
U
U
U
Paper and packaging 
Paper and cardboard
Provide water- and oil repellency
N
S
N
Manufacturing of paper
Release agent for paper coating 
N
S
N
Particle physics 
Particle accelerators
Part of the detection assemblies
U
U
U
Personal care products 
Cosmetics
﻿Emulsifiers, lubricants, or oleophobic 
agents
N
N
N
Cosmetics
﻿Make creams etc. penetrate the skin 
more easily
N
N
N
Cosmetics
﻿Make the skin brighter
N
N
N
Cosmetics
﻿Make the skin absorb more oxygen
N
N
N
Cosmetics
﻿Make the makeup more durable and 
weather resistant
N
N
N
Hair-conditioning formulations
﻿Enhance wet combing and render hair 
oleophobic
N
N
N
Pesticides 
﻿Insecticide against the common 
housefly and carmine mite
﻿Suffocation of the insect by the 
adsorbed fluorinated surfactant
N
S
N
﻿Insecticide against ants and 
cockroaches
?
U
S
N
﻿Formulation additives
﻿Anti-foaming agent
U
S
N
﻿Formulation additives
﻿Dispersant, facilitate the spreading of 
plant protection agents on insects and 
plant leaves
U
S
N
﻿Formulation additives
﻿Dispersant, increase uptake by insects 
and plants
U
S
N
﻿Formulation additive
﻿Wetting agent for leaves
N
N
N
Pharmaceuticals 
==PAGE:72==
Active ingredient (fulvestrant)
﻿Estrogen antagonists, inhibits the 
growth stimulus that the estrogen 
exert on cells
E
S
U
Active ingredint 
﻿Pharmaceutical combination of 
dabigatran and proton pump 
inhibitors
E
S
U
Formulation additives 
﻿Dispersant in self-propelling aerosol 
pharmaceuticals
E
S
U
Formulation additives 
Solvent
E
S
U
Pipes, pumps, fittings and liners
﻿Pipes, pipe plugs, seal glands, pump 
parts, fasteners, fittings and liners
﻿Polymeric PFAS are used for these 
applications
U
U
U
﻿Working fluid for pumps in the 
electronics industry
﻿Stable to reactive gases and 
aluminium chloride
U
U
U
Plastic and rubber
Plastic
Polymeric PFAS micropowder as 
additive?
U
S
N
Thermoplastic
Plasticizer
U
S
N
Bonding of rubber to steel
Allow adhesiveness bonding
U
S
N
Rubber and plastic 
Antistatic agent
U
S
N
Resin
Improve weatherbility and elasticity
U
S
N
Polycarbonate resins 
Flame retardants for polycarbonate 
resins 
U
S
N
Printing inks
Toner and printer ink
Enhance ink flow and levelling, 
improve wetting, aid pigment 
dispersion
N
S
N
Toner and printer ink
Impart water resistance to water-
based inks
N
S
N
Ink-yet recording heads
Make them ink repellent
N
S
N
Recording and printing paper
?
N
S
N
Lithographic printing plates 
?
N
S
N
Refrigerant systems
Refrigerant fluid systems
Heat transfer fluid
U
U
U
Refrigerant compressor
Lubricants
U
U
U
Sealants and adhesives
Sealants
Can be made out of polymetic PFAS
N
S
N
Silicone rubber seals 
Prevents soiling
U
U
U
Adhesives 
Improve levelling, spreading, and the 
penetration of the adhesive into the 
porev structure of the substrates 
U
U
U
Adhesives 
Antistatic agent
U
U
U
Soldering
Vapour phase fluids in vapour phase 
soldering
Heat transfer medium
U
U
U
Fluxing agent in solder paste
Low-foaming noncorrosive wetting 
agent
U
U
U
Soil remediation
 
Vapour barrier material on top of 
contaminated soil
Evaporation retarder
U
S
N
Surfactants to mobilize pollutants
Surfactants to mobilize soil-bould 
contaminants in remediation
U
S
N
Sport article
Ski wax
Highly water repellent 
N
N
N
(Sailing) boat equipment
Weather protection of textiles; anti-
fouling protection of ship hulls
N
N
N
==PAGE:73==
Tennis rackets
Used in coatings for tennis rackets
N
N
N
Bicycle
Lubricants
N
N
N
Climbing ropes
Provide water repellence, stain 
resistance and soil release
N
N
N
Fishing lines
No water absorption, invisible in 
water, high knot strength
N
N
N
Golf gloves 
Antifouling protection for the natural 
sheep leather of the glove 
N
N
N
Stone, concrete and tile
-
Impart oil and water repellecy to the 
surface; delay oxidation and ageging 
of surface
N
S
N
Textile and upholstery
Surface treatment 
Provide water and oil repellence, 
stain resistance and soil release 
N
S
N
Waving yarn
Facilitate waving 
N
S
N
Tracing and tagging
Tracking air-borne pollutants 
Tracer in air
U
U
N
Testing ventilation systems
Tracer in air
U
U
N
Mapping gas and petroleum 
reservoirs
Tracer in gas or petroleum
U
U
N
Leak detection in cables pipelines, 
landfill waste and underground 
storage tanks
Tracer in leaking material
U
U
N
Tracking of marked items 
Tracer in the marked item
U
U
N
Water and effluent treatment
Filter membranes 
Polymeric PFAS minimize the sorption 
of compounds to the filter itself
U
U
U
Wire and cable 
- 
Provide high-temperature endurance, 
fire resistance, and high stress crack 
resistance
U
U
U
==PAGE:74==
E
Safe and Sustainable­by­Design criteria by
JCR
On the next pages are the tables are the criteria for step 1 and 2 of the Safe and Sustainable­by­Design
proposal by the Joint Research Centre, as found in Caldeira et al. (2022b). The criteria that the chemical
substances group of PFAS fulfil are highlighted in yellow. Documentation is provided in chapter 3 and
chapter 6.
66
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
==PAGE:75==
Table 1: List of aspects and indicators (hazard properties) relevant for Step 1. 
Group Definition 
Human health hazards 
Environmental Hazards 
Physical hazards 
Includes the most harmful substances 
(according to CSS (EC, 2020a)), including 
the substances of very high concern 
(SVHC) according to REACH Art. 57(a-
f)13,14 (EU, 2006). These hazard 
properties will form Criterion S1. 
• 
Carcinogenicity Cat. 1A and 1B 
• 
Germ cell mutagenicity Cat. 1A and 
1B  
• 
Reproductive / developmental 
toxicity Cat. 1A and 1B 
• 
Endocrine disruption Cat. 1 (human 
health)  
• 
Respiratory sensitisation Cat 1  
• 
Specific target organ toxicity - 
repeated exposure (STOT-RE) Cat. 1, 
including immunotoxicity 
• 
 
• 
Persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic 
/ very persistent and very 
bioaccumulative (PBT/vPvB) 
• 
Persistent, mobile, and toxic / very 
persistent and mobile (PMT/vPvM) 
• 
Endocrine disruption Cat. 1 
(environment) 
 
Includes hazardous substances with 
chronic effect, which are part of the 
substances of concern, described in CSS 
(EC, 2020a) and are not included already 
in Criterion S1. These hazard properties 
will form Criterion S2.  
• 
Skin sensitisation Cat 1 
• 
Carcinogenicity Cat. 2  
• 
Germ cell mutagenicity Cat. 2 
• 
Reproductive / developmental 
toxicity Cat. 2  
• 
Specific target organ toxicity - 
repeated exposure (STOT-RE) Cat. 2 
• 
Specific target organ toxicity - single 
exposure (STOT-SE) Cat. 1 and 2 
• 
Endocrine disruption Cat. 2 (human 
health) 
• 
Hazardous for the ozone layer 
• 
Chronic environmental toxicity 
(chronic aquatic toxicity) 
• 
Endocrine disruption Cat. 2 
(environment) 
 
Includes the other hazard classes not part 
already in Criteria S1 and S2. These 
hazard properties will form Criterion S3. 
• 
Acute toxicity 
• 
Skin corrosion 
• 
Skin irritation 
• 
Serious eye damage / eye irritation 
• 
Aspiration hazard (Cat. 1) 
• 
Specific target organ toxicity - single 
exposure (STOT-SE) Cat. 3 
• 
Acute environmental toxicity (acute 
aquatic toxicity) 
• 
Explosives  
• 
Flammable gases, liquids, and solids 
• 
Aerosols 
• 
Oxidising gases, liquids, solids 
• 
Gases under pressure 
• 
Self-reactive 
• 
Pyrophoric liquids, solid 
• 
Self-heating 
• 
In contact with water emits 
flammable gas 
• 
Organic peroxides 
• 
Corrosivity 
• 
Desensitised explosives 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Table 2: List of aspects and indicators relevant for Step 2. 
Group Approach 
Acute human health 
hazards 
Chronic human health 
hazards 
Physical properties 
Hazards from release 
behaviour 
Process-related hazards 
Aspects related to very 
high-risk process  
• 
Acutely toxic 
substances/mixtures, 
Cat. 1 or 2 (H300, 
H310, H330) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
that in contact with 
acids liberate highly 
toxic gases (EUH032) 
• 
Human hazards 
similar to Step 1 / 
Criterion S1 (Table 1) 
• 
Unstable explosive 
substances / mixtures 
(H200) 
• 
Explosive substances / 
mixtures/articles, 
divisions 1.1 (H201), 
1.2 (H202), 1.3 
(H203), 1.4 (H204), 
1.5 (H205) and 1.6 
(without H-phrase) 
• 
Flammable gases, Cat. 
1A (H220, H230, 
H231, H232) and Cat. 
1B and 2 (H221) 
• 
Pyrophoric gases 
(H232) 
• 
Flammable liquids, 
Cat. 1 (H224) 
• 
Self-reactive 
substances/mixtures, 
Types A (H240) and B 
(H241) 
• 
Organic peroxides, 
Types A (H240) and B 
(H241) 
• 
Pyrophoric liquids or 
solids, Cat. 1 (H250) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
which in contact with 
water emit flammable 
gases, Cat. 1 (H260) 
• 
Oxidising liquids or 
solids, Cat. 1 (H271) 
• 
Gasses 
• 
Liquids with a vapour 
pressure > 250 hPa 
(mbar) 
• 
Dust-generating solids 
• 
Aerosols 
• 
Open processing 
• 
Possibility of direct 
skin contact 
• 
Large-area application 
• 
Open design or 
partially open design, 
natural ventilation 
Aspects related to high-risk 
process 
• 
Acutely toxic 
substances / mixtures, 
Cat. 3 (H301, H311, 
H331) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
toxic in contact with 
eyes (EUH070) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
that in contact with 
• 
Human hazards 
similar to Step 1 / 
Criterion S2 (Table 1)  
• 
Aerosols, Cat. 1 
(H222 and H229) 
• 
Flammable liquids, 
Cat. 2 (H225) 
• 
Flammable solids, Cat. 
1 (H228) 
• 
Self-reactive 
substances/mixtures, 
Types C and D (H242) 
• 
Liquids with a vapour 
pressure 50 - 250 hPa 
(mbar) 
• 
Partially open design, 
process related 
opening with simple 
extraction, open with 
simple extraction 
==PAGE:77==
water or acids liberate 
toxic gases (EUH029, 
EUH031) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
with specific target 
organ toxicity (single 
exposure), Cat. 1: 
Organ damage (H370) 
• 
Skin sensitising 
substances / mixtures 
(H317, Sh) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
that sensitise the 
respiratory organs 
(H334, Sa) 
• 
Substances / mixtures 
corrosive to the skin, 
Cat. 1, 1A (H314) 
• 
Organic peroxides 
Types C and D (H242) 
• 
Self-heating 
substances/mixtures 
Cat. 1 (H251) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
which in contact with 
water emit flammable 
gases, Cat. 2 (H261) 
• 
Oxidising gases, Cat. 
1 (H270) 
• 
Oxidising liquids or 
solids, Cat. 2 (H272) 
• 
Desensitised 
explosives, Cat. 1 
(H206) and Cat. 2 
(H207) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with certain properties 
(EUH001, EUH014, 
EUH018, EUH019, 
EUH044) 
Aspects related to medium-
risk process  
• 
Acutely toxic 
substances/mixtures, 
Cat. 4 (H302, H312, 
H332) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with specific target 
organ toxicity (single 
exposure), Cat. 2: 
Possible organ damage 
(H371) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
corrosive to the skin, 
Cat. 1B, 1C (H314) 
• 
Eye-damaging 
substances/mixtures 
(H318) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with corrosive effect 
on respiratory organs 
(EUH071) 
• 
Nontoxic gases that 
can cause suffocation 
• 
Human hazards 
similar to Step 1 / 
Criterion S3 (Table 1), 
except those listed 
under “acute human 
health hazards” (left 
column) 
• 
Aerosols, Cat. 2 
(H223 and H229) 
• 
Flammable liquids, 
Cat. 3 (H226) 
• 
Flammable solids, Cat. 
2 (H228) 
• 
Self-reactive 
substances/mixtures, 
Types E and F (H242) 
• 
Organic peroxides, 
Types E and F (H242) 
• 
Self-heating 
substances/mixtures, 
Cat. 2 (H252) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
which in contact with 
water emit flammable 
gases, Cat. 3 (H261) 
• 
Oxidising liquids or 
solids, Cat. 3 (H272) 
• 
Gases under pressure 
(H280, H281) 
• 
Liquids with a vapour 
pressure 10 - 50 hPa 
(mbar), with the 
exception of water 
• 
Closed processing 
with possibilities of 
exposure, e.g. during 
filling, sampling or 
cleaning 
• 
Closed design, 
tightness not ensured, 
partially open design 
with effective 
extraction 
==PAGE:78==
by displacing air (e.g. 
nitrogen) 
• 
Corrosive to metals 
(H290) 
• 
Desensitised 
explosives, Cat. 3 
(H207) and Cat. 4 
(H208) 
Aspects related to low-risk 
process 
• 
Skin-irritant 
substances/mixtures 
(H315) 
• 
Eye-irritant 
substances/mixtures 
(H319)  
• 
Skin damage when 
working in moisture 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with a risk of 
aspiration (H304) 
• 
Skin-damaging 
substances/mixtures 
(EUH066) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with specific target 
organ toxicity (single 
exposure), Cat. 3: 
irritation of the 
respiratory organs 
(H335) 
• 
Substances/mixtures 
with specific target 
organ toxicity (single 
exposure), Cat. 3: 
drowsiness, dizziness 
(H336) 
• 
Substances chronically 
harmful in other ways 
(no H-phrase)  
 
Note: Adapted from GSH 
Column Model (version 
2020) developed by the 
Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health of the 
German Social Accident 
Insurance (IFA) 
• 
Aerosols, Cat. 3 
(H229 without H222, 
H223) 
• 
Not readily flammable 
substances/mixtures 
(flash point > 60 … 
100 °C, no H-phase) 
• 
Self-reactive 
substances / mixtures, 
Type G (no H-phase) 
• 
Organic peroxides, 
Type G (no H-phase) 
 
• 
Liquids with a vapour 
pressure 2 – 10 hPa 
(mbar) 
• 
Closed design, 
tightness ensured, 
partially closed design 
with integrated 
extraction, partially 
open design with 
highly effective 
extraction 
Aspects related to 
negligible risk 
• 
Substances of no concern regarding intrinsic hazard properties, according to step 1 
criteria 
• 
Liquids with a vapour 
pressure < 2 hPa 
(mbar) 
• 
Non-dust-generating 
solids  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
EU Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability
71
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1600
www.env.dtu.dk
