==PAGE:1==
Genome and immune biomarkers with prog­
nostic and/or predictive value
in patients with melanoma
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
in patients with melanoma
Master Thesis
1st July, 2022
By
Sofus Halkjær Wiisbye
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis is the product of my work, carried out at Evaxion Biotech, in collaboration with
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and the department of Health Technology, in
partial fulfilment of the degree, Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. There is
no confidential information in this thesis. All data is readily available from The Cancer
Genome Atlas’ data portal ”https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/”.
Sofus Halkjær Wiisbye ­ s202754
ii
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis, will try and shed some light on Overall Survival (OS) in patients who suffer
from melanoma. Overall survival is defined as the length of time the patient is still alive,
from either diagnosis or start of treatment (National Cancer Institute). For this thesis, OS
will be measured from the time patients enroll in the project. This will be done by investi­
gating features in the form of genetic data from miRNA, RNA, and WXS data. Features
with either predictive or prognostic values will be the main target. In this project, OS takes
the spotlight and any feature that enhances the prediction of OS could be a predictive or
prognostic melanoma­specific biomarker. Due to the nature of prognostic biomarkers, it is
however difficult to ascertain whether or not a biomarker is prognostic without a baseline
and time­series measurements of the effect of either (non)treatment and the impact of this
in correlation to a genetic feature in focus. The data investigated will come from The Can­
cer Genome Atlas database (TCGA). More specifically, the ”Skin Cutaneous Melanoma”
project (SKCM). During these investigations, Machine Learning (ML) models are trained
on this data, to predict OS given the somatic mutations of patient’s cancer. The mod­
els will use genetic features for the predictions. These features will act as biomarkers,
and the model will reflect the strength of the biomarkers in unison. I show how feature
reduction improves the predictive power across all tested ML models. I show that after
feature reduction, a Random Forest classification model has the best performance with
an AUC=0.82. I also present the feyn algorithm, a new approach to explainable ML mod­
els. Lastly, a finding is that the best performing model was a feyn model without feature
reduction, but mainly on categorical features regarding tumor extraction, with only a single
genetic feature.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sofus Halkjær Wiisbye, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Writer of this thesis.
Gabriel Renaud, Associate Professor, Supervisor
Main supervisor from DTU.
Lars Rønn Olsen, Associate Professor, Supervisor
Co­supervisor from DTU.
Michael Schantz Klausen, Principle Scientist, External supervisor
External supervisor from Evaxion, where most of this project took form.
A special thanks goes out to my wonderful wife who supported me through yet another
master’s degree. Without her this project would not have found its way into existence, and
it is quite possible that I would have lost my sanity along the way. Another special thanks
to Michael, for always being willing to discuss questions and the project as a whole. For
encouraging me to engage in the social life of Evaxion, and for making me feel welcome.
Speaking of Evaxion I also want to send a warm thanks to everyone there. I felt so wel­
come and included both in the daily work, but also in the social arrangements taking place
there. Without that my stay would not have been the same. I want to thank Gabriel for
good guidance and asking questions that had me contemplating what I was even doing.
Also for great ping pong regarding results and proposing different directions. Finally I
want to thank my pseudo­supervisor and genuinely good guy Christian Bahne Thygesen,
for both sparing with me, and especially for helping me bring back my new flat screen TV.
iv
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What is cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Predicting with biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Different methods to identify biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Key data entries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Biomarker discovery with Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Results
5
2.1
Clinical data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Micro RNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
RNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5
Whole Exome Sequencing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.6
Model performance summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3
Discussion
23
3.1
Micro RNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
RNA data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Whole Exome Sequencing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Clinical data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Data processing and Methods
27
4.1
TCGA­SKCM data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Prospective ideas and current dead ends
31
5.1
Feature dependencies with SHAP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Mitochondrial mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.4
Developing digital biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Bibliography
33
A Supplement S1
37
A.1 Command line call for the VEP tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.2 Melanoma associated miRNA lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.3 Prognostic miRNA list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
B Supplement S2
38
B.1 RNA clustermaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
C Supplement S3
39
C.1 WXS variant occurrence plot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
What is cancer
Cancer as a disease is not a new phenomenon. Early evidence of cancer can be found
in mummies from Egypt and fossilized bone tumors. Coincidentally, the oldest recorded
description of cancer is from Egypt. In the Edwin Smith Papyrus, we find descriptions of
tumors and ulcers of the breast originating from an ancient Egyptian textbook on trauma
surgery [1]. Since ancient Egypt, our understanding of cancer has increased tremen­
dously through projects like The Cancer Genome Atlas [2]. We now have a better idea
of why cancer occurs and which events make it happen. The accuracy of DNA replica­
tion and repair has limitations, which result in mutations occurring spontaneously in all
living cells. Our bodies are made up of millions of cells, and a single cell behaving irreg­
ularly does not cause significant damage. Biological systems are in place to catch these
irregularities, e.g. apoptosis will terminate cells that misbehave, thus restoring order.
On the other hand, if the cell has accumulated the correct mutations, activating proto­
oncogenes or deactivating tumor­suppressor genes, it can enable itself to evade said
systems and survive, enabling further proliferation and spreading of the genomic changes
to its progeny. This uncontrolled proliferation lead to tumor formation. A tumor can be
benign, i.e. not cancerous, if the cells making up the tumor cannot invade other tissues.
However, benign tumors will still grow and potentially cause problems for the host. If the
would­be cancer cells mutate to where they can invade the surrounding tissue, the tu­
mor becomes cancerous and malignant. Though most cancers form tumors, some, like
leukemia, often do not. Cancerous tumors can cause metastasis, where a part of the
primary tumor will travel to another place in the body, settling and creating a new tumor,
which in turn invades and destroys the surrounding tissue, effectively colonizing non­
origin tissue sites. Proto­oncogenes, Tumor­suppressor genes, and DNA­repair genes
are called drivers of cancer because of their utmost importance in preventing cancer­
ous behavior. To describe cancer in more detail, please refer to the six hallmarks of
cancer, which are Sustaining Proliferative Signaling, Evading Growth Suppressors, Acti­
vating Invasion and Metastasis, Enabling Replicative Immortality, Inducing Angiogenesis,
and Resisting Cell Death [3].
Technological advances, specifically Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), have unraveled
the human genome ([4]), and through this discovery, the mutations existing across the
genome, that enable many different cancer forms (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/). With
NGS, science has taken another step towards managing cancer and unlocking the door
to potentially conquering the disease. NGS creates unseen amounts of data, and this
presents the next hurdle. We need to manage and understand the data we are gener­
ating before further progress can be made. Features with impact, positive or negative,
on the given disease can be referred to as potential biomarkers. To ease communica­
tion, researchers and clinicians between the FDA­NIH Biomarker Working Group have
created a document describing biomarkers in great detail [5]. The cancer type in focus
for this thesis is melanoma. Melanoma arises when a melanocyte, cells responsible for
making melanin (pigmentation), acquire mutations in drivers of cancer, turning the cell
cancerous. Therefore melanomas often form on the skin, and rarely, in the pigmentation
in the eye (uveal melanoma) and other places that harbor melanocytes [6, 7, 8]. Patients
in the SKCM, however, are exclusively derived from cutaneous skin.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Predicting with biomarkers
Per the FDA­NIH Biomarker Working Group a biomarker is: ”A defined characteristic
that is measured as an indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes
or responses to an exposure or intervention.” [5]. When working with biomarkers, it is
crucial to understand that there are different types of biomarkers. It is paramount in clinical
use, where the well­being of patients are at stake An in­depth set of definitions of the
different types of biomarkers has been formulated in the BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS,
and other Tools) Resource to ensure a uniform application in clinical use. I will cover three
kinds of biomarkers from the BEST Resource. Namely: Diagnostic­, Prognostic­ and
Predictive biomarkers. Diagnostic biomarkers should separate the cohort, sample size,
or population into two groups. One with a given disease and one without it. If it applies,
diagnostic biomarkers should also separate subtypes from each other. For this reason,
diagnostic biomarkers can be prognostic or predictive, if a subtype has the potential to
impact either the available treatment or the outcome of said treatment. Similar for all
biomarkers, regardless of functionality, is the need for thorough testing to determine the
accuracy and robustness of the marker before utilized in a clinical setting. Prognostic
biomarkers should indicate a likelihood of an event in the future. The events can be
any number of things and relate to the specific case. For cancer, it can be the likelihood
of being cancer­free, remission, recurrence, or death. To have this feature a prognostic
biomarker needs a baseline so we can project the change in the future. The prognostic
biomarker also separates the sample size into different risk groups depending on the
disease and the power of the marker. Predictive biomarkers can be hard to distinguish
from prognostic biomarkers. Validation requires a control group. However, a predictive
biomarker will hold information on the response to a given treatment. The biomarker can
help determine the type of treatment given to an individual, therefore, it is valuable to find
predictive biomarkers.
1.3
Different methods to identify biomarkers
The classic approach would be to find candidates based on the biology of the tumor and
the surrounding (micro)environment, or metabolism of the pharmaceutical agent [9]. Re­
producibility has taken a leading role for all biomarker identification. Findings cannot be
trusted if they cannot be attained following the initial experiment, because the end goal
of biomarker discovery is the clinical use of the marker [10]. A new approach based on
increased knowledge and technology is ”the Discovery approach.” This approach could
be through high­throughput sequencing, gene expression arrays, and mass spectroscopy
[11]. It will quickly identify groups or individuals who differ between cohorts. Steps in de­
veloping a candidate carry several hurdles to get over before a candidate can be classified
as a biomarker. These hurdles have been conceptualized into analytic validity, clinical va­
lidity, and clinical utility [12].
Analytic validity
While analytic validity is important, pre­analytic is just as important.
The handling of a sample can influence the outcome of the analytics. Pre­analytic could
include A) time and storage between sample time to processing B) type and duration of
fixation, and C) storage time and conditions following processing. Analytic validity refers
to the technical integrity of the assay itself. Most importantly, whether or not the process
can be reproduced in the initial lab as well as in others.
Clinical validity
Can also be viewed as biological validity.
Functionally this means
whether the biomarker and its presence can successfully section the population into two
2
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:11==
distinct groups. Again, reproducibility is crucial and should be validated on an indepen­
dent cohort.
Clinical utility
Since biomarkers in clinical use help guide patient care, it is paramount
that they are proven to work with high levels of evidence. Assessment of clinical utility
includes an evaluation of the effectiveness of a biomarker, as well as the benefit­to­harm
ratio. Few biomarkers have attained this ”status.” Since this label carries a lot of weight,
biomarkers should be put under scrutiny to ensure safe application for clinical use.
A compelling addition to biomarker validation was proposed by Simon et al. 2009. It
is a method that retrospectively validate biomarkers from archived samples [13]. The
addition of archived samples into the validation process could reduce the time it takes to
find fitting patients. However, using this approach requires rigorous scrutiny of the quality
of the samples, how they were sampled compared to the present new samples, and the
amount of data.
1.4
Key data entries
The SKCM project contains vast amounts of data. For this project, I have chosen to look
specifically at micro RNA (miRNA), RNA, and Whole Exome Sequencing (WXS) data.
The goal is to featurize all three data sets into one coherent one. Before that, I find it
prudent to ascertain the validity of each data set as the basis of biomarker discovery. In
the thesis each data component is also visualized to glean apparent surface information
before concatenating them into one data set ready for machine learning application. Micro
RNA are non­coding RNAs with important roles in regulation of gene expression [14].
This regulatory effect has been shown to affect disease in general and multiple cancers,
including melanoma, in several studies [15, 16, 17, 18]. RNA sequencing is a measure of
expression, and with this knowledge, it is possible to learn what genes exactly are being
expressed in a specific cell or the cell environment. Targeting expression of genes with
RNA regulation is viable therapeutic approach in cancer treatment [19, 20, 21]. The WXS
data are equally useful as a potential resource for biomarkers and can be equated to the
mutational burden of the tumor [22]. A mutational burden threshold can predict responses
to immune checkpoint blockade therapy, which for melanoma, a therapy­resistant cancer,
can be rather effective [8, 23, 24]. When visualizing both the miRNA and WXS data The
PAAD project was imported to act as an outgroup for the SKCM data. The PAAD project
was chosen as it has a low overall mutational burden compared to the high mutational
burden of the SKCM project [25]
1.5
Biomarker discovery with Machine Learning
The application of computational algorithms and Machine Learning (ML) is widely ac­
cepted as a tool for understanding complex correlations in vast amounts of data [26, 27].
There are several different algorithms and here a handful is chosen. By turning all the
data into features, I will train different models, and evaluate these and their top features
as biomarkers for OS in melanoma. The algorithms chosen are, XGBoost [28], Random
Forest [29], Feyn [30], and finally logistic regression intended as a baseline for perfor­
mance testing against the other models [31]. Common for all the algorithms chosen is
that they can handle classification problems. Another commonality for the algorithms
chosen, and all algorithms in general, is that they have innate advantages and disadvan­
tages. The intent was to pick algorithms with different traits and through testing, determine
which would classify and predict the problem at hand the best. Logistic regression is
a simple classification algorithm with clear advantages. From a user perspective, it is
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
3
==PAGE:12==
easy to implement, interpret, and trains efficiently. Because it does not make assump­
tions about distributions in the feature space, it can easily be applied to any data set with
a binary classification target. While usually not inclined to overfit, it does tend to do so on
large data sets where the features outnumber the observations. It was chosen still as a
baseline model to measure performance against, for the merits of being simple and fast.
Expectations are pessimistic at best because of the size and complexity expected from
the data set of the SKCM project. XGBoost is a very reliant and easy­to­use algorithm.
Gradient Boosting handles overfitting data well with a method that is both robust and re­
silient. While XGBoost is sensitive to outliers and does best on small to medium­sized
data sets, it was chosen for its renowned status as a top­tier classification problem solver.
Normalization will help diminish the issue of potential outliers, and expectations are opti­
mistic because of the range of applicability of the algorithm. Random Forest is another
tried and tested algorithm. It is efficient on large data sets and robust to the effects of
outliers. The algorithm also runs with a low chance of overfitting the data. It is more
resource­heavy than the other algorithms and does not handle categorical variables very
well. However, the advantages seem to outweigh the disadvantages, and this algorithm
show promise and an optimistic outcome. Lastly, the new algorithm Feyn is interesting
because of the non ”black­box” approach that the algorithm promotes. The sales pitch of
Feyn is appealing to scientists because the transparency is front and center. Every model
generated by Feyn can be followed from features through a modest selection of opera­
tions to the target outcome. Additionally the algorithm has been tailored to automate many
considerations of data preparations, serving a whole inclusive experience with modeling
data. Feyn was chosen to investigate how it delivers on the aforementioned points. To in­
terpret the best model the SHAP package has been chosen for its desirable performance
and consistency in important feature interpretation [32]. SHAP promises that predictions
are distributed fairly across features of importance, based on a Game Theory foundation.
4
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:13==
2
Results
Here results will be presented in appropriate sections pertaining to the specific data sets
that spawned them. In concluding the introduction on the merits of machine learning (ML)
it is natural to start with these results. It will effectively be the project in reverse, but the
ML results are the prime results of the project. The ML models developed in this project
rely on KM­curves for the choice of target class, therefore, they will briefly be described
prior to presenting the results of the ML models.
2.1
Clinical data
The clinical data are transformed through the Kaplan­Meier (KM) plot and relay Overall
Survival (OS) information. It is shown here that at least 50% of the cohort will survive past
3000 days (fig. 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Kaplan­Meier plot of SKCM clinical data. Survival plot of the data including
confidence interval, risk­set table, and median survival time.
Of interest is also that most of the cohort data is censored, meaning that most survived
longer than their participation in the project. It was tested whether gender could have an
impact on OS (fig. 2.2). While the male curve is somewhat below the female one, and the
male 50% OS number is a couple of hundred days lower than that of females, there is no
statistical evidence for the difference to be significant (P­value=0.280, pairwise log­rank
test).
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Kaplan­Meier plot SKCM clinical data. The plot is stratified on gender. The
risk­set table is not included but the above table is still valid. Male: Blue, Female: Green.
There is however statistical evidence for difference between OS when considering the
stage of the patients (P­value = 3.15 ∗10−4, pairwise log­rank test) (fig. 2.3). From the
KM plot, an indication can be gleaned that lower stages of melanoma live approximately
twice as long as stage III and up. The median survival time is double and the maximum
survival is almost twice as long as well fig. 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Kaplan­Meier plot SKCM clinical data. The KM plot is stratified into stages.
Specifically, the two groups of stages are; Stage 0­II: Blue, and Stage III­IV: Green.
To investigate which stage lowers OS the most, the data is split into stages III and IV
and compared individually to stages 0­II and each other. It is shown here that there is
no significant difference between stages 0­II and stage III, but a vast difference between
stage 0­II and stage IV, and also between stage III and stage IV (P­value =8.55 ∗10−2,
1.28∗10−7, 4.43∗10−3 respectively, for pairwise log­rank test fig. 2.4). These findings laid
the foundation for important decisions concerning the ML. With it, we are ready to move
to the most important results of the thesis.
6
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: Kaplan­Meier plot SKCM clinical data. The KM plot is stratified into stages.
Specifically, the three groups of stages are; Stage 0­II: Blue ,Stage III: Green, and Stage
IV: Red.
2.2
Machine Learning
The ML section will include the different algorithms previously described as individual
sections. Because of the KM­plots and the OS for the SKCM project (fig. 2.3), the models
are modeled on all data and a partition of the data which only includes patients with stage
III and stage IV melanomas. All models are handled as a classification problem since the
target value is binary. This is true for all but one model where the target is changed to a
continuous value of days spent in the project. For classification issues, the performance
is based on both a ROC curve with an AUC score and a confusion table. The choice to
couple these metrics was done because while modeling it became clear that some models
would have a great AUC score, but be unable to differentiate between event and no event
(1 and 0, respectively) rendering them unusable. The performance of the single regression
model was based on three different metrics, R2, Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and
Mean Absolute Error (MAE). During the ML work, the top­ranked features of the best­
performing model were extracted and used to rerun all models with this severely reduced
feature space, resulting in a performance boost across the line.
2.2.1
Logistic Regression
It can be difficult to determine whether a model is performing well or not. To alleviate
this, it can be beneficial to choose a simple model, and evaluate other models against it.
Logistic regression were chosen to be that model. This baseline model was modeled with
the whole data set and not the partitioned data set containing only stage III+IV patients.
The performance of the initial logistic regression model is slightly better than a coin flip
with an AUC of 0.64 fig. 2.5a. The same is true for the model’s ability to differentiate
between true positive and negative outcomes of the target value, which is just around
60%, performing better on the negative outcome comparatively fig. 2.5b.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
7
==PAGE:16==
(a) ROC curve
(b) Confusion Matrix
Figure 2.5: Performance of Logistic Regression model for all SKCM data.
Reducing the feature space by filtering out all features not assigned any value from the
XGBoost model section 2.2.3 results in a small increase in AUC score, resulting in AUC=0.69
fig. 2.6a. This small increase in AUC is coupled with a decrease in the model’s ability to
predict true negative outcomes. However, the discriminatory power of predicting correct
positive outcomes has increased from 0.59 to 0.73 fig. 2.6b.
(a) ROC curve for logistic regression.
(b) Confusion table for the logistic regression model.
Figure 2.6: Performance of Logistic Regression model after feature space reduction.
8
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:17==
2.2.2
Random Forest
The random forest (RF) algorithm is a well­known decision tree­based algorithm and is
very popular in machine learning for biological problems. The algorithm is applied to
both data sets here. Additionally, the RF is modeled as a regression problem on the full
data set. The RF model performs similarly to the baseline model when trained only on
the stage III+IV partitioned data set with an AUC=0.61 fig. 2.7a. The confusion table for
this model reveals that it can distinguish between the positive outcomes, and separates
them randomly fig. 2.7b. The RF model trained on the whole data set, on the other hand,
performs better with an AUC=0.76 (fig. 2.7c and is capable of separating the classes better
than previous models fig. 2.7d.
(a) ROC curve for RF on stage III­IV.
(b) Confusion table for RF on stage III­IV.
(c) ROC curve for RF on all data.
(d) Confusion table for RF on all data.
Figure 2.7: Performance of Random Forest model.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
9
==PAGE:18==
The performances of both models increase when the feature space is reduced. The in­
crease of the partitioned data set increases the AUC score drastically, but the ability to
distinguish true positive outcomes is worse figs. 2.8a and 2.8b. The model trained on all
the data also showed increased performance in both metrics. The AUC increases to 0.82
and the model is just as good at choosing the right negative outcome while getting better
at choosing the right positive outcome figs. 2.8c and 2.8d.
(a) ROC curve for RF on stage III­IV.
(b) Confusion table for RF on stage III­IV.
(c) ROC curve for RF on all data.
(d) Confusion table for RF on all data.
Figure 2.8: Performance of Random Forest model.
10
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:19==
Here, the 20 most important features from the RF model containing all data, is visualized
in fig. 2.9.
Figure 2.9: SHAP summary plot. Plot depicting top features of the model and information
of the impact on the model output. For each feature, the color of the point represents the
value by a gradient color scale going from low­blue to high­red. The impact of the feature
is shown on the x­axis.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
11
==PAGE:20==
The RF regression model, however, showed sub­par performance before and after fea­
ture reduction. The metrics used to evaluate performance were R2, RMSE, and MAE. The
R2 value is often used as a goodness of fit of a model, and for this model the R2=0.05 and
0.06, before and after feature space reduction respectively. For good measure, the MAE
and RMSE which are both expressions for the distance between the true and predicted
value with an output equal to the input, were include. This is beneficial as interpretation is
easy. For the model, these numbers are 1490.34 and 2016.53 days for MAE and RMSE,
respectively, before feature reduction, and 1467.96 and 2008.86 days after feature reduc­
tion. Feature reduction still improves the model, but as it is also seen visually, it is a slight
to inconsequential improvement fig. 2.10.
(a) Plot of regression plot
(b) Plot of regression plot after feature reduction
Figure 2.10: Plot of the regression models predictive power, before and after feature
reduction.
12
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:21==
2.2.3
XGBoost
XGBoost is another popular choice for ML algorithms. This model was chosen to do fea­
ture extraction with because it initially had the best performance. The feature extraction
was done with the SHAP package which also presents each feature’s impact on the model
outcome fig. 2.11. This summary only shows the top 20 features, since including all fea­
tures muddles the impact of the individual feature contribution. The contribution of the
features diminishes greatly even in the span of the top 20 features, indicating no need
for the vast feature space of nearly 80.000 features. The feature extraction only attributes
value to 265 features, resulting in a reduction of features of 99%.
Figure 2.11: SHAP summary plot. Plot depicting top features of the model and information
on the impact on the model output. For each feature, the color of the point represents the
value by a gradient color scale going from low­blue to high­red. The impact of the feature
is shown on the x­axis.
The feature extraction was done based on the XGBoost modeled on all the SKCM data,
i.e. the best performing model before feature reduction. While it reduces the features
drastically, representatives from all original data sets are still present. Unsurprisingly the
performance improvement after feature reduction is small for both XGBoost models. Be­
fore the reduction, it is clear that the model on only stage III+IV performs poorly figs. 2.12a
and 2.12b with an AUC=0.51 and a confusion matrix that states an inability to identify any
positive outcomes. On the other hand, the model with all SKCM data has a comparatively
good performance with an AUC=0.76 and can predict true negative outcomes. While not
as good, it can predict the true positive outcomes much better than the model on only
stage III+IV patients figs. 2.12c and 2.12d.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) ROC curve for XGBoost on stage III­IV.
(b) Confusion table for XGBoost on stage III­IV.
(c) ROC curve for XGBoost on all data.
(d) Confusion table for XGBoost on all data.
Figure 2.12: Performance of XGBoost models before feature reduction.
As mentioned previously, the feature reduction only marginally improves the XGBoost
models. Since the reduction is done with the features already attributed value by the XG­
Boost model, the marginal improvement could be attributed to noise reduction. The stage
III+IV model does increase the AUC to 0.60, and becomes better at predicting negative
outcomes but remains unable to predict any positive outcomes figs. 2.13a and 2.13b. The
other XGBoost model is still okay and receives a marginal lift in performance with a 0.01
increase to the AUC of 0.77 along with better confusion matrix allocation of predictions
figs. 2.13c and 2.13d.
14
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:23==
(a) ROC curve for XGBoost on stage III­IV.
(b) Confusion table for XGBoost on stage III­IV.
(c) ROC curve for XGBoost on all data.
(d) Confusion table for XGBoost on all data.
Figure 2.13: Performance of XGBoost models after feature reduction.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2.4
Feyn Qlattice
The model on the partitioned data set of only patients stage III+IV does not perform great
fig. 2.14a. However, the feature reduction reduces the noise in the data so that even the
model on the smaller data set can model better than previously fig. 2.14c. As the models
created by feyn are more transparent I also present the chain of operations and feature
interactions of both models figs. 2.14b and 2.14d. The two different models could indicate
some limitations of the algorithm to completely search through the whole feature space
as the features chosen for the two models have no overlap.
(a) ROC curve and Confusion matrix.
(b) Model.
(c) ROC curve and Confusion matrix.
(d) Model.
Figure 2.14: Performance of modeling of stage III+IV data, without feature reduction (a,b)
and with (c,d). (a) Before feature reduction, the model is close to being a random sepa­
ration with an AUC=0.54 and from the Confusion matrix, it shows that the model assigns
all patient to event 1, i.e. with surviving past 1000 days. (b) The model created by the
three genes does not carry information or correlation with the target of the model. (c)
After feature reduction the model AUC increases to 0.70 and while the predicted event of
outcome 0 is better predicted it is still not much better than a random assignment of the
outcome. (d) The new model here is based on other features, namely three RNA genes.
The model trained on all the data presents the same story of improving after feature re­
duction, except with better performance for both the models comparatively figs. 2.15a
and 2.15c. Both the higher AUC values for both models (AUC=0.66 and 0.76 respec­
tively figs. 2.15a and 2.15c) compared to the previous two models (AUC=0.54 and 0.70
figs. 2.14a and 2.14c) are hinting at the fact that the model have a harder time modeling
the outcome of the partitioned data set reliably. Furthermore, the confusion matrix of the
two models trained with all the data are both able to separate the two outcomes some­
what effectively (figs. 2.15a and 2.15c) in comparison with the previous model figs. 2.14a
and 2.14c. The model does not share any features and the model after feature reduction
has a higher complexity than the model before feature reduction figs. 2.15b and 2.15d.
16
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:25==
(a) ROC curve and Confusion matrix.
(b) Model.
(c) ROC curve and Confusion matrix.
(d) Model.
Figure 2.15: Performance of modeling of all data without feature reduction (a,b) and with
(c,d).(a) Before feature reduction, the model is just slightly convincing with an AUC=0.66
but the confusion matrix does show that with some degree of precision can predict the
correct outcomes. (b) The model created by the two RNA genes does carry some infor­
mation about the target of the model and is at least very simple compared to (d). (c) After
feature reduction, the model AUC increases to 0.76 and has a slight improvement in the
prediction of negative outcomes. (d) The new model has increased in complexity with
seven new RNA genes being the chosen features describing the model.
Prof of model reliability
Early in the project, while figuring out the initial feature space the feyn algorithm was ap­
plied to the full data set, containing the final feature space and many additional categorical
features. The categorical features were later removed to stick with the initial aim of the
study, but before that happened a model was created with great performance fig. 2.16.
Throughout the project, creating a model with equal or better performance was not pos­
sible. Out of the four features, only ”DPYSL5” is a genetic feature. The other features
are ”person neoplasm cancer status,” ”tissue prospective collection indicator,” and ”tissue
source site.” Person neoplasm cancer status and tissue prospective collection indicator
describe if the patient currently has a tumor and if they are registered for a future resection
of a tumor respectively. Additionally, person neoplasm cancer status is coined the single
strongest predictor of outcome in both breast and lung cancer [33]. The tissue source site
indicates the location of the primary tumor. For this project, they are all melanoma from
cutaneous skin. Notations, however, are quite different depending on the hospital from
which the tumor was sampled.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) ROC curve and Confusion matrix.
(b) Model.
Figure 2.16: Performance of the best model created by the feyn algorithm. (a) A strong
discriminatory power in predicting the right outcome as seen in the confusion matrix and
coupled with a high AUC=0.92 makes this model quite good. (b) Additionally, the model
is rather simple and easy to follow.
2.3
Micro RNA
Digging into the first individual data set results from the micro RNA (miRNA) are presented.
While the ML data set does not contain patients of other projects, another data set, the
PAAD project, is included here. The PAAD patients are a negative control and serve as
an intended outgroup when visualizing potential clusters in the SKCM projects miRNA
expression. Visualizing the raw unfiltered miRNA data does not reveal any information.
Simply put, the scale of the data is too large to extract visual information from (data not
shown). It is shown that a few SKCM patients lie in between the PAAD patients, and vice
versa. To improve the visualization, the scale is brought down by log transforming the
data. After the transformation, two distinct clades of miRNA expression emerge (fig. 2.17).
A low expression clade at the top of the map and a comparatively narrow clade with a
high expression at the bottom of the map. In the low expression clade, there is a small
box (highlighted in red) of high expression in the SKCM patients that could be interesting
since the rest of the patients, spanning both projects, do not have any expression here
(fig. 2.17). Also, it now looks as if there is a clear separation between the two projects
(SKCM and PAAD). This could, however, be due to the clustering and not indicative of
carrying substantial information.
Taking inspiration from the literature on which miRNA could carry important information,
the expression of just these miRNA is brought into focus (fig. 2.18). This reveals two
sizeable clades of differing expression and almost perfect separation of the two cancer
projects fig. 2.18. Interestingly, while the PAAD project was thought of as an outgroup,
here, a few SKCM patients act as an outgroup. It could potentially be SKCM patients with
a lower mutational burden or SKCM patients that fall outside the major oncogene groups.
Both the top most low expression clade and the lower high expression clade have multiple
smaller expression clades, and the bottom large clade is comprised of the majority of the
miRNA. The top clade has a distinct lower expression than the bottom one and is more
uniform across the heatmap, with some scattered groupings. The bottom clade, however,
is separated into three distinct bands of varying expression. These are high, medium, and
low expression bands. The expressions in the PAAD project are uniform and more distinct
than in the SKCM project. Also, compared to the SKCM outgroup. There seem to be a
couple of vague groupings but as of writing, it has not been followed up on. In addition
to looking at the melanoma­associated miRNA, the miRNA predicted to have prognostic
value from the literature was also filtered out and visualized.
18
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.17: Clustermap visualization of miRNA data. A hierarchically­clustered heatmap
of log­transformed miRNA data from both SKCM and PAAD projects (blue and red re­
spectively). A red box marks a block of high expression in an otherwise low expression
field.
Figure 2.18: Clustermap visualization of miRNA data. A hierarchically­clustered heatmap
of literature­derived miRNA data associated with melanoma. The miRNA data from the
PAAD project is also included (SKCM: blue, PAAD: red).
This addition significantly lowers the amount of miRNA in the heatmap allowing the nam­
ing of those that are present, since they are now readable. Again, two large clades of
different expression trends emerge (fig. 2.19). A clade with low expression and a clade
with three bands of a varying higher expression. The patients from the PAAD project
are still present here to indicate their expression compared to patients from the SKCM
project. The intention is for it to help visualize the indication of the prognostic value of
those chosen miRNA in regards to melanoma specifically. The two projects are still fairly
separated, safe from a few patients. Interestingly, however, is the uniform expression
in the PAAD project compared to that of the SKCM project, hinting at the validity of the
prognostic value. At least there are different groupings in the different miRNA hinting
at the possibility of prognostic or predictive value. For example, one can take a look at
both ”hsa­mir­1246” and ”hsa­mir­205”. For ”hsa­mir­1246” there is no expression in most
patients, but in some, there is a distinct expression, separating these patients from the
rest. For ”hsa­mir­205” where most patients have an average expression level while a
small group of patients has no expression at all and another group has seemingly higher
expression, again serving to cluster and differentiate certain patients from the rest.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.19: Clustermap visualization of miRNA data. A hierarchically­clustered heatmap
of miRNA with a prognostic value associated with melanoma. The miRNA data from the
PAAD project is also included (SKCM: blue, PAAD: red).
2.4
RNA
As with the miRNA data, the expression of RNA in the patients of the SKCM project is visu­
alized. The important difference is that while the miRNA data is in reads per million (rpm),
the RNA data is in transcripts per million (tpm) which consider gene lenght for normaliza­
tion. Also, the PAAD project is no longer included. For clarity, the visualization is done
in chunks due to the limitations of the visualization function chapter 4. The RNA genes
which globally sum to over zero show the most interesting heatmap fig. 2.20. Quite visible
bands outline groups of patients with similar expression across multiple RNA genes (ver­
tical bands) and RNA genes with similar expression across multiple patients (horizontal
bands). The remaining RNA heatmaps are sparse in information and will not be presented
here, but there are still interesting groups of expression there fig. B.1. However, focusing
solely on expression data is out of scope for this project.
Figure 2.20: Clustermap visualization of RNA data. Each RNA gene ID adds up to above
zero across all patients. Clear patient groups and RNA gene ID groups are present.
20
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:29==
2.5
Whole Exome Sequencing data
Visualizing the data by excluding lower occurring genes sheds light on the most prevalent
variants in general in melanoma. The PAAD project is included in this visualization to
investigate whether or not the melanoma fleet of genes would vary from that of the PAAD
project. The projects have been color­coded to easily distinguish between projects in the
heatmap fig. 2.21. Interestingly there are ”outliers” in the PAAD data set that ”invade”
the melanoma space. Likewise, some melanoma patients, hypothesized to be in lower
stages, also mingle with the PAAD patients. A visualization of just the SKCM patient’s
color separated by stage and oncogenes is also presented here fig. 2.22. This figure
shows that stage and oncogene does not seem to correlate. Interestingly oncogenes do
not cluster either. It looks like there are three groups in the patient cohort. While the red
triple WT oncogene is present in all groups, it has stronger representation in the left­most
patient group.
Figure 2.21: Cluster visualization of WXS data. Visualization of the WXS data for both
the SKCM and PAAD projects. The genes presented here have been reduced by filtering
out genes that occur globally in the data set less than 178 times. The specific number is
arbitrary but is chosen through the testing of different drop­off points, and visualizing these.
The number does not reference how many patients it occurs in, but the total number of
times the gene has had a coding mutation, which can happen multiple times in any patient.
180 genes are present in this heatmap. Project colors; SKCM: Blue, PAAD: Red. The
outcome is binary (white: Mutated gene, black: WT gene).
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.22: Cluster visualization of WXS data. Visualization of the WXS data with ad­
ditional information of stage and present oncogene in the patients of the SKCM project.
The genes presented here have been reduced by filtering out genes that occur globally
in the data set less than 156 times. 131 genes are present in this heatmap. Oncogene
colors; BRAF: Black, NF1: Cyan, NRAS: Blue, BRAF+NRAS: Green, Triple WT: Red.
Stage colors; Stage 0/I/II: Magenta, Stage III: White, Stage IV: Yellow.
2.6
Model performance summary
An overview of the AUC values and the confusion ratio between true positive and true
negative outcomes for all models are listed below. The best­performing metrics before
and after feature reduction have been highlighted table 2.1.
AUC
Confusion ratio
Feature reduction
NO
YES
NO
YES
Logistic Regression
0.64
0.69
0.63/0.59
0.55/0.73
Random Forest, all data
0.76
0.82
0.69/0.79
0.73/0.79
Random Forest, stage III+IV
0.61
0.73
0.52/0.78
0.17/0.97
XGBoost, all data
0.76
0.77
0.60/0.73
0.63/0.79
XGBoost, stage III+IV
0.51
0.60
0.17/0.85
0.17/0.93
Feyn, all data
0.66
0.76
0.60/0.68
0.68/0.66
Feyn, stage III+IV
0.54
0.70
0.26/0.83
0.48/0.88
Table 2.1: Comparison of model performance. Best performing models are highlighted
in bold. Confusion ratio represents the fraction of true positives and the fraction of true
negatives.
22
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:31==
3
Discussion
This chapter will touch upon the individual data sets of the SKCM project and discuss
the results they spawned individually. How to interpret the results and what there could
be possible interesting findings in relation to biomarker discovery. Finally, I will end by
discussing the modeling aspect of this thesis, what I have learned about modeling and how
to proceed with this knowledge, and whether or not modeling can be used for biomarker
discovery.
3.1
Micro RNA
The miRNA show some interesting findings. First of all, it is clear that the miRNA expres­
sion, between the two cancer types, is more unique in melanoma, where the expression
in the PAAD project is very uniform. While my work on the miRNA was more exploratory
there is plenty of possible investigations that could, and with time should be carried out
for either predictive or prognostic value. When filtering out most of the miRNA with pre­
vious associations based on the literature, there is great diversity in the expression of
many of the miRNAs across the cohort. With the assumption that the PAAD expression is
somewhat close to a healthy expression profile, it shows melanoma as highly variable and
presumably targetable. On the other hand, even though all miRNA in fig. 2.18 should be
associated with melanoma, some bands are very close to the expression of the PAAD co­
hort. It could be argued that some melanoma­associated miRNA, are cancer­associated
and therefore not unique to melanoma. However, it was not investigated whether those
miRNA has a similar expression across other cancer types. Moving on to the visualiza­
tion of the miRNA with literature­approved prognostic value there is a less strict separation
between the two projects. Quite evident is the separation of the high vs. low expressed
miRNA here. While it is not the intent of this project to question the literature apointed
prognostic power of the miRNA in fig. 2.19, it was curious how ”hsa­mir­4633” has, except
for one instance, no expression across both cohorts. It could be a necessary knockout to
promote proliferation or inhibit some tumor suppressors. If that is the case, however, it
does not immediately seem to be melanoma­specific. As mentioned in section 2.3 both
”hsa­mir­1246” and ”hsa­mir­205” does seem to separate the SKCM cohort.
3.2
RNA data
The RNA expression has potential and with either a change of focus or more time potential
biomarkers in this data could have been revealed. The most interesting RNA data is
fig. 2.20. Similar to the miRNA, bands of different levels of expression cluster together.
Especially the highly differentiated RNA genes show promise. The patient’s also cluster in
several clades, which is promising. The two bands of differentiated expression in the major
bands at the bottom right quadrant stand out. Here are two bands of RNA that appear
in the same patient group. Potential biomarkers with either predictive or prognostic value
could be sought after here. Biomarkers need to separate the cohort to be able to say
something about the group that they represent.
3.3
Whole Exome Sequencing data
Looking at genes with a coding variant is quite interesting. It is a complex endeavor to
unravel the effect of these mutations and could be a project in itself. Most likely, a variant
with a coding effect would be inhibitory to the normal functionality of an affected gene.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
23
==PAGE:32==
A variant could increase the effectiveness of a gene, but the first­mentioned outcome is
much more likely. They intend to show that while mutations appear at random, there
could be a signal in the variants that causes a cell to become cancerous. In principle, the
cancer cell only needs to knock out a few programs in the genome to become cancerous.
The BRAF gene is present in almost 50% of the SKCM project and exemplifies this point
well. As stated, some of the most prevalent mutations in melanoma target the MAPK
pathway. If we summarize the previously stated genes that occur frequently in the SKCM
project, i.e. BRAF, NRAS, NF1, and BRAF+NRAS, the part of the SKCM patients with
mutations targeting the MAPK pathway is at least 85.6%. Additionally, the Triple WT
patients are shown to carry KIT mutations, which is a proto­oncogene coding a receptor
that activates the MAPK pathway. These KIT mutations have the potential to turn the
pathway on constitutively, effectively not needing mutations in the pathway itself. Initially,
surprising was how the PAAD group did not act as the outgroup as intended, but following
the previous statement, this makes sense since any cancer just needs to hit a few key
drivers of cancer to enable their cancerous state. Something that was confirmed, however,
was the difference in the number of mutations between the two projects. Also expected
was that at least some patients of the SKCM project would group in a stage­appropriate
manner, but at least with regards to the mutational burden, this does not seem to be the
case. The groupings done on oncogene groups are unsurprisingly not correlated with
the stage of the disease. Surprising, though, is how the genomic classification does not
group together. One could expect that even though mutations are random, there could be
a pattern in which mutations follow mutations that occur frequently. From the heatmap,
there are patients with similar patterns, so there may be a signal.
3.4
Clinical data
The project is about Overall Survival (OS) so it is clear that the clinical data and the Kaplan
Meier plots play a central role. Luckily, 50% of the cohort survive almost 10 years after
entering the project. It should be noted, that when a patient enters the project, they have
likely been diagnosed at a prior point in time. This could mean that our patients have been
living with their disease for some time. Additionally, 280 of the patients are right­censored.
This means that we do not know how long they live past exiting the project. A hypothesis
could be, that patients who leave are potentially declining, but on the other hand, they
could just be done with doctors, wanting to live the rest of their lives in peace. Therefore,
no consideration for the faith of the right­censored patient’s data is given. As shown with
the KM plots the OS is seemingly correlated with the progression of the disease, i.e. the
stage of the patient’s cancer. Cancer progression is related to how aggressive the pa­
tient’s specific cancer is, and also where cancer metastasizes, as some tissues are more
vital than others. For example, the brain is quite crucial to OS. It was not considered to
look into progression rates even though it could have been interesting to see if there might
be biomarkers related to fast or slow progression of melanoma. However, the halftime for
stage IV patients is drastically lower than that of stage 0­II, with stage III patients having
an OS in between the two. An argument for the stage as a good predictive biomarker
could be made, alas it is not genomic. A counterpoint would be that stage is progressing,
implying that the underlying biomarker for the stage is progression rate. If willing to stretch
the definition of prognostic biomarkers, you could even argue that treatment, unless radi­
cally improved, will have little to no outcome on OS for patients with stage IV melanoma,
implying that stage IV is a potential prognostic biomarker. However, it is still not genomic
and therefore out of the scope of this project.
24
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:33==
3.5
Machine Learning
The culmination of this project is the ML and the models I have created. While not all
models are equally effective at predicting the outcome class, some at least prove that
the endeavor is fruitful. No one solution fits all issues. And given the data and questions
asked, some models will fit better than others. While ML can help find correlation and
patterns in an unending ocean of data, feature reduction proved its merit by improving all
models significantly. While it is true that the best model put forth here did not receive any
feature reduction it did contain features that were not genomic. It is possible that some
non­genomic features removed from the data, carry significant information concerning
OS. The ”Out of box” performance of logistic regression was not impressive, but for a
simple model serving as a baseline, it was adequate. It was not necessary to run the
baseline model with feature reduction, as it was just meant to be a baseline. However, it
was worth it to investigate whether the reduction in the feature space would improve the
performance of the simplest model. While the performance was improved, it was the sec­
ond most inadequate improvement, only better than the improvement to the model from
which the feature extraction was done, namely the XGBoost model on all data table 2.1.
It should also be noted that it was not the worst model. Random forest was believed to
perform well before beginning to model because of its credentials. Inadvertently it was
also the case. Before feature extraction, it was the RF model on all data that had the
best performing metrics, but initially, only the AUC score was considered and since XG­
Boost was done first and had the same AUC score it stuck out clearer when considering
the best model. Coincidentally, the feature extraction from the XGBoost model improved
both RF models greatly. The parameter tuning was not repeated for the models after
feature reduction, but instead, the default values were used. With the reduction in the
feature space, it was deemed unnecessary to optimize the number of trees. Because the
RF model on all data had the best performance metrics, feature extraction was carried out.
Interestingly, only one feature is present in both top 20 feature extraction tables, namely
RNA gene ENSG00000273084.1. It would have been interesting to rerun all models with
these features and compare the results. However, there was not enough time. These
findings however did spark the idea that the feature dependencies might have some cor­
relation between the top features from the two models. The tables were made, but again
due to time did not make it to the final thesis. The top features could pose a great source of
potential biomarkers. The XGBoost models had quite good performance out of the box as
well. While the size of the data set posed a potential issue with modeling that did not end
up a problem. At least for the model on all data. The model on partitioned data did have
a rather low performance which is true across all algorithms. Interestingly, while initial
parameter tuning was done for RF, the optimal amount of trees also has great perfor­
mance for the XGBoost models. The feature reduction, while seemingly unfair, now that
the best performance was the RF model, was done based on the top features of the XG­
Boost model. The decision to rerun all models came from rerunning the XGBoost model
on the reduced feature space. The initial prediction was that it would be an increase in
speed when training. However, the slight increase in performance of the model inspired
rerunning all the other models on this reduced feature space. Currently, the performance
increase is believed to be because of a major noise reduction for the XGBoost training.
The XGBoost can also struggle with large data sets, which is reprimanded in the reduced
feature space. An issue RF does not share, but the feature reduction improved the RF
model greatly, so there may be a lot of noise in the data. An interesting point about the
features is that while all three data sets are still present in the extracted features, it is
dominated by the RNA data. Had time not been an issue, it could have been interesting
to try the same process on the individual data sets. Identified the best model, extract the
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
25
==PAGE:34==
best features, rerun models to make sure the best models are chosen. Then do feature
extraction again. It would be interesting to see the feature space extracted from each and
see if there is a performance increase in a merged data frame made up of the top fea­
tures of each data set, instead of the way it was done here. Feyn had a lot of interesting
things going on. The promise of the algorithm is appealing and the application could be
far­reaching if the promise were delivered. Out of the box, the initial feature space seems
too large for the algorithm to handle. It only just performs better than logistic regression
which is not impressive given the sales pitch of the algorithm. The reduction in feature
space, however, gave a great on­par performance with at least XGBoost. If you subscribe
to the principle of simpler is better, however, Feyn has the upper hand. The initial feature
space for all models is almost 80.000 features. The extracted feature space is 265 fea­
tures. The models Feyn produce make their predictions on 2 −7 features. That in itself
is impressive. Transparency is a powerful trait for Feyn and it eases interpretation and
understanding of the models produced. It cannot be forgotten either, that even though the
model is outside the scope of this project, Feyn did produce the seemingly best model of
all. The prevalence of the RNA in the extracted feature space does imply that the expres­
sion level of RNA is crucial information. While it can be difficult to surmise the correlation
between chosen features and biological meaning, ML is a powerful tool to find patterns
not initially obvious. Nevertheless, I do think genetic biomarkers have relevance, given
how accessible sequencing is becoming and the increase in the validation of liquid biop­
sies. I think algorithms like feyn could gain a major foothold in science, for explaining and
simplifying abstract or complicated correlations for decision­makers and the prevalence
of ML­guided clinical decisions.
26
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:35==
4
Data processing and Methods
All results shown in this thesis are generated in whole upon data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas Research Network: https://www.cancer.gov/tcga (TCGA). The focus of the thesis
is melanoma, and as such, the main TCGA project used is Skin Cutaneous Melanoma
(SKCM). Additionally, a micro RNA (miRNA) and a Whole Exome Sequencing (WXS)
data set from the Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PAAD) project, was also used.
The SKCM project contains 470 patient cases. Some cases lack crucial information for
the research, and as such some computations are done on fewer than 470 cases. It will
be stated as such in the affected cases. The methods section of this thesis will consist of
data processing and methods applied to the final data products. In some cases, the data
processing continues with methods being applied in between data processing to elucidate
clues and connections of interest in the data. Data processing consists of conscious
choices of how to manage each data set and its entries. Choices can be to leave out
incomplete entries, normalize data to align the scale of the features, or in other ways
transform data for visualization purposes. Finally, when all data sets are merged, the
final shape of the data frame depends on the availability of patients across all data sets.
This means, that for modeling only patients present in all data sets are accounted for. In
effect, the total number of patients left for modeling is 416. Some methods are unique to
the specific data sets while others are applied to multiple data sets. When all data sets are
merged into one master data set, further applied methods are, of course, done to all data
available. These methods are generally different modeling methods. For miRNA, RNA,
and WXS data seaborn’s clustermap function is used to create a hierarchically­clustered
heatmap which is show potential clusters in the visualized data. I use the default settings
of the clustermap function, and also add color coding for the miRNA and WXS data.
4.1
TCGA­SKCM data
4.1.1
miRNA data
From each patient’s miRNA data set, two columns are kept, namely the miRNA ID and
reads per million miRNA mapped (rpm). While creating a concatenated data frame of all
patients, a column with patient ID and one with project ID are added so that the origin of
each row is clearly defined when added. The data is pivoted from a long table to a wide
table with the intent of comparing the rpm of each miRNA across all patient IDs. The pivot
table is created such that patients are columns, the row index is the miRNA identifier and
the values are the rpm values. Some miRNA that is screened for are either not present,
or only present in some patients, leading to an rpm value of 0. Since this value inter­
feres with visualization, it is changed to one fold under the lowest value found in the data
set. Additionally, the range of the rpm entries varies a great deal. Therefore they are log­
transformed so that when they are visualized the data is more digestible. Additionally, two
lists are used to filter the data set down. The two lists are a list of melanoma­associated
miRNAs from the literature, and a list of melanoma­associated miRNA from literature with
predicted prognostic power appendices A.2 and A.3. Visualizations made are, one of all
data, one with only melanoma associated miRNA, and one with only melanoma associ­
ated miRNA with a prognostic value. Color­coding is done on the project of the individual
patient making distinguishing them quite easy.
4.1.2
RNA data
As with the miRNA data 447 patients have usable RNA data sets. Two columns, namely
the gene ID and unstranded transcripts per million (tpm), are kept for further inspection.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
27
==PAGE:36==
As previously described, the patient ID column is added. Each patient data set contain
four rows of unidentified data. These rows are dropped as they point to unassigned in­
formation. The tpm values are log­transformed and normalized to ensure that the range
of all features is on a similar scale. To reduce the impact of outliers the data is normal­
ized by the 95­quantile, and values above 1 are clipped to 1. Again, the long data table
is pivoted to a wide table to compare the transcription of each RNA gene ID across all
patients. Should an RNA gene not be present in some patients, that value is filled with
a value 1­fold lower than the minimum value of the entire data set. For visualization, the
data is split into three chunks corresponding approximately to chunks of 20000 samples
(specifically 15148/22609/19568). The three chunks were made by grouping samples by
the sum of their expression. The three groups were; above 0, between 0 and ­40, and
below ­40. That means if the sum of the expression of a specific RNA gene was above,
between, or below the given threshold, it would be put in the corresponding group. Each
chunk was visualized as a clustermap. The largest group is split in two for visualizing as
the function can have problems with too large data sets.
4.1.3
Whole Exome Sequencing data
Each Whole Exome Sequencing (WXS) data set is processed by The Ensembl Variant
Effect Predictor (VEP) tool [34]. From the output, six columns were used. Four identify
the location of the variant. Those four columns are the chromosome, the position on
that chromosome, the nucleotide in the reference genome, and the alternate nucleotide
in the variant. The remaining two are a filter column that determines the quality of the
predicted variant and an info column that relays all potential outcomes of each variant.
Only variants that pass all filters are used (”filter”: ”PASS”). From the project, 448 patients
have WXS data entries. VEP was used to annotate variants with flags and filters directly
from the command line, for the specific call refer to supplementary appendix A.1. The
previously mentioned four columns used for identification were collapsed into one column.
The column with ”info” contains a long string of information. The useful information in the
column are potential outcomes of the variant call and whether or not they are coding.
Each variant is extracted into a unique column. Non­coding variants are of no interest to
this project and are removed. Before, however, all variants are counted to record the total
mutational burden as well as the coding mutational burden. The gene potentially altered
by the variant is stored in an additional column. The filter column is transformed from
”PASS” to 1. When creating a pivot table with the ”filter” column as values, 1 indicates that
the patient has a variant with a coding mutation, and 0 means the patient does not have the
variant. Later 0 was changed to ­1 the reflect the scale of the miRNA rpm and RNA tpm.
For visualization, the amount of data is downsized to exclude rare variants in the data.
This means that variants need to occur more times to be taken into consideration. The
excluded genes were visualized to see if any information could be gathered in that space
(data not included). The occurrence rate of variants in the WXS data was also plotted to
investigate the connection between high occurrence mutations and more patient­specific
variants fig. C.1. Furthermore, a column for disease stage was added. For clearer visuals,
the stage annotation was simplified to just the roman numeric. An oncogene group based
on [35] and their genomic classification was added to each patient. Some mutations
occur in very high frequency. Most notable is the BRAF mutation, 46.52% of patients,
secondly the NRAS mutation, 23.99% of patients, and thirdly the NF1 mutation, 9.43%
of patients. Notably, all these mutations impact the MAPK pathway. While 5.66% of
patients do carry both BRAF and NRAS they are almost mutually exclusive and therefore
constitute an oncogene group each. Finally, a fifth oncogene group for the co­occurrence
of BRAF+NRAS was created. NF1 also constitutes an oncogene group when it is the only
mutation of the MAPK pathway. And coined by [35] is the oncogene group of the Triple
28
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:37==
Wild type (Triple WT), where none of the three mentioned mutations occur. The PAAD
project is also added as an intended outgroup. For the heatmaps with both the SKCM and
PAAD project, color­coding by the project of the patient is added. When excluding PAAD
and only looking at SKCM WXS data the oncogene group and disease stage of patients
were color­coded.
4.1.4
Clinical data
The clinical data set contains all 470 cases. However, not all cases have good enough
survival data, which means the final data set contains 437 patients. The main reason for
patients being cut is that rows with nonsensical data were filtered out. Nonsensical data
could for example be if the ”days in project” column was zero or negative, as participating
in the project for a negative amount of time does not make sense. Only a few columns
carry information valuable to this project specifically, and therefore only columns contain­
ing information on days in the project, vital status, and disease stage were used. Vital
status is in cases where the patient did not die during the project, right censored, which
means that the patient left the project and their fate is unknown after that point. In the
raw data set, there are a lot of string values covering what are essentially Nan values or
missing data. These were all filtered out. Additionally, I created a new column that did not
discriminate whether the project was left before or after a death event. It simply states for
how long the patient is in the project. This was used for a regression approach in ML. The
censoring was used for Kaplan Meier plots and preliminary ML on death events. When
doing KM plots with stage differentiation, rows without a determined stage was filtered
out. The ML target evolved into surviving longer than 1000 days. Originally this threshold
was 2000 days, but the model could not distinguish between the classes at this threshold
nor the classification between an event or no event. An initial understanding of the overall
survival (OS) was generated with the help of the lifelines package and the application of
Kaplan­Meier plots. The ”KaplanMeierFitter” is done with default settings. Different itera­
tions of the plot are made to shed light on OS for the whole data set, gender specificity,
and the impact of the patient­specific stage of the associated melanoma on the OS.
4.1.5
TCGA­PAAD
The TCGA­PAAD miRNA data set was used as an outgroup in clustering visualization
when looking into heatmaps of miRNA data. It contains the same specifications as the
TCGA­SKCM miRNA data set. Likewise, the PAAD Whole Exomes Sequencing data is
also used as an outgroup. TCGA­PAAD contains 185 patients, of which all had usable
WXS data sets, but only 176 had a usable miRNA data set.
4.1.6
Machine Learning
The ML is too complex to explain in a single section. Therefore ML is split into separate
sections to describe each algorithm. Some algorithms are more alike, and the ML ap­
proach also carries similar processes but having the applied methods in singular sections
with respect to their algorithms, is more transparent. All models were trained on the same
data set and evaluated on the same validation data. Additionally, the same seed was
used for all models to ensure reproducibility. When splitting data into train and test sets,
the target column was stratified and the split kept at 66/33. If not specifically stated, the
default settings were used for each algorithm.
Logistic Regression
The baseline model is fitted with the default penalty=’l2’, and the solver=’sag’. Through
testing solvers, ”sag” had the best performance. Additionally, ”sag” is also marked as the
solver best suited for large data sets. While the data is not very long it is quite wide. To
produce a confusion matrix for this model it is necessary to split the predicted outcomes
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
29
==PAGE:38==
into a binary split. Since the predicted outcome fall between 1 and 0 a prediction > 0.5
was classified as 1 and everything else as 0.
Random Forest
While it holds for the Random Forest (RF) classification problem, the target column was
not stratified for the RF regression problem, as the target here is continuous. The RF
models which are classification problems overfit quickly, therefore I investigate how many
trees would be optimal for each data set and set the number of trees to 9 and 76 for stage
III+IV and all data respectively (the parameter n_estimators).
XGBoost
The same setting for n_estimators was used for XGBoost as it were for RF. Otherwise,
default settings were used for these models. For feature reduction, the model on all data
was used, as it had the highest performance metrics. The top features were extracted to
show the impact of models on all data with feature reduction. Extraction of top features
was performed using the SHAP package [32]. These features were then used to reduce
the data sets and all models were rerun.
Feyn Qlattice
The performance of the models varied greatly with initial testing. Therefore a lot of mod­
els were tested, trying to optimize the parameters and get acceptable performance. The
number of epochs and complexity were primarily tested. The complexity parameter is an
expression for complexity, max features, and max interactions. Max features is the com­
plexity divided by 2 (rounded up) and max interactions is a range between max features­
1:complexity­1. This sets a limit to nodes and interactions in the models, keeping them
rather simple compared to many other algorithms. Max complexity was tested in the
range of 4­20 in steps of 2. For the number of epochs, 100, 250, 500, 1000, and 2000
were tested. The general results on the wide data set for high epochs were models that
overfitted, therefore 100 epochs were chosen as the optimal number of epochs. The full
range of max complexity was testes for 100 epochs. The kind setting points at the prob­
lem, either regression or classification, in this project only classification was used. Binary
cross­entropy was used as a loss function and bic as a criterion for model performance.
Validation of the data and estimation of priors were run before modelling with Feyn.
30
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:39==
5
Prospective ideas and current dead
ends
This chapter covers ideas and dead ends that could hold potential but so far did not lead
to anything, and due to time, were not pursued.
5.1
Feature dependencies with SHAP
The SHAP package can do some really interesting things. Especially the feature depen­
dencies look promising. Considerations were made to add dependencies of the top twenty
features but, time did not permit this endeavor. They are made but, contemplating their
meaning for the models was not possible this time.
5.2
Mitochondrial mutations
Mitochondrial mutations could mean a lot for cancer as a disease. The growing tumor
needs energy and adaptions to the surrounding mitochondria could alleviate this issue.
As such, changes to mitochondria could serve as a potential biomarker [36]. However in
the SKCM project, 18 patients have mutations in their mitochondrial DNA, and I viewed it
as too few to pursue.
5.3
PCA
Considering the complex case of modeling almost 80.000 features I thought it could be
fruitful to try a Principal Component Analysis. Even though the first component carries
40% of the variation there is no obvious split or grouping in the plot (fig.PCA). Adding the
third component in a 3D space is not fruitful either. T­SNE is another algorithm that out­
puts similar results as PCA but has different advantages over PCA. As such, I was curious
whether t­SNE could handle the data better. While the plot looks different the informa­
tion does not change. I still cannot distinguish between OS in these plots. There could
however still be useful information here, but I might be looking with the wrong ”glasses”.
It is feasible that the data is clustered not on an event of death, but instead grouped by
either stage or maybe oncogene group. Time constraints, however, limited my search in
this area. Interestingly is it when applying these methods after feature reduction, there
seem to form two directions in the PCA and two clusters in the t­SNE, however, the target
outcome is not the right separator fig. 5.2.
Figure 5.1: PCA and t­SNE plot. The principle components and t­SNE plot of all the data.
Separation on target. No obvious clustering is present.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: PCA and t­SNE plot. The principle components of the data set and t­SNE plot
after reducing the data set to only features with positive contribution to the model, chosen
by the initial XGBoost model. For the t­SNE plot, there are two potential groups with
migration between them, however the clustering is not due to the target, Overall Survival,
in this instance.
5.4
Developing digital biomarkers
Digital biomarker recording devices, such as phone applications, watches with biometric
measuring capabilities, and similar devices have the potential to increase the gathering
of health information drastically. Monitoring could potentially increase data generation
many­fold, with the applications and products being commercially available. The bottle­
neck is gathering this data from companies and directing it into research. The strategy
proposed is indeed a catch­all strategy, but I started thinking if a model could predict
oncoming sickness, the measure of that sickness and whether or not it could be imple­
mented that a health check­up could be distributed to users of these devices. While not
immediately applicable to this project, I hypothesized that the onset of cancer challenges
the immune system, exposing the individual to being sick more, and maybe this could
also be registered.
32
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
R. P. Feldman and James T. Goodrich. “The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus”. In:
Child’s Nervous System 15.6­7 (July 1999), pp. 281–284. ISSN: 0256­7040. DOI:
10.1007/s003810050395. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s003810050395.
[2]
Katarzyna Tomczak, Patrycja Czerwińska, and Maciej Wiznerowicz. “Review The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA): an immeasurable source of knowledge”. In: Współczesna
Onkologia 1A (2015), pp. 68–77. ISSN: 1428­2526. DOI: 10.5114/wo.2014.47136.
URL: http://www.termedia.pl/doi/10.5114/wo.2014.47136.
[3]
Douglas Hanahan and Robert A. Weinberg. “Hallmarks of Cancer: The Next Gener­
ation”. In: Cell 144.5 (Mar. 2011), pp. 646–674. ISSN: 00928674. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.
2011.02.013. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092867411001279.
[4]
Mark A DePristo et al. “A framework for variation discovery and genotyping us­
ing next­generation DNA sequencing data”. In: Nature Genetics 43.5 (May 2011),
pp. 491–498. ISSN: 1061­4036. DOI: 10.1038/ng.806. URL: http://www.nature.
com/articles/ng.806.
[5]
BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource. Tech. rep.
[6]
Eran Hodis et al. “A Landscape of Driver Mutations in Melanoma”. In: Cell 150.2
(July 2012), pp. 251–263. ISSN: 00928674. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.024. URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092867412007787.
[7]
Janice M. Mehnert and Harriet M. Kluger. “Driver Mutations in Melanoma: Lessons
Learned From Bench­to­Bedside Studies”. In: Current Oncology Reports 14.5 (Oct.
2012), pp. 449–457. ISSN: 1523­3790. DOI: 10.1007/s11912- 012- 0249- 5. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11912-012-0249-5.
[8]
Niki Karachaliou et al. “Melanoma: Oncogenic drivers and the immune system”.
In: Annals of Translational Medicine 3.18 (2015), pp. 1–22. ISSN: 23055847. DOI:
10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.08.06.
[9]
Vathany Kulasingam and Eleftherios P Diamandis. “Strategies for discovering novel
cancer biomarkers through utilization of emerging technologies”. In: Nature Clinical
Practice Oncology 5.10 (Oct. 2008), pp. 588–599. ISSN: 1743­4254. DOI: 10.1038/
ncponc1187. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncponc1187.
[10]
Matthew J Selleck, Maheswari Senthil, and Nathan R Wall. “Making Meaningful Clin­
ical Use of Biomarkers”. In: Biomarker Insights 12 (Jan. 2017), p. 117727191771523.
ISSN: 1177­2719. DOI: 10.1177/1177271917715236. URL: http://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/10.1177/1177271917715236.
[11]
Kilian Wistuba­Hamprecht et al. “Establishing High Dimensional Immune Signa­
tures from Peripheral Blood via Mass Cytometry in a Discovery Cohort of Stage
IV Melanoma Patients”. In: The Journal of Immunology 198.2 (2017). ISSN: 0022­
1767. DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600875.
[12]
N. Lynn Henry and Daniel F. Hayes. “Cancer biomarkers”. In: Molecular Oncology
6.2 (Apr. 2012), pp. 140–146. ISSN: 15747891. DOI: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.01.010.
URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1016/j.molonc.2012.01.010.
[13]
R. M. Simon, S. Paik, and D. F. Hayes. “Use of Archived Specimens in Evaluation
of Prognostic and Predictive Biomarkers”. In: JNCI Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 101.21 (Nov. 2009), pp. 1446–1452. ISSN: 0027­8874. DOI: 10.1093/jnci/
djp335. URL: https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/jnci/djp335.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
33
==PAGE:42==
[14]
Jacob O’Brien et al. “Overview of MicroRNA Biogenesis, Mechanisms of Actions,
and Circulation”. In: Frontiers in Endocrinology 9.AUG (Aug. 2018). ISSN: 1664­
2392. DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2018.00402. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.
3389/fendo.2018.00402/full.
[15]
Lin Zhang et al. “microRNAs exhibit high frequency genomic alterations in human
cancer”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 103.24 (2006). ISSN: 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0508889103.
[16]
Xi Chen et al. “Characterization of microRNAs in serum: A novel class of biomarkers
for diagnosis of cancer and other diseases”. In: Cell Research 18.10 (2008). ISSN:
10010602. DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.282.
[17]
Sophie Mumford et al. “Circulating MicroRNA Biomarkers in Melanoma: Tools and
Challenges in Personalised Medicine”. In: Biomolecules 8.2 (Apr. 2018), p. 21.
ISSN: 2218­273X. DOI: 10.3390/biom8020021. URL: http://www.mdpi.com/2218-
273X/8/2/21.
[18]
Soudeh Ghafouri­Fard, Mahdi Gholipour, and Mohammad Taheri. “MicroRNA Sig­
nature in Melanoma: Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets”. In: Frontiers in Oncol­
ogy 11 (Apr. 2021). ISSN: 2234­943X. DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.608987. URL: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2021.608987/full.
[19]
P. van der Bruggen et al. “A Gene Encoding an Antigen Recognized by Cytolytic T
Lymphocytes on a Human Melanoma”. In: Science 254.5038 (Dec. 1991), pp. 1643–
1647. ISSN: 0036­8075. DOI: 10.1126/science.1840703. URL: https://www.science.
org/doi/10.1126/science.1840703.
[20]
Ophir Shalem et al. “Genome­Scale CRISPR­Cas9 Knockout Screening in Human
Cells”. In: Science 343.6166 (Jan. 2014), pp. 84–87. ISSN: 0036­8075. DOI: 10.
1126/science.1247005. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1247005.
[21]
Tulsi Ram Damase et al. “The Limitless Future of RNA Therapeutics”. In: Frontiers
in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 9 (Mar. 2021). ISSN: 2296­4185. DOI: 10.
3389/fbioe.2021.628137. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbioe.
2021.628137/full.
[22]
Anshuman Panda et al. “Identifying a Clinically Applicable Mutational Burden Thresh­
old as a Potential Biomarker of Response to Immune Checkpoint Therapy in Solid
Tumors”. In: JCO Precision Oncology 1 (Nov. 2017), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2473­4284.
DOI: 10.1200/PO.17.00146. URL: https://ascopubs.org/doi/10.1200/PO.17.00146.
[23]
Suzanne L. Topalian et al. “Mechanism­driven biomarkers to guide immune check­
point blockade in cancer therapy”. In: Nature Reviews Cancer 16.5 (May 2016),
pp. 275–287. ISSN: 1474­175X. DOI: 10.1038/nrc.2016.36. URL: http://www.
nature.com/articles/nrc.2016.36.
[24]
Noam Auslander et al. “Robust prediction of response to immune checkpoint block­
ade therapy in metastatic melanoma”. In: Nature Medicine 24.10 (Oct. 2018), pp. 1545–
1549. ISSN: 1078­8956. DOI: 10.1038/s41591-018-0157-9. URL: http://www.nature.
com/articles/s41591-018-0157-9.
[25]
Zachary R. Chalmers et al. “Analysis of 100,000 human cancer genomes reveals the
landscape of tumor mutational burden”. In: Genome Medicine 9.1 (Dec. 2017), p. 34.
ISSN: 1756­994X. DOI: 10.1186/s13073-017-0424-2. URL: https://genomemedicine.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13073-017-0424-2.
[26]
Nikolai Petrovsky and Vladimir Brusic. “Computational immunology: The coming of
age”. In: Immunology & Cell Biology 80.3 (June 2002), pp. 248–254. ISSN: 0818­
9641. DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1711.2002.01093.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1046/j.1440-1711.2002.01093.x.
34
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:43==
[27]
Guang Lan Zhang et al. “Dana­Farber repository for machine learning in immunol­
ogy”. In: Journal of Immunological Methods 374.1­2 (Nov. 2011), pp. 18–25. ISSN:
00221759. DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2011.07.007. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0022175911001773.
[28]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Vol. 13­
17­August­2016. New York, NY, USA: ACM, Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794. ISBN: 9781450342322.
DOI: 10.1145/2939672.2939785. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2939672.
2939785.
[29]
Leo Breiman. “Random forests”. In: Machine Learning 45.1 (2001). ISSN: 08856125.
DOI: 10.1023/A:1010933404324.
[30]
Kevin René Broløs et al. “An Approach to Symbolic Regression Using Feyn”. In:
(Apr. 2021).
[31]
Sandro Sperandei. “Understanding logistic regression analysis”. In: Biochemia Med­
ica 24.1 (2014). ISSN: 13300962. DOI: 10.11613/BM.2014.003.
[32]
Scott M. Lundberg and Su In Lee. “A unified approach to interpreting model predic­
tions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol. 2017­December.
2017.
[33]
Yifeng Tao et al. “Assessing the contribution of tumor mutational phenotypes to
cancer progression risk”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 17.3 (Mar. 2021). Ed.
by Roland F. Schwarz, e1008777. ISSN: 1553­7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1008777. URL: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008777.
[34]
William McLaren et al. “The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor”. In: Genome Biology
17.1 (2016). ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-016-0974-4.
[35]
Rehan Akbani et al. “Genomic Classification of Cutaneous Melanoma”. In: Cell
161.7 (June 2015), pp. 1681–1696. ISSN: 10974172. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.
05.044.
[36]
Yuan Yuan et al. “Comprehensive molecular characterization of mitochondrial genomes
in human cancers”. In: Nature Genetics 52.3 (2020). ISSN: 15461718. DOI: 10.
1038/s41588-019-0557-x.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:45==
A
Supplement S1
A.1
Command line call for the VEP tool
vep --cache --vcf --fields "Location,Consequence,SYMBOL,Gene,cDNA_position,CDS_position,Protein_position
,Amino_acids,Codons" --force -i input -o output
A.2
Melanoma associated miRNA lists
hsa­mir­211, hsa­mir­211­5p, hsa­mir­16, hsa­mir­204­5p, hsa­mir­378, hsa­mir­378a­5p,
hsa­mir­1908, hsa­mir­199a­3p, hsa­mir­199a­5p, hsa­mir­106b, hsa­mir­106a, hsa­mir­
146a, hsa­mir­10b, hsa­mir­21, hsa­mir­21­5p, hsa­mir­652, hsa­mir­367, hsa­mir­4286,
hsa­mir­638, hsa­mir­338­5p, hsa­mir­363­5p, hsa­mir­15b, hsa­mir­454, hsa­mir­214,
hsa­mir­122­5p, hsa­mir­182, hsa­mir­221, hsa­mir­767, hsa­mir­135a, hsa­mir­135b, hsa­
mir­25, hsa­mir­125a, hsa­mir­106b­5p, hsa­mir­181b, hsa­mir­769, hsa­mir­20a, hsa­
mir­30d, hsa­mir­30b, hsa­mir­224, hsa­mir­452, hsa­mir­19b, hsa­mir­3151, hsa­mir­301a,
hsa­mir­4262, hsa­mir­519d, hsa­mir­370, hsa­mir­373, hsa­mir­92a, hsa­mir­517, hsa­
mir­27a, hsa­mir­186, hsa­mir­1246, hsa­mir­150, hsa­mir­520f, hsa­mir­633, hsa­mir­
429­5p, hsa­mir­326, hsa­mir­34b, hsa­mir­34c, hsa­mir­34a, hsa­mir­184, hsa­mir­185,
hsa­mir­204, hsa­mir­365, hsa­mir­485­5p, hsa­mir­312, hsa­mir­7­5p, hsa­mir­7, hsa­
mir­153­3p, hsa­mir­625, hsa­mir­23a, hsa­mir­23b, hsa­mir­23a­3p, hsa­mir­15a, hsa­
mir­143­3p, hsa­mir­143, hsa­mir­708, hsa­mir­216b, hsa­mir­216­5p, hsa­mir­150­5p,
hsa­mir­142­3p, hsa­mir­142­5p, hsa­mir­136, hsa­mir­125b, hsa­mir­596, hsa­mir­137,
hsa­mir­29c, hsa­mir­488­5p, hsa­mir­488­3p, hsa­mir­675, hsa­mir­622, hsa­mir­92, hsa­
mir­4487, hsa­mir­4706, hsa­mir­4731, hsa­mir­509­3p, hsa­mir­509­5p, hsa­mir­203, hsa­
mir­17­3p, hsa­mir­30a­5p, hsa­mir­218, hsa­mir­605, hsa­mir­24­1­5p, hsa­mir­205­5p,
hsa­mir­145­5p, hsa­mir­205, hsa­mir­195, hsa­mir­181a, hsa­mir­181, hsa­mir­375, hsa­
mir­328, hsa­mir­4633­5p, hsa­mir­455, hsa­mir­145, hsa­mir­219­5p, hsa­mir­31, hsa­
mir­124a, hsa­mir­124, hsa­mir­206, hsa­mir­26b, hsa­mir­196a, hsa­mir­193b, hsa­mir­
200c, hsa­mir­200a, hsa­mir­155, hsa­mir­18b, hsa­mir­26a, hsa­mir­9, hsa­let­7b, hsa­
let­7c, hsa­let­7a, hsa­mir­330­3p, hsa­mir­330­5p, hsa­mir­183, hsa­mir­144, hsa­mir­
122, hsa­mir­107, hsa­mir­296­3p, hsa­mir­542­3p, hsa­mir­625­5p, hsa­mir­339­3p, hsa­
mir­590­5p, hsa­mir­768­3p, hsa­mir­451a.1, hsa­mir­32, hsa­mir­493, hsa­mir­382, hsa­
mir­516b, hsa­mir­194, hsa­mir­128, hsa­mir­1280, hsa­mir­573, hsa­mir­33a­5p, hsa­
mir­33a, hsa­mir­33b, hsa­mir­98, hsa­mir­425, hsa­mir­337, hsa­mir­637, hsa­mir­329,
hsa­mir­579­3p, hsa­mir­101, hsa­mir­664, hsa­mir­29a, hsa­mir­524­5p, hsa­mir­138,
hsa­mir­126, hsa­mir­377, hsa­mir­139­5p, hsa­mir­342, hsa­mir­127, hsa­mir­22, hsa­
mir­3065­5p, hsa­mir­610, hsa­mir­3662, hsa­mir­331, hsa­mir­149­5p, hsa­mir­338­3p,
hsa­mir­4458, hsa­mir­489­3p, hsa­mir­431, hsa­mir­134, hsa­mir­224­5p, hsa­mir­140­
5p, hsa­mir­140­3p, hsa­mir­191, hsa­miR­514a­3p, hsa­miR­508­3p, hsa­miR­509­3­5p,
hsa­miR­513c­5p, hsa­miR­513a­5p, hsa­let­7b­5p, hsa­miR­452­5p, hsa­miR­592, hsa­
let­7b­3p, hsa­mir­15, hsa­mir­342­3p, hsa­mir­455­3p, hsa­mir­497, hsa­mir­216a­5p,
hsa­mir­125
A.3
Prognostic miRNA list
hsa­mir­150, hsa­mir­142, hsa­mir­142, hsa­mir­4633, hsa­mir­1246, hsa­mir­185, hsa­
mir­9, hsa­mir­145, hsa­mir­150, hsa­mir­155, hsa­mir­205, hsa­mir­532, hsa­mir­106b,
hsa­mir­23a, hsa­mir­195, hsa­mir­224, hsa­mir­365a, hsa­mir­365b, hsa­mir­452, hsa­
mir­4709, hsa­mir­7702, hsa­mir­513c, hsa­mir­873, hsa­let­7b, hsa­let­7c, hsa­mir­10b
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
37
==PAGE:46==
B
Supplement S2
B.1
RNA clustermaps
(a) Between 0 and ­40, part 1.
(b) Between 0 and ­40, part 2.
(c) Below ­40.
Figure B.1: Clustermap visualization of three parts of the RNA data.
38
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
==PAGE:47==
C
Supplement S3
C.1
WXS variant occurrence plot
Figure C.1: WXS variant occurrence plot.
Genome and immune biomarkers with prognostic and/or predictive value
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
